It is a cause of very great regret to me that this task has taken so
much longer a time than I had expected for its completion. It is
now many months--over a year, in fact--since I wrote to Georgetown
announcing my intention of publishing, IN A VERY FEW MONTHS, the whole
truth about Mr. Abel. Hardly less could have been looked for from his
nearest friend, and I had hoped that the discussion in the newspapers
would have ceased, at all events, until the appearance of the promised
book. It has not been so; and at this distance from Guiana I was not
aware of how much conjectural matter was being printed week by week in
the local press, some of which must have been painful reading to Mr.
Abel's friends. A darkened chamber, the existence of which had never
been suspected in that familiar house in Main Street, furnished
only with an ebony stand on which stood a cinerary urn, its surface
ornamented with flower and leaf and thorn, and winding through it all
the figure of a serpent; an inscription, too, of seven short words which
no one could understand or rightly interpret; and finally the disposal
of the mysterious ashes--that was all there was relating to an untold
chapter in a man's life for imagination to work on. Let us hope that
now, at last, the romance-weaving will come to an end. It was, however,
but natural that the keenest curiosity should have been excited; not
only because of that peculiar and indescribable charm of the man, which
all recognized and which won all hearts, but also because of that hidden
chapter--that sojourn in the desert, about which he preserved silence.
It was felt in a vague way by his intimates that he had met with unusual
experiences which had profoundly affected him and changed the course of
his life. To me alone was the truth known, and I must now tell, briefly
as possible, how my great friendship and close intimacy with him came
about.

When, in 1887, I arrived in Georgetown to take up an appointment in a
public office, I found Mr. Abel an old resident there, a man of means
and a favourite in society. Yet he was an alien, a Venezuelan, one
of that turbulent people on our border whom the colonists have always
looked on as their natural enemies. The story told to me was that about
twelve years before that time he had arrived at Georgetown from some
remote district in the interior; that he had journeyed alone on foot
across half the continent to the coast, and had first appeared among
them, a young stranger, penniless, in rags, wasted almost to a skeleton
by fever and misery of all kinds, his face blackened by long exposure
to sun and wind. Friendless, with but little English, it was a hard
struggle for him to live; but he managed somehow, and eventually letters
from Caracas informed him that a considerable property of which he had
been deprived was once more his own, and he was also invited to return
to his country to take his part in the government of the Republic. But
Mr. Abel, though young, had already outlived political passions and
aspirations, and, apparently, even the love of his country; at all
events, he elected to stay where he was--his enemies, he would say
smilingly, were his best friends--and one of the first uses he made of
his fortune was to buy that house in Main Street which was afterwards
like a home to me.

I must state here that my friend's full name was Abel Guevez de
Argensola, but in his early days in Georgetown he was called by his
Christian name only, and later he wished to be known simply as "Mr.
Abel."

I had no sooner made his acquaintance than I ceased to wonder at the
esteem and even affection with which he, a Venezuelan, was regarded in
this British colony. All knew and liked him, and the reason of it was
the personal charm of the man, his kindly disposition, his manner with
women, which pleased them and excited no man's jealousy--not even
the old hot-tempered planter's, with a very young and pretty and
light-headed wife--his love of little children, of all wild creatures,
of nature, and of whatsoever was furthest removed from the common
material interests and concerns of a purely commercial community.
The things which excited other men--politics, sport, and the price of
crystals--were outside of his thoughts; and when men had done with
them for a season, when like the tempest they had "blown their fill" in
office and club-room and house and wanted a change, it was a relief to
turn to Mr. Abel and get him to discourse of his world--the world of
nature and of the spirit.

It was, all felt, a good thing to have a Mr. Abel in Georgetown. That
it was indeed good for me I quickly discovered. I had certainly
not expected to meet in such a place with any person to share my
tastes--that love of poetry which has been the chief passion and delight
of my life; but such a one I had found in Mr. Abel. It surprised me
that he, suckled on the literature of Spain, and a reader of only ten or
twelve years of English literature, possessed a knowledge of our modern
poetry as intimate as my own, and a love of it equally great. This
feeling brought us together and made us two--the nervous olive-skinned
Hispano-American of the tropics and the phlegmatic blue-eyed Saxon of
the cold north--one in spirit and more than brothers. Many were the
daylight hours we spent together and "tired the sun with talking"; many,
past counting, the precious evenings in that restful house of his where
I was an almost daily guest. I had not looked for such happiness; nor,
he often said, had he. A result of this intimacy was that the vague idea
concerning his hidden past, that some unusual experience had profoundly
affected him and perhaps changed the whole course of his life, did not
diminish, but, on the contrary, became accentuated, and was often in
my mind. The change in him was almost painful to witness whenever our
wandering talk touched on the subject of the aborigines, and of the
knowledge he had acquired of their character and languages when
living or travelling among them; all that made his conversation most
engaging--the lively, curious mind, the wit, the gaiety of spirit
tinged with a tender melancholy--appeared to fade out of it; even the
expression of his face would change, becoming hard and set, and he would
deal you out facts in a dry mechanical way as if reading them in a book.
It grieved me to note this, but I dropped no hint of such a feeling, and
would never have spoken about it but for a quarrel which came at last to
make the one brief solitary break in that close friendship of years.
I got into a bad state of health, and Abel was not only much concerned
about it, but annoyed, as if I had not treated him well by being ill,
and he would even say that I could get well if I wished to. I did not
take this seriously, but one morning, when calling to see me at the
office, he attacked me in a way that made me downright angry with him.
He told me that indolence and the use of stimulants was the cause of
my bad health. He spoke in a mocking way, with a presence of not quite
meaning it, but the feeling could not be wholly disguised. Stung by his
reproaches, I blurted out that he had no right to talk to me, even
in fun, in such a way. Yes, he said, getting serious, he had the best
right--that of our friendship. He would be no true friend if he kept his
peace about such a matter. Then, in my haste, I retorted that to me the
friendship between us did not seem so perfect and complete as it did to
him. One condition of friendship is that the partners in it should be
known to each other. He had had my whole life and mind open to him, to
read it as in a book. HIS life was a closed and clasped volume to me.

His face darkened, and after a few moments' silent reflection he got up
and left me with a cold good-bye, and without that hand-grasp which had
been customary between us.

After his departure I had the feeling that a great loss, a great
calamity, had befallen me, but I was still smarting at his too candid
criticism, all the more because in my heart I acknowledged its truth.
And that night, lying awake, I repented of the cruel retort I had made,
and resolved to ask his forgiveness and leave it to him to determine
the question of our future relations. But he was beforehand with me, and
with the morning came a letter begging my forgiveness and asking me to
go that evening to dine with him.

We were alone, and during dinner and afterwards, when we sat smoking and
sipping black coffee in the veranda, we were unusually quiet, even to
gravity, which caused the two white-clad servants that waited on us--the
brown-faced subtle-eyed old Hindu butler and an almost blue-black young
Guiana Negro--to direct many furtive glances at their master's face.
They were accustomed to see him in a more genial mood when he had a
friend to dine. To me the change in his manner was not surprising: from
the moment of seeing him I had divined that he had determined to open
the shut and clasped volume of which I had spoken--that the time had now
come for him to speak.


