
Before that well-nigh hopeless journey to the coast was half over I
became ill--so ill that anyone who had looked on me might well have
imagined that I had come to the end of my pilgrimage. That was what I
feared. For days I remained sunk in the deepest despondence; then, in a
happy moment, I remembered how, after being bitten by the serpent, when
death had seemed near and inevitable, I had madly rushed away through
the forest in search of help, and wandered lost for hours in the storm
and darkness, and in the end escaped death, probably by means of these
frantic exertions. The recollection served to inspire me with a new
desperate courage. Bidding good-bye to the Indian village where the
fever had smitten me, I set out once more on that apparently hopeless
adventure. Hopeless, indeed, it seemed to one in my weak condition. My
legs trembled under me when I walked, while hot sun and pelting rain
were like flame and stinging ice to my morbidly sensitive skin.

For many days my sufferings were excessive, so that I often wished
myself back in that milder purgatory of the forest, from which I had
been so anxious to escape. When I try to retrace my route on the map,
there occurs a break here--a space on the chart where names of rivers
and mountains call up no image to my mind, although, in a few
cases, they were names I seem to have heard in a troubled dream. The
impressions of nature received during that sick period are blurred, or
else so coloured and exaggerated by perpetual torturing anxiety, mixed
with half-delirious night-fancies, that I can only think of that country
as an earthly inferno, where I fought against every imaginable obstacle,
alternately sweating and freezing, toiling as no man ever toiled before.
Hot and cold, cold and hot, and no medium. Crystal waters; green shadows
under coverture of broad, moist leaves; and night with dewy fanning
winds--these chilled but did not refresh me; a region in which there was
no sweet and pleasant thing; where even the ita palm and mountain glory
and airy epiphyte starring the woodland twilight with pendent blossoms
had lost all grace and beauty; where all brilliant colours in earth and
heaven were like the unmitigated sun that blinded my sight and burnt my
brain. Doubtless I met with help from the natives, otherwise I do not
see how I could have continued my journey; yet in my dim mental picture
of that period I see myself incessantly dogged by hostile savages. They
flit like ghosts through the dark forest; they surround me and cut off
all retreat, until I burst through them, escaping out of their very
hands, to fly over some wide, naked savannah, hearing their shrill,
pursuing yells behind me, and feeling the sting of their poisoned arrows
in my flesh.

This I set down to the workings of remorse in a disordered mind and to
clouds of venomous insects perpetually shrilling in my ears and stabbing
me with their small, fiery needles.

Not only was I pursued by phantom savages and pierced by phantom arrows,
but the creations of the Indian imagination had now become as real to
me as anything in nature. I was persecuted by that superhuman man-eating
monster supposed to be the guardian of the forest. In dark, silent
places he is lying in wait for me: hearing my slow, uncertain footsteps
he starts up suddenly in my path, outyelling the bearded aguaratos in
the trees; and I stand paralysed, my blood curdled in my veins. His
huge, hairy arms are round me; his foul, hot breath is on my skin; he
will tear my liver out with his great green teeth to satisfy his raging
hunger. Ah, no, he cannot harm me! For every ravening beast, every
cold-blooded, venomous thing, and even the frightful Curupita, half
brute and half devil, that shared the forest with her, loved and
worshipped Rima, and that mournful burden I carried, her ashes, was a
talisman to save me. He has left me, the semi-human monster, uttering
such wild, lamentable cries as he hurries away into the deeper, darker
woods that horror changes to grief, and I, too, lament Rima for
the first time: a memory of all the mystic, unimaginable grace and
loveliness and joy that had vanished smites on my heart with such
sudden, intense pain that I cast myself prone on the earth and weep
tears that are like drops of blood.

Where in the rude savage heart of Guiana was this region where the
natural obstacles and pain and hunger and thirst and everlasting
weariness were terrible enough without the imaginary monsters and
legions of phantoms that peopled it, I cannot say. Nor can I conjecture
how far I strayed north or south from my course. I only know that
marshes that were like Sloughs of Despond, and barren and wet savannahs,
were crossed; and forests that seemed infinite in extent and never to
be got through; and scores of rivers that boiled round the sharp rocks,
threatening to submerge or dash in pieces the frail bark canoe--black
and frightful to look on as rivers in hell; and nameless mountain after
mountain to be toiled round or toiled over. I may have seen Roraima
during that mentally clouded period. I vaguely remember a far-extending
gigantic wall of stone that seemed to bar all further progress--a rocky
precipice rising to a stupendous height, seen by moonlight, with a huge
sinuous rope of white mist suspended from its summit; as if the guardian
camoodi of the mountain had been a league-long spectral serpent which
was now dropping its coils from the mighty stone table to frighten away
the rash intruder.

That spectral moonlight camoodi was one of many serpent fancies that
troubled me. There was another, surpassing them all, which attended
me many days. When the sun grew hot overhead and the way was over open
savannah country, I would see something moving on the ground at my side
and always keeping abreast of me. A small snake, one or two feet long.
No, not a small snake, but a sinuous mark in the pattern on a huge
serpent's head, five or six yards long, always moving deliberately at
my side. If a cloud came over the sun, or a fresh breeze sprang up,
gradually the outline of that awful head would fade and the well-defined
pattern would resolve itself into the motlings on the earth. But if the
sun grew more and more hot and dazzling as the day progressed, then the
tremendous ophidian head would become increasingly real to my sight,
with glistening scales and symmetrical markings; and I would walk
carefully not to stumble against or touch it; and when I cast my eyes
behind me I could see no end to its great coils extending across the
savannah. Even looking back from the summit of a high hill I could
see it stretching leagues and leagues away through forests and rivers,
across wide plains, valleys and mountains, to lose itself at last in the
infinite blue distance.

How or when this monster left me--washed away by cold rains perhaps--I
do not know. Probably it only transformed itself into some new shape,
its long coils perhaps changing into those endless processions and
multitudes of pale-faced people I seem to remember having encountered.
In my devious wanderings I must have reached the shores of the
undiscovered great White Lake, and passed through the long shining
streets of Manoa, the mysterious city in the wilderness. I see myself
there, the wide thoroughfare filled from end to end with people gaily
dressed as if for some high festival, all drawing aside to let the
wretched pilgrim pass, staring at his fever- and famine-wasted figure,
in its strange rags, with its strange burden.

A new Ahasuerus, cursed by inexpiable crime, yet sustained by a great
purpose.

But Ahasuerus prayed ever for death to come to him and ran to meet
it, while I fought against it with all my little strength. Only at
intervals, when the shadows seemed to lift and give me relief, would
I pray to Death to spare me yet a little longer; but when the shadows
darkened again and hope seemed almost quenched in utter gloom, then I
would curse it and defy its power. Through it all I clung to the belief
that my will would conquer, that it would enable me to keep off the
great enemy from my worn and suffering body until the wished goal was
reached; then only would I cease to fight and let death have its way.
There would have been comfort in this belief had it not been for that
fevered imagination which corrupted everything that touched me and gave
it some new hateful character. For soon enough this conviction that the
will would triumph grew to something monstrous, a parent of monstrous
fancies. Worst of all, when I felt no actual pain, but only unutterable
weariness of body and soul, when feet and legs were numb so that I knew
not whether I trod on dry hot rock or in slime, was the fancy that I was
already dead, so far as the body was concerned--had perhaps been dead
for days--that only the unconquerable will survived to compel the dead
flesh to do its work.

Whether it really was will--more potent than the bark of barks and wiser
than the physicians--or merely the vis medicatrix with which nature
helps our weakness even when the will is suspended, that saved me
I cannot say; but it is certain that I gradually recovered health,
physical and mental, and finally reached the coast comparatively well,
although my mind was still in a gloomy, desponding state when I first
walked the streets of Georgetown, in rags, half-starved and penniless.

But even when well, long after the discovery that my flesh was not only
alive, but that it was of an exceedingly tough quality, the idea born
during the darkest period of my pilgrimage, that die I must, persisted
in my mind. I had lived through that which would have killed most
men--lived only to accomplish the one remaining purpose of my life. Now
it was accomplished; the sacred ashes brought so far, with such infinite
labour, through so many and such great perils, were safe and would mix
with mine at last. There was nothing more in life to make me love it or
keep me prisoner in its weary chains. This prospect of near death
faded in time; love of life returned, and the earth had recovered its
everlasting freshness and beauty; only that feeling about Rima's ashes
did not fade or change, and is as strong now as it was then. Say that it
is morbid--call it superstition if you like; but there it is, the most
powerful motive I have known, always in all things to be taken into
account--a philosophy of life to be made to fit it. Or take it as a
symbol, since that may come to be one with the thing symbolized. In
those darkest days in the forest I had her as a visitor--a Rima of the
mind, whose words when she spoke reflected my despair. Yet even then I
was not entirely without hope. Heaven itself, she said, could not undo
that which I had done; and she also said that if I forgave myself,
Heaven would say no word, nor would she. That is my philosophy still:
prayers, austerities, good works--they avail nothing, and there is no
intercession, and outside of the soul there is no forgiveness in heaven
or earth for sin. Nevertheless there is a way, which every soul can find
out for itself--even the most rebellious, the most darkened with crime
and tormented by remorse. In that way I have walked; and, self-forgiven
and self-absolved, I know that if she were to return once more and
appear to me--even here where her ashes are--I know that her divine eyes
would no longer refuse to look into mine, since the sorrow which seemed
eternal and would have slain me to see would not now be in them.




