
When Nuflo at length opened his eyes he found me sitting alone and
despondent by the fire, just returned from my vain chase. I had been
caught in a heavy mist on the mountain-side, and was wet through as well
as weighed down by fatigue and drowsiness, consequent upon the previous
day's laborious march and my night-long vigil; yet I dared not think of
rest. She had gone from me, and I could not have prevented it; yet the
thought that I had allowed her to slip out of my arms, to go away alone
on that long, perilous journey, was as intolerable as if I had consented
to it.

Nuflo was at first startled to hear of her sudden departure; but he
laughed at my fears, affirming that after having once been over the
ground she could not lose herself; that she would be in no danger from
the Indians, as she would invariably see them at a distance and avoid
them, and that wild beasts, serpents, and other evil creatures would do
her no harm. The small amount of food she required to sustain life could
be found anywhere; furthermore, her journey would not be interrupted
by bad weather, since rain and heat had no effect on her. In the end he
seemed pleased that she had left us, saying that with Rima in the wood
the house and cultivated patch and hidden provisions and implements
would be safe, for no Indian would venture to come where she was. His
confidence reassured me, and casting myself down on the sandy floor of
the cave, I fell into a deep slumber, which lasted until evening; then
I only woke to share a meal with the old man, and sleep again until the
following day.

Nuflo was not ready to start yet; he was enamoured of the unaccustomed
comforts of a dry sleeping-place and a fire blown about by no wind and
into which fell no hissing raindrops. Not for two days more would he
consent to set out on the return journey, and if he could have persuaded
me our stay at Riolama would have lasted a week.

We had fine weather at starting; but before long it clouded, and then
for upwards of a fortnight we had it wet and stormy, which so hindered
us that it took us twenty-three days to accomplish the return journey,
whereas the journey out had only taken eighteen. The adventures we
met with and the pains we suffered during this long march need not be
related. The rain made us miserable, but we suffered more from hunger
than from any other cause, and on more than one occasion were reduced to
the verge of starvation. Twice we were driven to beg for food at Indian
villages, and as we had nothing to give in exchange for it, we got
very little. It is possible to buy hospitality from the savage without
fish-hooks, nails, and calico; but on this occasion I found myself
without that impalpable medium of exchange which had been so great
a help to me on my first journey to Parahuari. Now I was weak and
miserable and without cunning. It is true that we could have exchanged
the two dogs for cassava bread and corn, but we should then have been
worse off than ever. And in the end the dogs saved us by an occasional
capture--an armadillo surprised in the open and seized before it could
bury itself in the soil, or an iguana, opossum, or labba, traced by
means of their keen sense of smell to its hiding-place. Then Nuflo would
rejoice and feast, rewarding them with the skin, bones, and entrails.
But at length one of the dogs fell lame, and Nuflo, who was very hungry,
made its lameness an excuse for dispatching it, which he did apparently
without compunction, notwithstanding that the poor brute had served
him well in its way. He cut up and smoke-dried the flesh, and the
intolerable pangs of hunger compelled me to share the loathsome food
with him. We were not only indecent, it seemed to me, but cannibals to
feed on the faithful servant that had been our butcher. "But what does
it matter?" I argued with myself. "All flesh, clean and unclean, should
be, and is, equally abhorrent to me, and killing animals a kind of
murder. But now I find myself constrained to do this evil thing that
good may come. Only to live I take it now--this hateful strength-giver
that will enable me to reach Rima, and the purer, better life that is to
be."

During all that time, when we toiled onwards league after league in
silence, or sat silent by the nightly fire, I thought of many things;
but the past, with which I had definitely broken, was little in my mind.
Rima was still the source and centre of all my thoughts; from her they
rose, and to her returned. Thinking, hoping, dreaming, sustained me in
those dark days and nights of pain and privation. Imagination was the
bread that gave me strength, the wine that exhilarated. What sustained
old Nuflo's mind I know not. Probably it was like a chrysalis, dormant,
independent of sustenance; the bright-winged image to be called at some
future time to life by a great shouting of angelic hosts and noises of
musical instruments slept secure, coffined in that dull, gross nature.

The old beloved wood once more! Never did his native village in some
mountain valley seem more beautiful to the Switzer, returning, war-worn,
from long voluntary exile, than did that blue cloud on the horizon--the
forest where Rima dwelt, my bride, my beautiful--and towering over
it the dark cone of Ytaioa, now seem to my hungry eyes! How near at
last--how near! And yet the two or three intervening leagues to be
traversed so slowly, step by step--how vast the distance seemed! Even at
far Riolama, when I set out on my return, I scarcely seemed so far from
my love. This maddening impatience told on my strength, which was small,
and hindered me. I could not run nor even walk fast; old Nuflo, slow,
and sober, with no flame consuming his heart, was more than my equal in
the end, and to keep up with him was all I could do. At the finish he
became silent and cautious, first entering the belt of trees leading
away through the low range of hills at the southern extremity of the
wood. For a mile or upwards we trudged on in the shade; then I began
to recognize familiar ground, the old trees under which I had walked
or sat, and knew that a hundred yards further on there would be a first
glimpse of the palm-leaf thatch. Then all weakness forsook me; with a
low cry of passionate longing and joy I rushed on ahead; but I strained
my eyes in vain for a sight of that sweet shelter; no patch of pale
yellow colour appeared amidst the universal verdure of bushes, creepers,
and trees--trees beyond trees, trees towering above trees.

For some moments I could not realize it. No, I had surely made a
mistake, the house had not stood on that spot; it would appear in sight
a little further on. I took a few uncertain steps onwards, and then
again stood still, my brain reeling, my heart swelling nigh to bursting
with anguish. I was still standing motionless, with hand pressed to my
breast, when Nuflo overtook me. "Where is it--the house?" I stammered,
pointing with my hand. All his stolidity seemed gone now; he was
trembling too, his lips silently moving. At length he spoke: "They
have come--the children of hell have been here, and have destroyed
everything!"

"Rima! What has become of Rima?" I cried; but without replying he walked
on, and I followed.

The house, we soon found, had been burnt down. Not a stick remained.
Where it had stood a heap of black ashes covered the ground--nothing
more. But on looking round we could discover no sign of human beings
having recently visited the spot. A rank growth of grass and herbage now
covered the once clear space surrounding the site of the dwelling, and
the ash-heap looked as if it had been lying there for a month at least.
As to what had become of Rima the old man could say no word. He sat down
on the ground overwhelmed at the calamity: Runi's people had been there,
he could not doubt it, and they would come again, and he could only look
for death at their hands. The thought that Rima had perished, that she
was lost, was unendurable. It could not be! No doubt the Indians tract
come and destroyed the house during our absence; but she had returned,
and they had gone away again to come no more. She would be somewhere in
the forest, perhaps not far off, impatiently waiting our return. The old
man stared at me while I spoke; he appeared to be in a kind of stupor,
and made no reply: and at last, leaving him still sitting on the ground,
I went into the wood to look for Rima.

As I walked there, occasionally stopping to peer into some shadowy glade
or opening, and to listen, I was tempted again and again to call the
name of her I sought aloud; and still the fear that by so doing I might
bring some hidden danger on myself, perhaps on her, made me silent. A
strange melancholy rested on the forest, a quietude seldom broken by a
distant bird's cry. How, I asked myself, should I ever find her in that
wide forest while I moved about in that silent, cautious way? My only
hope was that she would find me. It occurred to me that the most likely
place to seek her would be some of the old haunts known to us both,
where we had talked together. I thought first of the mora tree, where
she had hidden herself from me, and thither I directed my steps. About
this tree, and within its shade, I lingered for upwards of an hour; and,
finally, casting my eyes up into the great dim cloud of green and purple
leaves, I softly called: "Rima, Rima, if you have seen me, and have
concealed yourself from me in your hiding-place, in mercy answer me--in
mercy come down to me now!" But Rima answered not, nor threw down
any red glowing leaves to mock me: only the wind, high up, whispered
something low and sorrowful in the foliage; and turning, I wandered away
at random into the deeper shadows.

By and by I was startled by the long, piercing cry of a wildfowl,
sounding strangely loud in the silence; and no sooner was the air still
again than it struck me that no bird had uttered that cry. The Indian
is a good mimic of animal voices, but practice had made me able to
distinguish the true from the false bird-note. For a minute or so I
stood still, at a loss what to do, then moved on again with greater
caution, scarcely breathing, straining my sight to pierce the shadowy
depths. All at once I gave a great start, for directly before me, on the
projecting root in the deeper shade of a tree, sat a dark, motionless
human form. I stood still, watching it for some time, not yet knowing
that it had seen me, when all doubts were put to flight by the form
rising and deliberately advancing--a naked Indian with a zabatana in
his hand. As he came up out of the deeper shade I recognized Piake, the
surly elder brother of my friend Kua-ko.

It was a great shock to meet him in the wood, but I had no time to
reflect just then. I only remembered that I had deeply offended him and
his people, that they probably looked on me as an enemy, and would
think little of taking my life. It was too late to attempt to escape by
flight; I was spent with my long journey and the many privations I had
suffered, while he stood there in his full strength with a deadly weapon
in his hand.

Nothing was left but to put a bold face on, greet him in a friendly way,
and invent some plausible story to account for my action in secretly
leaving the village.

He was now standing still, silently regarding me, and glancing round
I saw that he was not alone: at a distance of about forty yards on my
right hand two other dusky forms appeared watching me from the deep
shade.

"Piake!" I cried, advancing three or four steps.

"You have returned," he answered, but without moving. "Where from?"

"Riolama."

He shook his head, then asked where it was.

"Twenty days towards the setting sun," I said. As he remained silent I
added: "I heard that I could find gold in the mountains there. An old
man told me, and we went to look for gold."

"What did you find?"

"Nothing."

"Ah!"

And so our conversation appeared to be at an end. But after a few
moments my intense desire to discover whether the savages knew aught of
Rima or not made me hazard a question.

"Do you live here in the forest now?" I asked.

He shook his head, and after a while said: "We come to kill animals."

"You are like me now," I returned quickly; "you fear nothing."

He looked distrustfully at me, then came a little nearer and said: "You
are very brave. I should not have gone twenty days' journey with no
weapons and only an old man for companion. What weapons did you have?"

I saw that he feared me and wished to make sure that I had it not in
my power to do him some injury. "No weapon except my knife," I replied,
with assumed carelessness. With that I raised my cloak so as to let him
see for himself, turning my body round before him. "Have you found my
pistol?" I added.

He shook his head; but he appeared less suspicious now and came close up
to me. "How do you get food? Where are you going?" he asked.

I answered boldly: "Food! I am nearly starving. I am going to the
village to see if the women have got any meat in the pot, and to tell
Runi all I have done since I left him."

He looked at me keenly, a little surprised at my confidence perhaps,
then said that he was also going back and would accompany me One of the
other men now advanced, blow-pipe in hand, to join us, and, leaving the
wood, we started to walk across the savannah.

It was hateful to have to recross that savannah again, to leave the
woodland shadows where I had hoped to find Rima; but I was powerless:
I was a prisoner once more, the lost captive recovered and not yet
pardoned, probably never to be pardoned. Only by means of my own cunning
could I be saved, and Nuflo, poor old man, must take his chance.

Again and again as we tramped over the barren ground, and when we
climbed the ridge, I was compelled to stand still to recover breath,
explaining to Piake that I had been travelling day and night, with no
meat during the last three days, so that I was exhausted. This was
an exaggeration, but it was necessary to account in some way for the
faintness I experienced during our walk, caused less by fatigue and want
of food than by anguish of mind.

At intervals I talked to him, asking after all the other members of the
community by name. At last, thinking only of Rima, I asked him if any
other person or persons besides his people came to the wood now or lived
there.

He said no. "Once," I said, "there was a daughter of the Didi, a girl
you all feared: is she there now?"

He looked at me with suspicion and then shook his head. I dared not
press him with more questions; but after an interval he said plainly:
"She is not there now."

And I was forced to believe him; for had Rima been in the wood
they would not have been there. She was not there, this much I had
discovered. Had she, then, lost her way, or perished on that long
journey from Riolama? Or had she returned only to fall into the hands
of her cruel enemies? My heart was heavy in me; but if these devils in
human shape knew more than they had told me, I must, I said, hide my
anxiety and wait patiently to find it out, should they spare my
life. And if they spared me and had not spared that other sacred life
interwoven with mine, the time would come when they would find, too
late, that they had taken to their bosom a worse devil than themselves.



My arrival at the village created some excitement; but I was plainly no
longer regarded as a friend or one of the family. Runi was absent, and
I looked forward to his return with no little apprehension; he would
doubtless decide my fate. Kua-ko was also away. The others sat or stood
about the great room, staring at me in silence. I took no notice, but
merely asked for food, then for my hammock, which I hung up in the old
place, and lying down I fell into a doze. Runi made his appearance at
dusk. I rose and greeted him, but he spoke no word and, until he went to
his hammock, sat in sullen silence, ignoring my presence.

On the following day the crisis came. We were once more gathered in the
room--all but Kua-ko and another of the men, who had not yet returned
from some expedition--and for the space of half an hour not a word
was spoken by anyone. Something was expected; even the children were
strangely still, and whenever one of the pet birds strayed in at the
open door, uttering a little plaintive note, it was chased out again,
but without a sound. At length Runi straightened himself on his seat and
fixed his eyes on me; then cleared his throat and began a long harangue,
delivered in the loud, monotonous singsong which I knew so well and
which meant that the occasion was an important one. And as is usual
in such efforts, the same thought and expressions were used again and
again, and yet again, with dull, angry insistence. The orator of Guayana
to be impressive must be long, however little he may have to say.
Strange as it may seem, I listened critically to him, not without a
feeling of scorn at his lower intelligence. But I was easier in my mind
now. From the very fact of his addressing such a speech to me I was
convinced that he wished not to take my life, and would not do so if I
could clear myself of the suspicion of treachery.

I was a white man, he said, they were Indians; nevertheless they had
treated me well. They had fed me and sheltered me. They had done a
great deal for me: they had taught me the use of the zabatana, and had
promised to make one for me, asking for nothing in return. They had also
promised me a wife. How had I treated them? I had deserted them, going
away secretly to a distance, leaving them in doubt as to my intentions.
How could they tell why I had gone, and where? They had an enemy. Managa
was his name; he and his people hated them; I knew that he wished them
evil; I knew where to find him, for they had told me. That was what they
thought when I suddenly left them. Now I returned to them, saying that
I had been to Riolama. He knew where Riolama was, although he had never
been there: it was so far. Why did I go to Riolama? It was a bad place.
There were Indians there, a few; but they were not good Indians like
those of Parahuari, and would kill a white man. HAD I gone there? Why
had I gone there?

He finished at last, and it was my turn to speak, but he had given me
plenty of time, and my reply was ready. "I have heard you," I said.
"Your words are good words. They are the words of a friend. 'I am the
white man's friend,' you say; 'is he my friend? He went away secretly,
saying no word; why did he go without speaking to his friend who had
treated him well? Has he been to my enemy Managa? Perhaps he is a friend
of my enemy? Where has he been?' I must now answer these things, saying
true words to my friend. You are an Indian, I am a white man. You do not
know all the white man's thoughts. These are the things I wish to tell
you. In the white man's country are two kinds of men. There are the rich
men, who have all that a man can desire--houses made of stone, full of
fine things, fine clothes, fine weapons, fine ornaments; and they have
horses, cattle, sheep, dogs--everything they desire. Because they have
gold, for with gold the white man buys everything. The other kind
of white men are the poor, who have no gold and cannot buy or have
anything: they must work hard for the rich man for the little food he
gives them, and a rag to cover their nakedness; and if he gives them
shelter they have it; if not they must lie down in the rain out of
doors. In my own country, a hundred days from here, I was the son of a
great chief, who had much gold, and when he died it was all mine, and I
was rich. But I had an enemy, one worse than Managa, for he was rich and
had many people. And in a war his people overcame mine, and he took my
gold, and all I possessed, making me poor. The Indian kills his enemy,
but the white man takes his gold, and that is worse than death. Then I
said: 'I have been a rich man and now I am poor, and must work like a
dog for some rich man, for the sake of the little food he will throw me
at the end of each day. No, I cannot do it! I will go away and live with
the Indians, so that those who have seen me a rich man shall never see
me working like a dog for a master, and cry out and mock at me. For the
Indians are not like white men: they have no gold; they are not rich
and poor; all are alike. One roof covers them from the rain and sun.
All have weapons which they make; all kill birds in the forest and catch
fish in the rivers; and the women cook the meat and all eat from one
pot. And with the Indians I will be an Indian, and hunt in the forest
and eat with them and drink with them.' Then I left my country and came
here, and lived with you, Runi, and was well treated. And now, why did
I go away? This I have now to tell you. After I had been here a certain
time I went over there to the forest. You wished me not to go, because
of an evil thing, a daughter of the Didi, that lived there; but I feared
nothing and went. There I met an old man, who talked to me in the white
man's language. He had travelled and seen much, and told me one strange
thing. On a mountain at Riolama he told me that he had seen a great lump
of gold, as much as a man could carry. And when I heard this I said:
'With the gold I could return to my country, and buy weapons for myself
and all my people and go to war with my enemy and deprive him of all his
possessions and serve him as he served me.' I asked the old man to take
me to Riolama; and when he had consented I went away from here without
saying a word, so as not to be prevented. It is far to Riolama, and I
had no weapons; but I feared nothing. I said: 'If I must fight I must
fight, and if I must be killed I must be killed.' But when I got to
Riolama I found no gold. There was only a yellow stone which the old
man had mistaken for gold. It was yellow, like gold, but it would buy
nothing. Therefore I came back to Parahuari again, to my friend; and if
he is angry with me still because I went away without informing him, let
him say: 'Go and seek elsewhere for a new friend, for I am your friend
no longer.'"

I concluded thus boldly because I did not wish him to know that I had
suspected him of harbouring any sinister designs, or that I looked
on our quarrel as a very serious one. When I had finished speaking he
emitted a sound which expressed neither approval nor disapproval, but
only the fact that he had heard me. But I was satisfied. His expression
had undergone a favourable change; it was less grim. After a while
he remarked, with a peculiar twitching of the mouth which might have
developed into a smile: "The white man will do much to get gold. You
walked twenty days to see a yellow stone that would buy nothing." It was
fortunate that he took this view of the case, which was flattering to
his Indian nature, and perhaps touched his sense of the ludicrous. At
all events, he said nothing to discredit my story, to which they had all
listened with profound interest.

From that time it seemed to be tacitly agreed to let bygones be bygones;
and I could see that as the dangerous feeling that had threatened my
life diminished, the old pleasure they had once found in my company
returned. But my feelings towards them did not change, nor could they
while that black and terrible suspicion concerning Rima was in my heart.
I talked again freely with them, as if there had been no break in the
old friendly relations. If they watched me furtively whenever I went
out of doors, I affected not to see it. I set to work to repair my rude
guitar, which had been broken in my absence, and studied to show them
a cheerful countenance. But when alone, or in my hammock, hidden from
their eyes, free to look into my own heart, then I was conscious that
something new and strange had come into my life; that a new nature,
black and implacable, had taken the place of the old. And sometimes
it was hard to conceal this fury that burnt in me; sometimes I felt an
impulse to spring like a tiger on one of the Indians, to hold him fast
by the throat until the secret I wished to learn was forced from his
lips, then to dash his brains out against the stone. But they were many,
and there was no choice but to be cautious and patient if I wished to
outwit them with a cunning superior to their own.

Three days after my arrival at the village, Kua-ko returned with his
companion. I greeted him with affected warmth, but was really pleased
that he was back, believing that if the Indians knew anything of Rima he
among them all would be most likely to tell it.

Kua-ko appeared to have brought some important news, which he discussed
with Runi and the others; and on the following day I noticed that
preparations for an expedition were in progress. Spears and bows and
arrows were got ready, but not blow-pipes, and I knew by this that the
expedition would not be a hunting one. Having discovered so much, also
that only four men were going out, I called Kua-ko aside and begged him
to let me go with them. He seemed pleased at the proposal, and at once
repeated it to Runi, who considered for a little and then consented.

By and by he said, touching his bow: "You cannot fight with our weapons;
what will you do if we meet an enemy?"

I smiled and returned that I would not run away. All I wished to show
him was that his enemies were my enemies, that I was ready to fight for
my friend.

He was pleased at my words, and said no more and gave me no weapons.
Next morning, however, when we set out before daylight, I made the
discovery that he was carrying my revolver fastened to his waist. He
had concealed it carefully under the one simple garment he wore, but it
bulged slightly, and so the secret was betrayed. I had never believed
that he had lost it, and I was convinced that he took it now with the
object of putting it into my hands at the last moment in case of meeting
with an enemy.

From the village we travelled in a north-westerly direction, and before
noon camped in a grove of dwarf trees, where we remained until the sun
was low, then continued our walk through a rather barren country. At
night we camped again beside a small stream, only a few inches deep,
and after a meal of smoked meat and parched maize prepared to sleep till
dawn on the next day.

Sitting by the fire I resolved to make a first attempt to discover from
Kua-ko anything concerning Rima which might be known to him. Instead
of lying down when the others did, I remained seated, my guardian also
sitting--no doubt waiting for me to lie down first. Presently I moved
nearer to him and began a conversation in a low voice, anxious not to
rouse the attention of the other men.

"Once you said that Oalava would be given to me for a wife," I began.
"Some day I shall want a wife."

He nodded approval, and remarked sententiously that the desire to
possess a wife was common to all men.

"What has been left to me?" I said despondingly and spreading out my
hands. "My pistol gone, and did I not give Runi the tinder-box, and the
little box with a cock painted on it to you? I had no return--not even
the blow-pipe. How, then, can I get me a wife?"

He, like the others--dull-witted savage that he was--had come to the
belief that I was incapable of the cunning and duplicity they practiced.
I could not see a green parrot sitting silent and motionless amidst the
green foliage as they could; I had not their preternatural keenness of
sight; and, in like manner, to deceive with lies and false seeming was
their faculty and not mine. He fell readily into the trap. My return to
practical subjects pleased him. He bade me hope that Oalava might yet be
mine in spite of my poverty. It was not always necessary to have things
to get a wife: to be able to maintain her was enough; some day I would
be like one of themselves, able to kill animals and catch fish. Besides,
did not Runi wish to keep me with them for other reasons? But he could
not keep me wifeless. I could do much: I could sing and make music; I
was brave and feared nothing; I could teach the children to fight.

He did not say, however, that I could teach anything to one of his years
and attainments.

I protested that he gave me too much praise, that they were just as
brave. Did they not show a courage equal to mine by going every day to
hunt in that wood which was inhabited by the daughter of the Didi?

I came to this subject with fear and trembling, but he took it quietly.
He shook his head, and then all at once began to tell me how they first
came to go there to hunt. He said that a few days after I had secretly
disappeared, two men and a woman, returning home from a distant place
where they had been on a visit to a relation, stopped at the village.
These travellers related that two days' journey from Ytaioa they had
met three persons travelling in an opposite direction: an old man with
a white beard, followed by two yellow dogs, a young man in a big cloak,
and a strange-looking girl. Thus it came to be known that I had left the
wood with the old man and the daughter of the Didi. It was great news to
them, for they did not believe that we had any intention of returning,
and at once they began to hunt in the wood, and went there every day,
killing birds, monkeys, and other animals in numbers.

His words had begun to excite me greatly, but I studied to appear calm
and only slightly interested, so as to draw him on to say more.

"Then we returned," I said at last. "But only two of us, and not
together. I left the old man on the road, and SHE left us in Riolama.
She went away from us into the mountains--who knows whither!"

"But she came back!" he returned, with a gleam of devilish satisfaction
in his eyes that made the blood run cold in my veins.

It was hard to dissemble still, to tempt him to say something that
would madden me! "No, no," I answered, after considering his words. "She
feared to return; she went away to hide herself in the great mountains
beyond Riolama. She could not come back."

"But she came back!" he persisted, with that triumphant gleam in his
eyes once more. Under my cloak my hand had clutched my knife-handle, but
I strove hard against the fierce, almost maddening impulse to pluck it
out and bury it, quick as lightning, in his accursed throat.

He continued: "Seven days before you returned we saw her in the wood. We
were always expecting, watching, always afraid; and when hunting we were
three and four together. On that day I and three others saw her. It was
in an open place, where the trees are big and wide apart. We started
up and chased her when she ran from us, but feared to shoot. And in one
moment she climbed up into a small tree, then, like a monkey, passed
from its highest branches into a big tree. We could not see her there,
but she was there in the big tree, for there was no other tree near--no
way of escape. Three of us sat down to watch, and the other went back
to the village. He was long gone; we were just going to leave the tree,
fearing that she would do us some injury, when he came back, and with
him all the others, men, women, and children. They brought axes and
knives. Then Runi said: 'Let no one shoot an arrow into the tree
thinking to hit her, for the arrow would be caught in her hand and
thrown back at him. We must burn her in the tree; there is no way to
kill her except by fire.' Then we went round and round looking up, but
could see nothing; and someone said: 'She has escaped, flying like a
bird from the tree'; but Runi answered that fire would show. So we cut
down the small tree and lopped the branches off and heaped them round
the big trunk. Then, at a distance, we cut down ten more small trees,
and afterwards, further away, ten more, and then others, and piled them
all round, tree after tree, until the pile reached as far from the trunk
as that," and here he pointed to a bush forty to fifty yards from where
we sat.

The feeling with which I had listened to this recital had become
intolerable. The sweat ran from me in streams; I shivered like a person
in a fit of ague, and clenched my teeth together to prevent them from
rattling. "I must drink," I said, cutting him short and rising to my
feet. He also rose, but did not follow me, when, with uncertain steps, I
made my way to the waterside, which was ten or twelve yards away. Lying
prostrate on my chest, I took a long draught of clear cold water, and
held my face for a few moments in the current. It sent a chill through
me, drying my wet skin, and bracing me for the concluding part of the
hideous narrative. Slowly I stepped back to the fireside and sat down
again, while he resumed his old place at my side.

"You burnt the tree down," I said. "Finish telling me now and let me
sleep--my eyes are heavy."

"Yes. While the men cut and brought trees, the women and children
gathered dry stuff in the forest and brought it in their arms and piled
it round. Then they set fire to it on all sides, laughing and shouting:
'Burn, burn, daughter of the Didi!' At length all the lower branches of
the big tree were on fire, and the trunk was on fire, but above it was
still green, and we could see nothing. But the flames went up higher and
higher with a great noise; and at last from the top of the tree, out
of the green leaves, came a great cry, like the cry of a bird: 'Abel!
Abel!' and then looking we saw something fall; through leaves and smoke
and flame it fell like a great white bird killed with an arrow and
falling to the earth, and fell into the flames beneath. And it was the
daughter of the Didi, and she was burnt to ashes like a moth in the
flames of a fire, and no one has ever heard or seen her since."

It was well for me that he spoke rapidly, and finished quickly.
Even before he had quite concluded I drew my cloak round my face and
stretched myself out. And I suppose that he at once followed my example,
but I had grown blind and deaf to outward things just then. My heart no
longer throbbed violently; it fluttered and seemed to grow feebler and
feebler in its action: I remember that there was a dull, rushing sound
in my ears, that I gasped for breath, that my life seemed ebbing away.
After these horrible sensations had passed, I remained quiet for about
half an hour; and during this time the picture of that last act in the
hateful tragedy grew more and more distinct and vivid in my mind, until
I seemed to be actually gazing on it, until my ears were filled with the
hissing and crackling of the fire, the exultant shouts of the savages,
and above all the last piercing cry of "Abel! Abel!" from the cloud of
burning foliage. I could not endure it longer, and rose at last to my
feet. I glanced at Kua-ko lying two or three yards away, and he, like
the others, was, or appeared to be, in a deep sleep; he was lying on
his back, and his dark firelit face looked as still and unconscious as
a face of stone. Now was my chance to escape--if to escape was my wish.
Yes; for I now possessed the coveted knowledge, and nothing more was to
be gained by keeping with my deadly enemies. And now, most fortunately
for me, they had brought me far on the road to that place of the five
hills where Managa lived--Managa, whose name had been often in my
mind since my return to Parahuari. Glancing away from Kua-ko's still
stone-like face. I caught sight of that pale solitary star which Runi
had pointed out to me low down in the north-western sky when I had asked
him where his enemy lived. In that direction we had been travelling
since leaving the village; surely if I walked all night, by tomorrow I
could reach Managa's hunting-ground, and be safe and think over what I
had heard and on what I had to do.

I moved softly away a few steps, then thinking that it would be well to
take a spear in my hand, I turned back, and was surprised and startled
to notice that Kua-ko had moved in the interval. He had turned over on
his side, and his face was now towards me. His eyes appeared closed, but
he might be only feigning sleep, and I dared not go back to pick up the
spear. After a moment's hesitation I moved on again, and after a second
glance back and seeing that he did not stir, I waded cautiously across
the stream, walked softly twenty or thirty yards, and then began to run.
At intervals I paused to listen for a moment; and presently I heard a
pattering sound as of footsteps coming swiftly after me. I instantly
concluded that Kua-ko had been awake all the time watching my movements,
and that he was now following me. I now put forth my whole speed, and
while thus running could distinguish no sound. That he would miss me,
for it was very dark, although with a starry sky above, was my only
hope; for with no weapon except my knife my chances would be small
indeed should he overtake me. Besides, he had no doubt roused the others
before starting, and they would be close behind. There were no bushes
in that place to hide myself in and let them pass me; and presently, to
make matters worse, the character of the soil changed, and I was running
over level clayey ground, so white with a salt efflorescence that a
dark object moving on it would show conspicuously at a distance. Here
I paused to look back and listen, when distinctly came the sound of
footsteps, and the next moment I made out the vague form of an Indian
advancing at a rapid rate of speed and with his uplifted spear in his
hand. In the brief pause I had made he had advanced almost to within
hurling distance of me, and turning, I sped on again, throwing off my
cloak to ease my flight. The next time I looked back he was still in
sight, but not so near; he had stopped to pick up my cloak, which would
be his now, and this had given me a slight advantage. I fled on, and had
continued running for a distance perhaps of fifty yards when an object
rushed past me, tearing through the flesh of my left arm close to the
shoulder on its way; and not knowing that I was not badly wounded nor
how near my pursuer might be, I turned in desperation to meet him,
and saw him not above twenty-five yards away, running towards me with
something bright in his hand. It was Kua-ko, and after wounding me with
his spear he was about to finish me with his knife. O fortunate young
savage, after such a victory, and with that noble blue cloth cloak for
trophy and covering, what fame and happiness will be yours! A change
swift as lightning had come over me, a sudden exultation. I was wounded,
but my right hand was sound and clutched a knife as good as his, and
we were on an equality. I waited for him calmly. All weakness, grief,
despair had vanished, all feelings except a terrible raging desire to
spill his accursed blood; and my brain was clear and my nerves like
steel, and I remembered with something like laughter our old amusing
encounters with rapiers of wood. Ah, that was only making believe and
childish play; this was reality. Could any white man, deprived of his
treacherous, far-killing weapon, meet the resolute savage, face to face
and foot to foot, and equal him with the old primitive weapons? Poor
youth, this delusion will cost you dear! It was scarcely an equal
contest when he hurled himself against me, with only his savage strength
and courage to match my skill; in a few moments he was lying at my
feet, pouring out his life blood on that white thirsty plain. From his
prostrate form I turned, the wet, red knife in my hand, to meet the
others, still thinking that they were on the track and close at hand.
Why had he stooped to pick up the cloak if they were not following--if
he had not been afraid of losing it? I turned only to receive their
spears, to die with my face to them; nor was the thought of death
terrible to me; I could die calmly now after killing my first assailant.
But had I indeed killed him? I asked, hearing a sound like a groan
escape from his lips. Quickly stooping, I once more drove my weapon to
the hilt in his prostrate form, and when he exhaled a deep sigh, and his
frame quivered, and the blood spurted afresh, I experienced a feeling
of savage joy. And still no sound of hurrying footsteps came to my
listening ears and no vague forms appeared in the darkness. I concluded
that he had either left them sleeping or that they had not followed in
the right direction. Taking up the cloak, I was about to walk on, when
I noticed the spear he had thrown at me lying where it had fallen some
yards away, and picking that up also, I went on once more, still keeping
the guiding star before me.


