{"name": "Chapter 17", "summary": "CHAPTER SUMMARY AND NOTES CHAPTER 17 Summary The creature completes his tale and puts forward his suggestion. Victor is shocked to hear this and refuses to comply at first. But on reflecting upon the monster's plight, for which he has been responsible, he consents. Moreover, the creature promises to stay as far away as possible from humankind. He assures Victor that he would escape with his female companion into the fields of South America. He claims that he would survive on berries and acorns. The monster announces that he will return as soon as the creature is ready. He also warns that he will observe his creator throughout. Victor now heads home at sunset and reaches a fountain where he cries bitterly. He reaches Chamounix in the morning and returns home. He refuses to answer any questions about his haggard appearance. He finally resolves to fulfill the monster's request. Notes Victor is bewildered and perplexed at his creature's story. But his first reaction to the monster's request is anger. He refuses to take a further burden of responsibility by creating another monster, which would bring more death and destruction into the world. It is strange that he should choose to blame the creature totally. After all, he has heard the whole story and knows how helpless the monster actually is, regardless of his physical strength. The author never once shows Victor to be truly repentant for his deeds. The monster has been wreaking havoc, but mainly because he has had to bear rejection at the hands of Victor. This had left him distraught in the first place. The monster is presented as a sensitive being, capable of love and caring. But when his master deserts him, he is on his own, helpless and harassed. Victor consents to the creature's demands on one reasonable condition, that the monster leave Europe. His dilemma is rather peculiar. On the one hand, he is responsible for the creature's sad plight, and therefore it is his duty to keep him happy by providing him with a female of the species. On the other hand, two monsters are capable of much more destruction. Again, only Victor would be responsible for this possible catastrophe. He again seeks to escape and wishes the stars and clouds would take pity on him and turn him into nothingness. Agony has found a place in his life again.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820054109/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmFrankenstein28.asp"}