{"name": "book 6, Chapter 51", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180310100656/http://www.gradesaver.com/adam-bede/study-guide/summary-book-sixth", "summary": "Lisbeth begs her not to go, saying that perhaps Seth was not good enough for her, but Adam could be made to like her if she stops for a little while longer. After she leaves, Lisbeth complains to Seth that she would not have gone if Adam were more fond of her. Seth asks if she has said anything about the matter, but Lisbeth says that she can tell. Seth says that she should not tell Adam, because it will only make him uneasy if he does not feel the same way. On Sunday morning, Seth goes to hear a preacher, and Lisbeth is left alone with Adam. Adam reads the Bible, and his mother remarks that an angel in the illustration looks like Dinah. Adam says that this is so, but Dinah is prettier. Lisbeth asks Adam why he does not marry her and says that he should ask her. Lisbeth says that she is sure that Dinah loves him. Adam goes out walking in the fields and wonders if Seth would be hurt. He does not think that he would be, because he has never been jealous that Lisbeth loves him better. He meets Seth as he is coming home from Dinah's preaching. Seth tells Adam that there was a naughty boy who ceased to be bad once he heard Dinah's voice, then went up on the platform and pulled at her until she took him onto her lap for the rest of the prayer. The boy's mother cried to see it. Seth gives his consent to Adam regarding asking Dinah to marry him, after he guesses that this is what he means to do. Adam goes over to the Poysers' farm", "analysis": "During Adam's visit to the Poyser farm, what Eliot has been foreshadowing for a number of chapters now becomes obvious: Dinah is in love with Adam.  This is quite interesting given that Dinah said to Seth and repeated on a number of other occasions that her religious work prevents her from having a marriage and family of her own.  So, either she has changed her mind about the stringency with which she wishes to attend to her religious beliefs, or perhaps she has found a way to make them compatible with marriage. Dinah is still struggling with her own balance between the idea of being in love and maintaining her commitment to her religion.  When she says that she is leaving her aunt's house to avoid temptation, it is quite clear that this temptation is Adam.  By phrasing her attraction toward him as a \"temptation,\" Dinah implies not only that she respects him and wishes to have a family with him, but also that she has lustful thoughts about him-something that must be quite unsettling for such a religious woman. In Chapter Fifty, the scene in which Adam and Dinah walk home together feels painful to read in that Adam is unintentionally hurting Dinah.  Adam is blissfully unaware of Dinah's feelings toward him, and he does not realize how indelicate it is to raise the issue of her feelings for his brother.  At this point in the novel, it is difficult to see how there could be a comic resolution, because it seems that even if Adam were to become agreeable to a relationship with Dinah, his brother's feelings would stand in the way. In Chapter Fifty-One, Lisbeth takes on the role of the wise fool.  She has done nothing but interfere for the entire novel-making Adam feel guilty for the good fortune that he has enjoyed, and nagging her two boys incessantly.  She finally shows a sign of usefulness to the plot by saying what at this point is clear to everyone but Adam.  She is painfully blunt with Dinah, begging her to stay in case her presence could convince Adam to fall in love with her.  Seth's lack of jealousy is almost unbelievable.  In the end, he embodies a figure that is almost more religious than Dinah in that he puts others' happiness entirely before his own. When Adam asks Dinah to marry him in the next chapter, she begins to behave like a woman rather than a religious figure for the first time in the novel.  Like Hetty, she blushes and dreams at the thought of the man she loves.  Unlike Hetty, though, Dinah controls her desires, thinking that they will be detrimental to her religious practice.  By this point in the novel, Eliot's readers are likely to sympathize deeply with Adam, whose courtship of Dinah is more realistic and acceptable in some ways than his infatuation with Hetty was.  This makes Dinah's refusal to accept him seem unreasonable and too ascetic and self-denying, another implicit criticism of the Methodist lifestyle which, in other parts of the novel, Eliot seems to be on the edge of endorsing. In Chapter Fifty-Three, the scene of the Harvest dinner at the Poysers' farm recalls the scene of Arthur's birthday party at his estate. Both are decidedly pastoral in tone.  The pastoral mode in literature celebrates the common man by giving him a veneer of cleanliness and outdoorsiness.  The rougher characters aare portrayed as clowns or buffoons, as Wiry Ben was when he danced at the Captain's birthday celebration.  Here, the rougher servants of the family are exaggerated as comic, even down to the \"half-witted\" Tom Saft. Chapter Fifty-Four, in which Adam follows Dinah to Leeds, is heavily moralistic. Aware that her novel is drawing to a close, Eliot takes care to reiterate the values that she has tried to impart in her long work. To contemporary readers, her manner may seem heavy-handed. She reinforces the fact that her work focuses on the common man by having Dinah return from preaching to the working class in a newly industrial city.  She reinvokes the pastoral backdrop by having the two meet on a beautiful rural hill in order to exchange their loving vows.  Most of all  she seems to assert a Christian humanism  over Dinah's earlier ascetic Christianity, now that Dinah is deciding to start a family. What is more, with the denomination's new rules against women preachers, Dinah is excluded from the full religious life she once had. The structure of the novel is built around the marriage between Dinah and Adam.  Eliot mixes comedy with tragedy by having most of the novel describe Hetty's tragic flaw  and her subsequent downfall.  Like the comedy of manners in predecessors like Jane Austen, Eliot has her novel end in a marriage that is advantageous to both parties. Therefore the novel seems to qualify as a comedy.  Unlike Austen's characters, however, Adam and Dinah remain on the fringe of poverty and have a very modest wedding. The epilogue is suggestive of Eliot's idea of an ideal society. It also functions, as was the fashion in Victorian novels, to tie up all of the loose ends and reveal what the characters do later in life.  Having repudiated Christianity at an early age, Eliot seems to have chosen family values and the connections between man and nature as her subject.  The comedy began with two possible pairs, but the numbers shifted with Hetty's exile and death.  Three people--two men and a woman--is an awkward number with which to end a comedy, but Eliot tries to manage the impossibility of a double marriage by writing of Seth's non-jealous forgiveness of his brother. This unrealistic state of emotions has been identified as one of the few weaknesses in a magnificently constructed plot."}