{"name": "book 1, Chapter 5", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180310100656/http://www.gradesaver.com/adam-bede/study-guide/summary-book-first-chapters-1-8", "summary": "The rain was also strong at Broxton Parsonage, where Mr. Irwine has been playing chess with his mother. The home is pleasant but not opulent. The vicar wears a powdered wig, and his mother is elegant, wearing a number of rings. She has just won the chess game. The vicar's sister, Anne, is an invalid. Mr. Rann comes to tell the vicar about the happenings in Hayslope. He warns the vicar that the Methodists are likely to get the upper hand in the town if he is not careful, although he does not want to advise him too much because that would mean \"getting above his station. Mr. Rann says that Dinah is about to leave, but he is more worried about Will Maskery, who has no skill as a preacher, yet who insults the townspeople. The vicar says to leave well enough alone; since Maskery has found religion, he has become more responsible, stopped beating his wife, and stopped drinking. Arthur Donnithorne bursts on the scene. He is a well-dressed, handsome young man. Mr. Rann finally comes out with the news that Thias Bede has been found dead. Adam asks the vicar if his father can be buried by the White Thorn because of a dream that his mother had. The vicar agrees. Captain Donnithorne says that he respects Adam greatly and would like to have him manage the woods on his estate, but for some reason his grandfather dislikes him. He has also seen Dinah and was quite stuck by her appearance. The vicar says that he would like to see her. The Captain's arm is in a sling, explaining why he is not with his regiment, but he expects to return in August. The vicar's mother, Mrs. Irwine, says that she would never have been godmother to the Captain except that when he was a baby he took after his mother's side. The Captain has brought Mrs. Irwine a few books including Lyrical Ballads. The vicar visits his invalid sister upstairs. Eliot remarks that aristocratic families thought that it was a pity that such a magnificent mother should have such insignificant girls, while the townspeople think that they are good at medicine and call them \"the gentlefolks. It is thought that the vicar would have taken a wife if he had not needed to take care of his mother and two spinster sisters. Eliot says that the vicar has no particular religious fervor, although he is a good man. The vicar sets off with Mr. Rann", "analysis": "Chapter One mainly serves to introduce the namesake character of the book and to show off certain of his characteristics as he interacts with others.  An interesting aspect of the author's description of the main character is her characterization of him as having \"Celtic blood.\"  While this might refer to Welsh or Scottish or Irish descent, by including this detail, Eliot signals to her audience that Adam might tend towards the poetic or towards the violent, both common stereotypes of the Celts at the time that she was writing this novel.  Adam Bede and his brother, Seth, although they work at the same trade, are set up as opposites in many ways, especially with their divergent opinions about religion. Religion is first brought up by Wiry Ben, who paraphrases Matthew 11:9, saying, \"What come ye out for to see?  A prophetess?  Yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophetess-an uncommon pretty young woman.\"  Adam rebukes Ben for taking the Bible lightly in referring to a pretty young Methodist preacher in their town, showing that he is indeed a religious man.  Yet, he follows this rebuke by extolling modern progress and technology, rather than the inward-looking practices of the Methodists.  He mentions Arkwright's mills in particular, referring to the spinning frame which Sir Richard Arkwright  invented.  In some ways like Adam, Arkwright was a self-taught mechanic who, after working all day, at night studied the mathematics that was needed for his inventions. Chapter Two introduces Dinah as a very charismatic young woman.  The view of the Methodist meeting on the Green is filtered through the eyes of the horseman, who has the advantages of being an outsider to the community and having some previous knowledge of Methodism.  Given his ability to compare Dinah to other Methodist preachers, whom he has seen thump the Bible, mock holiness, or rant, the reader realizes that this is not the first Methodist meeting that he has attended. The reference to \"licking the French\" sets the novel in the time of the Napoleonic Wars, which began in February 1793.  The French fought against the self-proclaimed emperor, Napoleon, to try to prevent his imperialistic sweep through Europe.  It is possible that the horseman is a recruiter for the British Army. In her sermon, Dinah mentions the founding father of Methodism, John Wesley, as her inspiration.  Methodism is a denomination of Christianity founded in Britain in the eighteenth century that emphasized the idea that anyone can be saved.  Along with his younger brother Charles, John Wesley launched a religious movement known for its open-air revivals.  The preachers at these revivals were often so animated that they were accused of fanaticism. We see in Chapter Three that the novel not only examines the working class but demonstrates a way to write a novel about the working class.  In this chapter, for the first time, the voice of the narrator comes forth in first-person. The narrator seems to overlap enough with Eliot herself that this ClassicNote will refer to the narrator as Eliot, even though the narrator does not necessarily represent Eliot's views precisely. Eliot's strong voice in the novel is an acknowledgment of the fact that she is writing a new type of novel.  Her heroes are not handsome horsemen, and her heroines do not languish in fancy dresses.  Rather, Adam Bede is the beginning of a great tradition of social realism in novels.  Eliot advocates strongly for this new type of novel, arguing that \"we can hardly think Dinah and Seth beneath our sympathy.\" In Chapter Four, the night that Adam spends alone making the coffin involves elements of the gothic.  First, when the rapping on the door first occurs, Gyp howls instead of barking as usual.  Second, Eliot is careful to point out that Adam is uneasy and imagines a number of supernatural occurrences when he does not find anyone at the door.  Eliot describes superstition as an unavoidable part of Adam's peasant nature.  Although this may seem condescending, it is justified when Adam and Seth find their father dead the next morning--although it is as yet unclear what connection the two events might have. Although Adam Bede is quite clearly a novel, it also contains more direct commentary on human nature in general than is common in most fiction.  This means that, at times, it reads rather more like a treatise than like a novel.  This is another sign of Eliot's own views coming through. For example, when Adam stays up all night, he feels a great deal of resentment towards his father, and he thinks rather bitterly that the man will be a \"thorn in his side\" for many years to come.  But when he finds his father dead, Eliot observes that \"when death, the great Reconciler, has come, it is never our tenderness that we repent of, but our severity.\"  By generalizing in this statement, Eliot indicates that a certain way of feeling not only applies to Adam but also to most humans.  This is a successful way of convincing readers that a story about the working class can have implications for, or shed light on, their own lives as well. In Chapter Five, the vicar's powdered wig is a signal of old age and conservatism in his society.  Eliot is careful to describe his place in the community precisely.  He is well liked, but he has no burning immediate concern about the souls of his parishioners.  He cannot, or will not, work himself up into an emotional state in the manner of some of the most famous Methodist preachers.  By characterizing him in this way, Eliot demonstrates that there is a space left in the community for the role of leading some of the more thoughtful, religious townspeople. The scene between the vicar, his mother, and Mr. Rann has some qualities of a farce. Mr. Rann delays telling the most important news as a result of his eagerness to talk about what is most important to him.  Mr. Rann wastes a great deal of time ranting and raving about the fact that a Methodist has insulted him by calling him irreligious, and he forgets to inform the vicar that a death has just occurred in his vicarage.  As in a traditional farce, the characters are exaggerated according to stereotypes: the rigid, class-conscious matron; the jolly, accommodating vicar; the bumbling rustic, eager to show off his own holiness or intelligence to persons of higher position. Chapter Six shows some interesting similarities among members of the Poyser family.  It draws a familial relationship between Dinah and Hetty of which the reader was not previously aware.  Their relationship is not one of blood; Hetty is Mr. Poyser's niece, while Dinah is Mrs. Poyser's niece.  The two girls, both love interests of the respective Bede brothers, act as foils for one another.  Dinah is serious and unromantic, while Hetty is flighty and beautiful, using the surfaces that her aunt has polished to admire her own reflection. Mrs. Poyser's nervousness at seeing the grandson of her landlord approach reflects on her position in the social hierarchy.  In late eighteenth-century England, the social hierarchy was quite rigid, and everyone from the poorest farmer to the richest aristocrat knew his place in the pecking order.  The Poysers have been viewed in previous chapters as quite high-class given their large farm.  It has even been suggested that a marriage between Dinah and Seth would not quite be acceptable given the difference in social status.  Problems of love and marriage across socioeconomic boundaries constitute a common theme among early female novelists, including Jane Austen and the Bronte sisters, who influenced George Eliot. Chapter Seven begins a flirtation between the Captain and Hetty.  The story of a beautiful milk-maid seduced by a squire dates back to the days of Chaucer, and Eliot updates it by making the unequal nature of the interest clear from the very start.  It is obvious that the seduction will succeed if the Captain wants it to, not only because he is young and attractive, but also because he is coming from such a position of power over the Poyser family. It is in his power not only to invite the family to a ball, but also to evict them from his land if he so desires.  That this unequal distribution of power might affect his relationship with Hetty is demonstrated by the unquestioning acquiescence of Totty to the Captain's questions.  When he asks her if she has a pocket, she \"immediately and with great gravity lifted up her frock and showed a tiny pink pocket.\"  Totty's action has a distinctly sexual undertone of obedience, and it may foreshadow Hetty's future actions. In Chapter Eight the narrator's visible interjections become less visible.  It is possible that Eliot is willing to generalize expansively about human nature, but she wants to keep her feelings about religion to herself.  Critiquing religious thought and practice can be dangerous, but perhaps she is choosing to let the reader see for himself what is going on in Methodism and how it affects the rural poor.  Eliot does not come down in favor of Methodism, but she gives it a very respectable and persuasive voice in the character of Dinah, which impresses even the local vicar. Although she only makes a brief appearance in this chapter, the reader must begin to wonder if Hetty is a suitable match for Adam.  She is flirtatious and flighty in the previous chapters, which is forgivable in a pretty, young girl. But she now is thoughtless and uncaring to hear that Adam's father has died, which is somewhat shocking."}