{"name": "Chapter 20", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201025054346/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/j/the-jungle/summary-and-analysis/chapter-20", "summary": "Unable to remain drunk very long on the pittance he has, Jurgis returns to the widow's to find out that Elzbieta has begged enough money to pay for a funeral mass for Ona. Elzbieta uses baby Antanas as leverage as she encourages Jurgis to find a job, but he is refused a job even at the fertilizer plant. Finally he is offered a job, but when he reports for work, the boss tells him that he cannot use him. Jurgis is blacklisted. After weeks of unemployment, a chance meeting with a former union associate leads Jurgis to a job in the harvester works. Jurgis is heartened by his new job and begins to make plans for the future, only to be laid off ten days later.", "analysis": "With Ona's death, the only thing Jurgis lives for is his son, Antanas. True to his character, Jurgis diligently looks for gainful employment. Recognizing his responsibilities as a father, he even returns to the fertilizer plant, but to no avail. More potential workers exist in Packingtown than do jobs; therefore, packers have the ability to blacklist perceived troublemakers. This is another way the owners exercise power over the laborers. Getting a job outside the city seems to be an ideal situation, because working conditions are better there. Working as a harvester seems better than working in a factory. But work as a harvester is seasonal. When Jurgis is laid off, he realizes he is still at the whim of a capitalistic system that does not care for its employees, only its profits. Glossary cur a dog of mixed breed; a mongrel. angleworm an earthworm: so called because it is used for fishing bait. treason betrayal of trust or faith. blacklist a list of persons who have been censured and who are being discriminated against or refused employment. valise a piece of hand luggage. philanthropist a person, especially a wealthy one, who is interested in the general human welfare, especially as shown in large-scale gifts to charities. monopoly exclusive control of a commodity or service in a given market, or control that makes possible the fixing of prices and the virtual elimination of free competition."}