{"name": "act v, scene i", "summary": "scene i  Touchstone and Audrey wander through the forest discussing their postponed marriage. Audrey claims that the priest was qualified to perform the ceremony, regardless of Jaques's opinion. Switching topics, Touchstone mentions that there is a youth in the forest who loves Audrey. Just then, William, the youth in question, appears. Touchstone asks William if he is witty, and William responds that he is. Touchstone then asks if William is in love with Audrey. Again, the young man responds affirmatively. When Touchstone asks William if he is educated, William admits that he is not, and Touchstone sets out to teach him a lesson. o have is to have,\" he says, meaning that Audrey, to whom he is engaged, is not available to other men. He orders William to leave, employing an exhaustive list of synonyms so that the simple lad is sure to understand him. William exits, just as Corin enters to fetch the couple on Rosalind's behalf", "analysis": "Act V, scenes i-iii In the encounter between Touchstone and William, the sophistication of the court overwhelms the simplicity and ignorance of the country. But though Touchstone clearly defeats William in the country boy's attempt to win Audrey, his performance strikes us as farcical rather than triumphant. Touchstone may not be as ignorant as the uneducated country boy, but his inflated rhetoric makes him appear the more foolish of the two. Touchstone dazzles William with his city wit, for the lad lacks the means to see the ridiculousness of Touchstone's threats. But, to audiences watching Touchstone's tirade, the style and sophistication of the city may lose its luster. \tIn Act V, scene iii, Touchstone goes on to deflate the spiritually idealized brand of love. As the duke's pages sing a ballad that compares love to springtime, indulging every cliche from sweet lovers to trilling birds, Touchstone dismisses the song as senseless. His criticism recalls Rosalind's dismissal of literature's greatest lovers in Act IV, scene i, but it fails to convince. Whereas Rosalind's criticism seems imbued with a wide-ranging and generous understanding of the world, Touchstone's opinion seems narrow and begrudging. Although Touchstone is fundamentally correct in denying that love and budding springtime are one and the same, he remains blind to the song's undeniable beauty. Spring may not, in truth, be only a matter of \"green cornfield\" and a \"hey ding-a-ding ding,\" but the song captures something of the truth--the nonsense, irrationality, and sheer beauty of being in love . One cannot expect Touchstone to see this splendor, given his rather myopic focus on the mechanics of sex. Again, his insight is most valuable as a contrast to that of Rosalind, who could well enjoy the page's song even as she absorbs its silliness. \tQuick, irrational love is contagious in the Forest of Ardenne, as evidenced by Oliver's head-over-heels involvement with the disguised Celia. At court, Oliver would have no cause to notice, let alone fall in love with, a common shepherdess, but in Ardenne the injustices of class are cast aside for the sake of romance. Oliver's happy union brings about a swift end to Rosalind's game: she cannot stand to see her beloved Orlando jealous and unhappy, and so determines to hang up Ganymede's trousers. Her plan is quite clear as she strikes a marriage bargain with Phoebe, and we see the inevitability of a slew of weddings on the horizon. Some critics condemn the play at this point for what they see as a return to the normative social order that it has, thus far, delighted in subverting. As the close of the final act draws near, it is no surprise that the boys end up with the girls, and that life at court resumes, presumably, with its rigid class structures in place--in short, that all returns to normal.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210126025145/https://www.sparknotes.com/shakespeare/asyoulikeit/section9/"}