{"name": "Chapter 18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421025427/https://www.gradesaver.com/bleak-house/study-guide/summary-chapters-17-19", "summary": "In Chapter 18, Richard begins at Kenge and Carboy's. The rest of the party leave him in London, and go to visit Mr. Boythorn at his place down in Lincolnshire, which neighbors the Dedlocks' estate. When the party goes to church, Esther sees not only Rosa, Mrs. Rouncewell, and Mademoiselle Hortense, but also Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock. Esther seems to recognize Lady Dedlock's face, and wonders at the resemblance to her godmother's face. She also vaguely realizes that Lady Dedlock's face resembles her own when seen in the mirror. Later, Esther, Ada, and John Jarndyce then go for a walk and take refuge in a gamekeeper's lodge when it rains. Lady Dedlock is already there, and Esther experiences another weird feeling upon meeting Lady Dedlock. Lady Dedlock and John Jarndyce are old acquaintances, but it appears Mr. Jarndyce was actually closer to Lady Dedlock's sister. They discuss Lady Dedlock's sister's death, as she \"died in retirement. Esther admires Lady Dedlock's beauty and imperious manner. Lady Dedlock is kind and graceful to Ada, but gives not very much attention to Esther. When the rain stops, both Rosa and Mademoiselle Hortense arrive to attend their mistress. Lady Dedlock slights Hortense by preferring Rosa over her, and Hortense takes her revenge by walking shoeless back to the house over the wet grass. Ada, Esther, and Jarndyce find this very curious, but the gamekeeper and his wife assure them that Hortense is not mad, only \"passionate\"", "analysis": "Richard's decline is becoming more and more obvious.  The fact that Ada does not have the either the intelligence or the necessary boldness to counsel Richard against pursuing the matter of Jarndyce and Jarndyce leads us to believe that either Ada is not a very strong character, or has a slight inner inclination toward greed .  His tenure in Kenge and Carboy's can only bring sorrow, we are lead to believe. The mystery of Esther's parentage deepens as we learn that Jarndyce, though he claims no knowledge of it, dislikes being called \"Father\" by Esther.  Is this because he is actually her father, or because he knows who her father is?  The fact that it is because he loves her in a romantic way is not yet revealed. The two meetings with Lady Dedlock produce such strange feelings in Esther that there can now be no doubt that the two are closely linked in some way.  The cryptic discussion of Lady Dedlock's sister opens the door to speculation if that woman could be Esther's godmother/aunt, and, possibly Esther's mother. The strange reaction of Hortense to Lady Dedlock's slight is a direct foreshadowing of the revenge she will take later on in the story.  Hortense is portrayed as almost maniacally jealous, and with reactions to negative emotions that are separate and different than what most people would expect.  By this means, with the added fact of ther foreign birth, Dickens separates her from the rest of humankind.  Later, this will give the reader the feeling of a comfortable \"Other,\" when it is revealed that she is Tulkinghorn's murderer. At the Snagsby's, the black comedy of Guster and the Chadbands shows the artifice and hypocrisy of so much of middle class life.  Mrs. Snagsby tries hard to impress the minister and his wife, and is interrupted by her poor maid Guster's \"fits.\"  The lack of real concern that the people  have for Jo renders ironic the florid sermonizing done by Mr. Chadband.  Mr. Chadband, though seemingly only a plot device to bring Mrs. Chadband, the former Mrs. Rachael, into the picture, is another example of the bad father , though he is a father of the spiritual kind."}