{"name": "Chapter 62", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421025427/https://www.gradesaver.com/bleak-house/study-guide/summary-chapters-60-63", "summary": "The next morning, prompted by Allan's confession and her own fear of her feelings, Esther tells Jarndyce that she will be the mistress of Bleak House \"when he pleases. The date is set for the next month. Bucket and Grandfather Smallweed arrive, and Smallweed has made a shocking discovery. He has a signed will date later than the wills alrady examined in the Jarndyce and Jarndyce suit. The new will reduces Mr. Jarndyce's interests considerably but advances the interests of the young Mr. and Mrs. Carstone. Mr. Kenge is brought in for his opinion, and he thinks that it will do much to end the suit, but we have to wait until next month when court is again in session", "analysis": "The mystery plot having been resolved, a new plot -- Esther's love -- reaches a boiling point.  The date is set for Esther and Jarndyce's wedding, but the love of Allan Woodcourt for Esther, which he has exposed, complicates her happiness terrifically.  Meanwhile, the situation for Ada is becoming not unlike the brickmaker's wife, Jenny, though her husband is addicted to Chancery rather than alcohol.  Woodcourt remains a good helper, but he is not able to save Richard.  No one is. Skimpole's exposure is particulary satisfying, especially now that he has given over to psychically torturing Ada with his \"lightness.\" Allan's confession of love is no big surprise, but Esther's reaction, even for a Victorian novel, is perhaps a touch too restrained.  She makes her struggle quite clear for the reader, though, recalling her status as an orphan who lacked  a family's care until that was given her by the generosity of Jarndyce.  She feels that, in this light, she is not free to love Woodcourt, but we feel that she must do so.  Her reaction -- hurrying her own wedding to one man because she loves another -- is indicative of her feelings. The stunning discovery of the will in Jarndyce in the confusion of Krook's shop brings the Jarndyce suit finally near to its end.  It underscores the irony of Chancery justice that buried among the worthless piles of documents in Krook's abode there was the key to the case all along.  There is a glimmer of hope for Richard, but all the signs have pointed through the entire novel of the hopelessness of this cause. The episode of Rouncewell going to see his brother ties up the loose ends of this functional, happy family.  They are rewarded with happy endings because of their virtue and loyalty."}