{"name": "Chapter 14", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-11-15", "summary": "It was past midnight when David walked around the island. He took of his shoes and paced back and forth, afraid that if he sat he might freeze. With the beginning of dawn, he decided to trek to the top of the nearby hill, hoping to see a ship. From the top, he could not see the Covenant nor any other sail in the distance. Discouraged, David started walking east along the southern coast. He found no signs of civilization. It began to rain. His clothing, wet from his swim, remained wet and caused him to feel more miserable. He walked along until he came to a creek which was too deep to cross. He followed the creek until it narrowed and then grew wide again. David tried crossing at the narrowest spot but found it was impossible. Colder, he ran back to the shore to find the spar he had left. Unable to discover the spar, he waded into the sea only to view the spar twenty feet further out then he could reach. Greatly dismayed, David threw himself on the sand and wept. His stomach growled with hunger but David knew little of what was safe to eat. He caught a few snails and limpets. His first meal made him terribly sick but the second, made up of the same elements, restored him. It rained all day and through the second. David traveled to the other side of the island but found no homes or people. He chose to set up a resting spot where he could view the neighboring islands of Iona and Ross. It soothed his heart to see signs of civilization. From this spot he also hoped to view boats passing which he might hail. On the third day, David noticed that his pocket had ripped, allowing his money to drop out. From the fifty pounds he left Queensferry with, he retained little over three pounds. By midday, the sun finally came out and helped to refresh David's spirits. With the sky clear, David noticed a ship passing, headed for Iona. Exuberantly, he shouted to the ship. The ship's men could hear him but only laughed and continued to Iona. For only the second time, David wept. The next time he ate the island shellfish, he fell terribly ill. Yet when the illness passed, he was drier and better able to sleep. The next day, the ship from the previous day miraculously returned. David ran down to the shore to hear them speaking in Gaelic and laughing. He finally caught the English word \"tide\" and came to realize that the island was connected to land when the tides went out. He ran to the creek he had found earlier. It was much smaller. David waded across to the main island and was saved from his own folly.", "analysis": "David's experience on the islet where he lives for nearly four days without knowing that he is connected to the main island during low tide is a classic example of the dissolution of an obstacle after David approaches it or haggles with it. The reader thinks that David is stranded on a deserted island, tortuously within sight of habitation but without the means to reach that habitation. He traverses the entire islet to no avail, is made seriously ill by the diet of snails and limpets, loses most of the money he began with, and watches the very clothes on his body rot because of the incessant moisture. He is truly miserable on the desolate spot. The isle is again symbolic of the reduction of the self. Man is stripped entirely of the material objects, such as the money and clothing, which made him recognize his humanity until he can come to terms with the very essence of self. At first, David resists the self-reliance, constantly looking over his shoulder out of fear or hope. The text states, \"I had become in no way used to the horrid solitude of the isle, but still looked around me on all sides between fear and hope that I might see some human creature coming. Yet, David is forced to rely on his own direction and survival skills. However, suddenly, a boat comes into play which finally tells David that the islet was merely an illusion. In fact, the islet is connected with the main islands David had been staring longingly at the entire time. He was never separated or deserted at all, but connected to humanity all along. However, David did not know that. Growing into adulthood is often about learning the ways to navigate life and deciphering the best processes of decision making. What had first seemed like an impossible task often dissolves into one quite manageable. The illusion of impossibility fades and understanding evolves. In much the same manner, David cannot at first understand the men from the ship which returns to save him. They are speaking Gaelic and choppy Scottish and so David has difficulty deciphering their meaning. Soon enough, however, he catches a word or two and can piece together the puzzle. The impossible becomes possible and David is able to save himself"}