{"name": "Chapter 22", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-25", "summary": "By morning, after hours of traveling, Alan and David reached the end of the mountains. Beyond them, the moor let off a mist that draped the land, and any soldiers on it. Alan stopped and asked David if he wished to risk continuing or rest for the night. Alan described how dangers lay all around so that Eastward was the only path they could choose. However, going East would bring hardship too as the land was very flat and they would be easy to spot. David rationalized that they might as well keep going and Alan applauded his spirit. When the mist died away, David saw that the land was nearly barren and dead. As the sun rose and heat increased, they kept to their knees or bellies. At noon, they lay behind a thick bush to rest. Alan permitted David to sleep first. Too soon, David was awakened. Alan set a stick in the ground to judge the time and gave David a specific time to wake him up. Yet, David was still so fatigued that he dozed off. When he awoke, the shadow on the stick was past Alan's mark and soldiers had moved in. He woke Alan quickly. Alan's face showed anger but he said nothing to David except that they had better make a run for it before the soldiers got any closer. They ran for the large mountain nearby, Ben Alder. With no water left, smoke rising from the burnt ground, and their constant crawling about, David soon became extremely weary. He would have lain down had he not feared Alan and his fortitude. When they noticed the soldiers setting up camp for the night, David begged that they rest as well. Alan refused, exclaiming that they must reach the mountain. David did not know if he could continue so Alan offered to carry him. In disbelief, David agreed to keep moving. As he crept along in the light of night , David came to hate each step and the man who made him take it. He felt like a private blindly following his officer. When day dawned, they had traveled far enough from danger to stand upright. They were so exhausted, however, that they stumbled dumbly into an ambush. Alan was walking in the lead when suddenly three or four men jumped out, knocked them down, and held dirks to their throats. David was too tired to be scared. Alan spoke to them in Gaelic. The men were from the Vourich clan led by Cluny Macpherson, who had played a large role in 1746. While a messenger ran off, Alan slept but David could not rest because of the grasshoppers' chirping. When they had to move again, David looked so weary that two Cluny men carried him into Ben Alder.", "analysis": "Interestingly, the dynamic between David and Alan changes during the course of their journey in this chapter. In the last chapter, the two men participated in somewhat friendly, but masculine driven competition. David was pleased to be the best fisherman, whereas Alan wanted to practice sword fighting with David so that he could show off his skill. Thus, although the two are enjoying the period they have to relax and game play, tension builds. In this chapter, we see how they deal with the tension of constant togetherness over a long and difficult trek. Alan is lenient when David falls asleep and allows the redcoats to move in without his noticing. It is because of this error that the men are forced to run all the way to Ben Adler. However, David is exhausted. As he pushes himself along, the main reason he does not collapse is not because of his own inner strength but because of a fear and/or admiration for Alan. He tells the reader, \"Nothing but the fear of Alan lent me enough of a false kind of courage to continueI was driven to marvel at the man's endurance. Yet, when David finally asks to rest, Alan refuses because of the danger they are in. When he offers to carry David, David is humiliated. Pride weighs more on him than his physical capabilities. A hatred grows as David hates every step and he hates Alan for making him continue. David comments, \"And I dare say I would have made a good enough private; for in these last hours, it never occurred to me that I had any choice, but just to obey as long as I was able, and die obeying. David, through hatred and self-reflection, begins to understand the role he plays in conjunction with Alan. In their physical exertion and decision making, Alan is the controlling half of the partnership. David's growing hatred of this duality leads his body to finally collapse. The dynamic, though based on two halves, is an unstable splitting of human awareness. As David describes, \"what a pair we must have made, going double like old grandfathers, stumbling like babes, and as white as dead folk. Going double\" is how the men hoped to survive, exploring Stevenson's metaphor of the doppleganger, but weaknesses are discovered. The theme of man versus nature comes into play again as we see David and, to a lesser extent, Alan, grope to survive among the cruel elements of the moor, a stripped, dry, and barren expanse of land. The men have no water. Since they must crawl and slither, they inhale the smoke of the hot, burnt ground. The critic, Kiely, remarks, \"Even the natural landscape, for all its atmospheric importance in Kidnapped, is not permitted to pose an ultimate threat to the characters. However, we may note that the landscape in this chapter is pivotal in breaking down the brotherly dynamic between Alan and David. David begins to lose his sense of practicality and to hate the position he has been put in during this journey and during this novel. As doubles - as halves - the men crumble to the point of blindly entering an ambush. The landscape does not kill them or save them, only men are capable of these acts in the novel. However, the character of the landscape certainly aids, symbolically, in the disintegration of the sense of self and the questioning of duality"}