{"name": "Chapter 11", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-11-15", "summary": "When morning came, David and Alan breakfasted. Alan told David to expect more fighting especially since the men had no access to their liquor, as the round-house contained it all. In their location, David and Alan were able to share some of the best food and drink on the boat. As a gift of gratitude, Alan gave David one of the silver buttons on his coat. David was more thankful when he watched Alan meticulously brush his jacket, giving special care to the loose threads from the button. The vanity of Alan's speech also impressed and humored David. It was difficult at times not to smile at his claims. Soon, Mr. Riach contacted the men hoping to arrange a parley with the Captain. David leaned out of the broken skylight to speak with Riach, learning that the rest of the ship's men refused to form any sort of further attacks even if the Captain and Riach wanted it. Riach said they meant no treachery and were more scared of Alan than anything. The parley was agreed to and the Captain and Alan met to speak at one of the windows. Hoseason attempted to make Alan agree to be dropped off in Glasgow. Hoseason's first official was dead and the ship was very difficult to maneuver without him. Alan refused, demanding to be let off in his own land so he would not to meet any red coated Whigs. The Captain then tried to convince Alan that the shore was too difficult to navigate in Alan's part of Scotland. Consequently, Alan suggested a large stretch of shore which would be suitable. Hoseason asked for money. Alan agreed to his old proposition of thirty guineas if he was dropped sea side and sixty if he was dropped in Linnhe Loch. The Captain desired the sixty guineas if he brought Alan to the near spot of Ardnamurchan. Alan again refused, repeating his offer. He also refused to help the ship's men steer the ship, as the Captain requested, and gave the Captain the responsibility of avoiding ships loyal to King George. With an exchange of brandy for buckets of water, the deal was done. The Captain and Riach were able to drink again and David and Alan could clean the blood off their floor.", "analysis": "The silver button that Alan gives David is the fifth gift he has received from a friend since leaving home, and all have been symbolic. The first four were from Minister Campbell in Essendean. Ironically, the fifth is from a man who detests anyone with the last name Campbell as the Stewarts are arch enemies of the Campbells in the Highlands. The reader must wonder why the Minister is given a Highland surname when he seems to be a very respected Lowlander. In fact, when David first meets Uncle Ebenezer, he tells the old man that he has many friends by the name of Campbell in order to seem less reliant on his uncle's graciousness. Thus David first aligns himself with the Campbells but then befriends one who is an archenemy of the clan. Critics feel that Stevenson did not want readers to think that the duality between the Highlander and Lowlander sensibility was too simplistic or easily delineated. David accepts gifts from the Minister and from Alan and respects the gifts from both. The button is a synecdoche for Alan as it stands for the attention and care which Alan gives to his appearance and to his belongings. More extensively, the button represents the pride which Alan feels for his heritage and his people. His appearance and the upkeep of his belongings are the symbols of the Stewart clan which Alan shows to Scotland, England, and France. David remarks, \"For all , when I saw what care he took to pluck out the threads where the button had been cut away, I put a higher value on his gift. Due to the mercantile system of thought in the Lowlands, David is not quick to realize the emotional value the silver button contains for Alan until he observes Alan's attempt to smooth the wound its removal has left in his coat. By giving David a piece of his coat, Alan has shared with David a piece of himself and his heritage. A bond between them has been forged symbolically"}