LETTER XI.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

NEW HAVEN.

Well, Charles, I have been manoeuvring to-day a little revengefully.
That, you will say, is out of character. So baleful a passion does not
easily find admission among those softer ones which you well know I
cherish. However, I am a mere Proteus, and can assume any shape that
will best answer my purpose.

I called this afternoon, as I told you I intended, at General Richman's.
I waited some time in the parlor alone before Eliza appeared; and when
she did appear, the distant reserve of her manners and the pensiveness
of her countenance convinced me that she had been vexed, and I doubted
not but Peter Sanford was the occasion. Her wise cousin, I could have
sworn, had been giving her a detail of the vices of her gallant, and
warning her against the dangers of associating with him in future.
Notwithstanding, I took no notice of any alteration in her behavior, but
entered with the utmost facetiousness into a conversation which I
thought most to her taste. By degrees she assumed her usual vivacity;
cheerfulness and good humor again animated her countenance. I tarried
as long as decency would admit. She having intimated that they were to
dine at my friend Lawrence's, I caught at this information, and
determined to follow them, and tease the jealous Mrs. Richman by playing
off all the gallantry I was master of in her presence.

I went, and succeeded to the utmost of my wishes, as I read in the
vexation visible in the one, and the ease and attention displayed by the
other. I believe, too, that I have charmed the eye, at least, of the
amiable Eliza. Indeed, Charles, she is a fine girl. I think it would
hurt my conscience to wound her mind or reputation. Were I disposed to
marry, I am persuaded she would make an excellent wife; but that, you
know, is no part of my plan, so long as I can keep out of the noose.
Whenever I do submit to be shackled, it must be from a necessity of
mending my fortune. This girl would be far from doing that. However, I
am pleased with her acquaintance, and mean not to abuse her credulity
and good nature, if I can help it.

PETER SANFORD.



