LETTER XII.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

The heart of your friend is again besieged. Whether it will surrender to
the assailants or not I am unable at present to determine. Sometimes I
think of becoming a predestinarian, and submitting implicitly to fate,
without any exercise of free will; but, as mine seems to be a wayward
one, I would counteract the operations of it, if possible.

Mrs. Richman told me this morning that she hoped I should be as
agreeably entertained this afternoon as I had been the preceding; that
she expected Mr. Boyer to dine and take tea, and doubted not but he
would be as attentive and sincere to me, if not as gay and polite, as
the gentleman who obtruded his civilities yesterday. I replied that I
had no reason to doubt the sincerity of the one or the other, having
never put them to the test, nor did I imagine I ever should. "Your
friends, Eliza," said she, "would be very happy to see you united to a
man of Mr. Boyer's worth, and so agreeably settled as he has a prospect
of being." "I hope," said I, "that my friends are not so weary of my
company as to wish to dispose of me. I am too happy in my present
connections to quit them for new ones. Marriage is the tomb of
friendship. It appears to me a very selfish state. Why do people in
general, as soon as they are married, centre all their cares, their
concerns, and pleasures in their own families? Former acquaintances are
neglected or forgotten; the tenderest ties between friends are weakened
or dissolved; and benevolence itself moves in a very limited sphere."
"It is the glory of the marriage state," she rejoined, "to refine by
circumscribing our enjoyments. Here we can repose in safety.

  'The friendships of the world are oft
  Confed'racies in vice, or leagues in pleasure:
  Ours has the purest virtue for its basis;
  And such a friendship ends not but with life.'

True, we cannot always pay that attention to former associates which we
may wish; but the little community which we superintend is quite as
important an object, and certainly renders us more beneficial to the
public. True benevolence, though it may change its objects, is not
limited by time or place. Its effects are the same, and, aided by a
second self, are rendered more diffusive and salutary."

Some pleasantry passed, and we retired to dress. When summoned to
dinner, I found Mr. Boyer below. If what is sometimes said be true, that
love is diffident, reserved, and unassuming, this man must be tinctured
with it. These symptoms were visible in his deportment when I entered
the room. However, he soon recovered himself, and the conversation took
a general turn. The festive board was crowned with sociability, and we
found in reality "the feast of reason and the flow of soul." After we
rose from table, a walk in the garden was proposed--an amusement we are
all peculiarly fond of. Mr. Boyer offered me his arm. When at a
sufficient distance from our company, he begged leave to congratulate
himself on having an opportunity, which he had ardently desired for some
time, of declaring to me his attachment, and of soliciting an interest
in my favor; or, if he might be allowed the term, affection. I replied,
"That, sir, is indeed laying claim to an important interest. I believe
you must substitute some more indifferent epithet for the present."
"Well, then," said he, "if it must be so, let it be esteem or
friendship." "Indeed, sir," said I, "you are entitled to them both.
Merit has always a share in that bank; and I know of none who has a
larger claim on that score than Mr. Boyer." I suppose my manner was
hardly serious enough for what he considered a weighty cause. He was a
little disconcerted, but, soon regaining his presence of mind, entreated
me, with an air of earnestness, to encourage his suit, to admit his
addresses, and, if possible, to reward his love. I told him that this
was rather a sudden affair to me, and that I could not answer him
without consideration. "Well, then," said he, "take what time you think
proper; only relieve my suspense as soon as may be. Shall I visit you
again to-morrow?" "O, not so soon," said I; "next Monday, I believe,
will be early enough. I will endeavor to be at home." He thanked me even
for that favor, recommended himself once more to my kindness, and we
walked towards the company, returned with them to the house, and he soon
took leave. I immediately retired to write this letter, which I shall
close without a single observation on the subject until I know your
opinion.

ELIZA WHARTON.



