LETTER XIV.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I have received, and read again and again, your friendly epistle. My
reason and judgment entirely coincide with your opinion; but my fancy
claims some share in the decision; and I cannot yet tell which will
preponderate. This was the day fixed for deciding Mr. Boyer's cause. My
friends here gave me a long dissertation on his merits. Your letter,
likewise, had its weight; and I was candidly summoning up the _pros_ and
_cons_ in the garden, whither I had walked, (General Richman and lady
having rode out,) when I was informed that he was waiting in the parlor.
I went immediately in, (a good symptom, you will say,) and received him
very graciously. After the first compliments were over, he seemed eager
to improve the opportunity to enter directly on the subject of his
present visit. It is needless for me to recite to you, who have long
been acquainted with the whole process of courtship, the declarations,
propositions, protestations, entreaties, looks, words, and actions of a
lover. They are, I believe, much the same in the whole sex, allowing for
their different dispositions, educations, and characters; but you are
impatient, I know, for the conclusion.

You have hastily perused the preceding lines, and are straining your eye
forward to my part of the farce; for such it may prove, after all. Well,
then, not to play too long with the curiosity which I know to be excited
and actuated by real friendship, I will relieve it. I think you would
have been pleased to have seen my gravity on this important occasion.
With all the candor and frankness which I was capable of assuming, I
thus answered his long harangue, to which I had listened without
interrupting him: "Self-knowledge, sir, that most important of all
sciences, I have yet to learn. Such have been my situations in life, and
the natural volatility of my temper, that I have looked but little into
my own heart in regard to its future wishes and views. From a scene of
constraint and confinement, ill suited to my years and inclination, I
have just launched into society. My heart beats high in expectation of
its fancied joys. My sanguine imagination paints, in alluring colors,
the charms of youth and freedom, regulated by virtue and innocence. Of
these I wish to partake. While I own myself under obligations for the
esteem which you are pleased to profess for me, and, in return,
acknowledge that neither your person nor manners are disagreeable to me,
I recoil at the thought of immediately forming a connection which must
confine me to the duties of domestic life, and make me dependent for
happiness, perhaps, too, for subsistence, upon a class of people who
will claim the right of scrutinizing every part of my conduct, and, by
censuring those foibles which I am conscious of not having prudence to
avoid, may render me completely miserable. While, therefore, I receive
your visits, and cultivate towards you sentiments of friendship and
esteem, I would not have you consider me as confined to your society, or
obligated to a future connection. Our short acquaintance renders it
impossible for me to decide what the operations of my mind may
hereafter be. You must either quit the subject, or leave me to the
exercise of my free will, which, perhaps, may coincide with your present
wishes." "Madam," said he, "far is the wish from me to restrain your
person or mind. In your breast I will repose my cause. It shall be my
study to merit a return of affection; and I doubt not but generosity and
honor will influence your conduct towards me. I expect soon to settle
among a generous and enlightened people, where I flatter myself I shall
be exempt from those difficulties and embarrassments to which too many
of my brethren are subject. The local situation is agreeable, the
society refined and polished; and if, in addition, I may obtain that
felicity which you are formed to bestow in a family connection, I shall
be happy indeed."

He spoke with emphasis. The tear of sensibility sparkled in his eye. I
involuntarily gave him my hand, which he pressed with ardor to his lips;
then, rising, he walked to the window to conceal his emotion. I rang the
bell and ordered tea, during and after which we shared that social
converse which is the true zest of life, and in which I am persuaded
none but virtuous minds can participate. General Richman and lady
returned with the shades of the evening. The penetrating eye of my
cousin traced in _our_ countenances the progress of the cause, and the
smile of approbation animated _hers_. Mr. Boyer asked the favor of my
company to ride to-morrow morning; which was granted. He tarried to
supper, and took his leave. I retired immediately to my chamber, to
which I was followed by Mrs. Richman. I related to her the conversation
and the encouragement which I had given to Mr. Boyer. She was pleased,
but insisted that I should own myself somewhat engaged to him. This, I
told her, I should never do to any man before the indissoluble knot was
tied. "That," said I, "will be time enough to resign my freedom." She
replied, that I had wrong ideas of freedom and matrimony; but she hoped
that Mr. Boyer would happily rectify them.

I have now, my dear friend, given you an account of my present
situation, and leave you to judge for yourself concerning it. Write me
your opinion, and believe me ever yours,

ELIZA WHARTON.



