LETTER XV.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HARTFORD.

I congratulate you, my dear Eliza, on the stability of your conduct
towards Mr. Boyer. Pursue the system which you have adopted, and I dare
say that happiness will crown your future days. You are indeed very
tenacious of your freedom, as you call it; but that is a play about
words. A man of Mr. Boyer's honor and good sense will never abridge any
privileges which virtue can claim.

When do you return to embellish our society here? I am impatient to see
you, and likewise this amiable man. I am much interested in his favor.
By the way, I am told that Major Sanford has been to look at the seat of
Captain Pribble, which is upon sale. It is reported that he will
probably purchase it. Many of our gentry are pleased with the prospect
of such a neighbor. "As an accomplished gentleman," say they, "he will
be an agreeable addition to our social parties; and as a man of property
and public spirit, he will be an advantage to the town." But from what I
have heard of him, I am far from supposing him a desirable acquisition
in either of these respects. A man of a vicious character cannot be a
good member of society. In order to that, his principles and practice
must be uncorrupted; in his morals, at least, he must be a man of
probity and honor. Of these qualifications, if I mistake not, this
gallant of yours cannot boast. But I shall not set up for a censor. I
hope neither you nor I shall have much connection with him. My swain
interests himself very much in your affairs. You will possibly think him
impertinent; but I give his curiosity a softer name. Should I own to you
that I place great confidence in his integrity and honor, you would,
perhaps, laugh at my weakness; but, my dear, I have pride enough to keep
me above coquetry or prudery, and discretion enough, I hope, to secure
me from the errors of both. With him I am determined to walk the future
round of life. What folly, then, would it be to affect reserve and
distance relative to an affair in which I have so much interest! Not
that I am going to betray your secrets; these I have no right to
divulge; but I must be the judge what may, and what may not, be
communicated. I am very much pressed for an early day of consummation;
but I shall not listen to a request of that kind till your return. Such
is my regard for you, that a union of love would be imperfect if
friendship attended not the rites. Adieu.

LUCY FREEMAN.



