LETTER XVIII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

NEW HAVEN.

Do you know, Charles, that I have commenced lover? I was always a
general one, but now I am somewhat particular. I shall be the more
interested, as I am likely to meet with difficulties; and it is the
glory of a rake, as well as of a Christian, to combat obstacles. This
same Eliza, of whom I have told you, has really made more impression on
my heart than I was aware of, or than the sex, take them as they rise,
are wont to do. But she is besieged by a priest--a likely lad though. I
know not how it is, but they are commonly successful with the girls,
even the gayest of them. This one, too, has the interest of all her
friends, as I am told. I called yesterday at General Richman's, and
found this pair together, apparently too happy in each other's society
for my wishes. I must own that I felt a glow of jealousy, which I never
experienced before, and vowed revenge for the pain it gave me, though
but momentary. Yet Eliza's reception of me was visibly cordial; nay, I
fancied my company as pleasing to her as that which she had before. I
tarried not long, but left him to the enjoyment of that pleasure which I
flatter myself will be but shortlived. O, I have another plan in my
head--a plan of necessity, which, you know, is the mother of invention.
It is this: I am very much courted and caressed by the family of Mr.
Lawrence, a man of large property in this neighborhood. He has only one
child--a daughter, with whom I imagine the old folks intend to shackle
me in the bonds of matrimony. The girl looks very well; she has no soul,
though, that I can discover; she is heiress, nevertheless, to a great
fortune, and that is all the soul I wish for in a wife. In truth,
Charles, I know of no other way to mend my circumstances. But lisp not a
word of my embarrassments for your life. Show and equipage are my hobby
horse; and if any female wishes to share them with me, and will furnish
me with the means of supporting them, I have no objection. Could I
conform to the sober rules of wedded life, and renounce those dear
enjoyments of dissipation in which I have so long indulged, I know not
the lady in the world with whom I would sooner form a connection of this
sort than with Eliza Wharton. But it will never do. If my fortune or
hers were better, I would risk a union; but as they are, no idea of the
kind can be admitted. I shall endeavor, notwithstanding, to enjoy her
company as long as possible. Though I cannot possess her wholly myself,
I will not tamely see her the property of another.

I am now going to call at General Richman's, in hopes of an opportunity
to profess my devotion to her. I know I am not a welcome visitor to the
family; but I am independent of their censure or esteem, and mean to act
accordingly.

PETER SANFORD.



