LETTER XIX.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I find the ideas of sobriety and domestic solitude I have been
cultivating for three days past somewhat deranged by the interruption of
a visitor, with whom I know you will not be pleased. It is no other than
Major Sanford. I was walking alone in the garden yesterday, when he
suddenly appeared to my view. "How happy am I," said he, seizing my
hand, "in this opportunity of finding you alone--an opportunity, Miss
Wharton, which I must improve in expatiating on a theme that fills my
heart and solely animates my frame!"

I was startled at his impetuosity, and displeased with his freedom.
Withdrawing my hand, I told him that my retirement was sacred. He bowed
submissively; begged pardon for his intrusion; alleged that he found
nobody but the servants in the house; that they informed him I was alone
in the garden--which intelligence was too pleasing for him to consult
any forms of ceremony for the regulation of his conduct. He then went on
rhapsodically to declare his passion; his suspicions that I was forming
a connection with Mr. Boyer, which would effectually destroy all his
hopes of future happiness. He painted the restraint, the confinement,
the embarrassments to which a woman connected with a man of Mr. Boyer's
profession must be subjected, however agreeable his person might be. He
asked if my generous mind could submit to cares and perplexities like
these; whether I could not find greater sources of enjoyment in a more
elevated sphere of life, or share pleasures better suited to my genius
and disposition, even in a single state. I listened to him
involuntarily. My heart did not approve his sentiments; but my ear was
charmed with his rhetoric, and my fancy captivated by his address.

He invited my confidence by the most ardent professions of friendship,
and labored to remove my suspicions by vows of sincerity. I was induced
by his importunity gradually to disclose the state of affairs between
Mr. Boyer and myself. He listened eagerly; wished not, he said, to
influence me unduly; but if I were not otherwise engaged, might he
presume to solicit a place in my friendship and esteem, be admitted to
enjoy my society, to visit me as an acquaintance, and to attend my
excursions and amusements as a brother, if not more? I replied that I
was a pensioner of friendship at present; that friends were extremely
refined in their notions of propriety; and that I had no right to
receive visitants independent of them. "I understand you, madam," said
he. "You intimate that my company is not agreeable to them; but I know
not why. Surely my rank in life is as elevated, and my knowledge of and
acceptance in the world are as extensive, as General Richman's." "I
hope," said I, "since we are engaged in the conversation, that you will
excuse my frankness if I tell you that the understanding and virtue of
this worthy couple induce them, without any regard to rank, to bestow
their esteem wherever it is merited. I cannot say that you are not a
sharer. Your own heart can best determine whether upon their principles
you are or not." He appeared mortified and chagrined; and we had walked
some distance without exchanging a word or a look. At last he rejoined,
"I plead guilty to the charge, madam, which they have undoubtedly
brought against me, of imprudence and folly in many particulars; yet of
malignancy and vice I am innocent. Brought up in affluence, inured from
my infancy to the gratification of every passion, the indulgence of
every wish, it is not strange that a life of dissipation and gayety
should prove alluring to a youthful mind which had no care but to
procure what is deemed enjoyment. In this pursuit I have, perhaps,
deviated from the rigid rules of discretion and the harsher laws of
morality. But let the veil of charity be drawn over my faults; let the
eye of candor impartially examine my present behavior; let the kind and
lenient hand of friendship assist in directing my future steps; and
perhaps I may not prove unworthy of associating with the respectable
inhabitants of this happy mansion; for such I am sure it must be while
honored with Miss Wharton's presence. But, circumstanced as you and I
are at present, I will not sue for your attention as a lover, but rest
contented, if possible, with that share of kindness and regard which
your benevolence may afford me as a friend." I bowed in approbation of
his resolution. He pressed my hand with ardor to his lips; and at that
instant General Richman entered the garden. He approached us cheerfully,
offered Major Sanford his hand with apparent cordiality, and told us
pleasantly that he hoped he should not be considered as an intruder. "By
no means, sir," said Major Sanford; "it is I who have incurred that
imputation. I called this afternoon to pay you my respects, when, being
informed that you and your lady were abroad, and that Miss Wharton was
in the garden, I took the liberty to invade her retirement. She has
graciously forgiven my crime, and I was just affixing the seal to my
pardon as you entered."

We then returned into the house. Mrs. Richman received us politely.
During tea, the conversation turned on literary subjects, in which I
cannot say that the major bore a very distinguished part. After he was
gone, Mrs. Richman said, "I hope you have been agreeably entertained,
Miss Wharton." "I did not choose my company, madam," said I. "Nor," said
she, "did you refuse it, I presume." "Would you not have me respect the
rights of hospitality towards your guests when you are absent, madam?"
"If you had acted from that motive, I own my obligations to you, my
dear; but even that consideration can hardly reconcile me to the
sacrifice of time which you have made to the amusement of a seducer." "I
hope, madam, you do not think me an object of seduction." "I do not
think you seducible; nor was Richardson's Clarissa till she made herself
the victim by her own indiscretion. Pardon me, Eliza--this is a second
Lovelace. I am alarmed by his artful intrusions. His insinuating
attentions to you are characteristic of the man. Come, I presume you are
not interested to keep his secrets if you know them; will you give me a
little sketch of his conversation?" "Most willingly," said I, and
accordingly related the whole. When I had concluded, she shook her
head, and replied, "Beware, my friend, of his arts. Your own heart is
too sincere to suspect treachery and dissimulation in another; but
suffer not your ear to be charmed by the siren voice of flattery, nor
your eye to be caught by the phantom of gayety and pleasure. Remember
your engagements to Mr. Boyer. Let sincerity and virtue be your guides,
and they will lead you to happiness and peace." She waited not for an
answer, but, immediately rising, begged leave to retire, alleging that
she was fatigued. General Richman accompanied her, and I hastened to my
apartment, where I have written thus far, and shall send it on for your
comments. I begin to think of returning soon to your circle. One
inducement is, that I may be free from the intrusions of this man.
Adieu.

ELIZA WHARTON.



