LETTER XXIII.

TO THE REV. J. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

I have executed your commission, and been amply rewarded for my trouble
by the pleasures I enjoyed in the society of the agreeable family to
which I was introduced; especially of the amiable and accomplished lady
who is the object of your particular regard. I think she fully justifies
your partiality to her. She appears to possess both the virtues and the
graces. Her form is fine, and her countenance interests us at once in
her favor. There is a mixture of dignity and ease which commands respect
and conciliates affection. After these encomiums, will you permit me to
say there is an air of gayety in her appearance and deportment which
savors a little of coquetry? I am persuaded, however, that she has too
much good sense to practise its arts. She received your letter very
graciously, asked leave to retire a few moments, and returned with a
smile of complacency on her brow, which I construe favorably to you.

There was a Mr. Lawrence, with his lady and daughter, and a certain
Major Sanford, at the house. The latter, I believe, in the modern sense
of the phrase, _is much of a gentleman_; that is, a man of show and
fashion.

Miss Wharton asked me when I should leave town, and when I should
return, or have an opportunity of conveyance to Hampshire. I told her I
should write by the next post, and, if she had any commands, would be
happy to execute them. She would send a line to her friend, she said, if
I would take the trouble to enclose it in my letter. I readily
consented, and told her that I would call and receive her favor
to-morrow morning. This chitchat was a little aside; but I could not but
observe that the aforesaid Major Sanford had dropped his part in the
conversation of the rest of the company, and was attending to us, though
he endeavored to conceal his attention by looking carelessly over a
play which lay on the window by him. Yet he evidently watched every word
and action of Miss Wharton, as if he were really interested in her
movements.

It is said she has many admirers, and I conceive it very possible that
this may be one of them; though, truly, I do not think that she would
esteem such a conquest any great honor. I now joined in the general
topic of conversation, which was politics; Mrs. Richman and Miss Wharton
judiciously, yet modestly, bore a part; while the other ladies amused
themselves with Major Sanford, who was making his sage remarks on the
play, which he still kept in his hand. General Richman at length
observed that we had formed into parties. Major Sanford, upon, this,
laid aside his book. Miss Lawrence simpered, and looked as if she was
well pleased with being in a party with so fine a man; while her mother
replied that she never meddled with politics. "Miss Wharton and I," said
Mrs. Richman, "must beg leave to differ from you, madam. We think
ourselves interested in the welfare and prosperity of our country; and,
consequently, claim the right of inquiring into those affairs which may
conduce to or interfere with the common weal. We shall not be called to
the senate or the field to assert its privileges and defend its rights,
but we shall feel, for the honor and safety of our friends and
connections who are thus employed. If the community flourish and enjoy
health and freedom, shall we not share in the happy effects? If it be
oppressed and disturbed, shall we not endure our proportion of the evil?
Why, then, should the love of our country be a masculine passion only?
Why should government, which involves the peace and order of the society
of which we are a part, be wholly excluded from our observation?" Mrs.
Lawrence made some slight reply, and waived the subject. The gentlemen
applauded Mrs. Richman's sentiments as truly Roman, and, what was more,
they said, truly republican.

I rose to take leave, observing to Miss Wharton that I should call
to-morrow, as agreed. Upon this, General Richman politely requested the
favor of my company at dinner. I accepted his invitation, and bade them
good night. I shall do the same to you for the present, as I intend,
to-morrow, to scribble the cover, which is to enclose your Eliza's
letter.

T. SELBY.



