LETTER XXIV.

TO THE REV. J. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

I resume my pen, having just returned from General Richman's; not with
an expectation, however, of your reading this till you have perused and
reperused the enclosed. I can bear such neglect in this case, as I have
been alike interested myself.

I went to General Richman's at twelve o'clock. About a mile from thence,
upon turning a corner, I observed a gentleman and lady on horseback,
some way before me, riding at a very moderate pace, and seemingly in
close conversation. I kept at the same distance from them till I saw
them stop at the general's gate. I then put on, and, coming up with them
just as they alighted, was surprised to find them no other than Major
Sanford and Miss Wharton. They were both a little disconcerted at my
salutation: I know not why. Miss Wharton invited him in; but he
declined, being engaged to dine. General Richman received us at the
door. As I handed Miss Wharton in, he observed, jocosely, that she had
changed company. "Yes, sir," she replied, "more than once since I went
out, as you doubtless observed." "I was not aware," said Mrs. Richman,
"that Major Sanford was to be of your party to-day." "It was quite
accidental, madam," said Miss Wharton. "Miss Lawrence and I had agreed,
last evening, to take a little airing this forenoon. A young gentleman,
a relation of hers, who is making them a visit, was to attend us.

"We had not rode more than two miles when we were overtaken by Major
Sanford, who very politely asked leave to join our party. Miss Lawrence
very readily consented; and we had a very sociable ride. The fineness of
the day induced me to protract the enjoyment of it abroad; but Miss
Lawrence declined riding so far as I proposed, as she had engaged
company to dine. We therefore parted till the evening, when we are to
meet again." "What, another engagement!" said Mrs. Richman. "Only to
the assembly, madam." "May I inquire after your gallant, my dear? But I
have no right, perhaps, to be inquisitive," said Mrs. Richman. Miss
Wharton made no reply, and the conversation took a general turn. Miss
Wharton sustained her part with great propriety. Indeed, she discovers a
fund of useful knowledge and extensive reading, which render her
peculiarly entertaining; while the brilliancy of her wit, the fluency of
her language, the vivacity and ease of her manners are inexpressibly
engaging. I am going myself to the assembly this evening, though I did
not mention it to General Richman. I therefore took my leave soon after
dinner.

I have heard so much in praise of Miss Wharton's penmanship, in
addition to her other endowments, that I am almost tempted to break the
seal of her letter to you; but I forbear. Wishing you much happiness in
the perusal of it, and more in the possession of its writer, I subscribe
myself yours, &c.,

T. SELBY.



