LETTER XXV.

TO THE REV. J. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

Sir: Your favor of the 4th instant came to hand yesterday. I received it
with pleasure, and embrace this early opportunity of contributing my
part to a correspondence tending to promote a friendly and social
intercourse. An epistolary communication between the sexes has been with
some a subject of satire and censure; but unjustly, in my opinion. With
persons of refinement and information, it may be a source of
entertainment and utility. The knowledge and masculine virtues of your
sex may be softened and rendered more diffusive by the inquisitiveness,
vivacity, and docility of ours, drawn forth and exercised by each
other.

In regard to the _particular_ subject of yours, I shall be silent. Ideas
of that kind are better conveyed, on my part, by words than by the pen.

I congratulate you on your agreeable settlement, and hope it will be
productive of real and lasting happiness. I am convinced that felicity
is not confined to any particular station or condition in life; yet,
methinks, some are better calculated to afford it to me than others.

Your extract from a favorite poet is charmingly descriptive; but is it
not difficult to ascertain what we can pronounce "an elegant
sufficiency"? Perhaps you will answer, as some others have done, we can
attain it by circumscribing our wishes within the compass of our
abilities. I am not very avaricious; yet I must own that I should like
to enjoy it without so much trouble as that would cost me.

Excuse my seeming levity. You have flattered my cheerfulness by
commending it, and must, therefore, indulge me in the exercise of it. I
cannot conveniently be at the pains of restraining its sallies when I
write in confidence.

Is a sprightly disposition, in your view, indicative of a giddy mind
or an innocent heart? Of the latter, I presume; for I know you are not a
misanthrope.

We expect the pleasure of Mr. Selby's company to dinner. You are
certainly under obligations to his friendship for the liberal encomiums
he bestowed on you and your prospects yesterday. Mrs. Richman rallied
me, after he was gone, on my listening ear. The general and she unite in
requesting me to present their respects.

Wishing you health and happiness, I subscribe myself your friend,

ELIZA WHARTON.



