LETTER XXVI.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I am perplexed and embarrassed, my friend, by the assiduous attentions
of this Major Sanford. I shall write circumstantially and frankly to
you, that I may have the benefit of your advice. He came here last
Monday in company with Mr. Lawrence, his wife, and daughter, to make us
a visit. While they were present, a Mr. Selby, a particular friend of
Mr. Boyer, came in, and delivered me a letter from him. I was really
happy in the reception of this proof of his affection. His friend gave a
very flattering account of his situation and prospects.

The watchful eye of Major Sanford traced every word and action
respecting Mr. Boyer with an attention which seemed to border on
anxiety. That, however, did not restrain, but rather accelerated, my
vivacity and inquisitiveness on the subject; for I wished to know
whether it would produce any real effect upon him or not.

After Mr. Selby's departure, he appeared pensive and thoughtful the
remainder of the evening, and evidently sought an opportunity of
speaking to me aside, which I studiously avoided. Miss Lawrence and I
formed an engagement to take an airing in the morning on horseback,
attended by a relation of hers who is now with them. They called for me
about ten, when we immediately set out upon our preconcerted excursion.
We had not proceeded far before we were met by Major Sanford. He was
extremely polite, and finding our destination was not particular, begged
leave to join our party. This was granted; and we had an agreeable tour
for several miles, the time being passed in easy and unstudied remarks
upon obvious occurrences. Major Sanford could not, however, conceal his
particular attention to me, which rather nettled Miss Lawrence. She grew
somewhat serious, and declined riding so far as we had intended,
alleging that she expected company to dine.

Major Sanford, understanding that she was going to the assembly in the
evening with Mr. Gordon, solicited me to accept a ticket, and form a
party with them. The entertainment was alluring, and I consented. When
we had parted with Miss Lawrence, Major Sanford insisted on my riding a
little farther, saying he must converse with me on a particular subject,
and if I refused him this opportunity, that he must visit me at my
residence, let it offend whom it would. I yielded to his importunity,
and we rode on. He then told me that his mind was in a state of suspense
and agitation which was very painful to bear, and which I only could
relieve; that my cheerful reception of Mr. Boyer's letter yesterday, and
deportment respecting him, had awakened in his breast all the pangs of
jealousy which the most ardent love could feel; that my treatment of Mr.
Boyer's friend convinced him that I was more interested in his affairs
than I was willing to own; that he foresaw himself to be condemned to an
eternal separation, and the total loss of my favor and society, as soon
as time and circumstances would allow.

His zeal, his pathos, alarmed me. I begged him to be calm. "To you,"
said I, "as a friend, I have intrusted my situation in relation to Mr.
Boyer. You know that I am under no special obligation to him, and I do
not intend to form any immediate connection." "Mr. Boyer must have
different ideas, madam; and he has reason for them, if I may judge by
appearances. When do you expect another visit from him?" "In about a
fortnight." "And is my fate to be then decided? and so decided, as I
fear it will be, through the influence of your friends, if not by your
own inclination?" "My friends, sir, will not control, they will only
advise to what they think most for my interest, and I hope that my
conduct will not be unworthy of their approbation." "Pardon me, my dear
Eliza," said he, "if I am impertinent; it is my regard for you which
impels me to the presumption. Do you intend to give your hand to Mr.
Boyer?" "I do not intend to give my hand to any man at present. I have
but lately entered society, and wish, for a while, to enjoy my freedom
in the participation of pleasures suited to my age and sex." "These,"
said he, "you are aware, I suppose, when you form a connection with that
man, you must renounce, and content yourself with a confinement to the
tedious round of domestic duties, the pedantic conversation of
scholars, and the invidious criticisms of a whole town." "I have been
accustomed," said I, "and am therefore attached, to men of letters; and
as to the praise or censure of the populace, I hope always to enjoy that
approbation of conscience which will render me superior to both. But you
forget your promise not to talk in this style, and have deviated far
from the character of a friend and brother, with, which you consented to
rest satisfied." "Yes; but I find myself unequal to the task. I am not
stoic enough tamely to make so great a sacrifice. I must plead for an
interest in your favor till you banish me from your presence, and tell
me plainly that you hate me." We had by this time reached the gate, and
as we dismounted, were unexpectedly accosted by Mr. Selby, who had come,
agreeably to promise, to dine with us, and receive my letter to Mr.
Boyer.

Major Sanford took his leave as General Richman appeared at the door.
The general and his lady rallied me on my change of company, but very
prudently concealed their sentiments of Major Sanford while Mr. Selby
was present. Nothing material occurred before and during dinner, soon
after which Mr. Selby went away. I retired to dress for the assembly,
and had nearly completed the labor of the toilet when Mrs. Richman
entered. "My friendship for you, my dear Eliza," said she, "interests
me so much in your affairs that I cannot repress my curiosity to know
who has the honor of your hand this evening." "If it be any honor," said
I, "it will be conferred on Major Sanford." "I think it far too great to
be thus bestowed," returned she. "It is perfectly astonishing to me that
the virtuous part of my sex will countenance, caress, and encourage
those men whose profession it is to blast their reputation, destroy
their peace, and triumph in their infamy." "Is this, madam, the avowed
design of Major Sanford?" "I know not what he avows, but his practice
too plainly bespeaks his principles and views." "Does he now practise
the arts you mention? or do you refer to past follies?" "I cannot answer
for his present conduct; his past has established his character." "You,
madam, are an advocate for charity; that, perhaps, if exercised in this
instance, might lead you to think it possible for him to reform, to
become a valuable member of society, and, when connected with a lady of
virtue and refinement, to be capable of making a good husband." "I
cannot conceive that such a lady would be willing to risk her all upon
the slender prospect of his reformation. I hope the one with whom I am
conversing has no inclination to so hazardous an experiment." "Why, not
much." "Not much! If you have any, why do you continue to encourage Mr.
Boyer's addresses?" "I am not sufficiently acquainted with either, yet,
to determine which to take. At present, I shall not confine myself in
any way. In regard to these men, my fancy and my judgment are in scales;
sometimes one preponderates, sometimes the other; which will finally
prevail, time alone can reveal." "O my cousin, beware of the delusions
of fancy! Reason must be our guide if we would expect durable
happiness." At this instant a servant opened the door, and told me that
Major Sanford waited in the parlor. Being ready, I wished Mrs. Richman a
good evening, and went down. Neither General Richman nor his lady
appeared. He therefore handed me immediately into his phaeton, and we
were soon in the assembly room.

I was surprised, on my entrance, to find Mr. Selby there, as he did not
mention, at dinner, his intention of going. He attached himself to our
party, and, in the intervals of dancing, took every opportunity of
conversing with me. These, however, were not many; for Major Sanford
assiduously precluded the possibility of my being much engaged by any
one else. We passed the evening very agreeably; but the major's
importunity was rather troublesome as we returned home. He insisted upon
my declaring whether Mr. Boyer really possessed my affections, and
whether I intended to confer myself on him or not. "If," said he, "you
answer me in the affirmative, I must despair; but if you have not
absolutely decided against me, I will still hope that my persevering
assiduity, my faithful love, may at last be rewarded." I told him that I
was under no obligation to give him any account of my disposition
towards another, and that he must remember the terms of our present
association to which he had subscribed. I therefore begged him to waive
the subject now, if not forever. He asked my pardon, if he had been
impertinent, but desired leave to renew his request that I would receive
his visits, his friendly visits. I replied that I could not grant this,
and that he must blame himself, not me, if he was an unwelcome guest at
General Richman's. He lamented the prejudices which my friends had
imbibed against him, but flattered himself that I was more liberal than
to be influenced by them without any positive proof of demerit, as it
was impossible that his conduct towards me should ever deviate from the
strictest rules of honor and love.

What shall I say now, my friend? This man to an agreeable person has
superadded graceful manners, an amiable temper, and a fortune sufficient
to insure the enjoyments of all the pleasing varieties of social life.
Perhaps a gay disposition and a lax education may have betrayed him into
some scenes of dissipation. But is it not an adage generally received,
that "_a reformed rake makes the best husband_"? My fancy leads me for
happiness to the festive haunts of fashionable life. I am at present,
and know not but I ever shall be, too volatile for a confinement to
domestic avocations and sedentary pleasures. I dare not, therefore,
place myself in a situation where these must be indispensable. Mr.
Boyer's person and character are agreeable. I really esteem the man. My
reason and judgment, as I have observed before, declare for a connection
with him, as a state of tranquillity and rational happiness. But the
idea of relinquishing those delightful amusements and flattering
attentions which wealth and equipage bestow is painful. Why were not the
virtues of the one and the graces and affluence of the other combined? I
should then have been happy indeed. But, as the case now stands, I am
loath to give up either; being doubtful which will conduce most to my
felicity.

Pray write me impartially; let me know your real sentiments, for I rely
greatly upon your opinion. I am, &c.,

ELIZA WHARTON.



