LETTER XXVII.

TO THE REV. MR. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

I am quite a convert to Pope's assertion, that

  "Every woman is at heart a rake."

How else can we account for the pleasure which they evidently receive
from the society, the flattery, the caresses of men of that character?
Even the most virtuous of them seem naturally prone to gayety, to
pleasure, and, I had almost said, to dissipation. How else shall we
account for the existence of this disposition in your favorite fair? It
cannot be the result of her education. Such a one as she has received is
calculated to give her a very different turn of mind. You must forgive
me, my friend, for I am a little vexed and alarmed on your-account. I
went last evening to the assembly, as I told you in my last that I
intended. I was purposely without a partner, that I might have the
liberty to exercise my gallantry as circumstances should invite. Indeed
I must own that my particular design was to observe Miss Wharton's
movements, being rather inclined to jealousy in your behalf. She was
handed into the assembly room by Major Sanford. The brilliance of their
appearance, the levity of their manners, and the contrast of their
characters I found to be a general subject of speculation. I endeavored
to associate with Miss Wharton, but found it impossible to detach her a
moment from the coxcomb who attended her. If she has any idea of a
connection with you, why does she continue to associate with another,
especially with one of so opposite a description? I am seriously afraid
that there is more intimacy between them than there ought to be,
considering the encouragement she has given you.

I hope you will not be offended by my freedom in this matter. It
originates in a concern for your honor and future happiness. I am
anxious lest you should be made the dupe of a coquette, and your peace
of mind fall a sacrifice to an artful debauchee. Yet I must believe that
Miss Wharton has, in reality, all that virtue and good sense of which
she enjoys the reputation; but her present conduct is mysterious.

I have said enough (more than I ought, perhaps) to awaken your attention
to circumstances which _may_ lead to important events. If they appear of
little or no consequence to you, you will at least ascribe the mention
of them to motives of sincere regard in your friend and humble servant,

T. SELBY.



