LETTER XXIX.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HARTFORD.

You desire me to write to you, my friend; but if you had not, I should
by no means have refrained. I tremble at the precipice on which you
stand, and must echo and reecho the seasonable admonition of the
excellent Mrs. Richman, "Beware of the delusions of fancy." You are
strangely infatuated by them! Let not the magic arts of that worthless
Sanford lead you, like an _ignis fatuus_, from the path of rectitude and
virtue.

I do not find, in all your conversations with him, that one word about
marriage drops from his lips. This is mysterious. No, it is
characteristic of the man. Suppose, however, that his views are
honorable; yet what can you expect, what can you promise yourself, from
such a connection? "A reformed rake," you say, "makes the best
husband"--a trite, but a very erroneous maxim, as the fatal experience
of thousands of our sex can testify. In the first place, I believe that
rakes very seldom _do_ reform while their fortunes and constitutions
enable them to pursue their licentious pleasures. But even allowing this
to happen; can a woman of refinement and delicacy enjoy the society of a
man whose mind has been corrupted, whose taste has been vitiated, and
who has contracted a depravity, both of sentiment and manners, which no
degree of repentance can wholly efface? Besides, of true love they are
absolutely incapable. Their passions have been much too hackneyed to
admit so pure a flame. You cannot anticipate sincere and lasting respect
from them. They have been so long accustomed to the company of those of
our sex who deserve no esteem, that the greatest dignity and purity of
character can never excite it in their breasts. They are naturally prone
to jealousy. Habituated to an intercourse with the baser part of the
sex, they level the whole, and seldom believe any to be incorruptible.
They are always hardhearted and cruel. How else could they triumph in
the miseries which they frequently occasion? Their specious manners may
render them agreeable companions abroad, but at home the evil
propensities of their minds will invariably predominate. They are
steeled against the tender affections which render domestic life
delightful; strangers to the kind, the endearing sympathies of husband,
father, and friend. The thousand nameless attentions which soften the
rugged path of life are neglected, and deemed unworthy of notice, by
persons who have been inured to scenes of dissipation and debauchery.
And is a man of this description to be the partner, the companion, the
bosom friend of my Eliza? Forbid it, Heaven! Let not the noble qualities
so lavishly bestowed upon her be thus unworthily sacrificed!

You seem to be particularly charmed with the fortune of Major Sanford,
with the gayety of his appearance, with the splendor of his equipage,
with the politeness of his manners, with what you call the graces of
his person. These, alas! are superficial, insnaring endowments. As to
fortune, prudence, economy, and regularity are necessary to preserve it
when possessed. Of these Major Sanford is certainly destitute--unless
common fame (which more frequently tells the truth than some are willing
to allow) does him great injustice. As to external parade, it will not
satisfy the rational mind when it aspires to those substantial pleasures
for which yours is formed. And as to the graces of person and manners,
they are but a wretched substitute for those virtues which adorn and
dignify human life. Can you, who have always been used to serenity and
order in a family, to rational, refined, and improving conversation,
relinquish them, and launch into the whirlpool of frivolity, where the
correct taste and the delicate sensibility which you possess must
constantly be wounded by the frothy and illiberal sallies of licentious
wit?

This, my dear, is but a faint picture of the situation to which you seem
inclined. Reverse the scene, and you will perceive the alternative which
is submitted to your option in a virtuous connection with Mr. Boyer.
Remember that you are acting for life, and that your happiness in this
world, perhaps in the next, depends on your present choice.

I called last evening to see your mamma. She is fondly anticipating
your return, and rejoicing in the prospect of your agreeable and speedy
settlement. I could not find it in my heart to distress her by
intimating that you had other views. I wish her benevolent bosom
nevermore to feel the pangs of disappointed hope.

I am busily engaged in preparing for my nuptials. The solemn words, "As
long as ye both shall live," render me thoughtful and serious. I hope
for your enlivening presence soon, which will prove a seasonable cordial
to the spirits of your

LUCY FREEMAN.



