LETTER III.

TO THE SAME.

NEW HAVEN.

Is it time for me to talk again of conquests? or must I only enjoy them
in silence? I must write to you the impulses of my mind, or I must not
write at all. You are not so morose as to wish me to become a nun, would
our country and religion allow it. I ventured, yesterday, to throw aside
the habiliments of mourning, and to array myself in those more adapted
to my taste. We arrived at Colonel Farington's about one o'clock. The
colonel handed me out of the carriage, and introduced me to a large
company assembled in the hall.

My name was pronounced with an _emphasis_, and I was received with the
most flattering tokens of respect. When we were summoned to dinner, a
young gentleman in a clerical dress offered me his hand, and led me to a
table furnished with an elegant and sumptuous repast, with more
gallantry and address than commonly fall to the share of students. He
sat opposite me at table; and whenever I raised my eye, it caught his.
The ease and politeness of his manners, with his particular attention to
me, raised my curiosity, and induced me to ask Mrs. Laiton who he was.
She told me that his name was Boyer; that he was descended from a
worthy family; had passed with honor and applause through the university
where he was educated; had since studied divinity with success; and now
had a call to settle as a minister in one of the first parishes in a
neighboring state.

The gates of a spacious garden were thrown open at this instant, and I
accepted with avidity an invitation to walk in it. Mirth and hilarity
prevailed, and the moments fled on downy wings, while we traced the
beauties of Art and Nature, so liberally displayed and so happily
blended in this delightful retreat. An enthusiastic admirer of scenes
like these, I had rambled some way from the company, when I was followed
by Mrs. Laiton to offer her condolence on the supposed loss which I had
sustained in the death of Mr. Haly. My heart rose against the woman, so
ignorant of human nature as to think such conversation acceptable at
such a time. I made her little reply, and waved the subject, though I
could not immediately dispel the gloom which it excited.

The absurdity of a custom authorizing people at a first interview to
revive the idea of griefs which time has lulled, perhaps obliterated, is
intolerable. To have our enjoyments arrested by the empty compliments of
unthinking persons for no other reason than a compliance with fashion,
is to be treated in a manner which the laws of humanity forbid.

We were soon joined by the gentlemen, who each selected his partner, and
the walk was prolonged.

Mr. Boyer offered me his arm, which I gladly accepted, happy to be
relieved from the impertinence of my female companion. We returned to
tea; after which the ladies sung, and played by turns on the piano
forte; while some of the gentlemen accompanied with the flute, the
clarinet, and the violin, forming in the whole a very decent concert. An
elegant supper, and half an hour's conversation after it, closed the
evening; when we returned home, delighted with our entertainment, and
pleased with ourselves and each other. My imagination is so impressed
with the festive scenes of the day that Morpheus waves his ebon wand in
vain. The evening is fine beyond the power of description; all Nature is
serene and harmonious, in perfect unison with my present disposition of
mind. I have been taking a retrospect of my past life, and, a few
juvenile follies excepted, which I trust the recording angel has blotted
out with a tear of charity, find an approving conscience and a heart at
ease. Fortune, indeed, has not been very liberal of her gifts to me; but
I presume on a large stock in the bank of friendship, which, united
with health and innocence, give me some pleasing anticipations of future
felicity.


Whatever my fate may be, I shall always continue your

ELIZA WHARTON.



