LETTER XXX.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I believe your spirits need a cordial indeed, my dear Lucy, after
drawing so dreadful a portrait of my swain. But I call him mine no
longer. I renounce him entirely. My friends shall be gratified; and if
their predictions are verified, I shall be happy in a union with a man
of their choice. General Richman and lady have labored abundantly to
prove that my ruin was inevitable if I did not immediately break all
intercourse with Major Sanford. I promised a compliance with their
wishes, and have accomplished the task, though a hard one I found it.
Last Thursday he was here, and desired leave to spend an hour with me. I
readily consented, assuring my friends it should be the last hour which
I would ever spend in his company.

He told me that he was obliged to leave town for a few days; and as I
should probably see Mr. Boyer before his return, he could not depart in
peace without once more endeavoring to interest me in his favor, to
obtain some token of esteem, some glimpse of hope that I would not
utterly reject him, to support him in his absence. I thanked him for the
polite attention he had paid me since our acquaintance, told him that I
should ever retain a grateful sense of his partiality to me, that he
would ever share my best wishes, but that all connection of the kind to
which he alluded must from that time forever cease.

He exerted all his eloquence to obtain a retraction of that sentence,
and ran with the greatest volubility through all the protestations,
prayers, entreaties, professions, and assurances which love could feel
or art contrive. I had resolution, however, to resist them, and to
command my own emotions on the occasion better than my natural
sensibility gave me reason to expect.

Finding every effort vain, he rose precipitately, and bade me adieu. I
urged his tarrying to tea; but he declined, saying that he must retire
to his chamber, being, in his present state of mind, unfit for any
society, as he was banished from mine. I offered him my hand, which he
pressed with ardor to his lips, and, bowing in silence, left the room.

Thus terminated this affair--an affair which, perhaps, was only the
effect of mere gallantry on his part, and of unmeaning pleasantry on
mine, and which, I am sorry to say, has given my friends so much anxiety
and concern. I am under obligations to them for their kind solicitude,
however causeless it may have been.

As an agreeable companion, as a polite and finished gallant, Major
Sanford is all that the most lively fancy could wish. And as you have
always affirmed that I was a little inclined to coquetry, can you wonder
at my exercising it upon so happy a subject? Besides, when I thought
more seriously, his liberal fortune was extremely alluring to me, who,
you know, have been hitherto confined to the rigid rules of prudence and
economy, not to say necessity, in my finances.

Miss Lawrence called on me yesterday, as she was taking the air, and
asked me whether Major Sanford took leave of me when he left town. "He
was here last week," said I, "but I did not know that he was gone away."
"O, yes," she replied, "he is gone to take possession of his seat which
he has lately purchased of Captain Pribble. I am told it is superb; and
it ought to be, if it has the honor of his residence." "Then you have a
great opinion of Major Sanford," said I. "Certainly; and has not every
body else?" said she. "I am sure he is a very fine gentleman." Mrs.
Richman smiled rather contemptuously, and I changed the subject. I
believe that the innocent heart of this simple girl is a little taken
in.

I have just received a letter from Mr. Boyer in the usual style. He
expects the superlative happiness of kissing my hand next week. O, dear!
I believe I must begin to fix my phiz. Let me run to the glass, and try
if I can make up one that will look _madamish_. Yes, I succeeded very
well.

I congratulate you on your new neighbor; but I advise friend George to
have the Gordian knot tied immediately, lest you should be insnared by
this bewitching squire.

I have been trying to seduce General Richman to accompany me to the
assembly this evening, but cannot prevail. Were Mrs. Richman able to go
with us, he would be very happy to wait on us together; but, to tell the
truth, he had rather enjoy her company at home than any which is to be
found abroad. I rallied him on his old-fashioned taste, but my heart
approved and applauded his attachment. I despise the married man or
woman who harbors an inclination to partake of separate pleasures.

I am told that a servant man inquires for me below--the messenger of
some enamoured swain, I suppose. I will step down and learn what message
he brings.

Nothing extraordinary; it is only a card of compliments from a Mr.
Emmons, a respectable merchant of this city, requesting the honor to
wait on me to the assembly this evening--a welcome request, which I made
no hesitation to grant. If I must resign these favorite amusements, let
me enjoy as large a share as possible till the time arrives. I must
repair to the toilet, and adorn for a new conquest the person of

ELIZA WHARTON.



