LETTER XXXII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

HARTFORD.

I am really banished and rejected--desired nevermore to think of the
girl I love with a view of indulging that love or of rendering it
acceptable to its object. You will perhaps dispute the propriety of the
term, and tell me it is not love--it is only gallantry, and a desire to
exercise it with her as a favorite nymph. I neither know nor care by
what appellation you distinguish it; but it truly gives me pain. I have
not felt one sensation of genuine pleasure since I heard my sentence;
yet I acquiesced in it, and submissively took my leave; though I doubt
not but I shall retaliate the indignity one time or other.

I have taken possession of my new purchase--an elegant and delightful
residence. It is rendered more so by being in the vicinity of my
charmer's native abode. This circumstance will conduce much to my
enjoyment, if I can succeed in my plan of separating her from Mr. Boyer.
I know that my situation and mode of life are far more pleasing to her
than his, and shall therefore trust to my appearance and address for a
reestablishment in her favor. I intend, if possible, to ingratiate
myself with her particular friends. For this purpose I called last week
at her mother's to pay my respects to her (so I told the good woman) as
an object of my particular regard, and as the parent of a young lady
whom I had the honor to know and admire. She received me very civilly,
thanked me for my attention, and invited me to call whenever I had
opportunity; which was the very thing I wanted. I intend, likewise, to
court popularity. I don't know but I must accept, by and by, some
lucrative office in the civil department; yet I cannot bear the idea of
confinement to business. It appears to me quite inconsistent with the
character of a gentleman; I am sure it is with that of a man of
pleasure. But something I must do; for I tell you, in confidence, that I
was obliged to mortgage this place because I had not wherewithal to pay
for it. But I shall manage matters very well, I have no doubt, and keep
up the appearance of affluence till I find some lady in a strait for a
husband whose fortune will enable me to extricate myself from these
embarrassments. Do come and see me, Charles; for, notwithstanding all my
gayety and parade, I have some turns of the hypo, some qualms of
conscience, you will call them; but I meddle not with such obsolete
words. And so good by to you, says

PETER SANFORD.



