LETTER XXXIV.

TO MRS. RICHMAN.

HARTFORD.

Dear madam: The day after I left your hospitable dwelling brought me
safe to that of my honored mamma; to the seat of maternal and filial
affection; of social ease and domestic peace; of every species of
happiness which can result from religion and virtue, from refinement in
morals and manners.

I found my brother and his wife, with Lucy Freeman and Mr. Sumner,
waiting to receive and bid me welcome. I flew with ecstasy to the bosom
of my mamma, who received me with her accustomed affection, testified by
the expressive tears of tenderness which stole silently down her widowed
cheek. She was unable to speak. I was equally so. We therefore indulged
a moment the pleasing emotions of sympathizing sensibility. When
disengaged from her fond embrace, I was saluted by the others in turn;
and, having recovered myself, I presented Mr. Boyer to each of the
company, and each of the company to him. He was cordially received by
all, but more especially by my mamma.

The next day I was called upon and welcomed by several of my neighboring
acquaintance; among whom I was not a little surprised to see Major
Sanford. He came in company with Mr. Stoddard and lady, whom he
overtook, as he told me, near by; and, as they informed him that the
design of their visit was to welcome me home, he readily accepted their
invitation to partake of the pleasure which every one must receive on my
return. I bowed slightly at his compliment, taking no visible notice of
any peculiarity of expression either in his words or looks.

His politeness to Mr. Boyer appeared to be the result of habit; Mr.
Boyer's to him to be forced by respect to the company to which he had
gained admission. I dare say that each felt a conscious superiority--the
one on the score of merit, the other on that of fortune. Which ought to
outweigh the judicious mind will easily decide. The scale, as I once
observed to you, will turn as fancy or reason preponderates. I believe
the esteem which I now have for Mr. Boyer will keep me steady; except,
perhaps, some little eccentricities now and then, just by way of
variety. I am going to-morrow morning to spend a few days with Lucy
Freeman, to assist in the preparation for, and the solemnization of, her
nuptials. Mr. Boyer, in the mean time, will tarry among his friends in
town. My mamma is excessively partial to him, though I am not yet
jealous that she means to rival me. I am not certain, however, but it
might be happy for him if she should; for I suspect, not withstanding
the disparity of her age, that she is better calculated to make him a
good wife than I am or ever shall be.

But to be sober. Please, madam, to make my compliments acceptable to
those of your neighbors, whose politeness and attention to me while at
your house have laid me under particular obligations of gratitude and
respect. My best regards attend General Richman. Pray tell him that,
though I never expect to be so good a wife as he is blessed with, yet I
intend, after a while, (when I have sowed all my wild oats,) to make a
tolerable one.

I am anxious to hear of a wished-for event, and of your safety. All who
know you feel interested in your health and happiness, but none more
warmly than your obliged and affectionate

ELIZA WHARTON.



