LETTER IV.

TO MR. SELBY.

NEW HAVEN.

You ask me, my friend, whether I am in pursuit of truth, or a lady. I
answer, Both. I hope and trust they are united, and really expect to
find Truth, and the Virtues and Graces besides, in a fair form. If you
mean by the first part of your question whether I am searching into the
sublimer doctrines of religion,--to these I would by no means be
inattentive; but, to be honest, my studies of that kind have been very
much interrupted of late. The respectable circle of acquaintances with
which I am honored here has rendered my visits very frequent and
numerous. In one of these I was introduced to Miss Eliza Wharton--a
young lady whose elegant person, accomplished mind, and polished
manners have been much celebrated. Her fame has often reached me; but,
as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon, the half was not told me. You
will think that I talk in the style of a lover.

I confess it; nor am I ashamed to rank myself among the professed
admirers of this lovely fair one. I am in no danger, however, of
becoming an enthusiastic devotee. No; I mean I act upon just and
rational principles. Expecting soon to settle in an eligible situation,
if such a companion as I am persuaded she will make me may fall to my
lot, I shall deem myself as happy as this state of imperfection will
admit. She is now resident at General Richman's. The general and his
lady are her particular friends; they are warm in her praises. They tell
me, however, that she is naturally of a gay disposition. No matter for
that; it is an agreeable quality, where there is discretion sufficient
for its regulation. A cheerful friend, much more a cheerful wife, is
peculiarly necessary to a person of a studious and sedentary life. They
dispel the gloom of retirement, and exhilarate the spirits depressed by
intense application. She was formerly addressed by the late Mr. Haly, of
Boston. He was not, it seems, the man of her choice; but her parents
were extremely partial to him, and wished the connection to take place.
She, like a dutiful child, sacrificed her own inclination to their
pleasure so far as to acquiesce in his visits. This she more easily
accomplished, as his health, which declined from their first
acquaintance, led her to suppose, as the event has proved, that he would
not live to enter into any lasting engagements. Her father, who died
some months before him, invited him to reside at his house for the
benefit of a change of air, agreeably to the advice of his physicians.
She attended him during his last illness with all the care and assiduity
of a nurse and with all the sympathizing tenderness of a sister.

I have had several opportunities of conversing with her. She discovers
an elevated mind, a ready apprehension, and an accurate knowledge of the
various subjects which have been brought into view. I have not yet
introduced the favorite subject of my heart. Indeed, she seems
studiously to avoid noticing any expression which leads towards it; but
she must hear it soon. I am sure of the favor and interest of the
friends with whom she resides. They have promised to speak previously in
my behalf. I am to call, as if accidentally, this afternoon just as they
are to ride abroad. They are to refer me to Miss Wharton for
entertainment till their return. What a delightful opportunity for my
purpose! I am counting the hours--nay, the very moments. Adieu. You
shall soon again hear from your most obedient,

J. BOYER.



