LETTER XLII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

HARTFORD.

Well, Charles, the show is over, as we Yankees say, and the girl is my
own; that is, if I will have her. I shall take my own time for that,
however. I have carried my point, and am amply revenged on the whole
posse of those dear friends of hers. She was entangled by a promise (not
to marry this priest without my knowledge) which her conscience would
not let her break. Thank God, I have no conscience. If I had, I believe
it would make wretched work with me. I suppose she intended to have one
or the other of us, but preferred me. I have escaped the noose this
time, and I'll be fairly hanged if I ever get so near it again; for
indeed, Charles, I was seriously alarmed. I watched all their motions,
and the appearance of harmony between them awakened all my activity and
zeal. So great was my infatuation, that I verily believe I should have
asked her in marriage, and risked the consequences, rather than to have
lost her.

I went to the house while Mr. Boyer was in town; but her mamma refused
to call her, or to acquaint her that I was there. I then wrote a
despairing letter, and obtained a conference with her in the garden.
This was a fortunate event for me. True, Eliza was very haughty, and
resolutely insisted on an immediate declaration or rejection; and I
cannot say what would have been the result if Mr. Boyer had not
surprised us together. He gave us a pretty harsh look, and retired
without speaking a word.

I endeavored to detain Eliza, but in vain. She left me on my knees,
which are always ready to bend on such occasions.

This finished the matter, it seems. I rose, and went into a neighbor's
to observe what happened, and in about half an hour saw Mr. Boyer come
out and go to his lodgings. "This," said I to myself, "is a good omen."
I went home, and was informed, next day, that he had mounted his horse
and departed.

I heard nothing more of her till yesterday, when I determined to know
how she stood affected towards me. I therefore paid her a visit, her
mamma being luckily abroad.

She received me very placidly, and told me, on inquiry, that Mr.
Boyer's resentment at her meeting me in the garden was so great that he
had bade her a final adieu. I congratulated myself on having no rival,
hoped that her favor would now be unbiased, and that in due time I
should reap the reward of my fidelity. She begged me not to mention the
subject, said she had been perplexed by our competition, and wished not
to hear any thing further about it at present. I bowed in obedience to
her commands, and changed the discourse.

I informed her that I was about taking a tour to the southward; that I
should be absent several months, and trusted that on my return her
embarrassments would be over.

I left her with regret After all, Charles, she is the _summum bonum_ of
my life. I must have her in some way or other. Nobody else shall, I am
resolved.

I am making preparations for my journey, which, between you and me, is
occasioned by the prospect of making a speculation, by which I hope to
mend my affairs. The voyage will at least lessen my expenses, and screen
me from the importunity of creditors till I can look about me.

PETER SANFORD.



