LETTER XLIII.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

NEW HAVEN.

My dear Eliza: Through the medium of my friends at Hartford, I have been
informed of the progress of your affairs as they have transpired. The
detail which my sister gave me of your separation from Mr. Boyer was
painful, as I had long contemplated a happy union between you; but still
more disagreeable sensations possessed my breast when told that you had
suffered your lively spirits to be depressed, and resigned yourself to
solitude and dejection.

Why, my dear friend, should you allow this event thus to affect you?
Heaven, I doubt not, has happiness still in store for you--perhaps
greater than you could have enjoyed in that connection. If the
conviction of any misconduct on your part gives you pain, dissipate it
by the reflection that unerring rectitude is not the lot of mortals;
that few are to be found who have not deviated, in a greater or less
degree, from the maxims of prudence. Our greatest mistakes may teach
lessons which will be useful through life.

But I will not moralize. Come and see us, and we will talk over the
matter once, and then dismiss it forever. Do prevail on your mamma to
part with you a month or two at least. I wish you to witness how well I
manage my nursery business. You will be charmed with little Harriet. I
am already enough of the mother to think her a miniature of beauty and
perfection.

How natural and how easy the transition from one stage of life to
another! Not long since, I was a gay, volatile girl, seeking
satisfaction in fashionable circles and amusements; but now I am
thoroughly domesticated. All my happiness is centred within the limits
of my own walls, and I grudge every moment that calls me from the
pleasing scenes of domestic life. Not that I am so selfish as to exclude
my friends from my affection or society. I feel interested in their
concerns, and enjoy their company. I must own, however, that conjugal
and parental love are the mainsprings of my life. The conduct of some
mothers, in depriving their helpless offspring of the care and kindness
which none but a mother can feel, is to me unaccountable. There are many
nameless attentions which nothing short of maternal tenderness and
solicitude can pay, and for which the endearing smiles and progressive
improvements of the lovely babe are an ample reward.

How delightful to trace from day to day the expansion of reason and the
dawnings of intelligence! O, how I anticipate the time when these
faculties shall be displayed by the organs of speech, when the lisping
accent shall heighten our present pleasure, and the young idea be
capable of direction "how to shoot"! General Richman is not less
interested by these enjoyments than myself. All the father beams in his
eye; all the husband reigns in his heart and pervades his every action.

Miss Lawrence is soon to be married to Mr. Laiton. I believe he is a
mere fortune hunter. Indeed, she has little to recommend her to any
other. Nature has not been very bountiful either to her body or mind.
Her parents have been shamefully deficient in her education, but have
secured to her what they think the chief good--not considering that
happiness is by no means the invariable attendant of wealth.

I hope this incoherent scrawl will amuse, while it induces you speedily
to favor us with another visit.

My best wishes attend your honored mamma, while I subscribe myself, &c.,

A. RICHMAN.



