LETTER V.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

These bewitching charms of mine have a tendency to keep my mind in a
state of perturbation. I am so pestered with these admirers! Not that I
am so very handsome neither; but, I don't know how it is, I am certainly
very much the taste of the other sex. Followed, flattered, and caressed,
I have cards and compliments in profusion. But I must try to be serious;
for I have, alas! one serious lover. As I promised you to be particular
in my writing, I suppose I must proceed methodically. Yesterday we had a
party to dine. Mr. Boyer was of the number. His attention was
immediately engrossed; and I soon perceived that every word, every
action, and every look was studied to gain my approbation. As he sat
next me at dinner, his assiduity and politeness were pleasing; and as we
walked together afterwards, his conversation was improving. Mine was
sentimental and sedate--perfectly adapted to the taste of my gallant.
Nothing, however, was said particularly expressive of his apparent
wishes. I studiously avoided every kind of discourse which might lead to
this topic. I wish not for a declaration from any one, especially from
one whom I could not repulse and do not intend to encourage at present.
His conversation, so similar to what I had often heard from a similar
character, brought a deceased friend to mind, and rendered me somewhat
pensive. I retired directly after supper. Mr. Boyer had just taken
leave.

Mrs. Richman came into my chamber as she was passing to her own. "Excuse
my intrusion, Eliza," said she. "I thought I would just step in and ask
you if you have passed a pleasant day."

"Perfectly so, madam; and I have now retired to protract the enjoyment
by recollection." "What, my dear, is your opinion of our favorite, Mr.
Boyer?" "Declaring him your favorite, madam, is sufficient to render me
partial to him; but to be frank, independent of that, I think him an
agreeable man." "Your heart, I presume, is now free." "Yes, and I hope
it will long remain so." "Your friends, my dear, solicitous for your
welfare, wish to see you suitably and agreeably connected." "I hope my
friends will never again interpose in my concerns of that nature. You,
madam, who have ever known my heart, are sensible that, had the
Almighty spared life in a certain instance, I must have sacrificed my
own happiness or incurred their censure. I am young, gay, volatile. A
melancholy event has lately extricated me from those shackles which
parental authority had imposed on my mind. Let me, then, enjoy that
freedom which I so highly prize. Let me have opportunity, unbiased by
opinion, to gratify my natural disposition in a participation of those
pleasures which youth and innocence afford." "Of such pleasures, no one,
my dear, would wish to deprive you; but beware, Eliza! Though strewed
with flowers, when contemplated by your lively imagination, it is, after
all, a slippery, thorny path. The round of fashionable dissipation is
dangerous. A phantom is often pursued, which leaves its deluded votary
the real form of wretchedness." She spoke with an emphasis, and, taking
up her candle, wished me a good night. I had not power to return the
compliment. Something seemingly prophetic in her looks and expressions
cast a momentary gloom upon my mind; but I despise those contracted
ideas which confine virtue to a cell. I have no notion of becoming a
recluse. Mrs. Richman has ever been a beloved friend of mine; yet I
always thought her rather prudish. Adieu.

ELIZA WHARTON.



