LETTER VI.

TO THE SAME.

NEW HAVEN.

I had scarcely seated myself at the breakfast table this morning when a
servant entered with a card of invitation from Major Sanford, requesting
the happiness of my hand this evening at a ball given by Mr. Atkins,
about three miles from this. I showed the billet to Mrs. Richman,
saying, "I have not much acquaintance with this gentleman, madam; but I
suppose his character sufficiently respectable to warrant an affirmative
answer." "He is a gay man, my dear, to say no more; and such are the
companions we wish when we join a party avowedly formed for pleasure." I
then stepped into my apartment, wrote an answer, and despatched the
servant. When I returned to the parlor, something disapprobating
appeared in the countenances of both my friends. I endeavored, without
seeming to observe, to dissipate it by chitchat; but they were better
pleased with each other than with me, and, soon rising, walked into the
garden, and left me to amuse myself alone. My eyes followed them
through the window. "Happy pair!" said I. "Should it ever be my fate to
wear the hymeneal chain, may I be thus united! The purest and most
ardent affection, the greatest consonance of taste and disposition, and
the most congenial virtue and wishes distinguish this lovely couple.
Health and wealth, with every attendant blessing, preside over their
favored dwelling, and shed their benign influence without alloy." The
consciousness of exciting their displeasure gave me pain; but I consoled
myself with the idea that it was ill founded.

"They should consider," said I, "that they have no satisfaction to look
for beyond each other; there every enjoyment is centred; but I am a poor
solitary being, who need some amusement beyond what I can supply myself.
The mind, after being confined at home for a while, sends the
imagination abroad in quest of new treasures; and the body may as well
accompany it, for aught I can see."

General Richman and lady have ever appeared solicitous to promote my
happiness since I have resided with them. They have urged my acceptance
of invitations to join parties; though they have not been much
themselves of late, as Mrs. Richman's present circumstances render her
fond of retirement. What reason can be assigned for their apparent
reluctance to this evening's entertainment is to me incomprehensible;
but I shall apply the chemical powers of friendship, and extract the
secret from Mrs. Richman to-morrow, if not before. Adieu. I am now
summoned to dinner, and after that shall be engaged in preparation till
the wished-for hour of hilarity and mirth engrosses every faculty of
your

ELIZA WHARTON.



