LETTER VII.

TO MR. SELBY.

NEW HAVEN.

Divines need not declaim, nor philosophers expatiate, on the
disappointments of human life. Are they not legibly written on every
page of our existence? Are they not predominantly prevalent over every
period of our lives?

When I closed my last letter to you, my heart exulted in the pleasing
anticipation of promised bliss; my wishes danced on the light breezes of
hope; and my imagination dared to arrest the attention of, and even
claim a return of affection from, the lovely Eliza Wharton. But
imagination only it has proved, and that dashed with the bitter
ranklings of jealousy and suspicion.

But to resume my narrative. I reached the mansion of my friend about
four. I was disagreeably struck with the appearance of a carriage at the
door, as it raised an idea of company which might frustrate my plan; but
still more disagreeable were my sensations when, on entering the parlor,
I found Major Sanford evidently in a waiting posture. I was very
politely received; and when Eliza entered the room with a brilliance of
appearance and gayety of manner which I had never before connected with
her character, I rose, as did Major Sanford, who offered his hand and
led her to a chair. I forgot to sit down again, but stood transfixed by
the pangs of disappointment. Miss Wharton appeared somewhat confused,
but, soon resuming her vivacity, desired me to be seated, inquired after
my health, and made some commonplace remarks on the weather; then,
apologizing for leaving me, gave her hand again to Major Sanford, who
had previously risen, and reminded her that the time and their
engagements made it necessary to leave the good company; which, indeed,
they both appeared very willing to do. General Richman and lady took
every method in their power to remove my chagrin and atone for the
absence of my fair one; but ill did they succeed. They told me that Miss
Wharton had not the most distant idea of my visiting there this
afternoon, much less of the design of my visit; that for some months
together she had been lately confined by the sickness of Mr. Haly, whom
she attended during the whole of his last illness; which confinement had
eventually increased her desire of indulging her natural disposition for
gayety. She had, however, they said, an excellent heart and reflecting
mind, a great share of sensibility, and a temper peculiarly formed for
the enjoyments of social life. "But this gentleman, madam, who is her
gallant this evening,--is his character unexceptionable? Will a lady of
delicacy associate with an immoral, not to say profligate, man?" "The
rank and fortune of Major Sanford," said Mrs. Richman, "procure him
respect; his specious manners render him acceptable in public company;
but I must own that he is not the person with whom I wish my cousin to
be connected even for a moment. She never consulted me so little on any
subject as that of his card this morning. Before I had time to object,
she dismissed the servant; and I forbore to destroy her expected
happiness by acquainting her with my disapprobation of her partner. Her
omission was not design; it was juvenile indiscretion. We must, my dear
sir," continued she, "look with a candid eye on such eccentricities.
Faults, not foibles, require the severity of censure." "Far, madam, be
it from me to censure any conduct which as yet I have observed in Miss
Wharton; she has too great an interest in my heart to admit of that."

We now went into more general conversation. Tea was served; and I soon
after took leave. General Richman, however, insisted on my dining with
him on Thursday; which I promised. And here I am again over head and
ears in the hypo--a disease, you will say, peculiar to students. I
believe it peculiar to lovers; and with that class I must now rank
myself, though I did not know, until this evening, that I was so much
engaged as I find I really am. I knew, indeed, that I was extremely
pleased with this amiable girl; that I was interested in her favor; that
I was happier in her company than any where else; with innumerable other
circumstances, which would have told me the truth had I examined them.
But be that as it may, I hope and trust that I am, and ever shall be, a
reasonable creature, and not suffer my judgment to be misled by the
operations of a blind passion.

I shall now lay aside this subject; endeavor to divest even my
imagination of the charmer; and return, until Thursday, to the
contemplation of those truths and duties which have a happy tendency to
calm the jarring elements which compose our mortal frame. Adieu.

J. BOYER.



