LETTER IX.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I am not so happy to-day in the recollection of last evening's
entertainment as I was in the enjoyment.

The explanation which I promised you from Mrs. Richman yesterday I could
not obtain. When I went down to dinner some friends of General Richman's
had accidentally dropped in, which precluded all particular
conversation. I retired soon to dress, and saw Mrs. Richman no more till
I was informed that Major Sanford waited for me. But I was surprised, on
going into the parlor, to find Mr. Boyer there. I blushed and stammered;
but I know not why; for certain I am that I neither love nor fear the
good man yet, whatever I may do some future day. I would not be
understood that I do not respect and esteem him; for I do both. But
these are calm passions, which soothe rather than agitate the mind. It
was not the consciousness of any impropriety of conduct; for I was far
from feeling any. The entertainment for which I was prepared was such as
virtue would not disapprove, and my gallant was a man of fortune,
fashion, and, for aught I knew, of unblemished character.

But Mr. Boyer was much more disconcerted than myself. Indeed, he did not
recover his philosophy while I staid. I believe, by some hints I have
received since, that he had some particular views in which he was
disappointed.

Our ball had every charm which could render a ball delightful. My
partner was all ease, politeness, and attention; and your friend was as
much flattered and caressed as vanity itself could wish. We returned to
General Richman's about two. Major Sanford asked leave to call and
inquire after my health this morning; and I am now expecting him. I rose
to breakfast. The late hour of retiring to rest had not depressed, but
rather exhilarated, my spirits. My friends were waiting for me in their
parlor. They received me sociably, inquired after my health, my last
evening's entertainment, the company, &c.; when, after a little pause,
Mrs. Richman said, "And how do you like Major Sanford, Eliza?" "Very
well indeed, madam; I think him a finished gentleman. Will you, who are
a connoisseur, allow him that title?" "No, my dear; in my opinion he
falls far below it, since he is deficient in one of the great essentials
of the character; and that is _virtue_." "I am surprised," said I; "but
how has he incurred so severe a censure?" "By being a professed
libertine; by having but too successfully, practised the arts of
seduction; by triumphing in the destruction of innocence and the peace
of families." "O, why was I not informed of this before? But perhaps
these are old affairs--the effects of juvenile folly--crimes of which he
may have repented, and which charity ought to obliterate." "No, my dear,
they are recent facts---facts which he dares not deny--facts for which
he ought to be banished from all virtuous society. I should have
intimated this to you before; but your precipitate acceptance of his
invitation deprived me of an opportunity until it was too late to
prevent your going with him; and we thought it best to protract your
enjoyment as long as possible, not doubting but your virtue and delicacy
would, in future, guard you against the like deception."

"Must I, then, become an avowed prude at once, and refuse him admission
if he call in compliance with the customary forms?" "By no means. I am
sensible that even the false maxims of the world must be complied with
in a degree. But a man of Major Sanford's art can easily distinguish
between a forbidding and an encouraging reception. The former may, in
this case, be given without any breach of the rules of politeness."
Astonished and mortified, I knew not what further to say. I had been so
pleased with the man that I wished to plead in his favor; but virtue and
prudence forbade. I therefore rose and retired. He is this moment, I am
told, below stairs; so that I must bid you adieu until the next post.

ELIZA WHARTON.



