LETTER XXXVII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

HARTFORD.

Dear Charles: My hopes begin to revive. I am again permitted to
associate with my Eliza--invited to the same entertainment. She does not
refuse to join with me in the mazy dance, and partake the scenes of
festive mirth. Nay, more; she allows me to press her hand to my lips,
and listens to the sighing accents of love. Love her I certainly do.
Would to Heaven I could marry her! Would to Heaven I had preserved my
fortune, or she had one to supply its place! I am distracted at the idea
of losing her forever. I am sometimes tempted to solicit her hand in
serious earnest; but if I should, poverty and want must be the
consequence. Her disappointment in the expectation of affluence and
splendor, which I believe her ruling passion, would afford a perpetual
source of discontent and mutual wretchedness.

She is going to Boston with her friend, Mrs. Sumner. I must follow her.
I must break the connection which is rapidly forming between her and Mr.
Boyer, and enjoy her society a while longer, if no more.

I have had a little intimation from New Haven that Miss Lawrence is
partial to me, and might easily be obtained, with a handsome property
into the bargain. I am neither pleased with nor averse to the girl; but
she has money, and that may supply the place of love, by enabling me to
pursue independent pleasures. This she must expect, if she marries a man
of my cast. She, doubtless, knows my character; and if she is so vain of
her charms or influence as to think of reforming or confining me, she
must bear the consequences.

However, I can keep my head up at present without recourse to the noose
of matrimony, and shall therefore defer any particular attention to her
till necessity requires it. I am, &c.,

PETER SANFORD.



LETTER XXXVIII.

TO MRS. M. WHARTON.

BOSTON.

You commanded me, my dear mamma, to write to you. That command I
cheerfully obey, in testimony of my ready submission and respect. No
other avocation could arrest my time, which is now completely occupied
in scenes of amusement.

Mrs. Sumner is agreeably settled and situated. She appears to be
possessed of every blessing which can render life desirable. Almost
every day since our arrival has been engrossed by visitants. Our
evenings we have devoted to company abroad; and that more generally than
we should otherwise have done, as my stay is limited to so short a
period. The museum, the theatres, the circus, and the assemblies have
been frequented.

Mrs. Sumner has made me several presents; notwithstanding which, the
articles requisite to a fashionable appearance have involved me in
considerable expense. I fear that you will think me extravagant when you
are told how much.

Mr. Boyer tarried in town about a week, having business. He appeared a
little concerned at my taste for dissipation, as he once termed it. He
even took the liberty to converse seriously on the subject.

I was displeased with his freedom, and reminded him that I had the
disposal of my own time as yet, and that, while I escaped the censure of
my own heart, I hoped that no one else would presume to arraign it. He
apologized, and gave up his argument.

I was much surprised, the first time I went to the play, to see Major
Sanford in the very next box. He immediately joined our party; and
wherever I have been since, I have been almost sure to meet him.

Mr. Boyer has taken his departure; and I do not expect to see him again
till I return home.

O mamma, I am embarrassed about this man. His worth I acknowledge; nay,
I esteem him very highly. But can there be happiness with such a
disparity of dispositions?

I shall soon return to the bosom of domestic tranquillity, to the arms
of maternal tenderness, where I can deliberate and advise at leisure
about this important matter. Till when, I am, &c.,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XXXIX.

TO MR. T. SELBY.

HAMPSHIRE.

Dear sir: I believe that I owe you an apology for my long silence. But
my time has been much engrossed of late, and my mind much more so. When
it will be otherwise I cannot foresee. I fear, my friend, that there is
some foundation for your suspicions respecting my beloved Eliza. What
pity it is that so fair a form, so accomplished a mind, should be
tarnished in the smallest degree by the follies of coquetry! If this be
the fact, which I am loath to believe, all my regard for her shall never
make me the dupe of it.

When I arrived at her residence at New Haven, where I told you in my
last I was soon to go, she gave me a most cordial reception. Her whole
behavior to me was correspondent with those sentiments of esteem and
affection which she modestly avowed. She permitted me to accompany her
to Hartford, to restore her to her mother, and to declare my wish to
receive her again from her hand. Thus far all was harmony and happiness.
As all my wishes were consistent with virtue and honor, she readily
indulged them. She took apparent pleasure in my company, encouraged my
hopes of a future union, and listened to the tender accents of love.

But the scenes of gayety which invited her attention reversed her
conduct. The delightful hours of mutual confidence, of sentimental
converse, and of the interchange of refined affection were no more.
Instead of these, parties were formed unpleasing to my taste, and every
opportunity was embraced to join in diversions in which she knew I could
not consistently take a share. I, however, acquiesced in her pleasure,
though I sometimes thought myself neglected, and even hinted it to her
mother. The old lady apologized for her daughter, by alleging that she
had been absent for a long time; that her acquaintances were rejoiced
at her return, and welcomed her by striving to promote her amusement.

One of her most intimate friends was married during my stay, and she
appeared deeply interested in the event. She spent several days in
assisting her previous to the celebration. I resided, in the mean time,
at her mamma's, visiting her at her friend's, where Major Sanford, among
others, was received as a guest. Mrs. Sumner acquainted me that she had
prevailed on Miss Wharton to go and spend a few weeks with her at
Boston, whither she was removing, and urged my accompanying them. I
endeavored to excuse myself, as I had been absent from my people a
considerable time, and my return was now expected. But their importunity
was so great, and Eliza's declaration that it would be very agreeable to
her so tempting, that I consented. Here I took lodgings, and spent about
a week, taking every opportunity to converse with Eliza, striving to
discover her real disposition towards me. I mentioned the inconvenience
of visiting her so often as I wished, and suggested my desire to enter,
as soon as might be, into a family relation. I painted, in the most
alluring colors, the pleasures resulting from domestic tranquillity,
mutual confidence, and conjugal affection, and insisted on her declaring
frankly whether she designed to share this happiness with me, and when
it should commence. She owned that she intended to give me her hand,
but when she should be ready she could not yet determine. She pretended
a promise from me to wait her time, to consent that she should share the
pleasures of the fashionable world as long as she chose, &c.

I then attempted to convince her of her mistaken ideas of pleasure; that
the scenes of dissipation, of which she was so passionately fond,
afforded no true enjoyment; that the adulation of the coxcomb could not
give durability to her charms, or secure the approbation of the wise and
good; nor could the fashionable amusements of brilliant assemblies and
crowded theatres furnish the mind with

  "That which nothing earthly gives or can destroy--
  The soul's calm sunshine and the heartfelt joy."

These friendly suggestions, I found, were considered as the theme of a
priest, and my desire to detach her from such empty pursuits as the
selfishness of a lover. She was even offended at my freedom, and warmly
affirmed that no one had a right to arraign her conduct. I mentioned
Major Sanford, who was then in town, and who (though she went to places
of public resort with Mr. and Mrs. Sumner) always met and gallanted her
home. She rallied me upon my jealousy, as she termed it, wished that I
would attend her myself, and then she should need no other gallant. I
answered that I had rather resign that honor to another, but wished, for
her sake, that he might be a gentleman whose character would not
disgrace the company with which he associated. She appeared mortified
and chagrined in the extreme. However, she studiously suppressed her
emotions, and even soothed me with the blandishments of female softness.
We parted amicably. She promised to return soon and prepare for a
compliance with my wishes. I cannot refuse to believe her. I cannot
cease to love her. My heart is in her possession. She has a perfect
command of my passions. Persuasion dwells on her tongue. With all the
boasted fortitude and resolution of our sex, we are but mere machines.
Let love once pervade our breasts, and its object may mould us into any
form that pleases her fancy, or even caprice.

I have just received a letter from Eliza, informing me of her return to
Hartford. To-morrow I shall set out on a visit to the dear girl; for, my
friend, notwithstanding all her foibles, she is very dear to me. Before
you hear from me again I expect that the happy day will be fixed--the
day which shall unite in the-most sacred bands this lovely maid and your
faithful friend,

J. BOYER.



LETTER XL.

TO MR. T. SELBY.

HAMPSHIRE.

I have returned; and the day, indeed, is fixed; but O, how different
from my fond expectations! It is not the day of union, but the day of
final separation; the day which divides me from my charmer; the day
which breaks asunder the bands of love; the day on which my reason
assumes its empire, and triumphs over the arts of a finished coquette.
Congratulate me, my friend, that I have thus overcome my feelings, and
repelled the infatuating wiles of a deceitful girl. I would not be
understood to impeach Miss Wharton's virtue; I mean her chastity.
Virtue, in the common acceptation of the term, as applied to the sex, is
confined to that particular, you know. But in my view, this is of little
importance where all other virtues are wanting.

When I arrived at Mrs. Wharton's, and inquired for Eliza, I was told
that she had rode out, but was soon expected home. An hour after, a
phaeton stopped at the door, from which my fair one alighted, and was
handed into the house by Major Sanford, who immediately took leave. I
met her, and offered my hand, which she received with apparent
tenderness.

When the family had retired after supper, and left us to talk on our
particular affairs, I found the same indecision, the same loathness to
bring our courtship to a period, as formerly. Her previous excuses were
renewed, and her wishes to have a union still longer delayed were
zealously urged. She could not bear the idea of confinement to the cares
of a married life at present, and begged me to defer all solicitation on
that subject to some future day. I found my temper rise, and told her
plainly that I was not thus to be trifled with; that if her regard for
me was sincere, if she really intended to form a connection with me, she
could not thus protract the time, try my patience, and prefer every
other pleasure to the rational interchange of affection, to the calm
delights of domestic life. But in vain did I argue against her false
notions of happiness, in vain did I represent the dangerous system of
conduct which she now pursued, and urge her to accept, before it was too
late, the hand and heart which were devoted to her service. That, she
said, she purposed ere long to do, and hoped amply to reward my faithful
love; but she could not fix the time this evening. She must consider a
little further, and likewise consult her mother. "Is it not Major
Sanford whom you wish to consult, madam?" said I. She blushed, and gave
me no answer. "Tell me, Eliza," I continued, "tell me frankly, if he has
not supplanted me in your affections--if he be not the cause of my being
thus evasively, thus cruelly, treated." "Major Sanford, sir," replied
she, "has done you no harm. He is a particular friend of mine, a polite
gentleman, and an agreeable neighbor, and therefore I treat him with
civility; but he is not so much interested in my concerns as to alter my
disposition towards any other person." "Why," said I, "do you talk of
friendship with a man of his character? Between his society and mine
there is a great contrast. Such opposite pursuits and inclinations
cannot be equally pleasing to the same taste. It is, therefore,
necessary that you renounce the one to enjoy the other; I will give you
time to decide which. I am going to a friend's house to spend the night,
and will call on you to-morrow, if agreeable, and converse with you
further upon the matter." She bowed assent, and I retired.

The next afternoon I went, as agreed, and found her mamma and her alone
in the parlor. She was very pensive, and appeared to have been in tears.
The sight affected me. The idea of having treated her harshly the
evening before disarmed me of my resolution to insist on her decision
that day. I invited her to ride with me and visit a friend, to which
she readily consented. We spent our time agreeably. I forbore to press
her on the subject of our future union, but strove rather to soothe her
mind, and inspire her with sentiments of tenderness towards me. I
conducted her home, and returned early in the evening to my friend's,
who met me at the door, and jocosely told me that he expected that I
should now rob them of their agreeable neighbor. "But," added he, "we
have been apprehensive that you would be rivalled if you delayed your
visit much longer." "I did not suspect a rival," said I. "Who can the
happy man be?" "I can say nothing from personal observation," said he;
"but fame, of late, has talked loudly of Major Sanford and Miss Wharton.
Be not alarmed," continued he, seeing me look grave; "I presume no harm
is intended; the major is a man of gallantry, and Miss Wharton is a gay
lady; but I dare say that your connection will be happy, _if it be
formed_" I noticed a particular emphasis on the word _if_; and, as we
were alone, I followed him with questions till the whole affair was
developed. I informed him of my embarrassment, and he gave me to
understand that Eliza's conduct had, for some time past, been a subject
of speculation in the town; that, formerly, her character was highly
esteemed; but that her intimacy with a man of Sanford's known
libertinism, more especially as she was supposed to be engaged to
another, had rendered her very censurable; that they were often
together; that wherever she went he was sure to follow, as if by
appointment; that they walked, talked, sung, and danced together in all
companies; that some supposed he he would marry her; others, that he
only meditated adding her name to the black catalogue of deluded
wretches, whom he had already ruined!

I rose, and walked the room in great agitation. He apologized for his
freedom; was sorry if he had wounded my feelings; but friendship alone
had induced him frankly to declare the truth, that I might guard against
duplicity and deceit.

I thanked him for his kind intensions; and assured him that I should not
quit the town till I had terminated this affair, in one way or another.

I retired to bed, but sleep was a stranger to my eyes. With the dawn I
rose; and after breakfast walked to Mrs. Wharton's, who informed me,
that Eliza was in her chamber, writing to a friend, but would be down in
a few minutes. I entered into conversation with the old lady on the
subject of her daughter's conduct; hinted my suspicions of the cause,
and declared my resolution of knowing my destiny immediately. She
endeavored to extenuate, and excuse her as much as possible; but frankly
owned that her behavior was mysterious; that no pains had been wanting,
on her part, to alter and rectify it; that she had remonstrated,
expostulated, advised and entreated, as often as occasion required. She
hoped that my resolution would have a good effect, as she knew that her
daughter esteemed me very highly.

In this manner we conversed till the clock struck twelve; and, Eliza not
appearing, I desired her mamma to send up word that I waited to see her.
The maid returned with an answer that she was indisposed, and had lain
down. Mrs. Wharton observed that she had not slept for several nights,
and complained of the headache in the morning. The girl added that she
would wait on Mr. Boyer in the evening. Upon this information I rose,
and abruptly took my leave. I went to dine with a friend, to whom I had
engaged myself the day before; but my mind was too much agitated to
enjoy either the company or the dinner. I excused myself from tarrying
to tea, and returned to Miss Wharton's. On inquiry, I was told that
Eliza had gone to walk in the garden, but desired that no person might
intrude on her retirement. The singularity of the request awakened my
curiosity, and determined me to follow her. I sought her in vain in
different parts of the garden, till, going towards an arbor, almost
concealed from sight by surrounding shrubbery, I discovered her sitting
in close conversation with Major Sanford! My blood chilled in my veins,
and I stood petrified with astonishment at the disclosure of such
baseness and deceit. They both rose in visible confusion. I dared not
trust myself to accost them. My passions were raised, and I feared that
I might say or do something unbecoming my character. I therefore gave
them a look of indignation and contempt, and retreated to the house. I
traversed the parlor hastily, overwhelmed with chagrin and resentment.
Mrs. Wharton inquired the cause. I attempted to tell her, but my tongue
refused utterance. While in this situation, Eliza entered the room. She
was not less discomposed than myself. She sat down at the window and
wept. Her mamma wept likewise. At length she recovered herself, in a
degree, and desired me to sit down. I answered, No, and continued
walking. "Will you," said she, "permit me to vindicate my conduct, and
explain my motives?" "Your conduct," said I, "cannot be vindicated; your
motives need no explanation; they are too apparent. How, Miss Wharton,
have I merited this treatment from you? But I can bear it no longer.
Your indifference to me proceeds from an attachment to another, and,
forgive me if I add, to one who is the disgrace of his own sex and the
destroyer of yours. I have been too long the dupe of your dissimulation
and coquetry--too long has my peace of mind been sacrificed to the arts
of a woman whose conduct has proved her unworthy of my regard;
insensible to love, gratitude, and honor.

"To you, madam," said I, turning to her mother, "I acknowledge my
obligations for your friendship, politeness, and attention. I once hoped
for the privilege of rocking for you the cradle of declining age. I am
deprived of that privilege; but I pray that you may never want a child
whose love and duty shall prove a source of consolation and comfort.

"Farewell. If we never meet again in this life, I hope and trust we
shall in a better--where the parent's eye shall cease to weep for the
disobedience of a child, and the lover's heart to bleed for the
infidelity of his mistress."

I turned to Eliza, and attempted to speak; but her extreme emotion
softened me, and I could not command my voice. I took her hand, and
bowing, in token of an adieu, went precipitately out of the house. The
residence of my friend, with whom I lodged, was at no great distance,
and thither I repaired. As I met him in the entry, I rushed by him, and
betook myself to my chamber. The fever of resentment and the tumult of
passion began now to give place to the softer emotions of the soul. I
found myself perfectly unmanned. I gave free scope to the sensibility
of my heart; and the effeminate relief of tears materially lightened the
load which oppressed me.

After this arduous struggle I went to bed, and slept more calmly than
for several nights before. The next morning I wrote a farewell letter to
Eliza, (a copy of which I shall enclose to you,) and, ordering my horse
to be brought, left town immediately.

My resentment of her behavior has much assisted me in erasing her image
from my breast. In this exertion I have succeeded beyond my most
sanguine expectations. The more I reflect on her temper and disposition,
the more my gratitude is enlivened towards the wise Disposer of all
events for enabling me to break asunder the snares of the deluder. I am
convinced that the gayety and extravagance of her taste, the frivolous
levity of her manners, disqualify her for the station in which I wished
to have placed her. These considerations, together with that resignation
to an overruling Providence which the religion I profess and teach
requires me to cultivate, induce me cheerfully to adopt the following
lines of an ingenious poet:--

  "Since all the downward tracts of time
    God's watchful eye surveys,
  O, who so wise to choose our lot,
    Or regulate our ways?

  "Since none can doubt his equal love,
    Unmeasurably kind,
  To his unerring, gracious will
    Be every wish, resigned.

  "Good when he gives, supremely good;
    Not less when he denies;
  E'en crosses from his sovereign hand
    Are blessings in disguise."

I am, &c.,                 J. BOYER.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

[_Enclosed in the foregoing_.]

HARTFORD.

Madam: Fearing that my resolution may not be proof against the eloquence
of those charms which has so long commanded me, I take this method of
bidding you a final adieu. I write not as a lover,--that connection
between us is forever dissolved,--but I address you as a friend; as a
friend to your happiness, to your reputation, to your temporal and
eternal welfare. I will not rehearse the innumerable instances of your
imprudence and misconduct which have fallen under my observation. Your
own heart must be your monitor. Suffice it for me to warn you against
the dangerous tendency of so dissipated a life, and to tell you that I
have traced (I believe aright) the cause of your dissimulation and
indifference to me. They are an aversion to the sober, rational, frugal
mode of living to which my profession leads; a fondness for the parade,
the gayety, not to say the licentiousness, of a station calculated to
gratify such a disposition; and a prepossession for Major Sanford,
infused into your giddy mind by the frippery, flattery, and artifice of
that worthless and abandoned man. Hence you preferred a connection with
him, if it could be accomplished; but a doubt whether it could, together
with the advice of your friends, who have kindly espoused my cause, has
restrained you from the avowal of your real sentiments, and led you to
continue your civilities to me. What the result of your coquetry would
have been had I waited for it, I cannot say; nor have I now any desire
or interest to know. I tear from my breast the idea which I have long
cherished of future union and happiness with you in the conjugal state.
I bid a last farewell to these fond hopes, and leave you forever.

For your own sake, however, let me conjure you to review your conduct,
and, before you have advanced beyond the possibility of returning to
rectitude and honor, to restrain your steps from the dangerous path in
which you now tread.

Fly Major Sanford. That man is a deceiver. Trust not his professions.
They are certainly insincere, or he would not affect concealment; he
would not induce you to a clandestine intercourse. Many have been the
victims to his treachery. O Eliza, add not to the number. Banish him
from your society if you wish to preserve your virtue unsullied, your
character unsuspicious. It already begins to depreciate. Snatch it from
the envenomed tongue of slander before it receive an incurable wound.

Many faults have been visible to me, over which my affection once drew a
veil. That veil is now removed; and acting the part of a disinterested
friend, I shall mention some few of them with freedom. There is a levity
in your manners which is inconsistent with the solidity and decorum
becoming a lady who has arrived to years of discretion. There is also an
unwarrantable extravagance betrayed in your dress. Prudence and economy
are such necessary, at least such decent, virtues, that they claim the
attention of every female, whatever be her station or her property. To
these virtues you are apparently inattentive. Too large a portion of
your time is devoted to the adorning of your person.

Think not that I write thus plainly from resentment. No, it is from
benevolence. I mention your foibles, not to reproach you with them, but
that you may consider their nature and effects, and renounce them.

I wish you to regard this letter as the legacy of a friend, and to
improve it accordingly. I shall leave town before you receive it. O, how
different are my sensations at going from what they were when I came!
But I forbear description. Think not, Eliza, that I leave you with
indifference. The conquest is great, the trial more than I can calmly
support; yet the consciousness of duty affords consolation---a duty I
conceive it to be which I owe to myself and to the people of my charge,
who are interested in my future connection.

I wish not for an answer; my resolution is unalterably fixed. But should
you hereafter be convinced of the justice of my conduct, and become a
convert to my advice, I shall be happy to hear it.

That you may have wisdom to keep you from falling, and conduct you
safely through this state of trial to the regions of immortal bliss, is
the fervent prayer of your sincere friend and humble servant,

J. BOYER.



LETTER XLI.

TO MRS. LUCY SUMNER.

HARTFORD.

The retirement of my native home is not so gloomy, since my return from
Boston, as I expected, from the contrast between them. Indeed, the
customs and amusements of this place are materially altered since the
residence of Major Sanford among us. The dull, old-fashioned sobriety
which formerly prevailed is nearly banished, and cheerfulness, vivacity,
and enjoyment are substituted in its stead. Pleasure is now diffused
through all ranks of the people, especially the rich; and surely it
ought to be cultivated, since the wisest of men informs us that a merry
heart "doth good like a medicine." As human life hath many diseases
which require medicines, are we not right in selecting the most
agreeable and palatable? Major Sanford's example has had great influence
upon our society in general; and though some of our old ones think him
rather licentious, yet, for aught I can see, he is as strict an observer
of decorum as the best of them. True, he seldom goes to church; but
what of that? The Deity is not confined to temples made with hands. He
may worship him as devoutly elsewhere, if he chooses; and who has a
right to say he does not?

His return from Boston was but a day or two after mine. He paid me an
early visit, and, indeed, has been very attentive ever since. My mamma
is somewhat precise in her notions of propriety, and, of course, blames
me for associating so freely with him. She says that my engagements to
Mr. Boyer ought to render me more sedate, and more indifferent to the
gallantry of mere pleasure _hunters_, to use her phrase. But I think
otherwise. If I am to become a recluse, let me at least enjoy those
amusements which are suited to my taste a short time first. Why should I
refuse the polite attentions of this gentleman? They smooth the rugged
path of life, and wonderfully accelerate the lagging wheels of time.

Indeed, Lucy, he has an admirable talent for contributing to vary and
increase amusement. We have few hours unimproved. Some new plan of
pleasure and sociability is constantly courting our adoption. He lives
in all the magnificence of a prince: and why should I, who can doubtless
share that magnificence if I please, forego the advantages and
indulgences it offers, merely to gratify those friends who pretend to
be better judges of my happiness than I am myself? I have not yet told
my mamma that he entertains me with the lover's theme, or, at least,
that I listen to it. Yet I must own to you, from whom I have never
concealed an action or idea, that his situation in life charms my
imagination; that the apparent fervor and sincerity of his passion
affect my heart. Yet there is something extremely problematical in his
conduct. He is very urgent with me to dissolve my connection with Mr.
Boyer, and engage not to marry him without his consent, or knowledge, to
say no more. He warmly applauds my wish still longer to enjoy the
freedom and independence of a single state, and professedly adopts it
for his own. While he would disconnect me from another, he mysteriously
conceals his own intentions and views. In conversation with him
yesterday, I plainly told him that his conduct was unaccountable; that,
if his professions and designs were honorable, he could not neglect to
mention them to my mamma; that I should no longer consent to carry on a
clandestine intercourse with him; that I hourly expected Mr. Boyer, whom
I esteemed, and who was the favorite of my friends; and that, unless he
acted openly in this affair before his arrival, I should give my hand to
him.

He appeared thunderstruck at this declaration. All his words and actions
were indicative of the most violent emotions of mind. He entreated me
to recall the sentence; for I knew not, he said, his motives for
secrecy; yet he solemnly swore that they were honorable. I replied in
the words of the poet,--

  "Trust not a man; they are by nature cruel,
  False, deceitful, treacherous, and inconstant.
  When a man talks of love, with caution hear him;
  But if he swear, he'll certainly deceive you."

He begged that he might know by what means he had provoked my
suspicions; by what means he had forfeited my confidence. His
importunity vanquished my fortitude; and before we parted, I again
promised to make him acquainted, from time to time, with the progress of
my connection with Mr. Boyer.

Now, my dear friend, I want your advice more than ever. I am
inadvertently embarrassed by this man; and how to extricate myself I
know not. I am sensible that the power is in my hands; but the
disposition (shall I confess it?) is wanting.

  "I know the right; and I approve it too;
  I know the wrong, and yet the wrong pursue."

I have just received a card from Major Sanford, inviting me to ride
this afternoon. At first I thought of returning a negative answer; but,
recollecting that Mr. Boyer must soon be here, I concluded it best to
embrace this opportunity of talking further with him. I must now prepare
to go, but shall not close this letter, for I intend writing in
continuation, as events occur, till this important business is decided.

_Tuesday evening_.--The little tour which I mentioned to you this
afternoon was not productive of a final determination. The same plea was
repeated over and over again without closing the cause. On my return I
found Mr. Boyer waiting to receive me. My heart beat an involuntary
welcome. I received him very cordially, though with a kind of pleasure
mixed with apprehension. I must own that his conversation and manners
are much better calculated to bear the scrutinizing eye of a refined
understanding and taste than Major Sanford's. But whether the fancy
ought not to be consulted about our settlement in life, is with me a
question.

When we parted last I had promised Mr. Boyer to inform him positively,
at this visit, when my hand should be given. He therefore came, as he
told me in the course of our conversation, with the resolution of
claiming the fulfilment of this promise.

I begged absolution, told him that I could not possibly satisfy his
claim, and sought still to evade and put off the important decision. He
grew warm, and affirmed that I treated him ungenerously and made
needless delays. He even accused me of indifference towards him, and of
partiality to another. Major Sanford, he believed, was the man who
robbed him of the affection which he had supposed his due. He warned me
against any intercourse with him, and insisted that I must renounce the
society of the one or the other immediately.

He would leave me, he said, this evening, and call to-morrow to know the
result of my determination. It was late before he bade me good night,
since which I have written these particulars. It is now time to lay
aside my pen, and deliberate what course to take.

_Wednesday evening_.--Last night I closed not my eyes. I rose this
morning with the sun, and went into the garden till breakfast. My mamma
doubtless saw the disorder of my mind, but kindly avoided any inquiry
about it. She was affectionately attentive to me, but said nothing of my
particular concerns. I mentioned not my embarrassment to her. She had
declared herself in favor of Mr. Boyer; therefore I had no expectation
that she would advise impartially. I retired to my chamber, and
remained in a kind of revery for more than an hour, when I was roused by
the rattling of a carriage at the door. I hastened to the window, and
saw Major Sanford just driving away. The idea of his having been to
converse with my mamma gave me new sensations. A thousand perplexities
occurred to my mind relative to the part most proper for me to act in
this critical situation. All these might have been avoided, had I gone
down and inquired into the matter; but this I delayed till dinner. My
mamma then informed me that Major Sanford had been with her, and
inquired for me, but that she thought it unnecessary to call me, as she
presumed I had no particular business with him. I knew the motives by
which she was actuated, and was vexed at her evasions. I told her
plainly that she would never carry her point in this way; that Thought
myself capable of conducting my own affairs, and wished her not to
interfere, except by her advice, which I should always listen to and
comply with when I could possibly make it consistent with my inclination
and interest. She wept at my undutiful anger, (of which I have severely
repented since,) and affectionately replied, that my happiness was the
object of her wishes and prayers; conformably to which she felt
constrained freely to speak her mind, though it incurred my displeasure.
She then went through again with all the comparative circumstances and
merits of the two candidates for my favor, which have perpetually rung
in my ears for months. I shed tears at the idea of my embarrassment; and
in this condition Mr. Boyer found us. He appeared to be affected by my
visible disorder, and, without inquiring the cause, endeavored to
dissipate it. This was kindly done. He conversed upon indifferent
subjects, and invited me to ride, and take tea with your mamma, to which
I readily consented. We found her at home, and passed the time
agreeably, excepting the alloy of your absence. Mr. Boyer touched
lightly on the subject of our last evening's debate, but expatiated
largely on the pleasing power of love, and hoped that we should one day
both realize and exemplify it in perfection. When we returned he
observed that it was late, and took his leave, telling me that he should
call to-morrow, and begged that I would then relieve his suspense. As I
was retiring to bed, the maid gave me a hint that Major Sanford's
servant had been here and left a letter. I turned instantly back to my
mamma, and, telling her my information, demanded the letter. She hesitated,
but I insisted on having it; and seeing me resolute, she reluctantly gave it
into my hand. It contained the following words:--

"Am I forsaken? am I abandoned? O my adorable Eliza, have you sacrificed
me to my rival? have you condemned me to perpetual banishment without a
hearing?

"I came this day to plead my cause at your feet, but was cruelly denied
the privilege of seeing you. My mind is all anarchy and confusion. My
soul is harrowed up with jealousy. I will be revenged on those who
separate us, if that distracting event take place. But it is from your
lips only that I can hear my sentence. You must witness its effects. To
what lengths my despair may carry me I know not. You are the arbitress
of my fate.

"Let me conjure you to meet me in your garden to-morrow at any hour you
shall appoint. My servant will call for an answer in the morning. Deny
me not an interview, but have pity on your faithful     SANFORD."

I wrote for answer that I would meet him to-morrow, at five o'clock in
the afternoon.

I have now before me another night for consideration, and shall pass it
in that employment. I purpose not to see Mr. Boyer till I have conversed
with Major Sanford.

_Thursday morning_.--The morning dawns, and ushers in the day--a day,
perhaps, big with the fate of your friend. What that fate may be is
wrapped in the womb of futurity--that futurity which a kind Providence
has wisely concealed from the penetration of mortals.

After mature consideration, after revolving and re-revolving every
circumstance on both sides of the question, I have nearly determined, in
compliance with the advice of my friends and the dictates of my own
judgment, to give Mr. Boyer the preference, and with him to tread the
future round of life.

As to the despair of Major Sanford, it does not much alarm me. Such
violent passions are seldom so deeply rooted as to produce lasting
effects. I must, however, keep my word, and meet him according to
promise.

Mr. Boyer is below. My mamma has just sent me word that he wished to see
me. My reply was, that I had lain down, which was a fact.

_One o'clock._--My mamma, alarmed by my indisposition, has visited my
apartment. I soon convinced her that it was but trifling, owing
principally to the want of sleep, and that an airing in the garden,
which I intended towards night, would restore me.

_Ten o'clock at night_.--The day is past; and such a day it has been as
I hope nevermore to see. At the hour appointed, I went, tolerably
composed and resolute, into the garden. I had taken several turns, and
retired into the little arbor, where you and I have spent so many happy
hours, before Major Sanford entered. When he appeared, a consciousness
of the impropriety of this clandestine intercourse suffused my cheek,
and gave a coldness to my manners. He immediately penetrated the cause,
and observed that my very countenance told him he was no longer a
welcome guest to me. I asked him if he ought so to be, since his motives
for seeking admission were unworthy of being communicated to my friends.
That, he said, was not the case, but that prudence in the present
instance required a temporary concealment. He then undertook to
exculpate himself from blame, assuring me that as soon as I should
discountenance the expectations of Mr. Boyer, and discontinue the
reception of his address, his intentions should be made known. He was
enlarging upon this topic, when we heard a footstep approaching us, and,
looking up, saw Mr. Boyer within a few paces of the arbor. Confusion
seized us both. We rose involuntarily from our seats, but were mute as
statues. He spoke not a word, but casting a look of indignant accusation
at me,--a glance which penetrated my very soul,--turned on his heel,
and walked hastily back to the house.

I stood a few moments, considering what course to take, though shame and
regret had almost taken from me the power of thought.

Major Sanford took my hand. I withdrew it from him. "I _must_ leave
you," said I. "Where will you go?" said he. "I will go and try to
retrieve my character. It has suffered greatly by this fatal interview."

He threw himself at my feet, and exclaimed, "Leave me not, Eliza; I
conjure you not to leave me." "Let me go now," I rejoined, "or I bid you
farewell forever." I flew precipitately by him, and went into the
parlor, where I found Mr. Boyer and my mamma, the one traversing the
room in the greatest agitation, the other in a flood of tears. Their
appearance affected me, and I wept like an infant. When I had a little
recovered myself, I begged him to sit down. He answered, No. I then told
him that however unjustifiable my conduct might appear, perhaps I might
explain it to his satisfaction if he would hear me; that my motives were
innocent, though they doubtless wore the aspect of criminality in his
view. He sternly replied, that no palliation could avail; that my
motives were sufficiently notorious. He accused me of treating him ill,
of rendering him the dupe of coquetting artifice, of having an intrigue
with Major Sanford, and declared his determination to leave me forever,
as unworthy of his regard, and incapable of love, gratitude, or honor.
There was too much reason in support of his accusations for me to
gainsay them, had his impetuosity suffered me to attempt it.

But, in truth, I had no inclination to self-defence. My natural vivacity
had forsaken me, and I listened without interrupting him to the fluency
of reproachful language which his resentment inspired. He took a very
solemn and affectionate leave of my mamma, thanking her for her
politeness, and wishing her much future felicity. He attempted to
address me, I suppose, somewhat in the same way; but his sensibility
somewhat overcame him, and he only took my hand, and, bowing in silence,
departed.

The want of rest for two long nights together, the exercise of mind, and
conflict of passions which now tortured my breast, were too much for me
to support.

When I saw that he was gone, that he had actually forsaken me, I
fainted. My mamma, with the assistance of the maid, soon restored me.

When I opened my eyes and beheld this amiable and tender parent watching
and attending me with the most anxious concern, without one reproachful
word, without one accusing look, my reflections upon the part I had
acted, in defeating her benevolent wishes, were exquisitely afflictive.
But we mutually forbore to mention the occasion of my illness; and I
complied with her advice to take some refreshment, and retire to my
chamber. I am so much fatigued by the exertions of the day that rest is
absolutely necessary; and I lay aside my pen to seek it.

_Friday morning_.--When I shall again receive the balmy influence of
sleep, I know not. It has absolutely forsaken me at present. I have had
a most restless night. Every awakening idea presented itself to my
imagination; whether I had sustained a real loss in Mr. Boyer's
departure, reflections on my own misconduct, with the censure of my
friends, and the ill-natured remarks of my enemies, excited the most
painful anxiety in my mind.

I am going down; but how shall I see my mamma? To her I will confess my
faults, in her maternal breast repose my cares, and by her friendly
advice regulate my conduct. Had I done this before, I might have escaped
this trouble, and saved both her and myself many distressing emotions.

_Friday evening_'.--I have had a long conversation with my mamma, which
has greatly relieved my mind. She has soothed me with the most endearing
tenderness.

Mr. Atkins, with whom Mr. Boyer lodged while in town, called here this
afternoon. I did not see him; but he told my mamma that Mr. Boyer had
returned home, and left a letter for me, which he had promised to convey
with his own hand. By this I am convinced that the die is absolutely
cast with respect to him, and that no attempts on my part to bring about
a reconciliation would be either prudent or successful. He has
penetrated the cause of my proceedings; and such is his resentment, that
I am inclined not much to regret his avoiding another interview.

My excuses would be deemed utterly insufficient, and truth would not
befriend and justify me.

As I know you are impatient to hear from me, I will now despatch this
long letter without any other addition than that I am your sincere
friend,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XLII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

HARTFORD.

Well, Charles, the show is over, as we Yankees say, and the girl is my
own; that is, if I will have her. I shall take my own time for that,
however. I have carried my point, and am amply revenged on the whole
posse of those dear friends of hers. She was entangled by a promise (not
to marry this priest without my knowledge) which her conscience would
not let her break. Thank God, I have no conscience. If I had, I believe
it would make wretched work with me. I suppose she intended to have one
or the other of us, but preferred me. I have escaped the noose this
time, and I'll be fairly hanged if I ever get so near it again; for
indeed, Charles, I was seriously alarmed. I watched all their motions,
and the appearance of harmony between them awakened all my activity and
zeal. So great was my infatuation, that I verily believe I should have
asked her in marriage, and risked the consequences, rather than to have
lost her.

I went to the house while Mr. Boyer was in town; but her mamma refused
to call her, or to acquaint her that I was there. I then wrote a
despairing letter, and obtained a conference with her in the garden.
This was a fortunate event for me. True, Eliza was very haughty, and
resolutely insisted on an immediate declaration or rejection; and I
cannot say what would have been the result if Mr. Boyer had not
surprised us together. He gave us a pretty harsh look, and retired
without speaking a word.

I endeavored to detain Eliza, but in vain. She left me on my knees,
which are always ready to bend on such occasions.

This finished the matter, it seems. I rose, and went into a neighbor's
to observe what happened, and in about half an hour saw Mr. Boyer come
out and go to his lodgings. "This," said I to myself, "is a good omen."
I went home, and was informed, next day, that he had mounted his horse
and departed.

I heard nothing more of her till yesterday, when I determined to know
how she stood affected towards me. I therefore paid her a visit, her
mamma being luckily abroad.

She received me very placidly, and told me, on inquiry, that Mr.
Boyer's resentment at her meeting me in the garden was so great that he
had bade her a final adieu. I congratulated myself on having no rival,
hoped that her favor would now be unbiased, and that in due time I
should reap the reward of my fidelity. She begged me not to mention the
subject, said she had been perplexed by our competition, and wished not
to hear any thing further about it at present. I bowed in obedience to
her commands, and changed the discourse.

I informed her that I was about taking a tour to the southward; that I
should be absent several months, and trusted that on my return her
embarrassments would be over.

I left her with regret After all, Charles, she is the _summum bonum_ of
my life. I must have her in some way or other. Nobody else shall, I am
resolved.

I am making preparations for my journey, which, between you and me, is
occasioned by the prospect of making a speculation, by which I hope to
mend my affairs. The voyage will at least lessen my expenses, and screen
me from the importunity of creditors till I can look about me.

PETER SANFORD.



LETTER XLIII.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

NEW HAVEN.

My dear Eliza: Through the medium of my friends at Hartford, I have been
informed of the progress of your affairs as they have transpired. The
detail which my sister gave me of your separation from Mr. Boyer was
painful, as I had long contemplated a happy union between you; but still
more disagreeable sensations possessed my breast when told that you had
suffered your lively spirits to be depressed, and resigned yourself to
solitude and dejection.

Why, my dear friend, should you allow this event thus to affect you?
Heaven, I doubt not, has happiness still in store for you--perhaps
greater than you could have enjoyed in that connection. If the
conviction of any misconduct on your part gives you pain, dissipate it
by the reflection that unerring rectitude is not the lot of mortals;
that few are to be found who have not deviated, in a greater or less
degree, from the maxims of prudence. Our greatest mistakes may teach
lessons which will be useful through life.

But I will not moralize. Come and see us, and we will talk over the
matter once, and then dismiss it forever. Do prevail on your mamma to
part with you a month or two at least. I wish you to witness how well I
manage my nursery business. You will be charmed with little Harriet. I
am already enough of the mother to think her a miniature of beauty and
perfection.

How natural and how easy the transition from one stage of life to
another! Not long since, I was a gay, volatile girl, seeking
satisfaction in fashionable circles and amusements; but now I am
thoroughly domesticated. All my happiness is centred within the limits
of my own walls, and I grudge every moment that calls me from the
pleasing scenes of domestic life. Not that I am so selfish as to exclude
my friends from my affection or society. I feel interested in their
concerns, and enjoy their company. I must own, however, that conjugal
and parental love are the mainsprings of my life. The conduct of some
mothers, in depriving their helpless offspring of the care and kindness
which none but a mother can feel, is to me unaccountable. There are many
nameless attentions which nothing short of maternal tenderness and
solicitude can pay, and for which the endearing smiles and progressive
improvements of the lovely babe are an ample reward.

How delightful to trace from day to day the expansion of reason and the
dawnings of intelligence! O, how I anticipate the time when these
faculties shall be displayed by the organs of speech, when the lisping
accent shall heighten our present pleasure, and the young idea be
capable of direction "how to shoot"! General Richman is not less
interested by these enjoyments than myself. All the father beams in his
eye; all the husband reigns in his heart and pervades his every action.

Miss Lawrence is soon to be married to Mr. Laiton. I believe he is a
mere fortune hunter. Indeed, she has little to recommend her to any
other. Nature has not been very bountiful either to her body or mind.
Her parents have been shamefully deficient in her education, but have
secured to her what they think the chief good--not considering that
happiness is by no means the invariable attendant of wealth.

I hope this incoherent scrawl will amuse, while it induces you speedily
to favor us with another visit.

My best wishes attend your honored mamma, while I subscribe myself, &c.,

A. RICHMAN.



LETTER XLIV.

TO MRS. LUCY SUMNER.

HARTFORD.

I am extremely depressed, my dear Lucy. The agitating scenes through
which I have lately passed have broken my spirits, and rendered me unfit
for society. Major Sanford has visited me, and taken his leave. He is
gone to the southward on a tour of two or three months. I declined any
further conversation with him on the subject of love. At present I wish
not to hear it mentioned by any one.

I have received a very friendly and consolatory letter from Mrs.
Richman. She invites me to spend a few months with her, which, with my
mamma's consent, I shall do. I hope the change of situation and company
will dissipate the gloom which hangs over my mind.

It is a common observation, that we know not the value of a blessing but
by deprivation. This is strictly verified in my case. I was insensible
of my regard for Mr. Boyer till this fatal separation took place. His
merit and worth now appear in the brightest colors. I am convinced of
that excellence which I once slighted, and the shade of departed
happiness haunts me perpetually. I am sometimes tempted to write to him
and confess my faults; to tell him the situation of my mind, and to
offer him my hand; but he has precluded all hopes of success by the
severity of his letter to me. At any rate, I shall do nothing of the
kind till my return from New Haven.

I am the more willing to leave home as my affairs are made a town talk.
My mamma persuades me to disregard it; but how can I rise superior to
"the world's dread laugh, which scarce the firm philosopher can scorn"?

Pray remember me to Mr. Sumner. You are happy, my friend, in the love
and esteem of a worthy man, but more happy still in deserving them.
Adieu.

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XLV.

TO THE SAME.

HARTFORD.

I have returned to the once smiling seat of maternal affection; but I
find not repose and happiness even here.

In the society of my amiable friends at New Haven, I enjoyed every thing
that friendship could bestow; but rest to a disturbed mind was not in
their power.

I was on various parties of pleasure, and passed through different
scenes of amusement; but with me they have lost their charms. I relished
them not as formerly.

Mrs. Richman advises me to write to Mr. Boyer, and I have concluded to
act accordingly. If it answer no other purpose, it will be a relief to
my mind. If he ever felt for me the tenderness and regard which he
professed, I think they cannot be entirely obliterated. If they still
remain, perhaps I may rekindle the gentle flame, and we may both be
happy. I may at least recall his esteem, and that will be a satisfaction
to my conscious mind.

I wonder what has become of Major Sanford. Has he, too, forsaken me? Is
it possible for him wilfully to neglect me? I will not entertain so
injurious a suspicion. Yet, if it were the case, it would not affect me
like Mr. Boyer's disaffection; for I frankly own that my fancy, and a
taste for gayety of life, induced me to cherish the idea of a connection
with Major Sanford; while Mr. Boyer's real merit has imprinted those
sentiments of esteem and love in my heart which time can never efface.

Instead of two or three, more than twelve months have elapsed, and I
have not received a line from Major Sanford in all that time, which I
fully expected, though he made no mention of writing; nor have I heard a
syllable about him, except a report circulated by his servants, that he
is on the point of marrying, which I do not believe. No; it is
impossible. I am persuaded that his passion for me was sincere, however
deceitful he may have been with others. But I will not bestow an anxious
thought upon him. My design relative to Mr. Boyer demands my whole
attention.

My hopes and fears alternately prevail, and my resolution is extremely
fluctuating. How it finally terminates you shall hear in my next. Pray
write to me soon. I stand in need of the consoling power of friendship.
Nothing can beguile my pensive hours, and exhilarate my drooping
spirits, like your letters.

Let me know how you are to be entertained this winter at the theatre.
That, you know, is a favorite amusement of mine. You see I can step out
of myself a little. Afford an assisting hand, and perhaps I may again be
fit for society.

ELIZA WHARTON



LETTER XLVI.

TO THE REV. J. BOYER.

HARTFORD.

Sir: It is partly in compliance with your desire, in your last letter to
me, in which you tell me "that when I am convinced of the justice of
your conduct, and become a convert to your advice, you shall be happy to
hear it," and partly from a wish to inform you that such is in truth my
present state of mind, that I now write to you.

I cannot but hope that this letter, coming from the hand which you once
sought, will not be unacceptable.

Pope very justly observes, that "every year is a critic on the last."
The truth of this observation is fully exemplified in my years. How
severely this condemns the follies of the preceding, my own heart alone
can testify.

I shall not offer any palliation or apology for my misconduct. You told
me it admitted none. I frankly confess it; and if the most humble
acknowledgment of my offences, with an assurance that they have cost me
the deepest repentance, can in any degree atone for them, I now make
that atonement. Casting off the veil of dissimulation, I shall write
with frankness, believing you possessed of more honor than to make any
ungenerous use of the confidence reposed in you.

To say that I ever esteemed you may, perhaps, appear paradoxical when
compared with certain circumstances which occurred during our
acquaintance; but to assert that I loved you may be deemed still more
so. Yet these are real facts--facts of which I was then sensible, and by
which I am now more than ever affected.

I think you formerly remarked that absence served but to heighten real
love. This I find by experience. Need I blush to declare these
sentiments, when occasion like this calls for the avowal? I will go even
further, and offer you that heart which you once prized, that hand which
you once solicited. The sentiments of affection which you then
cultivated, though suppressed, I flatter myself are not wholly
obliterated. Suffer me, then, to rekindle the latent flame, to revive
that friendship and tenderness which I have so foolishly neglected. The
endeavor of my future life shall be to reward your benevolence, and
perhaps we may yet be happy together.

But let not this offer of myself constrain you. Let not pity influence
your conduct. I would have your return, if that pleasing event take
place, a voluntary act. Receive, or consent not to confer, happiness.

I thought it a duty which I owed to you, and to myself, to make this
expiation, this sacrifice of female reserve, for the wrongs I have done
you. As such I wish you to accept it; and if your affections are
entirely alienated or otherwise engaged, if you cannot again command the
respect and love which I would recall, do not despise me for the
concessions I have made. Think as favorably of my past faults and of my
present disposition as charity will allow. Continue, if possible, to be
my friend, though you cease to be my lover.

Should this letter find you in the full possession of happiness, let not
the idea of your once loved Eliza, thus intruding itself again upon your
thoughts, interrupt your enjoyments. May some distinguished female, as
deserving as fair, partake with you of that bliss which I have
forfeited.

Whatever may be my destiny, my best wishes shall ever attend you, and a
pleasing remembrance of your honorable attentions preside, till death,
in the breast of

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XLVII.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HAMPSHIRE.

Madam: As I was sitting last evening in my study, a letter was handed me
by a servant; upon which I no sooner cast my eye than I recognized, with
surprise, the hand and seal of my once loved, but to me long lost,
Eliza. I opened it hastily, and with still greater surprise read the
contents.

You write with frankness; I shall answer in the same manner.

On reviewing our former intercourse, be assured that I have not an
accusing thought in my heart. The regard which I felt for you was tender
and animated, but it was not of that passionate kind which ends in
death or despair. It was governed by reason, and had a nobler object in
view than mere sensual gratification. It was excited by the appearance
of excellent qualities. Your conduct, at length, convinced me it was
misplaced; that you possessed not in reality those charms which I had
fondly ascribed to you. They were inconsistent, I conceived, with that
artifice and dissimulation of which you strove to render me the dupe.
But, thank Heaven, the snare was broken. My eyes were open to discover
your folly; and my heart, engaged as it was, exerted resolution and
strength to burst asunder the chain by which you held me enslaved, and
to assert the rights of an injured man.

The parting scene you remember. I reluctantly bade you adieu. I tore
myself from you, determined to eradicate your idea from my breast. Long
and severe was the struggle; at last I vanquished, as I thought, every
tender passion of my soul, (for they all centred in you,) and resigned
myself to my God and my duty, devoting those affections to friendship
which had been disappointed in love. But they are again called into
exercise. The virtuous, the amiable, the accomplished Maria Selby
possesses my entire confidence and esteem; and I trust I am not deceived
when I think her highly deserving of both. With her I expect soon to be
united in the most sacred and endearing of human relations, with her to
pass my future days in serenity and peace.

Your letter, therefore, came too late, were there no other obstacle to
the renewal of our connection. I hope at the close of life, when we take
a retrospect of the past, that neither of us shall have reason to regret
our separation.

Permit me to add, that for your own sake, and for the sake of your
ever-valued friends, I sincerely rejoice that your mind has regained its
native strength and beauty; that you have emerged from the shade of
fanciful vanity. For although, to adopt your own phrase, I cease to
style myself your lover, among the number of your friends I am happy to
be reckoned. As such, let me conjure you, by all that is dear and
desirable, both in this life and another, to adhere with undeviating
exactness to the paths of rectitude and innocence, and to improve the
noble talents which Heaven has liberally bestowed upon you in rendering
yourself amiable and, useful to your friends. Thus will you secure your
own, while you promote the happiness of all around you.

I shall ever cherish sentiments of kindness towards you, and with
gratitude remember your condescension in the testimony of regard which
you have given me in your last letter.

I hope soon to hear that your heart and hand are bestowed on some worthy
man, who deserves the happiness you are formed to communicate. Whatever
we may have called errors will, on my part, be forever buried in
oblivion; and for your own peace of mind I entreat you to forget that
any idea of a connection between us ever existed.

I shall always rejoice at the news of your welfare, and my ardent
prayers will daily arise for your temporal and eternal felicity.

J. BOYER.



