LETTER I.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN

An unusual sensation possesses my breast--a sensation which I once
thought could never pervade it on any occasion whatever. It is
_pleasure_, pleasure, my dear Lucy, on leaving my paternal roof. Could
you have believed that the darling child of an indulgent and
dearly-beloved mother would feel a gleam of joy at leaving her? But so
it is. The melancholy, the gloom, the condolence which surrounded me for
a month after the death of Mr. Haly had depressed my spirits, and palled
every enjoyment of life. Mr. Haly was a man of worth--a man of real and
substantial merit. He is, therefore, deeply and justly regretted by
_his_ friends. He was chosen to be a future guardian and companion for
me, and was, therefore, beloved by _mine_. As their choice, as a good
man, and a faithful friend, I esteemed him; but no one acquainted with
the disparity of our tempers and dispositions, our views and designs,
can suppose my heart much engaged in the alliance. Both nature and
education had instilled into my mind an implicit obedience to the will
and desires of my parents. To them, of course, I sacrificed my fancy in
this affair, determined that my reason should concur with theirs, and on
that to risk my future happiness. I was the more encouraged, as I saw,
from our first acquaintance, his declining health, and expected that the
event would prove as it has. Think not, however, that I rejoice in his
death. No; far be it from me; for though I believe that I never felt the
passion of love for Mr. Haly, yet a habit of conversing with him, of
hearing daily the most virtuous, tender, and affectionate sentiments
from his lips, inspired emotions of the sincerest friendship and esteem.

He is gone. His fate is unalterably, and I trust happily, fixed. He
lived the life, and died the death, of the righteous. O that my last end
may be like his! This event will, I hope, make a suitable and abiding
impression upon my mind, teach me the fading nature of all sublunary
enjoyments, and the little dependence which is to be placed on earthly
felicity. Whose situation was more agreeable, whose prospects more
flattering, than Mr. Haly's? Social, domestic, and connubial joys were
fondly anticipated, and friends and fortune seemed ready to crown every
wish; yet, animated by still brighter hopes, he cheerfully bade them all
adieu. In conversation with me but a few days before his exit, "There
is," said he, "but one link in the chain of life undissevered; that, my
dear Eliza, is my attachment to you. But God is wise and good in all his
ways; and in this, as in all other respects, I would cheerfully say, His
will be done."

You, my friend, were witness to the concluding scene; and, therefore, I
need not describe it.

I shall only add on the subject, that if I have wisdom and prudence to
follow his advice and example, if his prayers for my temporal and
eternal welfare be heard and answered, I shall be happy indeed.

The disposition of mind which I now feel I wish to cultivate. Calm,
placid, and serene, thoughtful of my duty, and benevolent to all around
me, I wish for no other connection than that of friendship.

This letter is all an egotism. I have even neglected to mention the
respectable and happy friends with whom I reside, but will do it in my
next. Write soon and often; and believe me sincerely yours,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER II.

TO THE SAME.

NEW HAVEN.

Time, which effaces every occasional impression, I find gradually
dispelling the pleasing pensiveness which the melancholy event, the
subject of my last, had diffused over my mind. Naturally cheerful,
volatile, and unreflecting, the opposite disposition I have found to
contain sources of enjoyment which I was before unconscious of
possessing.

My friends here are the picture of conjugal felicity. The situation is
delightful--the visiting parties perfectly agreeable. Every thing tends
to facilitate the return of my accustomed vivacity. I have written to my
mother, and received an answer. She praises my fortitude, and admires
the philosophy which I have exerted under what she calls my heavy
bereavement. Poor woman! she little thinks that my heart was untouched;
and when that is unaffected, other sentiments and passions make but a
transient impression. I have been, for a month or two, excluded from the
gay world, and, indeed, fancied myself soaring above it. It is now that
I begin to descend, and find my natural propensity for mixing in the
busy scenes and active pleasures of life returning. I have received your
letter--your moral lecture rather; and be assured, my dear, your
monitorial lessons and advice shall be attended to. I believe I shall
never again resume those airs which you term _coquettish_, but which I
think deserve a softer appellation, as they proceed from an innocent
heart, and are the effusions of a youthful and cheerful mind. We are all
invited to spend the day to-morrow at Colonel Farington's, who has an
elegant seat in this neighborhood. Both he and his lady are strangers to
me; but the friends by whom I am introduced will procure me a welcome
reception. Adieu.

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER III.

TO THE SAME.

NEW HAVEN.

Is it time for me to talk again of conquests? or must I only enjoy them
in silence? I must write to you the impulses of my mind, or I must not
write at all. You are not so morose as to wish me to become a nun, would
our country and religion allow it. I ventured, yesterday, to throw aside
the habiliments of mourning, and to array myself in those more adapted
to my taste. We arrived at Colonel Farington's about one o'clock. The
colonel handed me out of the carriage, and introduced me to a large
company assembled in the hall.

My name was pronounced with an _emphasis_, and I was received with the
most flattering tokens of respect. When we were summoned to dinner, a
young gentleman in a clerical dress offered me his hand, and led me to a
table furnished with an elegant and sumptuous repast, with more
gallantry and address than commonly fall to the share of students. He
sat opposite me at table; and whenever I raised my eye, it caught his.
The ease and politeness of his manners, with his particular attention to
me, raised my curiosity, and induced me to ask Mrs. Laiton who he was.
She told me that his name was Boyer; that he was descended from a
worthy family; had passed with honor and applause through the university
where he was educated; had since studied divinity with success; and now
had a call to settle as a minister in one of the first parishes in a
neighboring state.

The gates of a spacious garden were thrown open at this instant, and I
accepted with avidity an invitation to walk in it. Mirth and hilarity
prevailed, and the moments fled on downy wings, while we traced the
beauties of Art and Nature, so liberally displayed and so happily
blended in this delightful retreat. An enthusiastic admirer of scenes
like these, I had rambled some way from the company, when I was followed
by Mrs. Laiton to offer her condolence on the supposed loss which I had
sustained in the death of Mr. Haly. My heart rose against the woman, so
ignorant of human nature as to think such conversation acceptable at
such a time. I made her little reply, and waved the subject, though I
could not immediately dispel the gloom which it excited.

The absurdity of a custom authorizing people at a first interview to
revive the idea of griefs which time has lulled, perhaps obliterated, is
intolerable. To have our enjoyments arrested by the empty compliments of
unthinking persons for no other reason than a compliance with fashion,
is to be treated in a manner which the laws of humanity forbid.

We were soon joined by the gentlemen, who each selected his partner, and
the walk was prolonged.

Mr. Boyer offered me his arm, which I gladly accepted, happy to be
relieved from the impertinence of my female companion. We returned to
tea; after which the ladies sung, and played by turns on the piano
forte; while some of the gentlemen accompanied with the flute, the
clarinet, and the violin, forming in the whole a very decent concert. An
elegant supper, and half an hour's conversation after it, closed the
evening; when we returned home, delighted with our entertainment, and
pleased with ourselves and each other. My imagination is so impressed
with the festive scenes of the day that Morpheus waves his ebon wand in
vain. The evening is fine beyond the power of description; all Nature is
serene and harmonious, in perfect unison with my present disposition of
mind. I have been taking a retrospect of my past life, and, a few
juvenile follies excepted, which I trust the recording angel has blotted
out with a tear of charity, find an approving conscience and a heart at
ease. Fortune, indeed, has not been very liberal of her gifts to me; but
I presume on a large stock in the bank of friendship, which, united
with health and innocence, give me some pleasing anticipations of future
felicity.


Whatever my fate may be, I shall always continue your

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER IV.

TO MR. SELBY.

NEW HAVEN.

You ask me, my friend, whether I am in pursuit of truth, or a lady. I
answer, Both. I hope and trust they are united, and really expect to
find Truth, and the Virtues and Graces besides, in a fair form. If you
mean by the first part of your question whether I am searching into the
sublimer doctrines of religion,--to these I would by no means be
inattentive; but, to be honest, my studies of that kind have been very
much interrupted of late. The respectable circle of acquaintances with
which I am honored here has rendered my visits very frequent and
numerous. In one of these I was introduced to Miss Eliza Wharton--a
young lady whose elegant person, accomplished mind, and polished
manners have been much celebrated. Her fame has often reached me; but,
as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon, the half was not told me. You
will think that I talk in the style of a lover.

I confess it; nor am I ashamed to rank myself among the professed
admirers of this lovely fair one. I am in no danger, however, of
becoming an enthusiastic devotee. No; I mean I act upon just and
rational principles. Expecting soon to settle in an eligible situation,
if such a companion as I am persuaded she will make me may fall to my
lot, I shall deem myself as happy as this state of imperfection will
admit. She is now resident at General Richman's. The general and his
lady are her particular friends; they are warm in her praises. They tell
me, however, that she is naturally of a gay disposition. No matter for
that; it is an agreeable quality, where there is discretion sufficient
for its regulation. A cheerful friend, much more a cheerful wife, is
peculiarly necessary to a person of a studious and sedentary life. They
dispel the gloom of retirement, and exhilarate the spirits depressed by
intense application. She was formerly addressed by the late Mr. Haly, of
Boston. He was not, it seems, the man of her choice; but her parents
were extremely partial to him, and wished the connection to take place.
She, like a dutiful child, sacrificed her own inclination to their
pleasure so far as to acquiesce in his visits. This she more easily
accomplished, as his health, which declined from their first
acquaintance, led her to suppose, as the event has proved, that he would
not live to enter into any lasting engagements. Her father, who died
some months before him, invited him to reside at his house for the
benefit of a change of air, agreeably to the advice of his physicians.
She attended him during his last illness with all the care and assiduity
of a nurse and with all the sympathizing tenderness of a sister.

I have had several opportunities of conversing with her. She discovers
an elevated mind, a ready apprehension, and an accurate knowledge of the
various subjects which have been brought into view. I have not yet
introduced the favorite subject of my heart. Indeed, she seems
studiously to avoid noticing any expression which leads towards it; but
she must hear it soon. I am sure of the favor and interest of the
friends with whom she resides. They have promised to speak previously in
my behalf. I am to call, as if accidentally, this afternoon just as they
are to ride abroad. They are to refer me to Miss Wharton for
entertainment till their return. What a delightful opportunity for my
purpose! I am counting the hours--nay, the very moments. Adieu. You
shall soon again hear from your most obedient,

J. BOYER.



LETTER V.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

These bewitching charms of mine have a tendency to keep my mind in a
state of perturbation. I am so pestered with these admirers! Not that I
am so very handsome neither; but, I don't know how it is, I am certainly
very much the taste of the other sex. Followed, flattered, and caressed,
I have cards and compliments in profusion. But I must try to be serious;
for I have, alas! one serious lover. As I promised you to be particular
in my writing, I suppose I must proceed methodically. Yesterday we had a
party to dine. Mr. Boyer was of the number. His attention was
immediately engrossed; and I soon perceived that every word, every
action, and every look was studied to gain my approbation. As he sat
next me at dinner, his assiduity and politeness were pleasing; and as we
walked together afterwards, his conversation was improving. Mine was
sentimental and sedate--perfectly adapted to the taste of my gallant.
Nothing, however, was said particularly expressive of his apparent
wishes. I studiously avoided every kind of discourse which might lead to
this topic. I wish not for a declaration from any one, especially from
one whom I could not repulse and do not intend to encourage at present.
His conversation, so similar to what I had often heard from a similar
character, brought a deceased friend to mind, and rendered me somewhat
pensive. I retired directly after supper. Mr. Boyer had just taken
leave.

Mrs. Richman came into my chamber as she was passing to her own. "Excuse
my intrusion, Eliza," said she. "I thought I would just step in and ask
you if you have passed a pleasant day."

"Perfectly so, madam; and I have now retired to protract the enjoyment
by recollection." "What, my dear, is your opinion of our favorite, Mr.
Boyer?" "Declaring him your favorite, madam, is sufficient to render me
partial to him; but to be frank, independent of that, I think him an
agreeable man." "Your heart, I presume, is now free." "Yes, and I hope
it will long remain so." "Your friends, my dear, solicitous for your
welfare, wish to see you suitably and agreeably connected." "I hope my
friends will never again interpose in my concerns of that nature. You,
madam, who have ever known my heart, are sensible that, had the
Almighty spared life in a certain instance, I must have sacrificed my
own happiness or incurred their censure. I am young, gay, volatile. A
melancholy event has lately extricated me from those shackles which
parental authority had imposed on my mind. Let me, then, enjoy that
freedom which I so highly prize. Let me have opportunity, unbiased by
opinion, to gratify my natural disposition in a participation of those
pleasures which youth and innocence afford." "Of such pleasures, no one,
my dear, would wish to deprive you; but beware, Eliza! Though strewed
with flowers, when contemplated by your lively imagination, it is, after
all, a slippery, thorny path. The round of fashionable dissipation is
dangerous. A phantom is often pursued, which leaves its deluded votary
the real form of wretchedness." She spoke with an emphasis, and, taking
up her candle, wished me a good night. I had not power to return the
compliment. Something seemingly prophetic in her looks and expressions
cast a momentary gloom upon my mind; but I despise those contracted
ideas which confine virtue to a cell. I have no notion of becoming a
recluse. Mrs. Richman has ever been a beloved friend of mine; yet I
always thought her rather prudish. Adieu.

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER VI.

TO THE SAME.

NEW HAVEN.

I had scarcely seated myself at the breakfast table this morning when a
servant entered with a card of invitation from Major Sanford, requesting
the happiness of my hand this evening at a ball given by Mr. Atkins,
about three miles from this. I showed the billet to Mrs. Richman,
saying, "I have not much acquaintance with this gentleman, madam; but I
suppose his character sufficiently respectable to warrant an affirmative
answer." "He is a gay man, my dear, to say no more; and such are the
companions we wish when we join a party avowedly formed for pleasure." I
then stepped into my apartment, wrote an answer, and despatched the
servant. When I returned to the parlor, something disapprobating
appeared in the countenances of both my friends. I endeavored, without
seeming to observe, to dissipate it by chitchat; but they were better
pleased with each other than with me, and, soon rising, walked into the
garden, and left me to amuse myself alone. My eyes followed them
through the window. "Happy pair!" said I. "Should it ever be my fate to
wear the hymeneal chain, may I be thus united! The purest and most
ardent affection, the greatest consonance of taste and disposition, and
the most congenial virtue and wishes distinguish this lovely couple.
Health and wealth, with every attendant blessing, preside over their
favored dwelling, and shed their benign influence without alloy." The
consciousness of exciting their displeasure gave me pain; but I consoled
myself with the idea that it was ill founded.

"They should consider," said I, "that they have no satisfaction to look
for beyond each other; there every enjoyment is centred; but I am a poor
solitary being, who need some amusement beyond what I can supply myself.
The mind, after being confined at home for a while, sends the
imagination abroad in quest of new treasures; and the body may as well
accompany it, for aught I can see."

General Richman and lady have ever appeared solicitous to promote my
happiness since I have resided with them. They have urged my acceptance
of invitations to join parties; though they have not been much
themselves of late, as Mrs. Richman's present circumstances render her
fond of retirement. What reason can be assigned for their apparent
reluctance to this evening's entertainment is to me incomprehensible;
but I shall apply the chemical powers of friendship, and extract the
secret from Mrs. Richman to-morrow, if not before. Adieu. I am now
summoned to dinner, and after that shall be engaged in preparation till
the wished-for hour of hilarity and mirth engrosses every faculty of
your

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER VII.

TO MR. SELBY.

NEW HAVEN.

Divines need not declaim, nor philosophers expatiate, on the
disappointments of human life. Are they not legibly written on every
page of our existence? Are they not predominantly prevalent over every
period of our lives?

When I closed my last letter to you, my heart exulted in the pleasing
anticipation of promised bliss; my wishes danced on the light breezes of
hope; and my imagination dared to arrest the attention of, and even
claim a return of affection from, the lovely Eliza Wharton. But
imagination only it has proved, and that dashed with the bitter
ranklings of jealousy and suspicion.

But to resume my narrative. I reached the mansion of my friend about
four. I was disagreeably struck with the appearance of a carriage at the
door, as it raised an idea of company which might frustrate my plan; but
still more disagreeable were my sensations when, on entering the parlor,
I found Major Sanford evidently in a waiting posture. I was very
politely received; and when Eliza entered the room with a brilliance of
appearance and gayety of manner which I had never before connected with
her character, I rose, as did Major Sanford, who offered his hand and
led her to a chair. I forgot to sit down again, but stood transfixed by
the pangs of disappointment. Miss Wharton appeared somewhat confused,
but, soon resuming her vivacity, desired me to be seated, inquired after
my health, and made some commonplace remarks on the weather; then,
apologizing for leaving me, gave her hand again to Major Sanford, who
had previously risen, and reminded her that the time and their
engagements made it necessary to leave the good company; which, indeed,
they both appeared very willing to do. General Richman and lady took
every method in their power to remove my chagrin and atone for the
absence of my fair one; but ill did they succeed. They told me that Miss
Wharton had not the most distant idea of my visiting there this
afternoon, much less of the design of my visit; that for some months
together she had been lately confined by the sickness of Mr. Haly, whom
she attended during the whole of his last illness; which confinement had
eventually increased her desire of indulging her natural disposition for
gayety. She had, however, they said, an excellent heart and reflecting
mind, a great share of sensibility, and a temper peculiarly formed for
the enjoyments of social life. "But this gentleman, madam, who is her
gallant this evening,--is his character unexceptionable? Will a lady of
delicacy associate with an immoral, not to say profligate, man?" "The
rank and fortune of Major Sanford," said Mrs. Richman, "procure him
respect; his specious manners render him acceptable in public company;
but I must own that he is not the person with whom I wish my cousin to
be connected even for a moment. She never consulted me so little on any
subject as that of his card this morning. Before I had time to object,
she dismissed the servant; and I forbore to destroy her expected
happiness by acquainting her with my disapprobation of her partner. Her
omission was not design; it was juvenile indiscretion. We must, my dear
sir," continued she, "look with a candid eye on such eccentricities.
Faults, not foibles, require the severity of censure." "Far, madam, be
it from me to censure any conduct which as yet I have observed in Miss
Wharton; she has too great an interest in my heart to admit of that."

We now went into more general conversation. Tea was served; and I soon
after took leave. General Richman, however, insisted on my dining with
him on Thursday; which I promised. And here I am again over head and
ears in the hypo--a disease, you will say, peculiar to students. I
believe it peculiar to lovers; and with that class I must now rank
myself, though I did not know, until this evening, that I was so much
engaged as I find I really am. I knew, indeed, that I was extremely
pleased with this amiable girl; that I was interested in her favor; that
I was happier in her company than any where else; with innumerable other
circumstances, which would have told me the truth had I examined them.
But be that as it may, I hope and trust that I am, and ever shall be, a
reasonable creature, and not suffer my judgment to be misled by the
operations of a blind passion.

I shall now lay aside this subject; endeavor to divest even my
imagination of the charmer; and return, until Thursday, to the
contemplation of those truths and duties which have a happy tendency to
calm the jarring elements which compose our mortal frame. Adieu.

J. BOYER.



LETTER VIII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

NEW HAVEN.

We had an elegant ball, last night, Charles; and what is still more to
the taste of your old friend, I had an elegant partner; one exactly
calculated to please my fancy--gay, volatile, apparently thoughtless of
every thing but present enjoyment. It was Miss Eliza Wharton--a young
lady whose agreeable person, polished manners, and refined talents have
rendered her the toast of the country around for these two years; though
for half that time she has had a clerical lover imposed on her by her
friends; for I am told it was not agreeable to her inclination. By this
same clerical lover of hers she was for several months confined as a
nurse. But his death has happily relieved her; and she now returns to
the world with redoubled lustre. At present she is a visitor to Mrs.
Richman, who is a relation. I first saw her on a party of pleasure at
Mr. Frazier's, where we walked, talked, sang, and danced together. I
thought her cousin watched her with a jealous eye; for she is, you must
know, a prude; and immaculate--more so than you or I--must be the man
who claims admission to her society. But I fancy this young lady is a
coquette; and if so, I shall avenge my sex by retaliating the mischiefs
she meditates against us. Not that I have any ill designs, but only to
play off her own artillery by using a little unmeaning gallantry. And
let her beware of the consequences. A young clergyman came in at General
Richman's yesterday, while I was waiting for Eliza, who was much more
cordially received by the general and his lady than was your humble
servant; but I lay that up.

When she entered the room, an air of mutual embarrassment was evident.
The lady recovered her assurance much more easily than the gentleman. I
am just going to ride, and shall make it in my way to call and inquire
after the health of my dulcinea. Therefore, adieu for the present.

PETER SANFORD.



LETTER IX.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I am not so happy to-day in the recollection of last evening's
entertainment as I was in the enjoyment.

The explanation which I promised you from Mrs. Richman yesterday I could
not obtain. When I went down to dinner some friends of General Richman's
had accidentally dropped in, which precluded all particular
conversation. I retired soon to dress, and saw Mrs. Richman no more till
I was informed that Major Sanford waited for me. But I was surprised, on
going into the parlor, to find Mr. Boyer there. I blushed and stammered;
but I know not why; for certain I am that I neither love nor fear the
good man yet, whatever I may do some future day. I would not be
understood that I do not respect and esteem him; for I do both. But
these are calm passions, which soothe rather than agitate the mind. It
was not the consciousness of any impropriety of conduct; for I was far
from feeling any. The entertainment for which I was prepared was such as
virtue would not disapprove, and my gallant was a man of fortune,
fashion, and, for aught I knew, of unblemished character.

But Mr. Boyer was much more disconcerted than myself. Indeed, he did not
recover his philosophy while I staid. I believe, by some hints I have
received since, that he had some particular views in which he was
disappointed.

Our ball had every charm which could render a ball delightful. My
partner was all ease, politeness, and attention; and your friend was as
much flattered and caressed as vanity itself could wish. We returned to
General Richman's about two. Major Sanford asked leave to call and
inquire after my health this morning; and I am now expecting him. I rose
to breakfast. The late hour of retiring to rest had not depressed, but
rather exhilarated, my spirits. My friends were waiting for me in their
parlor. They received me sociably, inquired after my health, my last
evening's entertainment, the company, &c.; when, after a little pause,
Mrs. Richman said, "And how do you like Major Sanford, Eliza?" "Very
well indeed, madam; I think him a finished gentleman. Will you, who are
a connoisseur, allow him that title?" "No, my dear; in my opinion he
falls far below it, since he is deficient in one of the great essentials
of the character; and that is _virtue_." "I am surprised," said I; "but
how has he incurred so severe a censure?" "By being a professed
libertine; by having but too successfully, practised the arts of
seduction; by triumphing in the destruction of innocence and the peace
of families." "O, why was I not informed of this before? But perhaps
these are old affairs--the effects of juvenile folly--crimes of which he
may have repented, and which charity ought to obliterate." "No, my dear,
they are recent facts---facts which he dares not deny--facts for which
he ought to be banished from all virtuous society. I should have
intimated this to you before; but your precipitate acceptance of his
invitation deprived me of an opportunity until it was too late to
prevent your going with him; and we thought it best to protract your
enjoyment as long as possible, not doubting but your virtue and delicacy
would, in future, guard you against the like deception."

"Must I, then, become an avowed prude at once, and refuse him admission
if he call in compliance with the customary forms?" "By no means. I am
sensible that even the false maxims of the world must be complied with
in a degree. But a man of Major Sanford's art can easily distinguish
between a forbidding and an encouraging reception. The former may, in
this case, be given without any breach of the rules of politeness."
Astonished and mortified, I knew not what further to say. I had been so
pleased with the man that I wished to plead in his favor; but virtue and
prudence forbade. I therefore rose and retired. He is this moment, I am
told, below stairs; so that I must bid you adieu until the next post.

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER X.

TO THE SAME.

NEW HAVEN.

Upon closing my last, I walked down, and found Major Sanford alone. He
met me at the door of the parlor, and, taking my hand with an air of
affectionate tenderness, led me to a seat, and took one beside me. I
believe the gloom of suspicion had not entirely forsaken my brow. He
appeared, however, not to notice it, but, after the compliments of the
day had passed, entered into an easy and agreeable conversation on the
pleasures of society--a conversation perfectly adapted to my taste, and
calculated to dissipate my chagrin and pass the time imperceptibly. He
inquired the place of my native abode; and, having informed him, he said
he had thoughts of purchasing the seat of Captain Pribble, in that
neighborhood, for his residence; and could he be assured of my society
and friendship, his resolution would be fixed. I answered his compliment
only by a slight bow. He took leave, and I retired to dress for the day,
being engaged to accompany my cousin to dine at Mr. Lawrence's--a
gentleman of fortune and fashion in this vicinity. Mr. Lawrence has but
one daughter, heiress to a large estate, with an agreeable form, but a
countenance which, to me, indicates not much soul. I was surprised in
the afternoon to see Major Sanford alight at the gate. He entered with
the familiarity of an old acquaintance, and, after accosting each of the
company, told me, with a low bow, that he did not expect the happiness
of seeing me again so soon. I received his compliment with a conscious
awkwardness. Mrs. Richman's morning lecture still rang in my head; and
her watchful eye now traced every turn of mine and every action of the
major's. Indeed, his assiduity was painful to me; yet I found it
impossible to disengage myself a moment from him, till the close of the
day brought our carriage to the door; when he handed me in, and,
pressing my hand to his lips, retired.

What shall I say about this extraordinary man? Shall I own to you, my
friend, that he is pleasing to me? His person, his manners, his
situation, all combine to charm my fancy, and, to my lively imagination,
strew the path of life with flowers. What a pity, my dear Lucy, that the
graces and virtues are not oftener united! They must, however, meet in
the man of my choice; and till I find such a one, I shall continue to
subscribe my name

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XI.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

NEW HAVEN.

Well, Charles, I have been manoeuvring to-day a little revengefully.
That, you will say, is out of character. So baleful a passion does not
easily find admission among those softer ones which you well know I
cherish. However, I am a mere Proteus, and can assume any shape that
will best answer my purpose.

I called this afternoon, as I told you I intended, at General Richman's.
I waited some time in the parlor alone before Eliza appeared; and when
she did appear, the distant reserve of her manners and the pensiveness
of her countenance convinced me that she had been vexed, and I doubted
not but Peter Sanford was the occasion. Her wise cousin, I could have
sworn, had been giving her a detail of the vices of her gallant, and
warning her against the dangers of associating with him in future.
Notwithstanding, I took no notice of any alteration in her behavior, but
entered with the utmost facetiousness into a conversation which I
thought most to her taste. By degrees she assumed her usual vivacity;
cheerfulness and good humor again animated her countenance. I tarried
as long as decency would admit. She having intimated that they were to
dine at my friend Lawrence's, I caught at this information, and
determined to follow them, and tease the jealous Mrs. Richman by playing
off all the gallantry I was master of in her presence.

I went, and succeeded to the utmost of my wishes, as I read in the
vexation visible in the one, and the ease and attention displayed by the
other. I believe, too, that I have charmed the eye, at least, of the
amiable Eliza. Indeed, Charles, she is a fine girl. I think it would
hurt my conscience to wound her mind or reputation. Were I disposed to
marry, I am persuaded she would make an excellent wife; but that, you
know, is no part of my plan, so long as I can keep out of the noose.
Whenever I do submit to be shackled, it must be from a necessity of
mending my fortune. This girl would be far from doing that. However, I
am pleased with her acquaintance, and mean not to abuse her credulity
and good nature, if I can help it.

PETER SANFORD.



LETTER XII.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

The heart of your friend is again besieged. Whether it will surrender to
the assailants or not I am unable at present to determine. Sometimes I
think of becoming a predestinarian, and submitting implicitly to fate,
without any exercise of free will; but, as mine seems to be a wayward
one, I would counteract the operations of it, if possible.

Mrs. Richman told me this morning that she hoped I should be as
agreeably entertained this afternoon as I had been the preceding; that
she expected Mr. Boyer to dine and take tea, and doubted not but he
would be as attentive and sincere to me, if not as gay and polite, as
the gentleman who obtruded his civilities yesterday. I replied that I
had no reason to doubt the sincerity of the one or the other, having
never put them to the test, nor did I imagine I ever should. "Your
friends, Eliza," said she, "would be very happy to see you united to a
man of Mr. Boyer's worth, and so agreeably settled as he has a prospect
of being." "I hope," said I, "that my friends are not so weary of my
company as to wish to dispose of me. I am too happy in my present
connections to quit them for new ones. Marriage is the tomb of
friendship. It appears to me a very selfish state. Why do people in
general, as soon as they are married, centre all their cares, their
concerns, and pleasures in their own families? Former acquaintances are
neglected or forgotten; the tenderest ties between friends are weakened
or dissolved; and benevolence itself moves in a very limited sphere."
"It is the glory of the marriage state," she rejoined, "to refine by
circumscribing our enjoyments. Here we can repose in safety.

  'The friendships of the world are oft
  Confed'racies in vice, or leagues in pleasure:
  Ours has the purest virtue for its basis;
  And such a friendship ends not but with life.'

True, we cannot always pay that attention to former associates which we
may wish; but the little community which we superintend is quite as
important an object, and certainly renders us more beneficial to the
public. True benevolence, though it may change its objects, is not
limited by time or place. Its effects are the same, and, aided by a
second self, are rendered more diffusive and salutary."

Some pleasantry passed, and we retired to dress. When summoned to
dinner, I found Mr. Boyer below. If what is sometimes said be true, that
love is diffident, reserved, and unassuming, this man must be tinctured
with it. These symptoms were visible in his deportment when I entered
the room. However, he soon recovered himself, and the conversation took
a general turn. The festive board was crowned with sociability, and we
found in reality "the feast of reason and the flow of soul." After we
rose from table, a walk in the garden was proposed--an amusement we are
all peculiarly fond of. Mr. Boyer offered me his arm. When at a
sufficient distance from our company, he begged leave to congratulate
himself on having an opportunity, which he had ardently desired for some
time, of declaring to me his attachment, and of soliciting an interest
in my favor; or, if he might be allowed the term, affection. I replied,
"That, sir, is indeed laying claim to an important interest. I believe
you must substitute some more indifferent epithet for the present."
"Well, then," said he, "if it must be so, let it be esteem or
friendship." "Indeed, sir," said I, "you are entitled to them both.
Merit has always a share in that bank; and I know of none who has a
larger claim on that score than Mr. Boyer." I suppose my manner was
hardly serious enough for what he considered a weighty cause. He was a
little disconcerted, but, soon regaining his presence of mind, entreated
me, with an air of earnestness, to encourage his suit, to admit his
addresses, and, if possible, to reward his love. I told him that this
was rather a sudden affair to me, and that I could not answer him
without consideration. "Well, then," said he, "take what time you think
proper; only relieve my suspense as soon as may be. Shall I visit you
again to-morrow?" "O, not so soon," said I; "next Monday, I believe,
will be early enough. I will endeavor to be at home." He thanked me even
for that favor, recommended himself once more to my kindness, and we
walked towards the company, returned with them to the house, and he soon
took leave. I immediately retired to write this letter, which I shall
close without a single observation on the subject until I know your
opinion.

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XIII.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HARTFORD.

And so you wish to have my opinion before you know the result of your
own.

This is playing a little too much with my patience; but, however, I will
gratify you this once, in hopes that my epistle may have a good effect.
You will ask, perhaps, whether I would influence your judgment. I
answer, No, provided you will exercise it yourself; but I am a little
apprehensive that your fancy will mislead you. Methinks I can gather
from your letters a predilection for this Major Sanford. But he is a
rake, my dear friend; and can a lady of your delicacy and refinement
think of forming a connection with a man of that character? I hope not;
nay, I am confident you do not. You mean only to exhibit a few more
girlish airs before you turn matron; but I am persuaded, if you wish to
lead down the dance of life with regularity, you will not find a more
excellent partner than Mr. Boyer. Whatever you can reasonably expect in
a lover, husband, or friend, you may perceive to be united in this
worthy man. His taste is undebauched, his manners not vitiated, his
morals uncorrupted. His situation in life is, perhaps, as elevated as
you have a right to claim. Forgive my plainness, Eliza. It is the task
of friendship, sometimes, to tell disagreeable truths. I know your
ambition is to make a distinguished figure in the first class of
polished society, to shine in the gay circle of fashionable amusements,
and to bear off the palm amidst the votaries of pleasure. But these are
fading honors, unsatisfactory enjoyments, incapable of gratifying those
immortal principles of reason and religion which have been implanted in
your mind by Nature, assiduously cultivated by the best of parents, and
exerted, I trust, by yourself. Let me advise you, then, in conducting
this affair,--an affair big, perhaps, with your future fate,--to lay
aside those coquettish airs which you sometimes put on; and remember
that you are not dealing with a fop, who will take advantage of every
concession, but with a man of sense and honor, who will properly
estimate your condescension and frankness. Act, then, with that modest
freedom, that dignified unreserve, which bespeak conscious rectitude and
sincerity of heart.

I shall be extremely anxious to hear the process and progress of this
business. Relieve my impatience as soon as possible; and believe me
yours with undissembled affection.

LUCY FREEMAN.



LETTER XIV.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I have received, and read again and again, your friendly epistle. My
reason and judgment entirely coincide with your opinion; but my fancy
claims some share in the decision; and I cannot yet tell which will
preponderate. This was the day fixed for deciding Mr. Boyer's cause. My
friends here gave me a long dissertation on his merits. Your letter,
likewise, had its weight; and I was candidly summoning up the _pros_ and
_cons_ in the garden, whither I had walked, (General Richman and lady
having rode out,) when I was informed that he was waiting in the parlor.
I went immediately in, (a good symptom, you will say,) and received him
very graciously. After the first compliments were over, he seemed eager
to improve the opportunity to enter directly on the subject of his
present visit. It is needless for me to recite to you, who have long
been acquainted with the whole process of courtship, the declarations,
propositions, protestations, entreaties, looks, words, and actions of a
lover. They are, I believe, much the same in the whole sex, allowing for
their different dispositions, educations, and characters; but you are
impatient, I know, for the conclusion.

You have hastily perused the preceding lines, and are straining your eye
forward to my part of the farce; for such it may prove, after all. Well,
then, not to play too long with the curiosity which I know to be excited
and actuated by real friendship, I will relieve it. I think you would
have been pleased to have seen my gravity on this important occasion.
With all the candor and frankness which I was capable of assuming, I
thus answered his long harangue, to which I had listened without
interrupting him: "Self-knowledge, sir, that most important of all
sciences, I have yet to learn. Such have been my situations in life, and
the natural volatility of my temper, that I have looked but little into
my own heart in regard to its future wishes and views. From a scene of
constraint and confinement, ill suited to my years and inclination, I
have just launched into society. My heart beats high in expectation of
its fancied joys. My sanguine imagination paints, in alluring colors,
the charms of youth and freedom, regulated by virtue and innocence. Of
these I wish to partake. While I own myself under obligations for the
esteem which you are pleased to profess for me, and, in return,
acknowledge that neither your person nor manners are disagreeable to me,
I recoil at the thought of immediately forming a connection which must
confine me to the duties of domestic life, and make me dependent for
happiness, perhaps, too, for subsistence, upon a class of people who
will claim the right of scrutinizing every part of my conduct, and, by
censuring those foibles which I am conscious of not having prudence to
avoid, may render me completely miserable. While, therefore, I receive
your visits, and cultivate towards you sentiments of friendship and
esteem, I would not have you consider me as confined to your society, or
obligated to a future connection. Our short acquaintance renders it
impossible for me to decide what the operations of my mind may
hereafter be. You must either quit the subject, or leave me to the
exercise of my free will, which, perhaps, may coincide with your present
wishes." "Madam," said he, "far is the wish from me to restrain your
person or mind. In your breast I will repose my cause. It shall be my
study to merit a return of affection; and I doubt not but generosity and
honor will influence your conduct towards me. I expect soon to settle
among a generous and enlightened people, where I flatter myself I shall
be exempt from those difficulties and embarrassments to which too many
of my brethren are subject. The local situation is agreeable, the
society refined and polished; and if, in addition, I may obtain that
felicity which you are formed to bestow in a family connection, I shall
be happy indeed."

He spoke with emphasis. The tear of sensibility sparkled in his eye. I
involuntarily gave him my hand, which he pressed with ardor to his lips;
then, rising, he walked to the window to conceal his emotion. I rang the
bell and ordered tea, during and after which we shared that social
converse which is the true zest of life, and in which I am persuaded
none but virtuous minds can participate. General Richman and lady
returned with the shades of the evening. The penetrating eye of my
cousin traced in _our_ countenances the progress of the cause, and the
smile of approbation animated _hers_. Mr. Boyer asked the favor of my
company to ride to-morrow morning; which was granted. He tarried to
supper, and took his leave. I retired immediately to my chamber, to
which I was followed by Mrs. Richman. I related to her the conversation
and the encouragement which I had given to Mr. Boyer. She was pleased,
but insisted that I should own myself somewhat engaged to him. This, I
told her, I should never do to any man before the indissoluble knot was
tied. "That," said I, "will be time enough to resign my freedom." She
replied, that I had wrong ideas of freedom and matrimony; but she hoped
that Mr. Boyer would happily rectify them.

I have now, my dear friend, given you an account of my present
situation, and leave you to judge for yourself concerning it. Write me
your opinion, and believe me ever yours,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XV.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HARTFORD.

I congratulate you, my dear Eliza, on the stability of your conduct
towards Mr. Boyer. Pursue the system which you have adopted, and I dare
say that happiness will crown your future days. You are indeed very
tenacious of your freedom, as you call it; but that is a play about
words. A man of Mr. Boyer's honor and good sense will never abridge any
privileges which virtue can claim.

When do you return to embellish our society here? I am impatient to see
you, and likewise this amiable man. I am much interested in his favor.
By the way, I am told that Major Sanford has been to look at the seat of
Captain Pribble, which is upon sale. It is reported that he will
probably purchase it. Many of our gentry are pleased with the prospect
of such a neighbor. "As an accomplished gentleman," say they, "he will
be an agreeable addition to our social parties; and as a man of property
and public spirit, he will be an advantage to the town." But from what I
have heard of him, I am far from supposing him a desirable acquisition
in either of these respects. A man of a vicious character cannot be a
good member of society. In order to that, his principles and practice
must be uncorrupted; in his morals, at least, he must be a man of
probity and honor. Of these qualifications, if I mistake not, this
gallant of yours cannot boast. But I shall not set up for a censor. I
hope neither you nor I shall have much connection with him. My swain
interests himself very much in your affairs. You will possibly think him
impertinent; but I give his curiosity a softer name. Should I own to you
that I place great confidence in his integrity and honor, you would,
perhaps, laugh at my weakness; but, my dear, I have pride enough to keep
me above coquetry or prudery, and discretion enough, I hope, to secure
me from the errors of both. With him I am determined to walk the future
round of life. What folly, then, would it be to affect reserve and
distance relative to an affair in which I have so much interest! Not
that I am going to betray your secrets; these I have no right to
divulge; but I must be the judge what may, and what may not, be
communicated. I am very much pressed for an early day of consummation;
but I shall not listen to a request of that kind till your return. Such
is my regard for you, that a union of love would be imperfect if
friendship attended not the rites. Adieu.

LUCY FREEMAN.



LETTER XVI.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

We go on charmingly here, almost as soft and smooth as your ladyship. It
seems to me that love must stagnate if it have not a light breeze of
discord once in a while to keep it in motion. We have not tried any yet,
however. We had a lovely tour this forenoon, were out three long hours,
and returned to dinner in perfect harmony.

Mr. Boyer informed me that he should set out to-morrow morning for his
future residence, and soon put on the sacred bands. He solicited an
epistolary correspondence, at the same time, as an alleviation of the
care which that weighty charge would bring on his mind. I consented,
telling him that he must not expect any thing more than general subjects
from me.

We were somewhat interrupted in our confidential intercourse, in the
afternoon, by the arrival of Major Sanford. I cannot say that I was not
agreeably relieved. So sweet a repast, for several hours together, was
rather sickening to my taste. My inamorato looked a little mortified at
the cheerful reception which I gave the intruder, and joined not so
placidly in the social conversation as I could have wished.

When Mr. Boyer, after the major took leave, pressed me to give him some
assurance of my constancy, I only reminded him of the terms of our
engagement. Seeing me decided, he was silent on the subject, and soon
bade me an affectionate adieu, not expecting, as he told me, the
pleasure of a personal interview again for two or three months.

Thus far we have proceeded in this sober business. A good beginning, you
will say. Perhaps it is. I do not, however, feel myself greatly
interested in the progress of the negotiation. Time consolidate my
affections, and enable me to fix them on some particular object. At
present the most lively emotions of my heart are those of friendship,
that friendship which I hope you will soon participate with your
faithful

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XVII.

TO MR. SELBY.

NEW HAVEN.

I have succeeded in my addresses to the lovely Eliza Wharton--as far,
at least, as I had any reason to expect from our short acquaintance. I
find the graces of her person and mind rise in my esteem, and have
already enjoyed in her society some of the happiest hours of my life.
She is kind, affable, and condescending; yet I must own that I have not
been able to infuse into her bosom the ardor which I feel in my own. I
know that the native modesty of the sex would restrain the discovery;
but there is an animation of countenance, which betrays the sensations
of the heart, that I find wanting in hers on this occasion.

I have just taken leave of my fair, and propose returning to-morrow
morning to take upon me the solemn charge which lies with such weight
upon my mind that I need every support, both human and divine. Eliza has
promised to correspond with me. From this I anticipate a source of
pleasure which alone can atone for her absence.

I am, &c.,

J. BOYER.



LETTER XVIII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

NEW HAVEN.

Do you know, Charles, that I have commenced lover? I was always a
general one, but now I am somewhat particular. I shall be the more
interested, as I am likely to meet with difficulties; and it is the
glory of a rake, as well as of a Christian, to combat obstacles. This
same Eliza, of whom I have told you, has really made more impression on
my heart than I was aware of, or than the sex, take them as they rise,
are wont to do. But she is besieged by a priest--a likely lad though. I
know not how it is, but they are commonly successful with the girls,
even the gayest of them. This one, too, has the interest of all her
friends, as I am told. I called yesterday at General Richman's, and
found this pair together, apparently too happy in each other's society
for my wishes. I must own that I felt a glow of jealousy, which I never
experienced before, and vowed revenge for the pain it gave me, though
but momentary. Yet Eliza's reception of me was visibly cordial; nay, I
fancied my company as pleasing to her as that which she had before. I
tarried not long, but left him to the enjoyment of that pleasure which I
flatter myself will be but shortlived. O, I have another plan in my
head--a plan of necessity, which, you know, is the mother of invention.
It is this: I am very much courted and caressed by the family of Mr.
Lawrence, a man of large property in this neighborhood. He has only one
child--a daughter, with whom I imagine the old folks intend to shackle
me in the bonds of matrimony. The girl looks very well; she has no soul,
though, that I can discover; she is heiress, nevertheless, to a great
fortune, and that is all the soul I wish for in a wife. In truth,
Charles, I know of no other way to mend my circumstances. But lisp not a
word of my embarrassments for your life. Show and equipage are my hobby
horse; and if any female wishes to share them with me, and will furnish
me with the means of supporting them, I have no objection. Could I
conform to the sober rules of wedded life, and renounce those dear
enjoyments of dissipation in which I have so long indulged, I know not
the lady in the world with whom I would sooner form a connection of this
sort than with Eliza Wharton. But it will never do. If my fortune or
hers were better, I would risk a union; but as they are, no idea of the
kind can be admitted. I shall endeavor, notwithstanding, to enjoy her
company as long as possible. Though I cannot possess her wholly myself,
I will not tamely see her the property of another.

I am now going to call at General Richman's, in hopes of an opportunity
to profess my devotion to her. I know I am not a welcome visitor to the
family; but I am independent of their censure or esteem, and mean to act
accordingly.

PETER SANFORD.



LETTER XIX.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I find the ideas of sobriety and domestic solitude I have been
cultivating for three days past somewhat deranged by the interruption of
a visitor, with whom I know you will not be pleased. It is no other than
Major Sanford. I was walking alone in the garden yesterday, when he
suddenly appeared to my view. "How happy am I," said he, seizing my
hand, "in this opportunity of finding you alone--an opportunity, Miss
Wharton, which I must improve in expatiating on a theme that fills my
heart and solely animates my frame!"

I was startled at his impetuosity, and displeased with his freedom.
Withdrawing my hand, I told him that my retirement was sacred. He bowed
submissively; begged pardon for his intrusion; alleged that he found
nobody but the servants in the house; that they informed him I was alone
in the garden--which intelligence was too pleasing for him to consult
any forms of ceremony for the regulation of his conduct. He then went on
rhapsodically to declare his passion; his suspicions that I was forming
a connection with Mr. Boyer, which would effectually destroy all his
hopes of future happiness. He painted the restraint, the confinement,
the embarrassments to which a woman connected with a man of Mr. Boyer's
profession must be subjected, however agreeable his person might be. He
asked if my generous mind could submit to cares and perplexities like
these; whether I could not find greater sources of enjoyment in a more
elevated sphere of life, or share pleasures better suited to my genius
and disposition, even in a single state. I listened to him
involuntarily. My heart did not approve his sentiments; but my ear was
charmed with his rhetoric, and my fancy captivated by his address.

He invited my confidence by the most ardent professions of friendship,
and labored to remove my suspicions by vows of sincerity. I was induced
by his importunity gradually to disclose the state of affairs between
Mr. Boyer and myself. He listened eagerly; wished not, he said, to
influence me unduly; but if I were not otherwise engaged, might he
presume to solicit a place in my friendship and esteem, be admitted to
enjoy my society, to visit me as an acquaintance, and to attend my
excursions and amusements as a brother, if not more? I replied that I
was a pensioner of friendship at present; that friends were extremely
refined in their notions of propriety; and that I had no right to
receive visitants independent of them. "I understand you, madam," said
he. "You intimate that my company is not agreeable to them; but I know
not why. Surely my rank in life is as elevated, and my knowledge of and
acceptance in the world are as extensive, as General Richman's." "I
hope," said I, "since we are engaged in the conversation, that you will
excuse my frankness if I tell you that the understanding and virtue of
this worthy couple induce them, without any regard to rank, to bestow
their esteem wherever it is merited. I cannot say that you are not a
sharer. Your own heart can best determine whether upon their principles
you are or not." He appeared mortified and chagrined; and we had walked
some distance without exchanging a word or a look. At last he rejoined,
"I plead guilty to the charge, madam, which they have undoubtedly
brought against me, of imprudence and folly in many particulars; yet of
malignancy and vice I am innocent. Brought up in affluence, inured from
my infancy to the gratification of every passion, the indulgence of
every wish, it is not strange that a life of dissipation and gayety
should prove alluring to a youthful mind which had no care but to
procure what is deemed enjoyment. In this pursuit I have, perhaps,
deviated from the rigid rules of discretion and the harsher laws of
morality. But let the veil of charity be drawn over my faults; let the
eye of candor impartially examine my present behavior; let the kind and
lenient hand of friendship assist in directing my future steps; and
perhaps I may not prove unworthy of associating with the respectable
inhabitants of this happy mansion; for such I am sure it must be while
honored with Miss Wharton's presence. But, circumstanced as you and I
are at present, I will not sue for your attention as a lover, but rest
contented, if possible, with that share of kindness and regard which
your benevolence may afford me as a friend." I bowed in approbation of
his resolution. He pressed my hand with ardor to his lips; and at that
instant General Richman entered the garden. He approached us cheerfully,
offered Major Sanford his hand with apparent cordiality, and told us
pleasantly that he hoped he should not be considered as an intruder. "By
no means, sir," said Major Sanford; "it is I who have incurred that
imputation. I called this afternoon to pay you my respects, when, being
informed that you and your lady were abroad, and that Miss Wharton was
in the garden, I took the liberty to invade her retirement. She has
graciously forgiven my crime, and I was just affixing the seal to my
pardon as you entered."

We then returned into the house. Mrs. Richman received us politely.
During tea, the conversation turned on literary subjects, in which I
cannot say that the major bore a very distinguished part. After he was
gone, Mrs. Richman said, "I hope you have been agreeably entertained,
Miss Wharton." "I did not choose my company, madam," said I. "Nor," said
she, "did you refuse it, I presume." "Would you not have me respect the
rights of hospitality towards your guests when you are absent, madam?"
"If you had acted from that motive, I own my obligations to you, my
dear; but even that consideration can hardly reconcile me to the
sacrifice of time which you have made to the amusement of a seducer." "I
hope, madam, you do not think me an object of seduction." "I do not
think you seducible; nor was Richardson's Clarissa till she made herself
the victim by her own indiscretion. Pardon me, Eliza--this is a second
Lovelace. I am alarmed by his artful intrusions. His insinuating
attentions to you are characteristic of the man. Come, I presume you are
not interested to keep his secrets if you know them; will you give me a
little sketch of his conversation?" "Most willingly," said I, and
accordingly related the whole. When I had concluded, she shook her
head, and replied, "Beware, my friend, of his arts. Your own heart is
too sincere to suspect treachery and dissimulation in another; but
suffer not your ear to be charmed by the siren voice of flattery, nor
your eye to be caught by the phantom of gayety and pleasure. Remember
your engagements to Mr. Boyer. Let sincerity and virtue be your guides,
and they will lead you to happiness and peace." She waited not for an
answer, but, immediately rising, begged leave to retire, alleging that
she was fatigued. General Richman accompanied her, and I hastened to my
apartment, where I have written thus far, and shall send it on for your
comments. I begin to think of returning soon to your circle. One
inducement is, that I may be free from the intrusions of this man.
Adieu.

ELIZA WHARTON.



