LETTER XX.

TO MRS. M. WHARTON.

NEW HAVEN.

From the conversation of the polite, the sedate, the engaging, and the
gay,--from corresponding with the learned, the sentimental, and the
refined,--my heart and my pen turn with ardor and alacrity to a tender
and affectionate parent, the faithful guardian and guide of my youth,
the unchanging friend of my riper years. The different dispositions of
various associates sometimes perplex the mind which seeks direction; but
in the disinterested affection of the maternal breast we fear no
dissonance of passion, no jarring interests, no disunion of love. In
this seat of felicity is every enjoyment which fancy can form, or
friendship, with affluence, bestow; but still my mind frequently returns
to the happy shades of my nativity. I wish there to impart my pleasures,
and share the counsels of my best, my long-tried, and experienced
friend. At this time, my dear mamma, I am peculiarly solicitous for your
advice. I am again importuned to listen to the voice of love; again
called upon to accept the addresses of a gentleman of merit and
respectability. You will know the character of the man when I tell you
it is Mr. Boyer. But his situation in life! I dare not enter it. My
disposition is not calculated for that sphere. There are duties arising
from the station which I fear I should not be able to fulfil, cares and
restraints to which I could not submit. _This_ man is not disagreeable
to me; but if I must enter the connubial state, are there not _others_
who may be equally pleasing in their persons, and whose profession may
be more conformable to my taste? You, madam, have passed through this
scene of trial with honor and applause. But, alas! can your volatile
daughter ever acquire your wisdom--ever possess your resolution,
dignity, and prudence?

I hope soon to converse with you personally upon the subject, and to
profit by your precepts and example. I anticipate the hour of my return
to your bosom with impatience. My daily thoughts and nightly dreams
restore me to the society of my beloved mamma; and, till I enjoy in
reality, I subscribe myself your dutiful daughter,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XXI.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HARTFORD.

How welcome to me, my dear Eliza, are the tidings of your return! My
widowed heart has mourned your absence, and languished for the company
of its now dearest connection. When stripped of one dependence, the mind
naturally collects and rests itself in another. Your father's death
deprived me, for a while, of every enjoyment. But a reviving sense of
the duties which I owed to a rising family roused me from the lethargy
of grief. In my cares I found an alleviation of my sorrows. The
expanding virtues of my children soothed and exhilarated my drooping
spirits, and my attention to their education and interest was amply
rewarded by their proficiency and duty. In them every hope, every
pleasure, now centres. They are the axis on which revolves the temporal
felicity of their mother. Judge, then, my dear, how anxiously I must
watch, how solicitously I must regard, every circumstance which relates
to their welfare and prosperity! Exquisitely alive to these sensations,
your letter awakens my hopes and my fears. As you are young and
charming, a thousand dangers lurk unseen around you. I wish you to find
a friend and protector worthy of being rewarded by your love and your
society. Such a one I think Mr. Boyer will prove. I am, therefore,
sorry, since there can be no other, that his profession should be an
objection in your mind. You say that I have experienced the scenes of
trial connected with that station. I have, indeed; and I will tell you
the result of this experience. It is, that I have found it replete with
happiness. No class of society has domestic enjoyment more at command
than clergymen. Their circumstances are generally a decent competency.
They are removed alike from the perplexing cares of want and from the
distracting parade of wealth. They are respected by all ranks, and
partakers of the best company. With regard to its being a dependent
situation, what one is not so? Are we not all links in the great chain
of society, some more, some less important, but each upheld by others,
throughout the confederated whole? In whatever situation we are placed,
our greater or less degree of happiness must be derived from ourselves.
Happiness is in a great measure the result of our own dispositions and
actions. Let us conduct uprightly and justly; with propriety and
steadiness; not servilely cringing for favor, nor arrogantly claiming
more attention and respect than our due; let us bear with fortitude the
providential and unavoidable evils of life, and we shall spend our days
with respectability and contentment at least.

I will not expatiate on the topic of your letter till we have a personal
interview, for which I am indeed impatient. Return, my daughter, as soon
as politeness will allow, to your expecting friends; more especially to
the fond embraces of your affectionate mother.

M. WHARTON.



LETTER XXII.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HAMPSHIRE.

Can time, can distance, can absence allay or extinguish the sentiments
of refined affection, the ardor of true love? No, my dear Eliza. If I
may judge by my own heart, I shall say they cannot. Amidst the parade
which has attended me, the interesting scenes in which I have been
engaged, and the weighty cares which have occupied my attention, your
idea has been the solace of my retired moments, the soother of every
anxious thought. I recall with pleasure the conversation which we have
shared. I dwell with rapture on the marks of favor which I have received
from you. My first wish is the continuance and increase of these favors;
my highest ambition, to deserve them. I look forward and anticipate with
impatience the future enjoyment of your society, and hope we shall one
day experience the reality of those beautiful lines of Thomson:--

        "--an elegant sufficiency,
  Content, retirement, rural quiet, friendship,
  Books, ease, and alternate labor; useful life,
  Progressive virtue, and approving Heaven;
  These are the matchless joys of virtuous love.

Mr. Selby, my particular friend, will have the honor of delivering this
letter. He will be able to give you any information, relative to our
public transactions, which you may wish. May I solicit the favor of a
line, through him, in return? It will relieve, in some measure, the
tediousness of this separation. I intend to pay my respects to you
personally in about a fortnight; till when I subscribe myself your
sincere and affectionate friend,

J. BOYER.



LETTER XXIII.

TO THE REV. J. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

I have executed your commission, and been amply rewarded for my trouble
by the pleasures I enjoyed in the society of the agreeable family to
which I was introduced; especially of the amiable and accomplished lady
who is the object of your particular regard. I think she fully justifies
your partiality to her. She appears to possess both the virtues and the
graces. Her form is fine, and her countenance interests us at once in
her favor. There is a mixture of dignity and ease which commands respect
and conciliates affection. After these encomiums, will you permit me to
say there is an air of gayety in her appearance and deportment which
savors a little of coquetry? I am persuaded, however, that she has too
much good sense to practise its arts. She received your letter very
graciously, asked leave to retire a few moments, and returned with a
smile of complacency on her brow, which I construe favorably to you.

There was a Mr. Lawrence, with his lady and daughter, and a certain
Major Sanford, at the house. The latter, I believe, in the modern sense
of the phrase, _is much of a gentleman_; that is, a man of show and
fashion.

Miss Wharton asked me when I should leave town, and when I should
return, or have an opportunity of conveyance to Hampshire. I told her I
should write by the next post, and, if she had any commands, would be
happy to execute them. She would send a line to her friend, she said, if
I would take the trouble to enclose it in my letter. I readily
consented, and told her that I would call and receive her favor
to-morrow morning. This chitchat was a little aside; but I could not but
observe that the aforesaid Major Sanford had dropped his part in the
conversation of the rest of the company, and was attending to us, though
he endeavored to conceal his attention by looking carelessly over a
play which lay on the window by him. Yet he evidently watched every word
and action of Miss Wharton, as if he were really interested in her
movements.

It is said she has many admirers, and I conceive it very possible that
this may be one of them; though, truly, I do not think that she would
esteem such a conquest any great honor. I now joined in the general
topic of conversation, which was politics; Mrs. Richman and Miss Wharton
judiciously, yet modestly, bore a part; while the other ladies amused
themselves with Major Sanford, who was making his sage remarks on the
play, which he still kept in his hand. General Richman at length
observed that we had formed into parties. Major Sanford, upon, this,
laid aside his book. Miss Lawrence simpered, and looked as if she was
well pleased with being in a party with so fine a man; while her mother
replied that she never meddled with politics. "Miss Wharton and I," said
Mrs. Richman, "must beg leave to differ from you, madam. We think
ourselves interested in the welfare and prosperity of our country; and,
consequently, claim the right of inquiring into those affairs which may
conduce to or interfere with the common weal. We shall not be called to
the senate or the field to assert its privileges and defend its rights,
but we shall feel, for the honor and safety of our friends and
connections who are thus employed. If the community flourish and enjoy
health and freedom, shall we not share in the happy effects? If it be
oppressed and disturbed, shall we not endure our proportion of the evil?
Why, then, should the love of our country be a masculine passion only?
Why should government, which involves the peace and order of the society
of which we are a part, be wholly excluded from our observation?" Mrs.
Lawrence made some slight reply, and waived the subject. The gentlemen
applauded Mrs. Richman's sentiments as truly Roman, and, what was more,
they said, truly republican.

I rose to take leave, observing to Miss Wharton that I should call
to-morrow, as agreed. Upon this, General Richman politely requested the
favor of my company at dinner. I accepted his invitation, and bade them
good night. I shall do the same to you for the present, as I intend,
to-morrow, to scribble the cover, which is to enclose your Eliza's
letter.

T. SELBY.



LETTER XXIV.

TO THE REV. J. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

I resume my pen, having just returned from General Richman's; not with
an expectation, however, of your reading this till you have perused and
reperused the enclosed. I can bear such neglect in this case, as I have
been alike interested myself.

I went to General Richman's at twelve o'clock. About a mile from thence,
upon turning a corner, I observed a gentleman and lady on horseback,
some way before me, riding at a very moderate pace, and seemingly in
close conversation. I kept at the same distance from them till I saw
them stop at the general's gate. I then put on, and, coming up with them
just as they alighted, was surprised to find them no other than Major
Sanford and Miss Wharton. They were both a little disconcerted at my
salutation: I know not why. Miss Wharton invited him in; but he
declined, being engaged to dine. General Richman received us at the
door. As I handed Miss Wharton in, he observed, jocosely, that she had
changed company. "Yes, sir," she replied, "more than once since I went
out, as you doubtless observed." "I was not aware," said Mrs. Richman,
"that Major Sanford was to be of your party to-day." "It was quite
accidental, madam," said Miss Wharton. "Miss Lawrence and I had agreed,
last evening, to take a little airing this forenoon. A young gentleman,
a relation of hers, who is making them a visit, was to attend us.

"We had not rode more than two miles when we were overtaken by Major
Sanford, who very politely asked leave to join our party. Miss Lawrence
very readily consented; and we had a very sociable ride. The fineness of
the day induced me to protract the enjoyment of it abroad; but Miss
Lawrence declined riding so far as I proposed, as she had engaged
company to dine. We therefore parted till the evening, when we are to
meet again." "What, another engagement!" said Mrs. Richman. "Only to
the assembly, madam." "May I inquire after your gallant, my dear? But I
have no right, perhaps, to be inquisitive," said Mrs. Richman. Miss
Wharton made no reply, and the conversation took a general turn. Miss
Wharton sustained her part with great propriety. Indeed, she discovers a
fund of useful knowledge and extensive reading, which render her
peculiarly entertaining; while the brilliancy of her wit, the fluency of
her language, the vivacity and ease of her manners are inexpressibly
engaging. I am going myself to the assembly this evening, though I did
not mention it to General Richman. I therefore took my leave soon after
dinner.

I have heard so much in praise of Miss Wharton's penmanship, in
addition to her other endowments, that I am almost tempted to break the
seal of her letter to you; but I forbear. Wishing you much happiness in
the perusal of it, and more in the possession of its writer, I subscribe
myself yours, &c.,

T. SELBY.



LETTER XXV.

TO THE REV. J. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

Sir: Your favor of the 4th instant came to hand yesterday. I received it
with pleasure, and embrace this early opportunity of contributing my
part to a correspondence tending to promote a friendly and social
intercourse. An epistolary communication between the sexes has been with
some a subject of satire and censure; but unjustly, in my opinion. With
persons of refinement and information, it may be a source of
entertainment and utility. The knowledge and masculine virtues of your
sex may be softened and rendered more diffusive by the inquisitiveness,
vivacity, and docility of ours, drawn forth and exercised by each
other.

In regard to the _particular_ subject of yours, I shall be silent. Ideas
of that kind are better conveyed, on my part, by words than by the pen.

I congratulate you on your agreeable settlement, and hope it will be
productive of real and lasting happiness. I am convinced that felicity
is not confined to any particular station or condition in life; yet,
methinks, some are better calculated to afford it to me than others.

Your extract from a favorite poet is charmingly descriptive; but is it
not difficult to ascertain what we can pronounce "an elegant
sufficiency"? Perhaps you will answer, as some others have done, we can
attain it by circumscribing our wishes within the compass of our
abilities. I am not very avaricious; yet I must own that I should like
to enjoy it without so much trouble as that would cost me.

Excuse my seeming levity. You have flattered my cheerfulness by
commending it, and must, therefore, indulge me in the exercise of it. I
cannot conveniently be at the pains of restraining its sallies when I
write in confidence.

Is a sprightly disposition, in your view, indicative of a giddy mind
or an innocent heart? Of the latter, I presume; for I know you are not a
misanthrope.

We expect the pleasure of Mr. Selby's company to dinner. You are
certainly under obligations to his friendship for the liberal encomiums
he bestowed on you and your prospects yesterday. Mrs. Richman rallied
me, after he was gone, on my listening ear. The general and she unite in
requesting me to present their respects.

Wishing you health and happiness, I subscribe myself your friend,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XXVI.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I am perplexed and embarrassed, my friend, by the assiduous attentions
of this Major Sanford. I shall write circumstantially and frankly to
you, that I may have the benefit of your advice. He came here last
Monday in company with Mr. Lawrence, his wife, and daughter, to make us
a visit. While they were present, a Mr. Selby, a particular friend of
Mr. Boyer, came in, and delivered me a letter from him. I was really
happy in the reception of this proof of his affection. His friend gave a
very flattering account of his situation and prospects.

The watchful eye of Major Sanford traced every word and action
respecting Mr. Boyer with an attention which seemed to border on
anxiety. That, however, did not restrain, but rather accelerated, my
vivacity and inquisitiveness on the subject; for I wished to know
whether it would produce any real effect upon him or not.

After Mr. Selby's departure, he appeared pensive and thoughtful the
remainder of the evening, and evidently sought an opportunity of
speaking to me aside, which I studiously avoided. Miss Lawrence and I
formed an engagement to take an airing in the morning on horseback,
attended by a relation of hers who is now with them. They called for me
about ten, when we immediately set out upon our preconcerted excursion.
We had not proceeded far before we were met by Major Sanford. He was
extremely polite, and finding our destination was not particular, begged
leave to join our party. This was granted; and we had an agreeable tour
for several miles, the time being passed in easy and unstudied remarks
upon obvious occurrences. Major Sanford could not, however, conceal his
particular attention to me, which rather nettled Miss Lawrence. She grew
somewhat serious, and declined riding so far as we had intended,
alleging that she expected company to dine.

Major Sanford, understanding that she was going to the assembly in the
evening with Mr. Gordon, solicited me to accept a ticket, and form a
party with them. The entertainment was alluring, and I consented. When
we had parted with Miss Lawrence, Major Sanford insisted on my riding a
little farther, saying he must converse with me on a particular subject,
and if I refused him this opportunity, that he must visit me at my
residence, let it offend whom it would. I yielded to his importunity,
and we rode on. He then told me that his mind was in a state of suspense
and agitation which was very painful to bear, and which I only could
relieve; that my cheerful reception of Mr. Boyer's letter yesterday, and
deportment respecting him, had awakened in his breast all the pangs of
jealousy which the most ardent love could feel; that my treatment of Mr.
Boyer's friend convinced him that I was more interested in his affairs
than I was willing to own; that he foresaw himself to be condemned to an
eternal separation, and the total loss of my favor and society, as soon
as time and circumstances would allow.

His zeal, his pathos, alarmed me. I begged him to be calm. "To you,"
said I, "as a friend, I have intrusted my situation in relation to Mr.
Boyer. You know that I am under no special obligation to him, and I do
not intend to form any immediate connection." "Mr. Boyer must have
different ideas, madam; and he has reason for them, if I may judge by
appearances. When do you expect another visit from him?" "In about a
fortnight." "And is my fate to be then decided? and so decided, as I
fear it will be, through the influence of your friends, if not by your
own inclination?" "My friends, sir, will not control, they will only
advise to what they think most for my interest, and I hope that my
conduct will not be unworthy of their approbation." "Pardon me, my dear
Eliza," said he, "if I am impertinent; it is my regard for you which
impels me to the presumption. Do you intend to give your hand to Mr.
Boyer?" "I do not intend to give my hand to any man at present. I have
but lately entered society, and wish, for a while, to enjoy my freedom
in the participation of pleasures suited to my age and sex." "These,"
said he, "you are aware, I suppose, when you form a connection with that
man, you must renounce, and content yourself with a confinement to the
tedious round of domestic duties, the pedantic conversation of
scholars, and the invidious criticisms of a whole town." "I have been
accustomed," said I, "and am therefore attached, to men of letters; and
as to the praise or censure of the populace, I hope always to enjoy that
approbation of conscience which will render me superior to both. But you
forget your promise not to talk in this style, and have deviated far
from the character of a friend and brother, with, which you consented to
rest satisfied." "Yes; but I find myself unequal to the task. I am not
stoic enough tamely to make so great a sacrifice. I must plead for an
interest in your favor till you banish me from your presence, and tell
me plainly that you hate me." We had by this time reached the gate, and
as we dismounted, were unexpectedly accosted by Mr. Selby, who had come,
agreeably to promise, to dine with us, and receive my letter to Mr.
Boyer.

Major Sanford took his leave as General Richman appeared at the door.
The general and his lady rallied me on my change of company, but very
prudently concealed their sentiments of Major Sanford while Mr. Selby
was present. Nothing material occurred before and during dinner, soon
after which Mr. Selby went away. I retired to dress for the assembly,
and had nearly completed the labor of the toilet when Mrs. Richman
entered. "My friendship for you, my dear Eliza," said she, "interests
me so much in your affairs that I cannot repress my curiosity to know
who has the honor of your hand this evening." "If it be any honor," said
I, "it will be conferred on Major Sanford." "I think it far too great to
be thus bestowed," returned she. "It is perfectly astonishing to me that
the virtuous part of my sex will countenance, caress, and encourage
those men whose profession it is to blast their reputation, destroy
their peace, and triumph in their infamy." "Is this, madam, the avowed
design of Major Sanford?" "I know not what he avows, but his practice
too plainly bespeaks his principles and views." "Does he now practise
the arts you mention? or do you refer to past follies?" "I cannot answer
for his present conduct; his past has established his character." "You,
madam, are an advocate for charity; that, perhaps, if exercised in this
instance, might lead you to think it possible for him to reform, to
become a valuable member of society, and, when connected with a lady of
virtue and refinement, to be capable of making a good husband." "I
cannot conceive that such a lady would be willing to risk her all upon
the slender prospect of his reformation. I hope the one with whom I am
conversing has no inclination to so hazardous an experiment." "Why, not
much." "Not much! If you have any, why do you continue to encourage Mr.
Boyer's addresses?" "I am not sufficiently acquainted with either, yet,
to determine which to take. At present, I shall not confine myself in
any way. In regard to these men, my fancy and my judgment are in scales;
sometimes one preponderates, sometimes the other; which will finally
prevail, time alone can reveal." "O my cousin, beware of the delusions
of fancy! Reason must be our guide if we would expect durable
happiness." At this instant a servant opened the door, and told me that
Major Sanford waited in the parlor. Being ready, I wished Mrs. Richman a
good evening, and went down. Neither General Richman nor his lady
appeared. He therefore handed me immediately into his phaeton, and we
were soon in the assembly room.

I was surprised, on my entrance, to find Mr. Selby there, as he did not
mention, at dinner, his intention of going. He attached himself to our
party, and, in the intervals of dancing, took every opportunity of
conversing with me. These, however, were not many; for Major Sanford
assiduously precluded the possibility of my being much engaged by any
one else. We passed the evening very agreeably; but the major's
importunity was rather troublesome as we returned home. He insisted upon
my declaring whether Mr. Boyer really possessed my affections, and
whether I intended to confer myself on him or not. "If," said he, "you
answer me in the affirmative, I must despair; but if you have not
absolutely decided against me, I will still hope that my persevering
assiduity, my faithful love, may at last be rewarded." I told him that I
was under no obligation to give him any account of my disposition
towards another, and that he must remember the terms of our present
association to which he had subscribed. I therefore begged him to waive
the subject now, if not forever. He asked my pardon, if he had been
impertinent, but desired leave to renew his request that I would receive
his visits, his friendly visits. I replied that I could not grant this,
and that he must blame himself, not me, if he was an unwelcome guest at
General Richman's. He lamented the prejudices which my friends had
imbibed against him, but flattered himself that I was more liberal than
to be influenced by them without any positive proof of demerit, as it
was impossible that his conduct towards me should ever deviate from the
strictest rules of honor and love.

What shall I say now, my friend? This man to an agreeable person has
superadded graceful manners, an amiable temper, and a fortune sufficient
to insure the enjoyments of all the pleasing varieties of social life.
Perhaps a gay disposition and a lax education may have betrayed him into
some scenes of dissipation. But is it not an adage generally received,
that "_a reformed rake makes the best husband_"? My fancy leads me for
happiness to the festive haunts of fashionable life. I am at present,
and know not but I ever shall be, too volatile for a confinement to
domestic avocations and sedentary pleasures. I dare not, therefore,
place myself in a situation where these must be indispensable. Mr.
Boyer's person and character are agreeable. I really esteem the man. My
reason and judgment, as I have observed before, declare for a connection
with him, as a state of tranquillity and rational happiness. But the
idea of relinquishing those delightful amusements and flattering
attentions which wealth and equipage bestow is painful. Why were not the
virtues of the one and the graces and affluence of the other combined? I
should then have been happy indeed. But, as the case now stands, I am
loath to give up either; being doubtful which will conduce most to my
felicity.

Pray write me impartially; let me know your real sentiments, for I rely
greatly upon your opinion. I am, &c.,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XXVII.

TO THE REV. MR. BOYER.

NEW HAVEN.

I am quite a convert to Pope's assertion, that

  "Every woman is at heart a rake."

How else can we account for the pleasure which they evidently receive
from the society, the flattery, the caresses of men of that character?
Even the most virtuous of them seem naturally prone to gayety, to
pleasure, and, I had almost said, to dissipation. How else shall we
account for the existence of this disposition in your favorite fair? It
cannot be the result of her education. Such a one as she has received is
calculated to give her a very different turn of mind. You must forgive
me, my friend, for I am a little vexed and alarmed on your-account. I
went last evening to the assembly, as I told you in my last that I
intended. I was purposely without a partner, that I might have the
liberty to exercise my gallantry as circumstances should invite. Indeed
I must own that my particular design was to observe Miss Wharton's
movements, being rather inclined to jealousy in your behalf. She was
handed into the assembly room by Major Sanford. The brilliance of their
appearance, the levity of their manners, and the contrast of their
characters I found to be a general subject of speculation. I endeavored
to associate with Miss Wharton, but found it impossible to detach her a
moment from the coxcomb who attended her. If she has any idea of a
connection with you, why does she continue to associate with another,
especially with one of so opposite a description? I am seriously afraid
that there is more intimacy between them than there ought to be,
considering the encouragement she has given you.

I hope you will not be offended by my freedom in this matter. It
originates in a concern for your honor and future happiness. I am
anxious lest you should be made the dupe of a coquette, and your peace
of mind fall a sacrifice to an artful debauchee. Yet I must believe that
Miss Wharton has, in reality, all that virtue and good sense of which
she enjoys the reputation; but her present conduct is mysterious.

I have said enough (more than I ought, perhaps) to awaken your attention
to circumstances which _may_ lead to important events. If they appear of
little or no consequence to you, you will at least ascribe the mention
of them to motives of sincere regard in your friend and humble servant,

T. SELBY.



LETTER XXVIII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

NEW HAVEN.

I go on finely with my amour. I have every encouragement that I could
wish. Indeed my fair one does not verbally declare in my favor; but
then, according to the vulgar proverb, that "_actions speak louder than
words,_" I have no reason to complain; since she evidently approves my
gallantry, is pleased with my company, and listens to my flattery. Her
sagacious friends have undoubtedly given her a detail of my vices. If,
therefore, my past conduct has been repugnant to her notions of
propriety, why does she not act consistently, and refuse at once to
associate with a man whose character she cannot esteem? But no; that,
Charles, is no part of the female plan; our entrapping a few of their
sex only discovers the gayety of our dispositions, the insinuating
graces of our manners, and the irresistible charms of our persons and
address. These qualifications are very alluring to the sprightly fancy
of the fair. They think to enjoy the pleasures which result from this
source, while their vanity and ignorance prompt each one to imagine
herself superior to delusion, and to anticipate the honor of reclaiming
the libertine and reforming the rake. I don't know, however, but this
girl will really have that merit with me; for I am so much attached to
her that I begin to suspect I should sooner become a convert to sobriety
than lose her. I cannot find that I have made much impression on her
heart as yet. Want of success in this point mortifies me extremely, as
it is the first time I ever failed. Besides, I am apprehensive that she
is prepossessed in favor of the other swain, the clerical lover, whom I
have mentioned to you before. The chord, therefore, upon which I play
the most, is the dissimilarity of their dispositions and pleasures. I
endeavor to detach her from him, and disaffect her towards him; knowing
that, if I can separate them entirely, I shall be more likely to succeed
in my plan. Not that I have any thoughts of marrying her myself; that
will not do at present. But I love her too well to see her connected
with another for life. I must own myself a little revengeful, too, in
this affair. I wish to punish her friends, as she calls them, for their
malice towards me, for their cold and negligent treatment of me whenever
I go to the house. I know that to frustrate their designs of a
connection between Mr. Boyer and Eliza would be a grievous
disappointment. I have not yet determined to seduce her, though, with
all her pretensions to virtue, I do not think it impossible. And if I
should, she can blame none but herself, since she knows my character,
and has no reason to wonder if I act consistently with it. If she will
play with a lion, let her beware of his paw, I say. At present, I wish
innocently to enjoy her society; it is a luxury which I never tasted
before. She is the very soul of pleasure. The gayest circle is
irradiated by her presence, and the highest entertainment receives its
greatest charms from her smiles. Besides, I have purchased the seat of
Captain Pribble, about a mile from her mother's; and can I think of
suffering her to leave the neighborhood just as I enter it? I shall
exert every nerve to prevent that, and hope to meet with the usual
success of

PETER SANFORD.



LETTER XXIX.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HARTFORD.

You desire me to write to you, my friend; but if you had not, I should
by no means have refrained. I tremble at the precipice on which you
stand, and must echo and reecho the seasonable admonition of the
excellent Mrs. Richman, "Beware of the delusions of fancy." You are
strangely infatuated by them! Let not the magic arts of that worthless
Sanford lead you, like an _ignis fatuus_, from the path of rectitude and
virtue.

I do not find, in all your conversations with him, that one word about
marriage drops from his lips. This is mysterious. No, it is
characteristic of the man. Suppose, however, that his views are
honorable; yet what can you expect, what can you promise yourself, from
such a connection? "A reformed rake," you say, "makes the best
husband"--a trite, but a very erroneous maxim, as the fatal experience
of thousands of our sex can testify. In the first place, I believe that
rakes very seldom _do_ reform while their fortunes and constitutions
enable them to pursue their licentious pleasures. But even allowing this
to happen; can a woman of refinement and delicacy enjoy the society of a
man whose mind has been corrupted, whose taste has been vitiated, and
who has contracted a depravity, both of sentiment and manners, which no
degree of repentance can wholly efface? Besides, of true love they are
absolutely incapable. Their passions have been much too hackneyed to
admit so pure a flame. You cannot anticipate sincere and lasting respect
from them. They have been so long accustomed to the company of those of
our sex who deserve no esteem, that the greatest dignity and purity of
character can never excite it in their breasts. They are naturally prone
to jealousy. Habituated to an intercourse with the baser part of the
sex, they level the whole, and seldom believe any to be incorruptible.
They are always hardhearted and cruel. How else could they triumph in
the miseries which they frequently occasion? Their specious manners may
render them agreeable companions abroad, but at home the evil
propensities of their minds will invariably predominate. They are
steeled against the tender affections which render domestic life
delightful; strangers to the kind, the endearing sympathies of husband,
father, and friend. The thousand nameless attentions which soften the
rugged path of life are neglected, and deemed unworthy of notice, by
persons who have been inured to scenes of dissipation and debauchery.
And is a man of this description to be the partner, the companion, the
bosom friend of my Eliza? Forbid it, Heaven! Let not the noble qualities
so lavishly bestowed upon her be thus unworthily sacrificed!

You seem to be particularly charmed with the fortune of Major Sanford,
with the gayety of his appearance, with the splendor of his equipage,
with the politeness of his manners, with what you call the graces of
his person. These, alas! are superficial, insnaring endowments. As to
fortune, prudence, economy, and regularity are necessary to preserve it
when possessed. Of these Major Sanford is certainly destitute--unless
common fame (which more frequently tells the truth than some are willing
to allow) does him great injustice. As to external parade, it will not
satisfy the rational mind when it aspires to those substantial pleasures
for which yours is formed. And as to the graces of person and manners,
they are but a wretched substitute for those virtues which adorn and
dignify human life. Can you, who have always been used to serenity and
order in a family, to rational, refined, and improving conversation,
relinquish them, and launch into the whirlpool of frivolity, where the
correct taste and the delicate sensibility which you possess must
constantly be wounded by the frothy and illiberal sallies of licentious
wit?

This, my dear, is but a faint picture of the situation to which you seem
inclined. Reverse the scene, and you will perceive the alternative which
is submitted to your option in a virtuous connection with Mr. Boyer.
Remember that you are acting for life, and that your happiness in this
world, perhaps in the next, depends on your present choice.

I called last evening to see your mamma. She is fondly anticipating
your return, and rejoicing in the prospect of your agreeable and speedy
settlement. I could not find it in my heart to distress her by
intimating that you had other views. I wish her benevolent bosom
nevermore to feel the pangs of disappointed hope.

I am busily engaged in preparing for my nuptials. The solemn words, "As
long as ye both shall live," render me thoughtful and serious. I hope
for your enlivening presence soon, which will prove a seasonable cordial
to the spirits of your

LUCY FREEMAN.



LETTER XXX.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

I believe your spirits need a cordial indeed, my dear Lucy, after
drawing so dreadful a portrait of my swain. But I call him mine no
longer. I renounce him entirely. My friends shall be gratified; and if
their predictions are verified, I shall be happy in a union with a man
of their choice. General Richman and lady have labored abundantly to
prove that my ruin was inevitable if I did not immediately break all
intercourse with Major Sanford. I promised a compliance with their
wishes, and have accomplished the task, though a hard one I found it.
Last Thursday he was here, and desired leave to spend an hour with me. I
readily consented, assuring my friends it should be the last hour which
I would ever spend in his company.

He told me that he was obliged to leave town for a few days; and as I
should probably see Mr. Boyer before his return, he could not depart in
peace without once more endeavoring to interest me in his favor, to
obtain some token of esteem, some glimpse of hope that I would not
utterly reject him, to support him in his absence. I thanked him for the
polite attention he had paid me since our acquaintance, told him that I
should ever retain a grateful sense of his partiality to me, that he
would ever share my best wishes, but that all connection of the kind to
which he alluded must from that time forever cease.

He exerted all his eloquence to obtain a retraction of that sentence,
and ran with the greatest volubility through all the protestations,
prayers, entreaties, professions, and assurances which love could feel
or art contrive. I had resolution, however, to resist them, and to
command my own emotions on the occasion better than my natural
sensibility gave me reason to expect.

Finding every effort vain, he rose precipitately, and bade me adieu. I
urged his tarrying to tea; but he declined, saying that he must retire
to his chamber, being, in his present state of mind, unfit for any
society, as he was banished from mine. I offered him my hand, which he
pressed with ardor to his lips, and, bowing in silence, left the room.

Thus terminated this affair--an affair which, perhaps, was only the
effect of mere gallantry on his part, and of unmeaning pleasantry on
mine, and which, I am sorry to say, has given my friends so much anxiety
and concern. I am under obligations to them for their kind solicitude,
however causeless it may have been.

As an agreeable companion, as a polite and finished gallant, Major
Sanford is all that the most lively fancy could wish. And as you have
always affirmed that I was a little inclined to coquetry, can you wonder
at my exercising it upon so happy a subject? Besides, when I thought
more seriously, his liberal fortune was extremely alluring to me, who,
you know, have been hitherto confined to the rigid rules of prudence and
economy, not to say necessity, in my finances.

Miss Lawrence called on me yesterday, as she was taking the air, and
asked me whether Major Sanford took leave of me when he left town. "He
was here last week," said I, "but I did not know that he was gone away."
"O, yes," she replied, "he is gone to take possession of his seat which
he has lately purchased of Captain Pribble. I am told it is superb; and
it ought to be, if it has the honor of his residence." "Then you have a
great opinion of Major Sanford," said I. "Certainly; and has not every
body else?" said she. "I am sure he is a very fine gentleman." Mrs.
Richman smiled rather contemptuously, and I changed the subject. I
believe that the innocent heart of this simple girl is a little taken
in.

I have just received a letter from Mr. Boyer in the usual style. He
expects the superlative happiness of kissing my hand next week. O, dear!
I believe I must begin to fix my phiz. Let me run to the glass, and try
if I can make up one that will look _madamish_. Yes, I succeeded very
well.

I congratulate you on your new neighbor; but I advise friend George to
have the Gordian knot tied immediately, lest you should be insnared by
this bewitching squire.

I have been trying to seduce General Richman to accompany me to the
assembly this evening, but cannot prevail. Were Mrs. Richman able to go
with us, he would be very happy to wait on us together; but, to tell the
truth, he had rather enjoy her company at home than any which is to be
found abroad. I rallied him on his old-fashioned taste, but my heart
approved and applauded his attachment. I despise the married man or
woman who harbors an inclination to partake of separate pleasures.

I am told that a servant man inquires for me below--the messenger of
some enamoured swain, I suppose. I will step down and learn what message
he brings.

Nothing extraordinary; it is only a card of compliments from a Mr.
Emmons, a respectable merchant of this city, requesting the honor to
wait on me to the assembly this evening--a welcome request, which I made
no hesitation to grant. If I must resign these favorite amusements, let
me enjoy as large a share as possible till the time arrives. I must
repair to the toilet, and adorn for a new conquest the person of

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XXXI.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

HARTFORD.

I am very happy to find you are in so good spirits, Eliza, after parting
with your favorite swain; for I perceive that he is really the favorite
of your fancy, though your heart cannot esteem him; and, independent of
that, no sensations can be durable.

I can tell you some news of this strange man. He has arrived, and taken
possession of his seat. Having given general invitations, he has been
called upon and welcomed by most of the neighboring gentry. Yesterday he
made an elegant entertainment. Friend George (as you call him) and I
were of the number who had cards. Twenty-one couple went, I am told. We
did not go. I consider my time too valuable to be spent in cultivating
acquaintance with a person from whom neither pleasure nor improvement is
to be expected. His profuseness may bribe the unthinking multitude to
show him respect; but he must know that, though

  "Places and honors have been bought for gold,
  Esteem and love were never to be sold."

I look upon the vicious habits and abandoned character of Major Sanford
to have more pernicious effects on society than the perpetrations of the
robber and the assassin. These, when detected, are rigidly punished by
the laws of the land. If their lives be spared, they are shunned by
society, and treated with every mark of disapprobation and contempt.
But, to the disgrace of humanity and virtue, the assassin of honor, the
wretch who breaks the peace of families, who robs virgin innocence of
its charms, who triumphs over the ill-placed confidence of the
inexperienced, unsuspecting, and too credulous fair, is received and
caressed, not only by his own sex, to which he is a reproach, but even
by ours, who have every conceivable reason to despise and avoid him.
Influenced by these principles, I am neither ashamed nor afraid openly
to avow my sentiments of this man, and my reasons for treating him with
the most pointed neglect.

I write warmly on the subject; for it is a subject in which I think the
honor and happiness of my sex concerned. I wish they would more
generally espouse their own cause. It would conduce to the public, weal,
and to their personal respectability. I rejoice, heartily, that you have
had resolution to resist his allurements, to detect and repel his
artifices. Resolution in such a case is absolutely necessary; for,

  "In spite of all the virtue we can boast,
  The woman that deliberates is lost."

As I was riding out yesterday I met your mamma. She wondered that I was
not one of the party at our new neighbor's. "The reason, madam," said I,
"is, that I do not like the character of the man." "I know nothing of
him," said she; "he is quite a stranger to me, only as he called at my
house last week to pay me his respects, as he said, for the sake of my
late husband, whose memory he revered, and because I was the mother of
Miss Eliza Wharton, with whom he had the honor of some little
acquaintance. His manners are engaging, and I am sorry to hear that his
morals are corrupt."

This, my dear, is a very extraordinary visit. I fear that he has not yet
laid aside his arts. Be still on your guard, is the advice of your
sincere and faithful friend,

LUCY FREEMAN.



LETTER XXXII.

TO MR. CHARLES DEIGHTON.

HARTFORD.

I am really banished and rejected--desired nevermore to think of the
girl I love with a view of indulging that love or of rendering it
acceptable to its object. You will perhaps dispute the propriety of the
term, and tell me it is not love--it is only gallantry, and a desire to
exercise it with her as a favorite nymph. I neither know nor care by
what appellation you distinguish it; but it truly gives me pain. I have
not felt one sensation of genuine pleasure since I heard my sentence;
yet I acquiesced in it, and submissively took my leave; though I doubt
not but I shall retaliate the indignity one time or other.

I have taken possession of my new purchase--an elegant and delightful
residence. It is rendered more so by being in the vicinity of my
charmer's native abode. This circumstance will conduce much to my
enjoyment, if I can succeed in my plan of separating her from Mr. Boyer.
I know that my situation and mode of life are far more pleasing to her
than his, and shall therefore trust to my appearance and address for a
reestablishment in her favor. I intend, if possible, to ingratiate
myself with her particular friends. For this purpose I called last week
at her mother's to pay my respects to her (so I told the good woman) as
an object of my particular regard, and as the parent of a young lady
whom I had the honor to know and admire. She received me very civilly,
thanked me for my attention, and invited me to call whenever I had
opportunity; which was the very thing I wanted. I intend, likewise, to
court popularity. I don't know but I must accept, by and by, some
lucrative office in the civil department; yet I cannot bear the idea of
confinement to business. It appears to me quite inconsistent with the
character of a gentleman; I am sure it is with that of a man of
pleasure. But something I must do; for I tell you, in confidence, that I
was obliged to mortgage this place because I had not wherewithal to pay
for it. But I shall manage matters very well, I have no doubt, and keep
up the appearance of affluence till I find some lady in a strait for a
husband whose fortune will enable me to extricate myself from these
embarrassments. Do come and see me, Charles; for, notwithstanding all my
gayety and parade, I have some turns of the hypo, some qualms of
conscience, you will call them; but I meddle not with such obsolete
words. And so good by to you, says

PETER SANFORD.



LETTER XXXIII.

TO MISS LUCY FREEMAN.

NEW HAVEN.

My dear friend: I believe I must begin to assume airs of gravity; and
they will not be quite so foreign to my feelings now as at some other
times. You shall know the reason. I have been associated for three days
with sentiment and sobriety in the person of Mr. Boyer. I don't know but
this man will seduce me into matrimony. He is very eloquent upon the
subject; and his manners are so solemn that I am strongly tempted--yet I
dare not--to laugh. Really, Lucy, there is something extremely engaging,
and soothing, too, in virtuous and refined conversation. It is a source
of enjoyment which cannot be realized by the dissolute and unreflecting.
But then this particular theme of his is not a favorite one to me; I
mean as connected with its consequences--care and confinement. However,
I have compounded the matter with him, and conditioned that he shall
expatiate on the subject, and call it by what name he pleases,
_platonic_ or _conjugal_, provided he will let me take my own time for
the consummation. I have consented that he shall escort me next week to
see my mamma and my Lucy. O, how the idea of returning to that revered
mansion, to those beloved friends, exhilarates my spirits!

General Richman's politeness to me has induced him to invite a large
party of those gentlemen and ladies who have been particularly attentive
to me during my residence here to dine and take tea to-morrow. After
that, I expect to be engaged in making farewell visits till I leave the
place. I shall, therefore, forego the pleasure of telling you any
occurrences subsequent to this date until you see and converse with your
sincere friend,

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XXXIV.

TO MRS. RICHMAN.

HARTFORD.

Dear madam: The day after I left your hospitable dwelling brought me
safe to that of my honored mamma; to the seat of maternal and filial
affection; of social ease and domestic peace; of every species of
happiness which can result from religion and virtue, from refinement in
morals and manners.

I found my brother and his wife, with Lucy Freeman and Mr. Sumner,
waiting to receive and bid me welcome. I flew with ecstasy to the bosom
of my mamma, who received me with her accustomed affection, testified by
the expressive tears of tenderness which stole silently down her widowed
cheek. She was unable to speak. I was equally so. We therefore indulged
a moment the pleasing emotions of sympathizing sensibility. When
disengaged from her fond embrace, I was saluted by the others in turn;
and, having recovered myself, I presented Mr. Boyer to each of the
company, and each of the company to him. He was cordially received by
all, but more especially by my mamma.

The next day I was called upon and welcomed by several of my neighboring
acquaintance; among whom I was not a little surprised to see Major
Sanford. He came in company with Mr. Stoddard and lady, whom he
overtook, as he told me, near by; and, as they informed him that the
design of their visit was to welcome me home, he readily accepted their
invitation to partake of the pleasure which every one must receive on my
return. I bowed slightly at his compliment, taking no visible notice of
any peculiarity of expression either in his words or looks.

His politeness to Mr. Boyer appeared to be the result of habit; Mr.
Boyer's to him to be forced by respect to the company to which he had
gained admission. I dare say that each felt a conscious superiority--the
one on the score of merit, the other on that of fortune. Which ought to
outweigh the judicious mind will easily decide. The scale, as I once
observed to you, will turn as fancy or reason preponderates. I believe
the esteem which I now have for Mr. Boyer will keep me steady; except,
perhaps, some little eccentricities now and then, just by way of
variety. I am going to-morrow morning to spend a few days with Lucy
Freeman, to assist in the preparation for, and the solemnization of, her
nuptials. Mr. Boyer, in the mean time, will tarry among his friends in
town. My mamma is excessively partial to him, though I am not yet
jealous that she means to rival me. I am not certain, however, but it
might be happy for him if she should; for I suspect, not withstanding
the disparity of her age, that she is better calculated to make him a
good wife than I am or ever shall be.

But to be sober. Please, madam, to make my compliments acceptable to
those of your neighbors, whose politeness and attention to me while at
your house have laid me under particular obligations of gratitude and
respect. My best regards attend General Richman. Pray tell him that,
though I never expect to be so good a wife as he is blessed with, yet I
intend, after a while, (when I have sowed all my wild oats,) to make a
tolerable one.

I am anxious to hear of a wished-for event, and of your safety. All who
know you feel interested in your health and happiness, but none more
warmly than your obliged and affectionate

ELIZA WHARTON.



LETTER XXXV.

TO MISS ELIZA WHARTON.

NEW HAVEN.

I write a line, at Mrs. Richman's request, just to inform you, Eliza,
that, yesterday, that lovely and beloved woman presented me with a
daughter. This event awakens new sensations in my mind, and calls into
exercise a kind of affection which had before lain dormant. I feel
already the tenderness of a parent, while imagination fondly traces the
mother's likeness in the infant form. Mrs. Richman expects to receive
your congratulations in a letter by the next post. She bids me tell
you, moreover, that she hopes soon to receive an invitation, and be able
to attend, to the consummation you talk of. Give Mrs. Richman's and my
particular regards to your excellent mother and to the worthy Mr. Boyer.
With sentiments of esteem and friendship, I am, &c.,

S. RICHMAN.



LETTER XXXVI.

TO MRS. RICHMAN.

HARTFORD.

From the scenes of festive mirth, from the conviviality of rejoicing
friends, and from the dissipating amusements of the gay world, I retire
with alacrity, to hail my beloved friend on the important charge which
she has received; on the accession to her family, and, may I not say, on
the addition to her care? since that care will be more than
counterbalanced by the pleasure it confers. Hail, happy babe! ushered
into the world by the best of mothers; entitled by birthright to virtue
and honor; defended by parental love from the weakness of infancy and
childhood, by guardian wisdom from the perils of youth, and by affluent
independence from the griping hand of poverty in more advanced life! May
these animating prospects be realized by your little daughter, and may
you long enjoy the rich reward of seeing her all that you wish.

Yesterday, my dear friend, Lucy Freeman, gave her hand to the amiable
and accomplished Mr. George Sumner. A large circle of congratulating
friends were present. Her dress was such as wealth and elegance
required. Her deportment was every thing that modesty and propriety
could suggest. They are, indeed, a charming couple. The consonance of
their dispositions, the similarity of their tastes, and the equality of
their ages are a sure pledge of happiness. Every eye beamed with
pleasure on the occasion, and every tongue echoed the wishes of
benevolence. Mine only was silent. Though not less interested in the
felicity of my friend than the rest, yet the idea of a separation,
perhaps of an alienation of affection, by means of her entire devotion
to another, cast an involuntary gloom over my mind. Mr. Boyer took my
hand after the ceremony was past. "Permit me, Miss Wharton," said he,
"to lead you to your lovely friend; her happiness must be heightened by
your participation of it." "O, no," said I, "I am too selfish for that.
She has conferred upon another that affection which I wished to engross.
My love was too fervent to admit a rival." "Retaliate, then," said he,
"this fancied wrong by doing likewise." I observed that this was not a
proper time to discuss that subject, and, resuming my seat, endeavored
to put on the appearance of my accustomed vivacity. I need not relate
the remaining particulars of-the evening's entertainment. Mr. Boyer
returned with my mamma, and I remained at Mrs. Freeman's.

We are to have a ball here this evening. Mr. Boyer has been with us, and
tried to monopolize my company; but in vain. I am too much engaged by
the exhilarating scenes around for attending to a subject which affords
no variety. I shall not close this till to-morrow.

I am rather fatigued with the amusements of last night, which were
protracted to a late hour. Mr. Boyer was present; and I was pleased to
see him not averse to the entertainment, though his profession prevented
him from taking an active part. As all the neighboring gentry were
invited, Mr. Freeman would by no means omit Major Sanford, which his
daughter earnestly solicited. It happened (unfortunately, shall I say?)
that I drew him for a partner. Yet I must own that I felt very little
reluctance to my lot. He is an excellent dancer, and well calculated for
a companion in the hours of mirth and gayety. I regretted Mr. Boyer's
being present, however, because my enjoyment seemed to give him pain. I
hope he is not inclined to the passion of jealousy. If he is, I fear it
will be somewhat exercised.

Lucy Freeman, now Mrs. Sumner, removes next week to Boston. I have
agreed to accompany her, and spend a month or two in her family. This
will give variety to the journey of life. Be so kind as to direct your
next letter to me there.

Kiss the dear little babe for me. Give love, compliments, &c., as
respectively due; and believe me, with every sentiment of respect, your
affectionate

ELIZA WHARTON.



