{"name": "Book 1, Chapter 30", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419213154/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/little-dorrit/summary/book-1-chapter-30", "summary": "Blandois recognizes Flintwinch and is floored to see him. Flintwinch has no idea what's going on and starts choking Affery. After a little while, Blandois interrupts and kind of laughs off the domestic abuse, basically saying that Flintwinch puts the fun in dysfunctional. In any case, Blandois has a letter of introduction from a company in Paris that's well known to Clennam & Co. This is basically how international banking was done back in the day. Now Blandois can withdraw money from Clennam & Co. with the understanding that the Paris bank will pay them back. Blandois asks for an inn to go freshen up in before meeting Mrs. Clennam. Flintwinch is sort of at a loss, since Blandois seems to be a gentleman and there are no fancy places anywhere in the neighborhood, but Blandois says he's fine anywhere. He eats alone and does a weird self-talk to psych himself up. After dinner Blandois comes back and goes upstairs. Mrs. Clennam is waiting for him with some tea. They are clearly thinking he's some kind of reasonably important customer or client. There's some small talk. Blandois is charming and terrifying at the same time. Mrs. Clennam is her usual half-catatonic self. Suddenly Blandois notices the watch that Mr. Clennam left Mrs. Clennam. It turns out the watch is engraved \"D.N.F.\" which stands for \"Do Not Forget,\" according to Mrs. Clennam. She goes off on a tirade about how she will never forget and how she lives her life just waiting to die and get to heaven. She thinks she's a shoo-in. Finally Blandois is ready to go, but first he asks for a tour of the house. This is bizarre, since it's just an old dump, but Flintwinch takes him around. It turns out, though, that Blandois is mostly just looking at Flintwinch and not the house itself. After the tour, Blandois invites Flintwinch for a drink, but as drunk as the two get, it's impossible to get any information out of Flintwinch. Finally Blandois says good night and promises that he'll be back. Terminator-style.", "analysis": ""}