{"name": "act 1, Scene 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180414055342/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-spanish-tragedy/study-guide/summary-act-1", "summary": "The scene shifts to Portugal, where the Viceroy laments his misfortune in front of two noblemen, Alexandro and Villuppo. After confirming that an ambassador has been sent to Spain with the required tribute, the Viceroy prostrates himself on the ground. This way, he declares, his fortunes can no fall no further. The Viceroy continues to grieve over his misfortunes and in particular over the loss of his son - if only he himself could have been killed, instead of Balthazar. Alexandro hastens to inform the King that his son is most likely still alive: the prince has been taken prisoner, and his ransom will probably assure his life. Villuppo, however, tells a different tale. After insuring against the King's wrath for being the messenger of bad news, Villuppo claims that he saw Balthazar engaged in battle with the Spanish General, whereupon Alexandro shot the prince in the back. Despite Alexandro's vehement protest, the Viceroy is inclined to believe Villuppo. His nightly dreams, the Viceroy says, have confirmed Villuppo's claim that the Spanish dragged Balthazar's body to their tents. The Viceroy thus turns to Alexandro and accuses him of treachery, speculating that he was blinded by either the Spanish gold or his eventual claim to the throne. The Viceroy takes his crown off and puts it on again, declaring that he will wear it until Alexandro's blood has been spilled. He sends Alexandro to prison and promises Villuppo a reward. The latter delivers a short soliloquy to conclude the scene, revealing desire for a reward as his motive for treachery", "analysis": "F. S. Boas believes that \"few passages in Elizabethan literature were so often quoted and caricatured\" as the opening lines of The Spanish Tragedy : When this eternal substance of my soul  Did live imprison'd in my wanton flesh,  Each in their function serving other's need,  I was a courtier in the Spanish court:  My name was Don Andrea. \"Caricatured\" is a misleading word.  As Arthur Freeman suggests, the parodies may be akin to the innumerable burlesques on Hamlet's famous \"To be or not to be\" .  The corollary of such a parallel is that Kyd's opening lines may reflect a profound truth about human existence.  In the world of the play, at least, the soul and the flesh exist as separate entities, each dependant on the other.  Though the soul may be eternal, it cannot escape the prison of the flesh.  The two exist therefore in a sort of mutualism, but one in which conflicts certainly arise: the passions of the \"wanton flesh\" may at times lead the soul in undesirable directions. The descent into the underworld narrated by the Ghost of Andrea recalls that of Aeneas's descent in Book VI of Virgil's Aeneid.  It is noteworthy, however, that Revenge takes the Ghost through the gates of horn.  The gates refer to the following famous passage in the Aeneid: There are two gates of Sleep, one said to be  Of horn, whereby the true shades pass with ease,  The other all white ivory agleam  Without a flaw, and yet false dreams are sent  Through this one by the ghosts to the upper world. Aeneas passes through the ivory gates of \"false dreams.\"  What does it mean, then, for the Ghost to have come through the gates of horn? The question seems to be intimately bound up with the \"theatricality\" of the main play.  In other words, the Ghost and Revenge sit down to watch a play that unfolds before their eyes.  While the exposition progresses from the second to the fifth scene, they are spectators invisible to the characters as well as to the audience.  But as spectators, they also walk on the same stage as the characters in the first and last scene of the act.  To complicate matters further, Revenge indicates that he has foresight as well as control over the events of the play.  All of this is suggestive of a parallel between the actual audience and the two spectators.  The audience, after all, could potentially fulfill the roles of Ghost and Revenge - as actors, a playwright, or simply one who knows how the play will end.  The gates of horn, then, may attest to the proximity of the play to reality - at least in a symbolic sense. It is not clear, however, whether an objective \"reality\" can exist even in the world of The Spanish Tragedy.  The events surrounding Balthazar in the battle, for example, are hopelessly confused in the opening act.  The Lord General tells a poetic but vague story of a \"single fight\" between Horatio and Balthazar; both Horatio and Lorenzo each tell a version that contradicts the General's version, and in Portugal Villuppo invents an entirely different version altogether.  When recounting the turn of events to Bellimperia, furthermore, Horatio claims that the goddess Nemesis granted divine aid to Balthazar in defeating Andrea.  Perhaps it makes the most sense to first follow the General's version, and then to assume that Lorenzo and Horatio both fought Balthazar.  But it may also be a mistake to believe that everything should make sense. In a play that's premise is a seemingly whimsical decision passed by the Queen of Hades, the plot may not necessarily follow a clear linear progression.  The existence of a \"higher\"  order finds a loose parallel in Hieronimo's masque.  The Marshall pleases both his king and the Portuguese ambassador by showing that both of their countries have been previously conquered by English forces .  History, in a large sense, is composed of small stories.  With such a perspective, neither Spain nor Portugal should worry about the recent battle.  But this larger history usually remains inaccessible; the King \"sound not well the mystery\" until Hieronimo explains the significance of the masque.  Plays-within-plays, most of them simply dumb shows, will be important throughout the play. In light of the above, the world of The Spanish Tragedy becomes unstable and volatile.  The King, who so spontaneously rewards the General with a chain, does not quite know how to deal with Horatio and Lorenzo.  Before issuing an awkward partition of their reward for capturing Balthazar, he must first reaffirm his authority: \"Will both abide the censure of my doom\"?  Across the border, the Portuguese Viceroy finds himself on even more unstable sands.  The evidence that inspires him to believe Villuppo's story instead of Alexandro's is nothing but his oneiric visions.  And his dreams, as the audience perceives, are simply false.  Moreover, his interpretation of the vision as confirming Villuppo's accusation remains entirely whimsical.  Or perhaps not only does \"evil news fly faster still than good\"; it also flies with more credibility.  In any case, the Viceroy undermines his own authority in the opening act of the play.  This is symbolically reflected in his removal of the crown - which he immediately puts back on.  The sovereign who abdicates his own power, if such a thing is possible, should not have the authority to take back the same sovereignty. The exposition, then, has set up an explosive potential for murder, hate, and revenge, coupled with love.  With Bellimperia, love and revenge will merge together in a sub-plot surrounding Horatio.  The action of the play, however, has just only begun.  As the Ghost duly notes, the promised death of Balthazar is still nowhere in sight. But Revenge promises much more than his initial statement - indeed, a massively chaotic event that will turn the order of things upside down."}