{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 16", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-21", "summary": "The next day, Emma is miserable that she was so deceived by Mr. Elton that she failed to recognize his true motives. She realizes that the situation is entirely her fault because she tried to meddle in Harriet's and Mr. Elton's affairs. Mr. Knightley, despite the inclement weather, visits Hartfield that Christmas day.", "analysis": "Emma is upset about Mr. Elton's behavior towards her for several reasons. The first and most obvious reason is that it humiliates Harriet, and Emma has the burden of telling Harriet that Mr. Elton never had the slightest interest in her. The second relates to Mr. Elton's motives for pursuing Emma. Among Emma's objections to Mr. Elton is the fact that his devotion to her is largely fiscal. He so desperately wants to move up in society and perceives marriage to Emma as the ideal opportunity. Emma is also insulted that a person of Mr. Elton's social status would consider himself fit for her. This demonstrates some arrogance, for Mr. Elton is too low for Emma but good enough for her close friend. She dismisses Mr. Elton because he does not come from a reputable family, the same reason that he rejects Harriet Smith. Also, the qualities that Emma finds objectionable in Mr. Elton he is \"proud, assuming, conceited; very full of his own claims\" are the very qualities that she instills in Harriet. Still, even Austen makes some distinction between what Mr. Elton does and what Emma attempts to do for Harriet. Mr. Elton uses Harriet's attentions to get to Emma and behaves with no sense of polite manners. Emma, Harriet and Mr. Elton may have the same reasons for pursuing and rejecting suitors, but the two women behave with tact, while Mr. Elton is manipulative and rude. Yet another reason why Emma is upset is that her plans go awry. Emma wishes everything to be orderly, and in this situation nothing has gone as she planned. Nevertheless, she shows some newfound signs of maturity. She accepts the blame for the situation and realizes that she erred. She also concedes that both Mr. Knightley and his brother were correct in their appraisal of the situation"}