{"name": "book 2, Chapter 5", "summary": "Chapter 5: So Be It. So Be It. Alyosha follows Zosima back to his cell, where Ivan and the monks are debating Ivan's article about ecclesiastical courts. Miusov, who considers himself a political intellectual, continually tries to join the argument, but the other men, caught up in their own discussion, generally ignore him. Miusov, already aggravated by Fyodor Pavlovich's taunting, becomes almost unbearably irritated. Ivan explains that he does not believe in the separation of the church and state. He believes that the church should subsume the state, so that religious authorities administer laws, and ecclesiastical courts handle the judicial process. Miusov tries to interject that this situation would be \"sheer Ultramontanism,\" meaning that Ivan's proposal would create a situation in which the pope would have absolute power. The word Ultramontanism refers to the fact that Rome, the seat of the papacy of the Catholic Church, is literally \"beyond the mountains\" from Russia and the Orthodox Church. The other men ignore Miusov. Ivan insists that if the only courts were ecclesiastical courts, the very notion of crime would slowly change. People would be much less likely to commit crimes in the first place, he argues, because they would know that in doing so, they would be acting not merely against a government or a state, but against God. Zosima, to the surprise of some of the others in the room, agrees with Ivan's analysis. He argues, however, that the only real power capable of punishing crime is conscience. He says that because the church knows that each individual's moral sense is the real authority, the church chooses not to become involved in the state's administration of justice. The men become so embroiled in their debate that they forget about Dmitri's lateness, and when he suddenly bursts in through the door, they are slightly surprised to see him", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210305110438/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/brothersk/section3/"}