{"name": "Chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820041120/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmDracula14.asp", "summary": "A paper cutting of a news column is pasted on Minas journal. It reports of a great storm, which struck the seas. A foreign schooner with all sails set docked in the storm almost unscrewed. A strange fog set in which prevented any clear sight. As the fog melted in the light of a searchlight a corpse was sighted in the ship. On August 9, Mina records that the ship is Russian, and from Varna, a dog was sighted making its way from it. Later, it was found dead, its throat torn away and its belly slit. In the log of Demeter, the captain records, which Mina is very kindly allowed to see, tells about the crew being dissatisfied, about sighting a strange tall man, the mysterious disappearance of two men and then the captains record of being the sole man on board. He ties his hands to the wheel and then he dies. The verdict given on the strange happening is misadventure. In the meantime, Mina continues her journal. She talks about Lucy being restless and trying to get out in the night dressed twice. Mina without waking her puts her back to sleep. On August 10, the funeral of the captain of the Russian ship takes place. The old man, who Mina met earlier, is dead, his neck mysteriously broken.", "analysis": "Notes This chapter tells about a strange ship. Again the author has strange ship. Again the author has deliberately digressed from the point what connection does a ship have with Dracula until an obscure statement of a tall thin man comes to the fore. Of course it is Dracula who has preyed on the ship. His abilities, as a super- villain, again are evident. He can turn himself into a fog or a mist or a dog or a wolf. He can change himself. The Count has landed in England and the meaning of those odd rings on the map of England on the atlas is now evident. Lucy too is behaving very strangely, nothing too obvious yet in anticipation. After the climax of the first four chapters, one starts thinking on the lines of \"vampire.\""}