{"name": "Chapter 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820041120/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmDracula11.asp", "summary": "Jonathan Harkers journal continues to record the events. He finds himself in his own bed. The Count has carried him back and undressed him. Luckily his diary has not been found. On May 18, he wants to check Count Draculas door but the door is fastened from inside 19th May. The Count has asked Jonathan to write three letters. One saying that his work was nearly done he was returning home within a few days. Another, that he was starting for home the very next morning, and the third, he has left the castle and has arrived at Bistritz. The first is dated June 12, the second June 19 and the third June 29. Jonathan realizes that his life is short. On May 28, he believes there is a chance of escape, as he sees a band of gypsies. He writes letters to Mina and Mr. Hawkins, and he gives the letters to the gypsies with a gold piece. The gypsies treacherously give the letter to the Count. The Count burns Minas letter because it is in short hand and burns the envelope of the other. On May 31, all the envelopes and the papers are taken from Jonathans bag. On June 17, Jonathan realizes that his door has been locked from outside. June 24, before morning Jonathan is horrified to see the Count in his clothes. He realizes that the Count wants the others to think that Jonathan has left. Jonathan realizes that he is trapped. A couple of hours later, he hears a wail and though he sees a woman, who begs for her child. The Count gives a whistle and a pack of wolves appear and take away the woman. On June 25, Jonathan decides to take a risk. He goes to the window to the South-side and climbs on the ledge and stands on a narrow ledge. From there he tries to enter the Counts room to find it empty. In a corner he finds a heap of gold which is very old. There is heavy door, which leads to a ruined chapel, evidently being used as a graveyard. He finds old coffins. He opens the coffins and finds the Count in it. Scared Jonathan runs away. On June 29, the Count tells Jonathan that this is his last day. Jonathan realizes that he will be killed. On June 30, Jonathan goes back to the Counts room to the coffin. He hits the Count with a shovel. He rushes out and decides to jump down.", "analysis": "Notes This is one of the most important chapters amongst the chapters 1 - 4. This chapter keeps the reader hanging in exasperated anticipation about the fate of Jonathan Harker. One is not sure whether he is dead or alive. Dracula has already spelt out what would happen to him on the 30th June. Firstly, he would be feasted on by Dracula, and the three women would suck on his blood. Secondly, if he tries to escape, wolves would devour him in a pack. Thirdly, Jonathan could jump from the castle ledge and seek the mercy of God, for he feels it was better if he dies and becomes Gods soul, rather than being a member of the Un-dead. In this chapter, each of the days, which Dracula dictates to him, is carefully described in the minutest of details. Each aspect dimension and description is very painstakingly done. Jonathan, the hero, is panicky and petrified, but his sharp lawyer-brain makes him record each moment in his diary. Dracula comes across as a very careful and shrewd man in this chapter. Firstly, he asks Jonathan to write three letters so that through Jonathans letters it can be surmised that he has left the castle. Secondly, he has got the gypsies so terrified that they almost immediately give him the letter Jonathan has tried to smuggle out to Mina. Thirdly, his civil urbanity has not dipped even a little as he destroys Minas letter in front of Jonathan ever so politely. Fourthly, he wears Jonathans suit on the June 17 as if to infer that Jonathan has left the castle. All this careful detailed planning, barring the diary being found out, show a conniving man, careful and shrewd, trying not to leave a trace of evidence. In this chapter, one realizes that Dracula has been living through the ages sucking blood of innumerable people and gathering immense wealth so that he can continue throughout the generations. He is finally exterminated in the last chapter of this book by the band of men, who will meet in the ensuing chapters."}