{"name": "Chapter 6", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820041120/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmDracula13.asp", "summary": "This chapter begins with Mina recording entries in her journal. On July 24, she goes to meet Lucy at her place in Whitby, which is a very picturesque place near a little river, the Esk. She meets an old man who brushes off her queries of bells at sea and the White Lady. On August 1, Mina and Lucy meet some old people who sermonize about the Day of Judgment and the dead. Lucy tells Mina later on about her forthcoming marriage with Arthur. Mina misses Jonathan, whom she has not heard from for a month. She is worried about him. Dr. Seaward records in his diary, dated 5th June about Renfield, who loves animals. Dr. Seward asks him to clear the flies, which he currently was catching. He asks for three days. On the 18 th of June, Dr. Seward records that Renfield is now keeping spiders. The flies diminish. On 1st July Renfield eats a blowfly and this make Dr. Seward realize how Renfield is getting rid of his pets. Dr. Seward realizes Renfield is a zoophagous a life-eating maniac, which makes Dr. Seward more interested in him. Mina Murrays Journal continues in the meantime, where she is anxious about Lucy who is sleep walking in her sleep and Jonathan who she has not heard about for a long time. Mina, in the end, deviates from her problems and records about a strange Russian ship, which was locked.", "analysis": "Notes There is an entire change of scenario in this chapter. Mina goes to a very lovely village in England called Whitby. She is enchanted by the village but misses Jonathan whom she has not heard of. She has received one of Jonathans letters dictated by Dracula of his return. This chapter also digresses abruptly to Dr. Seward and Renfield. One does not understand its connections. Of course in the following chapters, it becomes clearer about Renfields strange obsession of animals and its connections with Dracula. Again the author digresses about Lucys sleep walking and the Russian ship. Two seemingly unconnected happenings, yet the connection, which becomes clear letter on again, points to Dracula."}