{"name": "Chapter 25", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-24-26", "summary": "Meanwhile, Madame Merle and Countess Gemini's conversation, occurring at the same time as Isabel and Osmond's conversation, is recounted. Countess Gemini declares that she does not approve of Madame Merle's plan. Madame Merle claims that she has no plan, and that she is not calculating. Countess Gemini declares that she will thwart Merle and Osmond's plan, warning Isabel of her brother's character. Merle warns her that this will simply backfire, and Isabel will dislike Gemini. Merle believes that Isabel has already fallen in love with Osmond, after only two meetings. Madame Merle has Pansy make some tea, and Pansy is very eager to please. Merle and Gemini continue the discussion. Countess Gemini asks Merle if she thinks Osmond will make Isabel happy, and Merle responds that he would at least behave like a gentleman. Merle informs the countess that Isabel has seventy thousand pounds, and Countess Gemini responds by saying that it is a pity that such a charming girl needs to be sacrificed", "analysis": "In Chapter 24, Isabel gets an impression of Osmond's home.  Note that she does not see it as so ominous an object as the narrator has previously described the villa.  Rather than seeing it as a house with windows that do not allow communication with the world , Isabel's perspective allows the narrator to briefly remark upon the \"grave\" air of the place, as if one would \"need an act of energy to get out\" of it once inside .  The narrator counterbalances this observation with the remark that Isabel is only thinking about \"advancing\" though, and her thoughts are not nearly so foreboding.  In the previous conversation between Madame Merle and Osmond, the setting has offered a reflection of the atmosphere: something sinister is going on between Madame Merle and Osmond, in this very secluded house.  In this scene however, the signs are ignored, or poorly read.  Notably Isabel herself realizes that she does not know how to read the people and the objects in the house, as the occasion \"signified more than lay on the surface\" for her .  In other words, the narrator is setting up a contrast between a more objective interpretation of the house and Isabel's more interested, ambitious reading of the house.  She wants to see more than lays beyond the surface, she wants to read into the signs, but she believes it is written in a cryptic language.  The narrator's previous description of the house signifies that there is not much more than a superficial shell in this house: that signs do not point to a deeper meaning to be interpreted, but rather everything points to keeping the interpreter mystified through its lack of depth. This kind of deception is a reference to the larger deception that aesthetic objects play on people.  Aesthetics is the analysis of art; it refers to the philosophical question of why we find something beautiful.  So, for example, one can look at a beautiful artistic object and believe that there must be some deeper meaning or some higher \"value\" that is being referred to in it.  One might believe it is a moral value, or an intellectual value, to which the various signs in a painting refer.  Or, we could apply the same question to a novel: why do we read? What makes a book worthy of being read? Does it make us more moral people when we read? Or do we learn some higher truth about life?  We believe that the signs of fiction might point us in a particular direction in life, give us some guidance.  However, by treating aesthetics in the context of a novel, James is hinting at the idea that art is all an illusion.  There is a trick being played: it looks like all the signs refer to some deeper meaning, but in fact, they are creating the illusion of depth by means of blocking the reader from pinning a definite interpretation upon them.  That is what is happening to Isabel here.  She is unable to figure out what values Osmond is referring to, what standards he uses to judge.  But she is still interested because she believes there is a value.  But if Osmond is revealed to be a bad person with no morality and no higher values, then it will show that she has created the illusion of value from her own inability to interpret the signs.  She has tricked herself into believing there is depth, when there is only superficiality. Another theme that is relevant is the relationship between commodities and people.  It is notable that many of Henry James' descriptions of characters end up being a comparison between a person and inanimate objects.  Here, it seems that Osmond, who has so many nice objects and allows their value to all appreciate here in his own home as if they were collector's items, is comparing a woman to a commodity: \"A woman's natural mission is to be where she's most appreciated,\" he says . This is an eerie description of moral value, with an indication that he is actually referring to financial value.  Similarly, Isabel begins to see him as an aesthetic object: a painting with a low-tone. In Chapter 25, we get a sense of what the true motivations of the characters are, beneath their appearances.  There is the mention of money and marriage again: Isabel has seventy thousand pounds.  But it is not quite clear why Madame Merle would be interested in giving Osmond Isabel's fortune through marriage.  What does she have to gain from making this match?  As a first time reader, it would be easy to overlook this chapter as the eccentric worries of Countess Gemini, who has been portrayed as a busybody.  This foreshadows the true nature of Osmond."}