
A PROPOSED FLIGHT FROM THE NEST.


Lady Monroe was right when she said the Athertons would prove true
friends; and it soon became one of Salome's greatest pleasures to get a
quiet talk with Mrs. Atherton. She possessed the power, rare but
beautiful, of influencing others by _herself_, not by her words. She had
remarkably quick insight into character; and she had not known the
Wiltons long before she had, as it were, mastered the situation, and
could enter into the difficulties and trials of each one. She saw that
Salome had the hardest task of all, and she felt for her, with her
dreamy, imaginative temperament, forced, as it were, to take up with the
practical side of daily life, and set herself to help her.

Lady Monroe had postponed the departure to Cannes longer than Dr. Wilton
thought right, till the sudden change from a prolonged St. Luke's summer
to an early and sunless spell of winter brought on Eva's little short
cough, and made her hasten the arrangements for leaving England.

Eva was a spoiled child--or, rather, would have been spoiled, had so
sweet and gentle a nature been capable of "spoiling," in the common
acceptation of the word. Her mother clung to her with the intense love
which springs from the thought that all love and care for our heart's
dearest ones may not be needed long. Eva had taken a sudden and real
liking for Ada Wilton. Her beauty and serenity had a charm for her. She
liked to hear her play and watch her white hands on the piano. She liked
to talk with her and to hear her voice. And so it had come to pass that
Ada was continually sent for to Lady Monroe's house; and when the time
for leaving Roxburgh was definitely arranged, Eva said that nothing
would please her so much or help to pass the winter cheerfully as to
have Ada with her.

Lady Monroe herself had her misgivings. "Ada is so young, and ought to
be going on with education and lessons," she said.

"But she can _have_ lessons, mamma; and think how she will learn to
speak French. And there are drawing-masters and music-masters at Cannes.
Oh, _do_ let us take her; she is so fond of me, mamma, and she is so
lovely and so ladylike."

The feverish glow on Eva's face and the excited light in her eyes made
her mother hesitate before she refused.

"I will consult Dr. Wilton," she said, "and her mother. I hardly know if
it would be right to take her away from her mother; and yet it might be
a relief in some ways. Still it would be an additional anxiety for me;
and you might get tired of her, Eva."

"Tired of her, mamma! Oh no. Think of the many dull, lonely hours I have
to spend, while other girls are playing tennis, and going to picnics,
and dancing, and enjoying themselves. I know I have you, darling
mother," Eva said tenderly; "but if I had a young companion, you would
feel more free to leave me."

"We will see about it, Eva. I must not do anything rashly."

But Lady Monroe lost no time in consulting Dr. Wilton, who gave the plan
unqualified approbation; and then it only remained to get Mrs. Wilton's
leave.

Her note with the proposition came one afternoon when the day had been a
troubled one--the children naughty, and Salome unable to manage them;
Ada still less so; Stevens put out by the inveterate smoking of the
chimney in the little boys' room, where she kept a fire and sat at her
needle-work, and made the room look like the ghost of her old nursery.
Then Mrs. Wilton had been vainly trying to look over accounts. Her head
and eyes ached. The weekly bills when multiplied by fifty-two would
amount to far more than her small income. Raymond had asked for a
sovereign, and how could she refuse him? Reginald had begged for his
football jersey and cap, for which the old Rugby colours were
inadmissible. Rain poured without, and a cold wind penetrated through
every crack and cranny of the house. In fact, the aspect of life was
dark and gloomy; and Mrs. Wilton, fairly exhausted, was just losing
herself in a day-dream by the fire when Ada tripped in with Lady
Monroe's note.

"I expect I know what it is about, mamma; something very, very
delightful for _me_."

"I can't see to read it till the lamp is brought in," Mrs. Wilton said.

"Let me get the lamp, mamma--or ring for it--or poke up a blaze," said
Ada.

It was quite unusual for Ada to exert herself like this; and so Salome
thought, who was reading to Hans and Carl in a low tone by the window,
where the daylight was stronger than by the fire.

Mrs. Wilton yielded to Ada's impatience, and opened the envelope,
holding it towards the bright blaze Ada had brought to life, and
reading by it the large, clear handwriting.

"You know what is in this note, Ada?" Mrs. Wilton said when she had
finished it, and turned back to the first sheet again to assure herself
of the contents.

"I can guess, mother," Ada said, drawing nearer. "Do let me go."

"Go where?" asked Salome, leaving her post by the window and coming
towards the fire,--"go where, Ada?"

Mrs. Wilton gave Lady Monroe's note into Salome's hand. She bent down,
shading her forehead from the heat by her hand, and read:--

     "DEAR MRS. WILTON,--I am writing to ask you a great favour.
     Will you lend your dear Ada to me for the winter? Eva has so
     set her heart on the plan, and has such a real affection for
     your Ada, that I hope you will consent. I need not say that
     she will be to me for the time as my own child, and that I am
     of course answerable for every expense; and I will see that
     she has advantages in the way of music lessons and any others
     that may be available at Cannes. My Eva's life will be
     brightened, and she will feel the privations of her delicate
     health less with a young companion whom she loves. Do not
     refuse me this request. I may add that Dr. Wilton encourages
     me to make it. Our friendship is not a new thing; and when I
     look at Ada, I see again the Emily Bruce of old times.--With
     kindest love, I am ever affectionately yours,

                                           "KATHARINE MONROE."

"Do you wish to go, Ada?" Salome asked.

"Wish? Oh, I shall like it so much! I think it is delightful!"

"To _you_, no doubt," said Salome; "but it will put a great deal more on
me. The children's lessons, and walking with them, and--But if mother
likes it, there is nothing to be said."

"Well, it will be a great advantage to Ada," Mrs. Wilton sighed out;
"and Lady Monroe will be a substantial friend. If your uncle approves
it, I do not see how I can refuse."

Ada sprang up. She was but a child, and the idea of a journey to the
south of France was full of untold delight. Then to escape from the
tiresome lessons, the dull way of life, the bother about money, the
fidgets about keeping two fires burning, looked most attractive.

"Thank you, darling mother," she exclaimed with unusual enthusiasm,
throwing her arms round her mother. "I shall come back ever so much
brighter, and able to do heaps more things."

"It is very easy to settle things in that way," said Salome. "You are
exactly like Raymond--_intensely_ selfish."

"Don't be jealous, Salome," Ada exclaimed. "You knew the Monroes first,
and if Eva had taken a fancy to you, you would have been only too
pleased; but you see Eva happens to like _me_ best."

"Oh, my dear children, do not let there be any uncomfortable feeling.
Though we are poor, let us be loving."

Salome's heart was full, and rising hastily, she dropped Lady Monroe's
letter, and left the room. Poor child, it did seem to her, as to many
another, that effort for others was in vain; that those who keep self
and selfish interests well to the front are, after all, those who
succeed best, not only in getting what they wish, and escaping
disagreeables and worries, but in winning affection and admiration from
every one.

"I have done my very best ever since dear father died. I _have_ tried to
do everything, and yet Ada is the most cared for. I believe mother does
really love her best. Father--father--_he_ cared for me, and now he is
gone."

"Why, Sal, what is the matter?" It was Reginald's voice, as he came into
the dining-room, where, in an arm-chair, by the dying embers of the
fire, which was not allowed to burn up, Salome was sobbing out her
trouble. "Why, old Sal, what is it?"

"Ada is going off to Cannes with Lady Monroe, and never thinks about me.
I shall have twice as much to do--the children always on my hand; and I
shall never be able to finish my story. I have not minded leaving mother
with Ada; but now--and she _is_ so selfish, Reginald."

"So is half the world, it seems to me, Sal. Cheer up. _I_ am glad, for
one, _you_ are not going to the south of France. I tell you that. I
cannot get on without you, nor any one else either; so that is very
certain. Come, Sal, don't be down-hearted. It will make one less here,
and Ada is not cut out for our present life. You and I do very well; and
I know I have got the best of it at school, and have no time to sit and
mope."

"I don't mope," said poor Salome, half-offended. "To-day, I have--"
Tears were just beginning to fall again, when Reginald caught sight of a
book on the floor.

"Is not this Mrs. Atherton's paper you promised to send back this
morning, Salome? I say, she said she must have it to post to a friend.
Shall I run over with it to the vicarage?"

"Oh dear, how careless I am," Salome sighed. "I should like to go with
it myself, Reginald. It is not quite dark, not nearly dark out of
doors. Will you come for me in half an hour? I do feel as if the run,
and seeing Mrs. Atherton, would do me good."

"All right," said Reginald good-naturedly; "only, be quick, for I want
tea over early this evening. I have no end of work to get through."

Salome raced upstairs, and snatching up her jacket and hat, and
thrusting her hands into a muff, with the newspaper crushed up
mercilessly, she was out of the house in no time, and was very soon at
the vicarage.

If she could only find Mrs. Atherton at home, she thought, and alone.
She stood in awe of Mr. Atherton, the grave, dignified man, who looked
as much older for his years as his mother looked younger, and by reason
of this had led to much confusion in the parish when he and Mrs.
Atherton first came to St. Luke's.

Yes, Susan thought Mrs. Atherton was at home. Would Miss Wilton walk in?

Salome was shown into the drawing-room, which was empty; and Susan,
after throwing a log on the fire, and remarking that "it was quite
wintry weather," left her.

That bright, cheerful room, full of the signs of the life of those
who inhabited it, always gave Salome a sense of home. Books on all
sides; a little picture on an easel in one corner; needle-work; a
carefully-arranged writing-table in one recess by the fire, a work-table
in the other. Nothing fine or grand, no aspirations after "high art,"
though a few old china plates were hung against the wall, and the large
square of crimson carpet was surrounded by polished dark boards. A room
used and loved already, though the vicarage was a new house, and there
was not the charm of association with the past to make it dear.

Salome had waited for a few minutes, lost in a day-dream by the fire,
and forgetting her vexation and trouble, when the door opened and Mr.
Atherton came in.

"I have brought back this newspaper Mrs. Atherton lent me," she began
hurriedly, "to read a review. I hope it is not too late for the post."

"My mother is gone to see a child who is ill; but sit down, and let me
have the benefit of a talk in her place." Mr. Atherton saw the look of
disappointment in Salome's face, and added, "If you can wait, my mother
will be home before long."

Salome stood irresolute, and then, fearing to be ungracious, she said,--

"I can come again to-morrow, thank you. I daresay you are busy now."

"No; I was only reading for half an hour's recreation. I may as well
take it by talking with you, unless you really would rather go away."

In spite of her shyness, a bright smile flashed over Salome's face.

"I could not say so," she said, "as you ask me to stay, without--"

"Being uncivil," he said laughing. "Now I think we have had enough of
preliminaries. I was thinking of you just before you came. I have a
little class at the Sunday school ready for you, if you would like to
take it, and one for your sister also."

"My sister is going away for the winter with Lady Monroe," Salome said.
"I wanted to tell Mrs. Atherton about it. It is not quite decided; that
is to say, mother had not written the answer to the note when I came
away; but I feel sure she will go, and as I shall be left alone with
mother and the children and the boys, I don't think I shall be able to
leave them on Sunday afternoons."

"Then I would not urge you; our first duties lie at home."

"I shall have to teach the children altogether now. Ada helped with
arithmetic and music. I am so stupid at both, especially arithmetic."

Mr. Atherton saw that Salome was troubled, and yet he did not press her
for confidence, but quietly said,--

"Well, we are not all born to be mathematicians or musicians. God gives
us all different powers. It is wholesome, however, to grind a little at
what we dislike sometimes. The old story of the two roads, you know."

"I don't know," said Salome, her eyes glistening with interest; "unless
you mean the narrow and the broad road," she added simply.

"Yes; I was thinking of Lord Bacon's rendering of the same idea. If two
roads seem to lie before the Christian--one smooth and pleasant, the
other rough and thorny--let him choose the rough one, and in spite of
pricks and wounds he will gather flowers there, and fruit too, if he
perseveres. Those may not be the precise words, but it is the meaning."

"I don't think I have _two_ roads before me to choose from," Salome
said. "When I look back on our dear, happy home at Maplestone, and
compare that time with this, it _does_ seem hard enough."

"Do not look back, my dear child, nor onward too much; just take the
day, and live it, as far as you can, in the fear of God, taking
everything--joy and sorrow--from Him."

"Oh, it's not so much the big things," said Salome. "Even the greatest
trouble of all--dear father's death--is not so hard in the way I mean;
though I would give--oh, I would give anything to get him back and to
see him happy. Still, I can think he is at rest, and that God took him
from what would have broken his heart. But I mean little
worries--crossness, ill-temper, fidgets about money, and, above all,
feeling that I am getting so disagreeable--worse every day."

"You do not think you are alone in these feelings, do you? My dear
child, it is a very common experience. Take these little pricking
thorns, and the wounds they make, yes, and the poison they sometimes
leave behind, to the loving hand of the Great Healer. Would you not
think it strange if people only sent to your uncle, Dr. Loftus Wilton,
for great and dangerous ailments? His patients go to him with the small
ones also, and often by skill the small ones are prevented from growing
into large ones. Be patient, and watchful, and hopeful, and cheerful,
and leave the rest to God. There is a deep meaning in those words we
were using last Sunday: 'Cheerfully accomplish those things that thou
wouldest have done.'"

Salome felt in much better spirits when she left the vicarage than when
she entered. She raced down the garden to the gate, where Reginald was
waiting for her, and then she saw Mrs. Atherton tripping lightly up the
road with a basket in her hand.

It would have been dark by this time, except for the light of a bright
young moon which was hanging like a silver bow over the church spire;
Jupiter, a little in advance of the moon, in a clear blue sky.

"I am sorry I missed you, my dear," Mrs. Atherton said. "Come to-morrow,
if you can, about four o'clock. I have been to see a dear little boy who
is suffering great pain from a burn. I have dressed it for him, and he
is better."

"I brought back the paper you lent me," Salome said.

"It is too late for the north post to-day; but never mind. Good-bye,"
and Mrs. Atherton's alert steps were soon out of hearing as she walked
quickly up the garden to the house.

"Reginald, let us go round by the upper road and down at the back of Elm
Cottage; it is so fine and bright, and I feel in a better temper."

"Make haste then," said Reginald; "for Digby said something about coming
to tea. He had to go home first."

The brother and sister walked fast; and Reginald told Salome a long and
rather involved history of a football match, and said he hoped soon to
work up into the first fifteen. The road at the back of Elm Cottage took
a sudden dip down towards an excavation from which stone for building
had been taken some years before; but the particular vein had been
exhausted, and the quarry was deserted, and made a circular outlet from
the road of some thirty feet, overhung with brambles and ivy. As
Reginald and Salome passed this quarry they heard voices. Something
familiar in the tone of one speaker made Salome slacken her pace.

"Reginald, I am sure that was Raymond speaking. Look back. Who is it?"

Reginald turned, and distinctly saw two figures at the entrance of the
quarry--two men or boys.

"I don't think it is Raymond."

"I am certain it is," Salome said. "Whom can he be talking with?"

"I am sure I don't know," said Reginald. "I daresay it is not he."

"I wish I knew how Raymond is really getting on," said Salome. "The
worst of it is, one never feels quite sure that he is telling the
truth."

Reginald was silent.

"Does Percival's brother ever say anything to you about Raymond?"

"No; at least, not much."

"Reg, if you _do_ know anything about Raymond, tell me. It's not like
telling tales. I think I ought to know, for there seems no one to look
after him, and, though I hate to say so, he does deceive mother."

But Reginald was not to be drawn into the discussion further. Digby
Wilton arrived at Elm Cottage at the same moment as Reginald and Salome,
and he was always a cheerful and welcome visitor. The two families
seemed to leave any intimacy that existed between them to the two pairs
of brothers and sisters.

Louise's affection for Ada was short-lived, and a certain jealousy
possessed her when she saw that Eva Monroe had taken an affection for
her. Louise would have liked very much to be the elected companion of
Eva to Cannes, and was lost in astonishment that a child of fifteen
should be preferred before her, when the plan was announced.

"It is done as an act of charity, my dear Louise," her mother said. "Be
thankful that your education and social position and advantages have
been secured by me without the help of strangers. Poor Emily! it must be
hard for her to receive so much from her friends. My proud spirit could
never be brought to do so. And she is not an economical woman. I notice
she has had the crape on her dress renewed already. And I hear from Aunt
Betha that they deal with the tradesmen about Elm Fields and Whitelands
Road. It would be far cheaper if they sent down into Harstone, and
really Stevens might do this. It seems extravagant for poor people in
lodgings to keep a maid."

"I don't believe Stevens would leave Aunt Emily if she begged and prayed
her to go," said Kate with indiscreet heat. "Really I do think it hard
to talk of Aunt Emily like that, mamma."

"My dear Kate," said Mrs. Wilton, "will you ask Aunt Betha to come and
speak with me? I must send a note to the Quadrant this evening."

These were Mrs. Wilton's favourite tactics. She seldom argued a point
with her children, and she was right in the principle. If the
differences of opinion were likely to be very decided, she would ignore
them by turning quietly to another subject.



