
ADA'S DEPARTURE.


The household at Elm Cottage were engrossed for the next ten days with
preparations for Ada's departure. Mrs. Pryor's eyes filled with tears
whenever it was mentioned.

"Going off to foreign parts, where my dear departed lady went years
agone, to find a grave for her husband; no good ever comes from going to
these outlandish places. However a widow lady can trust her child to go
off like this passes my comprehension."

"These are old-fashioned notions in these days, mother," Ruth would
interpose. "These foreign places are just English all over. I know a
young person who went as maid to--to--not Cannes, but it's all the same;
the name begins with a saint."

"Ah! I daresay," sighed Mrs. Pryor; "some Papist's place."

"Well, this young person told me," said Ruth, taking no notice of the
interruption, "that at their hotel it was just like an English country
house; everything goes like clock-work. In your lady's days, I daresay,
sixty years ago, it might have been changed."

"Yes, it _was_ different. And times are changed," said Mrs. Pryor. "The
young set themselves up, and think it fine to scoff at their elders. If
this pretty child--for she is _but_ a child--is laid in the
burying-ground out there, hundreds of miles from her widowed mother,
don't come to me to be _surprised_--that's all."

Ruth nodded at Stevens to say no more. But Stevens's own heart was
heavy; and many were the sighs which were breathed over Ada's box, which
stood ready, strapped and addressed, in the dull haze of the November
morning.

Ada herself had kept up bravely till now; but as the wheels of the fly
were heard which was to take her to the station, to meet Lady Monroe and
Eva and their maid, her sobs broke forth.

"Oh, I wish I were not going!" she said. "O mother, mother!"

"Don't upset mamma, Ada," Salome whispered. "Dear Ada, please don't."

But Ada threw herself into her mother's arms, and could only sob out,
"Oh, I wish I were not going!"

Mrs. Wilton strove to be calm; and Stevens wisely hastened box, and neat
little bundle of rugs, and ulster, and umbrella into the fly. Hans and
Carl, who, with Stevens, were to see Ada off, stood bewildered to see
their generally calm, self-possessed sister crying so bitterly.

"I thought she wanted to go to France," Carl said, puckering up his
mouth.

"Yes; I thought Stevens said Ada was crazy to go," echoed Hans.

"She will be all right when she is once off, my dears," said Ruth. "You
run and get in. There's good little boys; get into the fly. Look! I
declare there is Puck, knowing as well as possible that Miss Ada is
going."

At last Ada was gone, clinging to the last to her mother and to Salome,
and saying, "Give Raymond and Reg my love; don't forget."

Ada was not the first to find that the longed-for pleasure is not all
that imagination pictured; and well might Ruth say, as she turned back
into her little shop,--

"There, I didn't think she had so much heart, that I didn't."

"Everybody's heart ain't always in their mouths, Ruth," was Frank's
rejoinder. "Still waters run deep, my dear."

"Then you are one of the deepest I ever saw, Frank; you never waste a
word. I do believe if I hadn't helped you, you never would have come to
the point with me."

"That's an old story now, my dear," said Frank, rubbing his floury face
with his hand. "Don't be offended, my dear," he continued. "I don't say
it wasn't a good story, for _me_ anyhow, that I _did_ come to the
point."

After Ada's departure Salome made a great effort to settle down into a
fixed routine. She wrote out a list of the lessons with her little
brothers, and with Reginald's help got over the formidable arithmetic
better than might have been expected. Irksome as this routine was to a
girl of her dreamy and imaginative temperament, she bravely struggled to
take each day as it came, and do the best with it. Stevens, who did all
the needle-work and small washing of the family, could not always walk
with her children, but she clung to this habit of a past life; and soon
after the one o'clock dinner in the short winter days Hans and Carl
would set off on a shopping expedition with Stevens, or for a walk over
the downs. And while Mrs. Wilton rested quietly for an hour, Salome
would sit down to her story, and forget the present in the society of
the imaginary children of whom she wrote. Unconsciously she reproduced
the dear old home of her happy childhood,--the stately trees, the
emerald turf, the little lake with the rustic bridge. Her children were
the idealized children of her own experience, and the circumstances in
which she placed them and the adventures which befell them were, like
the "monkey stories," for the most part reproductions of incidents
which lay treasured in the storehouse of her memory. Thanks to Miss
Barnes's admirable teaching, Salome was guiltless of slips of grammar,
and wrote a fair hand. This "thinking on paper" has a peculiar
fascination in it for the young; and no one could have grudged Salome
these hours she spent over her manuscript, full of hope and even belief
that by her hand the weight of care might be lifted from her mother.

Christmas drew on, and Reginald was full of his examinations--so full,
that he sat up late at night with his papers, and had but little time to
give to the consideration of Salome's tale.

It was one evening when Mrs. Wilton was occupied in answering a long
letter from Ada, filled with glowing descriptions of Cannes and the
happy life she was leading there, that Salome went into the dining-room
where Reginald was at work. The finished manuscript was in her hand, and
she said, "Reg, where do you advise me to send my story? I have finished
it, every word."

Reginald was absorbed in his Euclid, and held up his hand, as if to beg
her to stop.

"Are you very busy?" she said. "Then I won't trouble you."

Still there was the thought in her heart, "How nice it would be if
somebody cared." But she waited patiently, and at last Reginald pushed
the books away, and giving a prolonged yawn, said,--

"It is awfully cold here with no fire. What do you want, Sal?"

"Reg, do come and work in the drawing-room. The children are gone to
bed, and mother and I are as quiet as mice."

"Raymond is not there, of course."

"No," said Salome, "and I can't think what he does every evening. He
goes off directly after tea, and he is so late every night now. Reg, do
you know where he goes?"

"I don't _know_," said Reginald, "but I don't think things are all
square with him. But, you see, Raymond and I have never had much to do
with each other, going to different schools, and he has always looked
down on me."

"I hope he has not bad friends," Salome said; "but I am certain he was
with some one he did not care for you and me to see that evening when I
had been up to the vicarage, the day it was fixed for Ada to go to
Cannes."

"Yes; I remember. However, I don't see that we can do any good. We must
just go on and leave it."

"I am sorry mother gave him a latch-key. I know she lies awake till she
hears him come upstairs; and though I am glad to do anything for her,
still I think it is a pity she let him have our room when Ada went away.
When he slept in yours it was a check. I can't think where he gets money
from," Salome went on. "That is a new ulster he has, and a new
cigar-case, and I don't believe he has had any salary yet at Mr.
Warde's. Reg," said Salome in a low voice, "_do_ you think he is getting
into debt?"

"You see, Sal," said Reginald, "I don't like to say anything I am not
sure about, so don't ask me, though of course a fellow like Percival is
to be trusted. Still, I don't think either you or I can do anything, so
it is better to hold our tongues. Is that your story?" touching the roll
of manuscript.

"Yes," said Salome sadly. "I thought you wouldn't mind just looking at
my letter. I shall send it to Bardsley and Carrow. They have such a long
list of stories for the young. Look, this is what I have said. Will it
do, Reg?"

"How should I know, Sal? You can write a letter fifty times better than
I can. It is a pity you cannot consult somebody else."

"I don't know who, unless it is Mrs. Atherton."

"Mr. Atherton," suggested Reg; "he is awfully clever."

"Yes; and I should feel so stupid and shy, I know. I think I will just
try by myself; and if it is returned, I may pluck up courage to ask Mr.
Atherton then."

"Yes; that will be the best way. And mind you put in the same number of
stamps in the envelope that you put on the parcel, or you will never see
the story again."

"Then you think it is safe to be rejected, Reg? Well," said Salome with
a sigh, "never mind. I am going to begin another at once, so perhaps at
last I shall succeed."

Reginald drew his chair to the table again, and opened a book, as if to
show he had no more to say on the subject; and Salome returned to her
mother, having first deposited her precious manuscript and the letter
addressed to Messrs. Bardsley and Carrow in the drawer, where she had
kept them since the day when Kate had so roughly handled the sheets.

"Are you going to write to Ada, Salome?" Mrs. Wilton asked.

"Not to-night, I think, mother."

"Hers is a delightful letter--dear child! I am sure I am thankful she is
so happy; and Lady Monroe's little enclosure is so pleasant."

"I did not see that," Salome said. "Give it to me, mother;" and Salome
read:--

"Your dear child is all, and more than all, I wished for a companion to
my Eva. They are so happy together, and lessons are not forgotten. Ada
is making rapid advances with her music. There are some very nice people
in the hotel, and we have pleasant little drives, and picnics, and
excursions in the sunshine and amongst the flowers."

Salome made no comment as she returned the letter to her mother, and the
next minute Dr. Wilton's little short rap was heard, followed by Mrs.
Pryor's footstep in the passage, eager to have the honour of admitting
the doctor. "The only visitor she troubles herself about," Stevens
always said.

"Uncle Loftus!" Salome exclaimed. "How late! It is past nine o'clock!"

"He must have been on a late round," Mrs. Wilton said. And then Mrs.
Pryor, with her usual solemnity, announced,--

"Dr. Wilton."

"Well, my dear Salome? And how are you, Emily? You look warm and
comfortable here. It _is_ a wretched night. Where are the boys?"

"Reginald is working hard at the exams, and the little ones are in bed.
Raymond is out. He is so closely confined in the office all day that I
cannot keep him here all the evening. The change in our circumstances
falls more heavily on him than on any of them. Life at Eton and life
here are indeed two different things."

Dr. Wilton gave an almost imperceptible shrug of his shoulders, and
looking at Salome, whose face was turned up to his with its wistful
expression, he said,--

"I saw Mr. Warde to-day, and I am sorry to say that he did not give at
all a good account of Raymond. He is very unpunctual in his attendance
at the office, and very careless and idle when he is there. The senior
clerk complains of him continually; and not only of this, but he gives
himself such airs that he is most unpopular with the men in the same
office."

Dr. Wilton had found great difficulty in beginning what he had to say,
but when once in for it he went straight through. He saw with pity and
compassion his sister-in-law's face grow whiter and whiter as he went
on, and he saw Salome quietly move and, going behind her mother's chair,
put her hand caressingly on her shoulder, bending down, and pressing her
cheek against her mother's in silent sympathy.

"My dear Emily," Dr. Wilton said kindly, "I am extremely sorry to have
to say this. The boy is young, and has been--well, a good deal indulged.
Let us hope he will see the folly of throwing away his chance of
earning his living. His head is stuffed full of nonsense, and even my
own boys complain of his brag."

Mrs. Wilton rallied now. That the clerks in the office should complain
of her son filled her with pain: but that his cousins (as she thought),
plain, uninteresting, heavy boys, should dare to disparage her handsome,
bright son, to whose faults she was blind, filled her with anger as well
as pain.

"I do not think any of my children have seen much of yours in their own
home, Loftus," she replied; "and if _this_ is the way the one who is so
constantly here has repaid our kindness, I shall take care he is not
with us so much in future."

"O mother, Digby would never be unkind," Salome said warmly. "He would
never speak evil of any one. Reg says--"

"I know Reginald is your favourite brother, Salome. Perhaps you might
have done more for poor Raymond, if--"

Mrs. Wilton's voice faltered. The best mothers have what may be called
"colour-blindness" as to their children's faults and failings. But there
are some who will suffer any amount of personal trouble and anxiety that
the children inflict, rather than that their faults should be canvassed
by others. The discussion of them by ordinary people is resented; how
much more when relations bring them roughly to light! It is not too much
to say that Mrs. Wilton could have better borne a complaint of her boy
coming direct from Mr. Warde to herself than to have that complaint
brought by his uncle. Worse still that Raymond's cousins should be
quoted.

I cannot say that I think Mrs. Wilton had any reason to think kindly of
her husband's family. Although Dr. Wilton had been kind and attentive,
his wife had taken no trouble to brighten the life of her relatives at
Elm Cottage. This arose chiefly from her habit of never troubling
herself about outside matters. She "never puts herself out of the way
for any one. It is not _in_ Anna to do it," Aunt Betha would say
sometimes when even the maternal instinct was not strong enough to keep
Mrs. Wilton from an "afternoon" or a dinner party when little Guy was in
one of his worst fits of pain.

"I can do no good. It only hurts me to see him suffer, dear little man,"
she would say. "Auntie nurses him so much better than I can."

Thus it is not likely that a woman who could be thus unconcerned about
her own children would be greatly interested in her husband's nieces and
nephews. Hans and Carl had been twice to Edinburgh Crescent to tea, and
had walked with Miss Scott, and Edith, and Maude. Salome had spent one
day with Kate and Louise. But this was about all the hospitality which
had been extended to them. Ada had been more sought after, because she
was so pretty; every one asked who she was and admired her. But Ada was
gone, and jealousy at Eva's preference for her was now the prominent
feeling with both Louise and her mother.

"Well," Dr. Wilton said, "I think the boy ought to be seriously
remonstrated with. If he leaves Warde's office, I don't know what on
earth is to be done with him. If you can send him up to Edinburgh
Crescent to-morrow evening to dinner, I'll make an opportunity of
speaking to him. I am sorry to be the bearer of unpleasant news; but as
I recommended Warde to take him, even go out of his way to help
him,--for they don't, as a rule, take young men with any salary,--I can
but feel some responsibility about it.--Can you say anything to your
brother, Salome?" Dr. Wilton said in a gentle voice,--a voice which
always recalled her father. "You are the best of sisters and daughters,"
he added, putting his arm kindly round Salome's slight figure.

"I will try, Uncle Loftus," was the answer in a low voice.

Then Dr. Wilton went away, saying,--

"Good-bye; we must hope for better things. Remember, tell Raymond seven
o'clock to-morrow evening."

"The first time he has ever asked Raymond to dinner," said Mrs. Wilton.
"O Salome, it is very hard to be treated in this way!"

"I think I am sure Uncle Loftus means to help us; he is very kind. And,
dear mother, Raymond must be told he cannot go on like this. He ought
not to stay out so late every night; and--" Salome stopped. Mrs. Wilton
broke completely down, and cried bitterly.

"Don't speak sharply to him, Salome," she sobbed. "I will try what I can
do. He does love me. I shall wait up for him to-night, and you can go to
bed. Let us have prayers now."

To the surprise of his mother and Salome, though scarcely more than
half-past nine, Raymond's key was heard in the door, and he came in,
throwing his ulster on a chair and his hat on it.

"Is it raining, Raymond?" his mother asked.

"No," was the short answer; and then there was silence till Stevens came
in with the Bible, and Reginald, with a rough, shaggy head of hair, and
ink on his fingers, followed her into the room.



