
WHILE Charlotte was enjoying some small degree of comfort in the
consoling friendship of Mrs. Beauchamp, Montraville was advancing
rapidly in his affection towards Miss Franklin. Julia was an amiable
girl; she saw only the fair side of his character; she possessed an
independent fortune, and resolved to be happy with the man of her heart,
though his rank and fortune were by no means so exalted as she had a
right to expect; she saw the passion which Montraville struggled to
conceal; she wondered at his timidity, but imagined the distance fortune
had placed between them occasioned his backwardness, and made every
advance which strict prudence and a becoming modesty would permit.
Montraville saw with pleasure he was not indifferent to her, but a
spark of honour which animated his bosom would not suffer him to take
advantage of her partiality. He was well acquainted with Charlotte's
situation, and he thought there would be a double cruelty in forsaking
her at such a time; and to marry Miss Franklin, while honour, humanity,
every sacred law, obliged him still to protect and support Charlotte,
was a baseness which his soul shuddered at.

He communicated his uneasiness to Belcour: it was the very thing this
pretended friend had wished. "And do you really," said he, laughing,
"hesitate at marrying the lovely Julia, and becoming master of her
fortune, because a little foolish, fond girl chose to leave her friends,
and run away with you to America. Dear Montraville, act more like a
man of sense; this whining, pining Charlotte, who occasions you so much
uneasiness, would have eloped with somebody else if she had not with
you."

"Would to heaven," said Montraville, "I had never seen her; my regard
for her was but the momentary passion of desire, but I feel I shall love
and revere Julia Franklin as long as I live; yet to leave poor Charlotte
in her present situation would be cruel beyond description."

"Oh my good sentimental friend," said Belcour, "do you imagine no body
has a right to provide for the brat but yourself."

Montraville started. "Sure," said he, "you cannot mean to insinuate that
Charlotte is false."

"I don't insinuate it," said Belcour, "I know it."

Montraville turned pale as ashes. "Then there is no faith in woman,"
said he.

"While I thought you attached to her," said Belcour with an air of
indifference, "I never wished to make you uneasy by mentioning her
perfidy, but as I know you love and are beloved by Miss Franklin, I was
determined not to let these foolish scruples of honour step between you
and happiness, or your tenderness for the peace of a perfidious girl
prevent your uniting yourself to a woman of honour."

"Good heavens!" said Montraville, "what poignant reflections does a man
endure who sees a lovely woman plunged in infamy, and is conscious he
was her first seducer; but are you certain of what you say, Belcour?"

"So far," replied he, "that I myself have received advances from her
which I would not take advantage of out of regard to you: but hang it,
think no more about her. I dined at Franklin's to-day, and Julia bid
me seek and bring you to tea: so come along, my lad, make good use of
opportunity, and seize the gifts of fortune while they are within your
reach." Montraville was too much agitated to pass a happy evening even
in the company of Julia Franklin: he determined to visit Charlotte early
the next morning, tax her with her falsehood, and take an everlasting
leave of her; but when the morning came, he was commanded on duty, and
for six weeks was prevented from putting his design in execution.
At length he found an hour to spare, and walked out to spend it with
Charlotte: it was near four o'clock in the afternoon when he arrived at
her cottage; she was not in the parlour, and without calling the servant
he walked up stairs, thinking to find her in her bed room. He opened the
door, and the first object that met his eyes was Charlotte asleep on the
bed, and Belcour by her side.

"Death and distraction," said he, stamping, "this is too much. Rise,
villain, and defend yourself." Belcour sprang from the bed. The noise
awoke Charlotte; terrified at the furious appearance of Montraville, and
seeing Belcour with him in the chamber, she caught hold of his arm as he
stood by the bed-side, and eagerly asked what was the matter.

"Treacherous, infamous girl," said he, "can you ask? How came he here?"
pointing to Belcour.

"As heaven is my witness," replied she weeping, "I do not know. I have
not seen him for these three weeks."

"Then you confess he sometimes visits you?"

"He came sometimes by your desire."

"'Tis false; I never desired him to come, and you know I did not: but
mark me, Charlotte, from this instant our connexion is at an end. Let
Belcour, or any other of your favoured lovers, take you and provide for
you; I have done with you for ever."

He was then going to leave her; but starting wildly from the bed, she
threw herself on her knees before him, protesting her innocence and
entreating him not to leave her. "Oh Montraville," said she, "kill me,
for pity's sake kill me, but do not doubt my fidelity. Do not leave me
in this horrid situation; for the sake of your unborn child, oh! spurn
not the wretched mother from you."

"Charlotte," said he, with a firm voice, "I shall take care that neither
you nor your child want any thing in the approaching painful hour; but
we meet no more." He then endeavoured to raise her from the ground;
but in vain; she clung about his knees, entreating him to believe her
innocent, and conjuring Belcour to clear up the dreadful mystery.

Belcour cast on Montraville a smile of contempt: it irritated him almost
to madness; he broke from the feeble arms of the distressed girl; she
shrieked and fell prostrate on the floor.

Montraville instantly left the house and returned hastily to the city.



