
IN the mean time the passion Montraville had conceived for Julia
Franklin daily encreased, and he saw evidently how much he was beloved
by that amiable girl: he was likewise strongly prepossessed with an idea
of Charlotte's perfidy. What wonder then if he gave himself up to the
delightful sensation which pervaded his bosom; and finding no obstacle
arise to oppose his happiness, he solicited and obtained the hand of
Julia. A few days before his marriage he thus addressed Belcour:

"Though Charlotte, by her abandoned conduct, has thrown herself from my
protection, I still hold myself bound to support her till relieved
from her present condition, and also to provide for the child. I do not
intend to see her again, but I will place a sum of money in your hands,
which will amply supply her with every convenience; but should she
require more, let her have it, and I will see it repaid. I wish I could
prevail on the poor deluded girl to return to her friends: she was an
only child, and I make no doubt but that they would joyfully receive
her; it would shock me greatly to see her henceforth leading a life of
infamy, as I should always accuse myself of being the primary cause of
all her errors. If she should chuse to remain under your protection, be
kind to her, Belcour, I conjure you. Let not satiety prompt you to treat
her in such a manner, as may drive her to actions which necessity might
urge her to, while her better reason disapproved them: she shall never
want a friend while I live, but I never more desire to behold her; her
presence would be always painful to me, and a glance from her eye would
call the blush of conscious guilt into my cheek.

"I will write a letter to her, which you may deliver when I am gone, as
I shall go to St. Eustatia the day after my union with Julia, who will
accompany me."

Belcour promised to fulfil the request of his friend, though nothing
was farther from his intentions, than the least design of delivering the
letter, or making Charlotte acquainted with the provision Montraville
had made for her; he was bent on the complete ruin of the unhappy girl,
and supposed, by reducing her to an entire dependance on him, to bring
her by degrees to consent to gratify his ungenerous passion.

The evening before the day appointed for the nuptials of Montraville and
Julia, the former refired early to his apartment; and ruminating on the
past scenes of his life, suffered the keenest remorse in the remembrance
of Charlotte's seduction. "Poor girl," said he, "I will at least write
and bid her adieu; I will too endeavour to awaken that love of virtue in
her bosom which her unfortunate attachment to me has extinguished." He
took up the pen and began to write, but words were denied him. How could
he address the woman whom he had seduced, and whom, though he thought
unworthy his tenderness, he was about to bid adieu for ever? How should
he tell her that he was going to abjure her, to enter into the most
indissoluble ties with another, and that he could not even own the
infant which she bore as his child? Several letters were begun and
destroyed: at length he completed the following:

TO CHARLOTTE.

"Though I have taken up my pen to address you, my poor injured girl, I
feel I am inadequate to the task; yet, however painful the endeavour, I
could not resolve upon leaving you for ever without one kind line to bid
you adieu, to tell you how my heart bleeds at the remembrance of what
you was, before you saw the hated Montraville. Even now imagination
paints the scene, when, torn by contending passions, when, struggling
between love and duty, you fainted in my arms, and I lifted you into
the chaise: I see the agony of your mind, when, recovering, you found
yourself on the road to Portsmouth: but how, my gentle girl, how could
you, when so justly impressed with the value of virtue, how could you,
when loving as I thought you loved me, yield to the solicitations of
Belcour?

"Oh Charlotte, conscience tells me it was I, villain that I am, who
first taught you the allurements of guilty pleasure; it was I who
dragged you from the calm repose which innocence and virtue ever enjoy;
and can I, dare I tell you, it was not love prompted to the horrid deed?
No, thou dear, fallen angel, believe your repentant Montraville, when
he tells you the man who truly loves will never betray the object of his
affection. Adieu, Charlotte: could you still find charms in a life of
unoffend-ing innocence, return to your parents; you shall never want the
means of support both for yourself and child. Oh! gracious heaven!
may that child be entirely free from the vices of its father and the
weakness of its mother.

"To-morrow--but no, I cannot tell you what to-morrow will produce;
Belcour will inform you: he also has cash for you, which I beg you will
ask for whenever you may want it. Once more adieu: believe me could I
hear you was returned to your friends, and enjoying that tranquillity of
which I have robbed you, I should be as completely happy as even you,
in your fondest hours, could wish me, but till then a gloom will obscure
the brightest prospects of MONTRAVILLE."

After he had sealed this letter he threw himself on the bed, and enjoyed
a few hours repose. Early in the morning Belcour tapped at his door: he
arose hastily, and prepared to meet his Julia at the altar.

"This is the letter to Charlotte," said he, giving it to Belcour: "take
it to her when we are gone to Eustatia; and I conjure you, my dear
friend, not to use any sophistical arguments to prevent her return to
virtue; but should she incline that way, encourage her in the thought,
and assist her to put her design in execution."



