{"name": "book ii, Chapter XIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-ii-chapters-10-15", "summary": "Jim's grandmother is crying one afternoon because she has heard that he has been going to the Saturday night dances. He promises not to go anymore since she is so sad that he may be growing up to be a bad boy. As a result, he has a very boring spring and does extra reading to get some college requirements out of the way. Frances Harling tells Jim that her mother does not disapprove of him but just wonders why he prefers to spend time only with older, country girls. Frances thinks it's because he's more mature than most boys and because he knew Antonia and her friends in the country and romanticizes them. Jim gives a speech at his graduation, which Mrs. Harling is very proud of. Antonia and her friends run up to him afterwards and also praise him. Antonia was reminded of her father during the speech, and Jim confesses that it was dedicated to him. Antonia hugs him tearfully, and Jim says that that was the most poignant moment of his life.", "analysis": "Jim is shunned and treated as if he really were \"queer\" because he only likes spending time with older country girls like Antonia. He doesn't have any friends, becomes depressed, and wants to get out of Black Hawk as soon as he can. The situation is apparently so serious that Frances Harling brings it up with Jim one day. Though she sees why Jim focuses all his energy on Antonia and her friends, she does not see why he makes all the effort. Her comment that he romanticizes them implies that he is making more of them than is necessarythat there is really nothing overwhelmingly special about them. For the first time, we thus get a glimpse of what people other than Jim really think about Antonia and the other hired girls. Frances Harling does not think that there's any special mystique surrounding them, which makes Jim's love and admiration only seem more sincere and genuine. Antonia in particular is especially important to him, and though his opinion is necessarily subjective, it makes his relationship with Antonia that much more personal"}