{"name": "book v, Chapter III", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-v", "summary": "The next day Jim says goodbye to Antonia and all her children. Leo and Ambrosch run ahead to open the gate, and Leo disappears before Jim can say goodbye. Ambrosch explains that he's either sad that Jim's leaving or jealous of his mother's affection. Jim is sad to leave Ambrosch, who is very manly, and he promises to come next year to go hunting with him and Rudolph. Jim spends a disappointing day in Black Hawk. He doesn't know anyone there anymore, so he spends the day talking to Anton Jelinek and then to an old lawyer friend about the Cutters. Only when he takes a walk outside of town does he feel completely at home with the sky, the prairie vegetation, and the cornfields. He plans to spend a lot of time with the Cuzak boys and is glad that there are a lot of them, including Cuzak himself. While walking, he happens to come upon the first road north out of Black Hawkthe road that went to his grandfather's farm and the Shimerdas'. The road is barely visible and has been plowed under everywhere else. Jim remembers that this is the road that he and Antonia took after being on the train that took them both to Black Hawk for the first time, and he can suddenly remember very specific physical sensations of being on the train. He feels like he is coming home to himself, that his life has run in a circle back to the beginning, and he thinks the road has been one to Destiny, both for himself and for Antonia. He knows that the road will bring Antonia and him together again, and he feels no regret for what might have been because they both still have the past.", "analysis": "Jim plans to spend a lot of time playing with Antonia's sons and Cuzak. Why does he only want to spend time with the boys and not with the girls. This section is titled \"Cuzak's Boys,\" not \"Cuzak's Children. In an earlier chapter, Jim tells Antonia that he wishes she could have been \"a sweetheart, or a wife, or my mother or my sisteranything that a woman can be to a man. If Antonia fills all these roles in Jim's life, then in a sense, he is one of her boys too. He is included in the title of \"Cuzak's Boys,\" and in wanting to play only with Antonia's sons, he is imagining himself as part of that group of children. The novel concludes when Jim finds the old dirt road that went to his grandparents' farm and realizes that he has come full circle. Though Jim has followed other paths in life, he once again returns to the land and to Antonia. The old dirt road brings him back to Antonia, the earth mother, and once again he becomes her little boy"}