{"name": "book i, Chapter IV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-i-chapters-1-10", "summary": "Jim reminisces about the countryside in this chapter. He recounts how he used to ride his pony Dude to the post office and to give messages. During this time there are no fences, and Jim likes to ride on the roads bordered by sunflowers. He hears that the Mormons had planted the sunflowers when they were fleeing to Utah, and he therefore associates the roads with freedom. There are very few trees on the landscape, and he and Antonia like to go look at the earth-owls and prairie dogs. He describes Antonia as very opinionated and tells that every day he would give her English lesson and then they would go eat watermelons in the garden. Antonia would also help Jim's grandmother in the kitchen. According to Jim, Mrs. Shimerda isa very poor housekeeper and makes bad bread. During their first few months in their new home, the Shimerdas are dependent on Krajiek, who is the only person who they can speak to and who gives them bad advice. Krajiek tells them not to go to the city, and he lives with them.", "analysis": "In the novel road imagery is very significant. At this point in the history of the United States, the roads in the frontier are winding and follow the natural contours of the land. They go from point to point, but they do not have the same sense of directness and urgency that city roads have. There are no fences or obstacles blocking the roads, which are free to simply cut across the countryside in whichever way is most convenient. Roads thus represent the freedom, vastness, and unlimited potential of the Western frontier. They take explorers, as well as the persecuted Mormons, to entirely new places where the land is open and undivided and free from the laws and biases of civilization. Jim is discovering new lands and a new life at the same time that adventurers and pushing the new roads ever westward"}