{"name": "Act 4, Scene 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210508171050/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/king-john/summary/act-4-scene-3", "summary": "This scene opens high on the walls of the castle where Arthur is imprisoned. In fact, Arthur is at the top of the wall. Huh? What's he doing there? In a soliloquy, Arthur explains that he's going to make a run for it. He figures that he's dead meat if he stays where he is; even though he might die by falling from the wall, he thinks it's worth risking it. Arthur jumps--and gets knocked silly. He regains consciousness just long enough to say a brief prayer for his soul. Then he dies. Just then, in walk the noblemen who were looking for Arthur: Pembroke, Salisbury, and Lord Bigot. They don't notice Arthur. We find out these English noblemen are secretly in cahoots with Louis the Dauphin , against King John. Then the Bastard shows up. He tries to get a hearing from the noblemen, but they want nothing to do with him. They think King John is a murderer and don't want to give their loyalty to him again. Then Salisbury sees Arthur's dead body. The noblemen make a big show of their grief and anger. Finally, the Bastard manages to get a word in edgewise. He says that it's definitely a bad thing that all this has happened, but he points out that Arthur could have died by accident. Salisbury isn't buying it--he's pretty sure Arthur was murdered by King John. Salisbury and the other nobles kneel in front of Arthur's corpse and swear allegiance to it. Just now, Hubert, who seems to have a knack for being in the wrong place at the wrong time, walks in. Not only that, but the first words out of his mouth are: \"Hey! So glad I ran into you! You can stop worrying, Arthur's alive!\" Yeah, oops. As you might imagine, Salisbury is pretty outraged. In fact, he pulls out his sword and threatens to stab Hubert in the guts. The Bastard tries to calm Salisbury down, but he's pretty worked up. In the meantime, Hubert isn't budging an inch: he swears to defend himself. When it becomes clear that Hubert and the Bastard aren't backing down, Pembroke, Salisbury, and Lord Bigot head off to join Louis the Dauphin and his army. Now that they're alone, the Bastard says to Hubert, \"Hey man, tell me the truth: did you do it? Because, if you did, you are definitely--and I mean definitely--going to suffer in hell for all eternity.\" Hubert says, \"It wasn't me, I swear: I had nothing to do with it.\" The Bastard accepts Hubert's words. He tells Hubert to carry away the child's body. In the meantime, he plans to go see King John. Then the Bastard plans to help the king get ready to rumble with the rebellious English lords and the French invaders.", "analysis": ""}