{"name": "Chapter 45", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302052229/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/confidence-man/summary/chapter-45", "summary": "In the cabin rooms, there's only one lamp still burning. The steward has told people not to let it go out until daylight for safety--you could trip; people could try to rob or kill you; you know, the usual. The lamp's design is a death metal band cover knock-off of a glowing horned altar surrounded by flames with a dark hooded figure graced with a halo. Sitting beneath the lamp is a wholesome-looking old man. He gives off the well-to-do farmer vibe, so he's got money but none of the baggage of being a rich dude . The old dude is reading the Bible when Frank walks in. Frank wants to read the Bible really badly, but he doesn't mean to rush the old man. Old man: It's not a thing. Here, knock yourself out. Frank reads. He starts to look like someone kicked his dog. The old man wants to know: Why so sad, panda bear? Frank tells the old man about the line from the Bible that the barber mentioned. He's upset that there are lines in the Bible that shake one's confidence in one's fellow man. The old man gets it. If you don't have confidence in your fellow man, then it's like not having confidence in the creator of man. Frank: Yes. Exactly. The old man tells Frank not to fret, since the part he was reading was from the Apocrypha, a section of the Bible not officially part of the canon selected by church leaders and considered to the word of God. Frank: Phew, really dodged an existential bullet there. Thanks. Suddenly, a young boy appears in the room. He surprises the dudes because, um, creepy much, you quiet little sneak? The boy wears rags, but he's noted for his sharp mind and world-wise expressions. The boy's got things to sell. Boy: Do either of you want a lock attachment for your private cabins? Old man: Super yes. Frank loves and trusts his fellow man. Boy: Do either of you want a money-belt for the safekeeping of your cash? Old man: Super yes. Frank loves and trusts his fellow man. The boy teases Frank for his trust and gives the old man a free gift with his purchase: a how-to guide for detecting counterfeit bills. The boy leaves. The old man starts checking his money. He gets stressed out: the directions are complicated, and he's got serious doubts about his money. Frank tries to convince the old man the money is fine. No dice. The old man gets up to go to bed, but he's looking for a life preserver. Frank says his seat is one. Grabbing his new lock, money belt, and life preserver, the old man gets ready to go. He's all, God will keep me safe, right? Frank: God will keep you safe. The lamp starts emitting smoke. Old man: Oh, it's getting hard to see. Frank: I'll help you. I'll just put out this dying flame completely. The light revealing the demonic image goes out.", "analysis": ""}