{"name": "Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302052229/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/confidence-man/summary/chapter-10", "summary": "The cabin on the ship--unlike the one in the woods--is where you go to play cards. The room is filled with people and papers--pamphlets containing poetry, to be exact. A silent older man passed them out earlier, and then everyone just tossed them on the floor. One man is reading the ode written on them about trusting your fellow man. This again? Apparently the guy is moved by what he reads there. Tassel shows up and asks this guy where the pamphlets came from. The guy has no clue. Tassel is a social bunny, and he wants to party. However, his temporary companion here doesn't play cards, drink, smoke, or tell stories. Tassel flutters away from that dude. Tassel sits down by the country merchant. This is Mr. Roberts, the guy who believed in Guinea and gave him a coin; he also believed in Weeds and gave him money after his sob story. Tassel and Mr. Roberts chat about the card players. There's a pair of young guys in cream suits each wearing a bright tie, one green and the other red. They're up against a pair of middle-aged guys all in black. Mr. Roberts doesn't trust these guys. Tassel thinks he means the young guys, since he's apparently been judging their outfits. No, Roberts means the older two. He thinks they must be cardsharps out to hoodwink the younger pair. Tassel basically goes, Pssshhhh, nah. Everyone here is playing fair, and they could all win. The two of them agree to disagree. Tassel puts his ledger down on the seat. Mr. Roberts looks away. A+ for not being a screen-creeper, Robbie. Tassel leaves the ledger there and walks away. Being a good dude, Mr. Roberts grabs it and takes it to him. He can't help but note that the binding on the ledger bears the title: Black Rapids Coal Company. Mr. Roberts is giddy. Can he has stocks? Tassel does not appear amused or forgiving about the fact that Mr. Roberts knows who he is and what he does. He gives him a hard time. Eventually he agrees to sell him some in another backroom deal. Tricksy.", "analysis": ""}