{"name": "Chapter 43", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302052229/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/confidence-man/summary/chapter-43", "summary": "The conversation and shave continue. The barber doesn't want to distrust people, but his line of work has taught him to. Frank counters that lawyers, politicians, and editors all argue the same. He wonders how everyone thinks their particular field is the one to provide insights into human nature. The barber has been thinking about this off and on for years, and Frank's got it wrong. It's not unique insight; it's equal insight. That is, anybody who's got a job dealing with the public gets to see the public's secrets. Some aren't pretty. For instance, the barber knows everyone on the boat who's bald and pretends that wigs are real. Let that sink in. They're liars. All of them. Frank then offers to strike a curious bargain with the barber. If he takes down the \"No Trust\" sign and doesn't try to scare off customers who might not have the cash up front to pay for a shave or a haircut, then Frank will pay the barber back for any money lost on the experiment. The barber says no at first, but then a sort of magical fascination overtakes him. This experiment is intriguing to him, and he agrees. Frank and the barber draw up a contract. The barber wants to take the contract to the captain as an impartial third party. Frank: No, you keep it. I trust you. The barber: Okay, then there's just the matter of the cash. The narrator notes that usually when it's time to pony up, people are shocked or grim. Not so with Frank. He's cool as a sea cucumber. Frank: Cash? The barber: I want cash in advance for the insurance you say you'll grant me. The barber goes on to quote a line from the Bible about not trusting people with honeyed words. Frank says this goes against the agreement, since it's all about building trust. Don't distrust me yet, man. The barber: Fine, but pay me what you owe for this shave. Frank: No can do. No cash on me, buddy, but I'm good for it. See you when the contract period ends. When Frank leaves, it's like the spell is broken. Barber: That guy's not coming back, is he? Voice inside the barber's head: No. The barber puts the sign back. He tears up the letter. He tells all his friends about Frank. They all agree that Frank is \"Quite an original.\"", "analysis": ""}