{"name": "volume 1, Chapter VII", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter VII, pages 54-62<PARAGRAPH>Upon hearing that Captain Wentworth has come to Kellynch, Mr. Musgrove visits him and the Crofts. Captain Wentworth returns the visit, and Anne barely escapes seeing him. Just as she and Mary were walking to the main house, Mary's eldest son is brought to her, his collar bone injured in a fall. Mary falls to pieces, and it is up to Anne to arrange for a doctor, manage the servants, calm Mary, control the younger children, and send for Charles. Anne and Mary therefore miss Wentworth's visit, but soon Henrietta and Louisa come to report about it, glowing about Wentworth's looks and manners. PARAGRAPH>Anne is further relieved when she thinks that she, Charles, and Mary will be excused from the dinner for Wentworth and the Crofts the next evening. Charles, however, declares that because his son is mending nicely, he will attend the dinner. Mary immediately complains that she is always left behind and that being a mother should not keep her from enjoying the dinner, too. Anne convinces both of them to leave the child in her care while they both go to dine. They return after the dinner, raving about Captain Wentworth. Anne discovers that he is to meet Charles at the main house the next morning to go hunting; he was invited to meet Charles at Uppercross Cottage, but he declined, saying he did not wish to get in the way when a sick child was there. Anne suspects that he made up that excuse so he need not see her. PARAGRAPH>However, the next morning brings Henrietta and Louisa, with Wentworth in tow, to the cottage. Before Anne can compose herself, he is there. Her eye half met Captain Wentworth's; a bow, a curtsey passed; she heard his voice--he talked to Mary, said all that was right; said something to the Miss Musgroves, enough to mark an easy footing: the room seemed full--full of persons and voices--but a few minutes ended it. Charles shewed himself at the window, all was ready, their visitor bowed and was gone. PARAGRAPH>Anne is flustered by the visit and wonders anxiously if Wentworth felt anything upon seeing her again. Mary later informs her that Wentworth remarked to Henrietta that Anne was \"'so altered he should not have known  again. Anne is mortified because in her eyes Wentworth had not changed, but apparently her eight years of worry and sadness have changed her for the worse in his eyes. Anne realizes that he has not forgiven her for breaking his heart, for her \"weakness and timidity\" in not standing up to her family. PARAGRAPH>Captain Wentworth, now wealthy and successful in his career, is clearly looking for a wife. He tells Mrs. Croft that he wants a woman with \"'A strong mind, with sweetness of manner,'\" thinking of Anne--and her weakness of mind--as he declares this. PARAGRAPH>Analysis<PARAGRAPH>Wentworth makes clear that Anne's value with him is gone. His remark about her lost looks reveals that he considers Anne to be an old maid, a woman unmarried and past her \"bloom. Such a woman has little social value. Conveniently, he will not have to notice her because she is an old maid. But he still chafes over their broken engagement. As a navy man, he values courage and commitment and strength, qualities which he believes Anne does not have. He deliberately seeks a woman confident in her own mind, not easily persuaded by others. He does not see that Anne has suffered and lost her bloom because she regrets her decision to break their engagement", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210213065256/https://www.novelguide.com/persuasion/summaries/volume1-chapter6-7"}