{"name": "Chapter 7- Chapter 9", "summary": "Chapter 7: While out one afternoon with her sisters, Amy laments about being poor to her sisters and they ask her why.  She tells them that it is fashionable at her school for girls to share and give away limes to other girls.  She so far, has excepted these gifts, but has not been able to return the favor.  Meg gives her a quarter so she can buy limes to share the next day.  Amy takes the limes to school and everyone is very excited that they will get to partake in her treat at recess.  Amy's archenemy, Jenny Snow, found out about the limes, and informed their teacher, Mr. Davis.  The previous week he had forbidden the limes.  He made Amy throw them out the window, and then he slapped her on the palm with a ruler, and made her stand for fifteen minutes up in front of the entire class.  Amy was so humiliated that at recess she went home and did not come back.  Jo went to collect her things, and Mrs. March said that she would look into a different school for Amy because she did not believe in corporal punishment.  Laurie while playing chess with Jo gave Beth a compliment on the music she had composed and she was extremely shocked and surprised that he knew she wrote music. \n\tChapter 8: Meg and Jo are leaving to go to the theater one afternoon with Laurie, when Amy realizes where they are going and decides she wants to go too.  She begs and pleads but Jo gets very cross and tells her that she was not invited therefor she cannot go.  Amy throws a fit and promises to make Jo pay for being so mean, and thinking nothing of it, Meg and Jo leave.  When they return home however, after having a wonderful time, Jo finds her the book she wrote that was filled with her fairy tales missing.  It is her most treasured possession that she had worked on for years.  She asks her sisters if they had seen it, and Amy confesses that she had it last, but threw it into the fire. Jo becomes extremely angry and attacks the child.  They pull her away and she vows never to forgive her little sister for being so selfish and cruel.  The tension between the girls is felt throughout the house for the next day, until Amy tries to apologize.  Jo refuses to accept however, and Amy feels more repentant.  Jo decides that the only thing to cheer her up will be going ice skating with Laurie, and Amy decides she should go along but does not tell Jo.  Jo however sees her chasing after them but ignores her.  When they are on the ice, Laurie tells Jo to stay away from the middle because it is thin, but Amy does not hear the warning.  Amy breaks through the ice and falls in the freezing river, and Laurie goes to save her with Jo's help.  They bring her home and she is safe, but Jo feels horribly guilty, but talks to Marmee who makes her feel better.  Jo decides that she needs to keep her temper under better control.  She goes to visit Amy and they make up. \n\tChapter 9: The Kings children fall ill, so they give Meg a holiday.  She is invited to stay with the Moffat family for that time for they are throwing a bunch of festivities for their children and their children's friends.  Meg is delighted, and Marmee says she may attend.  She gathers up her finest things, and her sisters lend her their treasures and she goes away for two weeks of socializing and partying.  After arriving however, Meg feels exceptionally poor only having one evening dress that is decent and a few other shabby dresses.  At the party one night she overhears girls gossiping about her relationship with Laurie who sent her flowers and her shabby dress. They endeavor for the next party to lend her a dress.  Meg is humiliated but when the next party comes, the offer is made so nicely that she consents to let the older engaged Moffat sister, Belle, dress her.  She looks beautiful and receives many compliments and admiring glances.  Laurie, who they invited to the party knowing he was a friend of Meg, disapproves however.  Meg begins to feel guilty and when she goes home, she confesses to Marmee and Jo how she had been ashamed of their lack of money, and how nice it had felt to be praised.  Marmee teaches her eldest daughters that happiness does not come from money, but from virtue and modesty.  She also tells them that all they need in life is a husband that loves them and a loving home.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201204114018/https://www.novelguide.com/little-women/summaries/chap7-9"}