{"name": "Chapter 17", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20211017011430/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/confidence-man/summary/chapter-17", "summary": "More people have boarded the ship. This crop of new blood is sitting in a room, kind of shy, and very quiet. We see the herb-doctor hawking another concoction. This time it's the Samaritan Pain Dissuader--good for whatever pains you--mind, body, and soul. The crowd just stares at the herb-doctor. They all seem healthy. The herb-doctor tries again in an appeal to the women, asking if they have any sick, bedridden friends at home who would appreciate this as a gift. Cricket cricket. Undeterred by the crowd's apathy, the herb-doctor continues with another tack: You're fine now, but you may have a sudden, terrible pain by noon. No response. Just then, another new passenger boards the ship and enters the room. We're talking chillingly dramatic entrance here, folks. Imagine the tough, quiet, tall, dark outlaw type walking up to a saloon. He's s man of mystery. He's got a limp and a little girl with bright, dark eyes as deep as eternity. They're no nonsense. The herb-doctor goes to these new passengers and makes the number-one wrong move when talking to kids: he acts like a cheery doofus. He takes the girl's hand , sings at her, and tries to get her to sing with him. She gives him a blank stare. Her dad offers him a look of scorn. The herb-doctor does the \"Don't I know you from the Kentucky ship?\" thing. The man says no. The herb-doctor suggests his Samaritan Pain Dissuader as a cure for the guy's limp. The man says no. He goes to sit down with difficulty. Another dude arrives--much less dramatically this time. He's not from the shore like this crowd, but from another part of the boat. He buys a bottle of Samaritan Pain Dissuader. This seems to signal a go for the others gathered there, and some others buy a few bottles. From his seat, the father asks the herb-doctor to repeat what he just said to the crowd. Gladly: This stuff will ease pain in ten minutes. Father: Does it make you drowsy or numb? Herb-doctor: Nah, you retain your brain game. Father: Lies. You're a lying liar who lies. The crowd is silent again. Those who have bought some of the meds already feel sheepish. The herb-doctor shakes it off and launches into a story about how this concoction will cure mental and emotional pain in addition to physical suffering. He purports to have cured a woman in agony over the death of her husband and child. The father can't stand it any longer. He blows up at the herb-doctor, calls him a snake, and leaves the room. The herb-doctor pauses and narrates his internal monologue for the audience: he's hurt, no doubt, but he's not going to lower himself to be as wrathful as that man. Instead, he hopes that the audience will see this behavior and have confidence in him. The herb-doctor gets only cold stares from the audience. In a weirdly Shakespearean exit, the herb-doctor responds to a voice only he hears calling him.", "analysis": ""}