{"name": "Chapter 24", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20211017011430/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/confidence-man/summary/chapter-24", "summary": "Hooooo, we thought the previous chapter was full of philosophical musings. We don't know what hit us with this one, and neither does the cosmopolitan after he encounters Pitch. Pitch immediately distrusts the cosmopolitan and mocks his attire, a multi-colored mix of patterns and textures over crisp white pants. The cosmopolitan retorts with a sort of pot-kettle response--remember that Pitch is wearing a bunch of animal skins. Pitch: Fair, but stop touching me. The men engage in a debate over whether it's better to distrust mankind and live a solitary life or live in the world, tasting everyone . The cosmopolitan tries a few tactics. First, he argues that while not all partying will make you a drunkard, too much sobriety will ruin a person. He then tells a story of a respectable old woman who suddenly didn't want anything to do with anybody, stopped eating, and was generally mopey. She was \"cured\" by getting tipsy. Pitch says if you need alcohol to like people, he'll stick with the truth available in water and be alone. The cosmopolitan guilts Pitch: So, you think you're better than everyone, huh? Well, you're like a noble boot in the truth of the sun, but you're warped. I'm like the honest well-worn slipper that walks among the people. Or, you're like the sick chicken that no one wants to hang out with. Pitch finds this insulting. The cosmopolitan is glad, because if Pitch is insulted, then he must think humans are good after all, since Pitch is also human. See what he did there? Pitch accuses the cosmopolitan of being the third crook he's come across today. The cosmopolitan tries to get Pitch to go party with him because he sees him as a good wine. Besides, he argues, didn't Diogenes have more fun than Timon of Athens? Pitch is super excited about the Diogenes reference and gives the cosmopolitan a strong handshake. He's so glad the cosmopolitan hates people, too, but was just playing. The cosmopolitan freezes up. He's like, No. That's not what I meant at all. The cosmopolitan gives up and walks away.", "analysis": ""}