{"name": "Chapter 13", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20211017011430/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/confidence-man/summary/chapter-13", "summary": "We interrupt our narrator's regularly scheduled announcement with an announcement from...our narrator. He says: don't judge. Specifically, don't be like the American scholar in London who prejudged a dude for his fancy duds before he found out that the dude was also a great sage. How embarrassing. This is all to remind the reader not to judge Tassel for not being sympathetic earlier, because we'd then unfairly assume he's heartless. Apparently, Tassel's got boatloads of compassion for the predicament in which Weeds finds himself. Mr. Roberts and Tassel bond over their shared pity. Does Weeds still have faith in his fellow man? Tassel wants to know. Mr. Roberts misunderstands and says that Weeds is handling things well and is resigned to his life. Tassel's all, Very good, but I hope he doesn't lose confidence in his fellow man. While we're on the subject, it's probably not fair to take the unfortunate Weeds's word for it. After all, husband and wife probably both have their flaws and their good points. Mr. Roberts veritably flips out at this suggestion. How could anyone feel anything but sympathy? Tassel gets Mr. Roberts to cool off by making the argument that to distrust Goneril to such a degree is to lose faith in Providence and the goodness that stems from one's belief. Besides, Tassel adds, being too compassionate will train your head and your heart to be too easily swayed by emotion, and then you'll just be a fool in public. Oh, and another thing: wishing revenge on Goneril is another ding against Providence, because it shows you don't have faith in what God is doing now, but are hoping for something from God in the future. Doubting Providence, Tassel continues, is like putting your faith in the stock market during wartime. Translation: it's risky. At this point, Tassel looks sideways at his exchange book. Mr. Roberts is cowed and fully on board with Tassel's survey of things. Tassel hopes he wasn't being a bossy know-it-all. Mr. Roberts is all, No, I like it. You're better than a preacher. This makes Tassel uneasy, because he prefers to just chat like equals. To get back on the same level again, he pokes at Goneril: Weeds is better off without her, anyway--his misfortune is really cause for celebration. They men decide to drink to that. A lot, a lot. Once fully under the effects of champagne, Mr. Roberts gets weepy about how evil Goneril is all over again. Tassel is irritated as all get-out: Aha. The truth comes out. You, sir, have no faith in your fellow man. What's more, I'm cutting you off. So there. Mr. Roberts is embarrassed.", "analysis": ""}