{"name": "Chapters 22\u201325", "summary": "Chapter 22  Jane remains at Gateshead for a month because Georgiana dreads being left alone with Eliza, with whom she does not get along. Eventually, Georgiana goes to London to live with her uncle, and Eliza joins a convent in France. Jane tells us that Eliza eventually becomes the Mother Superior of her convent, while Georgiana marries a wealthy man. At Gateshead, Jane receives a letter from Mrs. Fairfax, which says that Rochester\u2019s guests have departed and that Rochester has gone to London to buy a new carriage\u2014a sure sign of his intention to marry Blanche. As Jane travels toward Thornfield, she anxiously anticipates seeing Rochester again, and yet she worries about what will become of her after his marriage. To her surprise, as she walks from the station at Millcote, Jane encounters Rochester. When he asks her why she has stayed away from Thornfield so long, she replies, still a bit bewildered, \u201cI have been with my aunt, sir, who is dead.\u201d Rochester asks Jane whether she has heard about his new carriage, and he tells her: \u201cYou must see the carriage, Jane, and tell me if you don\u2019t think it will suit Mrs. Rochester exactly.\u201d After a few more words together, Jane surprises herself by expressing the happiness she feels in Rochester\u2019s presence: \u201cI am strangely glad to get back again to you; and wherever you are is my home\u2014my only home.\u201d Back at the manor, Mrs. Fairfax, Ad\u00e8le, and the servants greet Jane warmly.  Chapter 23 After a blissful two weeks, Jane encounters Rochester in the gardens. He invites her to walk with him, and Jane, caught off guard, accepts. Rochester confides that he has finally decided to marry Blanche Ingram and tells Jane that he knows of an available governess position in Ireland that she could take. Jane expresses her distress at the great distance that separates Ireland from Thornfield. The two seat themselves on a bench at the foot of the chestnut tree, and Rochester says: \u201cwe will sit there in peace to-night, though we should never more be destined to sit there together.\u201d He tells Jane that he feels as though they are connected by a \u201ccord of communion.\u201d Jane sobs\u2014\u201cfor I could repress what I endured no longer,\u201d she tells us, \u201cI was obliged to yield.\u201d Jane confesses her love for Rochester, and to her surprise, he asks her to be his wife. She suspects that he is teasing her, but he convinces her otherwise by admitting that he only brought up marrying Blanche in order to arouse Jane\u2019s jealousy. Convinced and elated, Jane accepts his proposal. A storm breaks, and the newly engaged couple hurries indoors through the rain. Rochester helps Jane out of her wet coat, and he seizes the opportunity to kiss her. Jane looks up to see Mrs. Fairfax watching, astonished. That night, a bolt of lightning splits the same chestnut tree under which Rochester and Jane had been sitting that evening.  Chapter 24 Preparations for Jane and Rochester\u2019s wedding do not run smoothly. Mrs. Fairfax treats Jane coldly because she doesn\u2019t realize that Jane was already engaged to Rochester when she allowed him to kiss her. But even after she learns the truth, Mrs. Fairfax maintains her disapproval of the marriage. Jane feels unsettled, almost fearful, when Rochester calls her by what will soon be her name, Jane Rochester. Jane explains that everything feels impossibly ideal, like a fairy-tale or a daydream. Rochester certainly tries to turn Jane into a Cinderella-like figure: he tells her he will dress her in jewels and in finery befitting her new social station, at which point Jane becomes terrified and self-protective. She has a premonitory feeling that the wedding will not happen, and she decides to write her uncle, John Eyre, who is in Madeira. Jane reasons that if John Eyre were to make her his heir, her inheritance might put her on more equal footing with Rochester, which would make her feel less uncomfortable about the marriage.  Chapter 25 The night before her wedding, Jane waits for Rochester, who has left Thornfield for the evening. She grows restless and takes a walk in the orchard, where she sees the now-split chestnut tree. When Rochester arrives, Jane tells him about strange events that have occurred in his absence. The preceding evening, Jane\u2019s wedding dress arrived, and underneath it was an expensive veil\u2014Rochester\u2019s wedding gift to Jane. In the night, Jane had a strange dream, in which a little child cried in her arms as Jane tried to make her way toward Rochester on a long, winding road. Rochester dismisses the dream as insignificant, but then she tells him about a second dream. This time, Jane loses her balance and the child falls from her knee. The dream was so disturbing that it roused Jane from her sleep, and she perceived \u201ca form\u201d rustling in her closet. It turned out to be a strange, savage-looking woman, who took Jane\u2019s veil and tore it in two. Rochester tells her that the woman must have been Grace Poole and that what she experienced was really \u201chalf-dream, half-reality.\u201d He tells her that he will give her a full explanation of events after they have been married for one year and one day. Jane sleeps with Ad\u00e8le for the evening and cries because she will soon have to leave the sleeping girl.", "analysis": "Chapters 22\u201325 After her stay at Gateshead, Jane comes to understand fully what Rochester and Thornfield mean to her. Having been acutely reminded of the abjection and cruelty she suffered during her childhood, Jane now realizes how different her life has become, how much she has gained and how much she has grown. In Rochester she has found someone she truly cares for\u2014someone who, despite periodic shows of brusqueness, nevertheless continues to admire Jane and care for her tenderly. Moreover, Rochester gives her a true sense of belonging, something she has always lacked. As she tells him, \u201cwherever you are is my home\u2014my only home.\u201d Although Rochester\u2019s declaration of love and marriage proposal make Jane exceedingly happy, she is also very apprehensive about the marriage. Her feelings of dread may stem in part from a subconscious intimation of Rochester\u2019s dark and horrible secret, which will be divulged in the next few chapters: the eerie laughter she has heard, the mysterious fire from which she rescued Rochester, the strange figure who tears Jane\u2019s wedding veil, and other smaller clues may have led Jane to make some subconscious conclusions about what she will consciously find out only later.<PARAGRAPH>Another possibility is that Jane\u2019s misgivings stem from other concerns. She has always longed for freedom and escape, and marrying Rochester would be a form of tying herself down. Jane may worry that the marriage will encroach upon her autonomy, and even enforce her submission to Rochester. Not only would the marriage bring her into a relationship of responsibility and commitment to another person, it could cement her into a position of inferiority. Jane\u2019s anxiety surfaces when Rochester tries to dress her in feminine finery. She reacts with revulsion, noting that she feels like a toy doll. Jane fears that Rochester may be trying to objectify her, that he sees her not as a human being with her own thoughts and feelings but as a plaything designed to cater to his fantasies and whims. Jane also worries about her financial inferiority: she hates the thought of marrying \u201cabove her station,\u201d as she does not want to feel that she somehow \u201cowes\u201d Rochester something for the fact that he has \u201cdeigned\u201d to love her, as it were. She hates the thought that his love might be a \u201cfavor\u201d to her. Thus, Jane\u2019s feelings and desires for Rochester are tightly bound up with her feelings about her social position (her status as an employee and her experiences of economic dependence) and her position as a woman. She is very sensitive to the hierarchy and power dynamic implicit in marriage, and despite her statement that she is forced to \u201cyield\u201d to her feelings for Rochester, she does not desire the complete surrender that heroines in romance novels experience. The storybook wedding toward which these chapters appear to lead cannot succeed, because Jane will only be able to occupy the role of wife on her own, quite different, terms.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210123075639/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/section5/"}