{"name": "Chapters 1\u20134", "summary": "Chapter 1 The novel opens on a dreary November afternoon at Gateshead, the home of the wealthy Reed family. A young girl named Jane Eyre sits in the drawing room reading Bewick\u2019s History of British Birds. Jane\u2019s aunt, Mrs. Reed, has forbidden her niece to play with her cousins Eliza, Georgiana, and the bullying John. John chides Jane for being a lowly orphan who is only permitted to live with the Reeds because of his mother\u2019s charity. John then hurls a book at the young girl, pushing her to the end of her patience. Jane finally erupts, and the two cousins fight. Mrs. Reed holds Jane responsible for the scuffle and sends her to the \u201cred-room\u201d\u2014the frightening chamber in which her Uncle Reed died\u2014as punishment.  Chapter 2 Two servants, Miss Abbott and Bessie Lee, escort Jane to the red-room, and Jane resists them with all of her might. Once locked in the room, Jane catches a glimpse of her ghastly figure in the mirror, and, shocked by her meager presence, she begins to reflect on the events that have led her to such a state. She remembers her kind Uncle Reed bringing her to Gateshead after her parents\u2019 death, and she recalls his dying command that his wife promise to raise Jane as one of her own. Suddenly, Jane is struck with the impression that her Uncle Reed\u2019s ghost is in the room, and she imagines that he has come to take revenge on his wife for breaking her promise. Jane cries out in terror, but her aunt believes that she is just trying to escape her punishment, and she ignores her pleas. Jane faints in exhaustion and fear.  Chapter 3 When she wakes, Jane finds herself in her own bedroom, in the care of Mr. Lloyd, the family\u2019s kind apothecary. Bessie is also present, and she expresses disapproval of her mistress\u2019s treatment of Jane. Jane remains in bed the following day, and Bessie sings her a song. Mr. Lloyd speaks with Jane about her life at Gateshead, and he suggests to Jane\u2019s aunt that the girl be sent away to school, where she might find happiness. Jane is cautiously excited at the possibility of leaving Gateshead. Soon after her own reflections on the past in the red-room, Jane learns more of her history when she overhears a conversation between Bessie and Miss Abbott. Jane\u2019s mother was a member of the wealthy Reed family, which strongly disapproved of Jane\u2019s father, an impoverished clergyman. When they married, Jane\u2019s wealthy maternal grandfather wrote his daughter out of his will. Not long after Jane was born, Jane\u2019s parents died from typhus, which Jane\u2019s father contracted while caring for the poor.  Chapter 4  \u201cI am glad you are no relation of mine. I will never call you aunt again as long as I live. I will never come to visit you when I am grown up; and if any one asks me how I liked you, and how you treated me, I will say the very thought of you makes me sick. . . .\u201d See Important Quotations Explained  About two months have passed, and Jane has been enduring even crueler treatment from her aunt and cousins while anxiously waiting for the arrangements to be made for her schooling. Now Jane is finally told she may attend the girls\u2019 school Lowood, and she is introduced to Mr. Brocklehurst, the stern-faced man who runs the school. Mr. Brocklehurst abrasively questions Jane about religion, and he reacts with indignation when she declares that she finds the psalms uninteresting. Jane\u2019s aunt warns Mr. Brocklehurst that the girl also has a propensity for lying, a piece of information that Mr. Brocklehurst says he intends to publicize to Jane\u2019s teachers upon her arrival. When Mr. Brocklehurst leaves, Jane is so hurt by her aunt\u2019s accusation that she cannot stop herself from defending herself to her aunt. Mrs. Reed, for once, seems to concede defeat. Shortly thereafter, Bessie tells Jane that she prefers her to the Reed children. Before Jane leaves for school, Bessie tells her stories and sings her lovely songs.", "analysis": "Chapters 1\u20134 In the early chapters, Bront\u00eb establishes the young Jane\u2019s character through her confrontations with John and Mrs. Reed, in which Jane\u2019s good-hearted but strong-willed determination and integrity become apparent. These chapters also establish the novel\u2019s mood. Beginning with Jane\u2019s experience in the red-room in Chapter 2, we sense a palpable atmosphere of mystery and the supernatural. Like Emily Bront\u00eb\u2019s Wuthering Heights, Jane Eyre draws a great deal of its stylistic inspiration from the Gothic novels that were in vogue during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. These books depicted remote, desolate landscapes, crumbling ruins, and supernatural events, all of which were designed to create a sense of psychological suspense and horror. While Jane Eyre is certainly not a horror novel, and its intellectually ambitious criticisms of society make it far more than a typical Gothic romance, it is Bront\u00eb\u2019s employment of Gothic conventions that gives her novel popular as well as intellectual appeal.<PARAGRAPH>From its beginning, Jane Eyre explores and challenges the social preconceptions of nineteenth-century Victorian society. Themes of social class, gender relations, and injustice predominate throughout. Jane Eyre begins her story as an orphan raised by a wealthy and cultivated family, and this ambiguous social standing motivates much of the novel\u2019s internal tension and conflict. Jane\u2019s education and semi-aristocratic lifestyle are those of the upper class, but she has no money. As a penniless orphan forced to live on the charity of others, Jane is a kind of second-class citizen. In some ways she is below even the servants, who certainly have no obligation to treat her respectfully. The tensions of this contradiction emerge in the very first chapter of the novel, when Jane suffers teasing and punishment at the hands of John Reed and his hateful mother. Jane\u2019s banishment to the red-room exemplifies her inferior position with regard to the rest of the members of the Reed household. The red-room is the first in a series of literal and metaphorical imprisonments in the novel. Although Jane\u2019s imprisonment in the red-room is real, she will encounter spiritual, intellectual, and emotional imprisonment throughout the book. The rigid Victorian hierarchies of social class and gender will pose challenges to her freedom of movement and personal growth, and corrupt morals and religion will also constitute menaces to her ability to realize her dreams for herself. Jane will even come to fear \u201censlavement\u201d to her own passions. At the same time, the red-room is also symbolic of Jane\u2019s feeling of isolation with respect to every community: she is \u201clocked in,\u201d but she is also, in a sense, \u201clocked out.\u201d Again, class and gender hierarchies will contribute to Jane\u2019s sense of exile. For example, her position as a governess at Thornfield once again situates her in a strange borderland between the upper class and the servant class, so that she feels part of neither group.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210123075639/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/section1/"}