{"name": "Chapter 42", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421025427/https://www.gradesaver.com/bleak-house/study-guide/summary-chapters-39-42", "summary": "Chapter 42 brings Tulkinghorn back to London, where he converses with Snagsby. Mr. Snagsby has been harassed by the discarded maid, Mademoiselle Hortense, who tries desperately to contact Tulkinghorn. Hortense is resentful of Tulkinghorn, because he used her to gain information through Jo by the ruse of dressing in Hortense's clothing. She has not been given any consideration of a new position, though he had told her he would do so. He goes back on his promise and threatens Hortense with jail. The woman leaves, vowing to hound Tulkinghorn forever", "analysis": "The incredibly taut scene of Tulkinghorn telling Lady Dedlock's story to a room of her family and guests shows the nearly superhuman amount of self-control that Lady Dedlock has, and the nearly subhuman amount of humanity that Tulkinghorn has.  He verbally tortures her, in front of the most sensitive of witnesses, apparently out of the joy of hurting her.  He delights in secrets, and the power they give him over others.  He has proved to be a misogynist, being unmarried himself: we recall his thoughts earlier in the novel that women cause most of the trouble in the world, but also make a lot of business for lawyers. It really seems as if this might be the end for Lady Dedlock -- she is so determined to leave on the night of Tulkinghorn's revelation, and only the thought of hurting Sir Leicester so dreadfully keeps her back.  She is getting to the point where she has less and less to lose, which makes her dangerous. The equally sub-human Hortense arrives and demands retribution from Tulkinghorn, only to be rebuffed.  She is seen as most tenacious and single-minded woman, who hates her former mistress and can only obtain employment for herself by squeezing others.  Snagsby seems to be quite victimized by her. Dickens stars throwing clues around willy-nilly at this point.  Both Lady Dedlock and Hortense have reason to want Tulkinghorn dead, but does Sir Leicester actually know the secret, too?  Tulkinghorn's death is foreshadowed, but it is still done skillfully enough to be unexpected. There is a sharp satire of British political parties at the beginning of Chapter 42, which doesn't really add anything to the story.  Like the call for legal reform that echoes throughout Bleak House, the sense in this political debate that the old, corrupted system might be giving way to a more enlightened and effective reform system resonates with the social, political, economic critique at the heart of the novel."}