{"name": "Act II", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201130174449/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/h/hedda-gabler/summary-and-analysis/act-ii", "summary": "As the curtain rises, Hedda is busy loading one of her pistols. There is nothing else to do besides shoot, she tells Judge Brack, who has come to see George. As they chat, Hedda tells him how bored she was during her wedding trip. She complains that her husband, with his everlasting talk about medieval civilization, is also boring. She is glad that Brack is a lively conversationalist who is \"not at all a specialist.\" Her visitor wonders why Hedda accepted George in the first place. \"My day was done,\" she sighs. \"I had positively danced myself tired, my dear judge.\" Besides, among all her suitors, George, \"who is correctness itself,\" was the one who offered marriage and a promising economic future; she saw no reason to refuse his proposal. Brack, having himself been one of Hedda's admirers, admits that he never considered marriage. He enjoys being their family friend, he says, adding, \"especially a friend of the mistress of the house.\" Very smoothly, he suggests that Hedda accept him as a third party in her domestic circle, for a \"triangular friendship\" will be convenient to all concerned. Hedda would then be able to enjoy the companionship of one who is not \"a specialist,\" and Brack's relation with George would continue as before. Hedda agrees without committing herself. At this moment, George enters. He has just visited his invalid Aunt Rina, who is very sick, and he has brought some books, including the recent publication by Eilert Lovborg. Although George expects to attend Brack's bachelor party this evening, he says he is eager to begin reading Lovborg's book and will come downstairs when it is time to leave. Hedda and the judge are free to continue their conversation. Brack cannot understand why she is constantly bored; isn't she mistress of the very house she had set her heart on? She never liked this villa, replies Hedda. The matter came up when George escorted her home from a party one evening. As a pretext for conversation with the shy historian, Hedda relates, she pretended great interest in the villa they were just passing. This sham enthusiasm provided the first bond of sympathy between herself and George; from this followed the courtship, engagement, and eventual marriage. Brack observes that she requires a vocation as a relief from boredom. Hedda confesses she would like to try and push George into politics, but now that they have such meager finances this is impossible. Having the responsibility of a child would give her life an objective, Brack ventures. \"No responsibilities for me,\" Hedda retorts angrily, and the judge remarks that her instincts are very unlike those of ordinary women. She despairs her purposeless life. \"I often think there is only one thing in the world I have any turn for,\" Hedda observes darkly, \" -- boring myself to death.\" George, dressed for the dinner, comes to ask if Lovborg left any message. Don't expect him to join the party, Hedda says; he shall spend the evening with herself and Thea. At this moment, Lovborg enters. When they discuss his latest book, the writer denies its virtues, saying it is just a sop he threw to the critics. \"This is the real book,\" he says drawing a packet from his coat, \"the book I have put my true self into.\" Dealing with the \"civilizing forces of the future,\" the manuscript excites George's curiosity and he is eager for Lovborg to read aloud from it. George is further delighted when his friend promises not to compete with him for the professorship. The only interest Lovborg has in making his scheduled lecture tour, he tells George, is to accomplish a \"moral victory.\" Refusing to drink a glass of punch with Brack and George, Lovborg joins Hedda, and she shows him the photograph album of their wedding journey. While she impersonally points out dull landscapes, Lovborg reminds her of the time when they were close comrades and he exposed all his secret thoughts to her. Her interest was not motivated by love, she admits, but by curiosity to learn about the outside world. \"Comradeship in the thirst of life\" could have continued even when they became serious lovers, Lovborg pursues. He regrets that she did not shoot him down as she threatened, for he still finds her lovely and fascinating. I was afraid of a scandal, replies Hedda, and adds, \"The fact that I dared not shoot you down -- that was not my most arrant cowardice -- that evening.\" Lovborg is filled with emotion. \"Ah, Hedda! Hedda Gabler!\" he murmurs. \"Now I begin to see a hidden reason beneath our comradeship! You and I! After all, then, it was your craving for life -- \" and he understands that she was afraid to give herself in love. Mrs. Elvsted appears, and as they sit down together, Lovborg exclaims how courageous and lovely and inspiring Thea has been for him. When Lovborg refuses her offer of punch, Hedda subtly taunts him for feeling insecure about his temperance vow. She says that George and Brack also noticed his lack of self-confidence. Again Lovborg refuses to drink, and Hedda turns smilingly to Thea. \"You see,\" she says, \"he is as firm as a rock.\" Thea needn't have run to her house, distracted with fear and worry about her friend's will power. Deeply injured at this lack of trust, Lovborg downs two cocktails in vengeance. Then he announces that he will, after all, join George and Brack at this evening's dinner party. Hedda assures them she will entertain Mrs. Elvsted until the writer returns to escort her home. When the men go out, Hedda comforts the agitated Thea. He will return at ten o'clock, she tells her friend. \"I can see him already -- flushed and fearless -- with vine leaves in his hair.\" As the curtain falls, the victorious Hedda draws Thea, limp with exhaustion and anxiety, into the dining room for tea.", "analysis": "In this act, Hedda fully expresses her desire to have power over someone. Frustrated at being unable to push her husband into a political career, incapable of maternal feelings, Hedda strives to compete with Thea for her influence over Lovborg. Having restored his liberty, she now looks forward to Eilert's fulfilling her romantic image of him as the incarnation of \"the joy of life\": he shall return \"flushed and fearless with vine leaves in his hair!\" That she has at once destroyed Thea's life work and Lovborg's morale is unimportant to Hedda; she merely wishes to have proof of her own worth by having power over someone. At the same time that her craving for life distinguishes Hedda from \"ordinary women,\" she shows, in this act, her deep commitment to the same bourgeois ethics which chain a woman to her domestic duties. Expressing to the judge that she accepted George Tesman because he \"is correctness itself,\" Hedda implicitly rejects Brack's proposition of a domestic triangle: such a scandalous relationship would be repugnant to her. The judge, not recognizing that Hedda maintains such strict conventions, believes she has accepted his frank proposal. Eilert Lovborg, however, shows more insight into Hedda's nature. When he accuses her of cowardice, he recognizes that she was too much a conformist to love an erratic and unconventional personality. Nevertheless, at the time of their youthful friendship, Hedda expressed her \"craving for life\" by being fascinated by Eilert's intensity and brilliance; extracting detailed confessions from him was her way of vicariously experiencing a liberated and excessive way of life she was too afraid to live for herself."}