{"name": "Chapter 34", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Thirty-Four Summary: Newland is now fifty-seven and he is remembering his life while sitting at hiswriting table. He thinks about his son Dallas and his daughter Mary. Mary married one of Reggie Chivers1s dullest sons. Dallas became an architect and Newland became a politician, briefly. Newland realizes that he has become a \"good citizen\" although he has missed the \"flower of life. Newland respected the duty of marriage and mourned when May died. Dallas calls his father on the telephone and tells him that he is going to Paris on business; Newland must accompany him. PARAGRAPH>Newland reflects that so much had changed in his world. Dallas, his eldest son, was in fact marrying on e of :Beaufort1s bastards\", Fanny Beaufort, and no one cared. PARAGRAPH>Newland goes to Paris with his son; there, Dallas informs him that Ellen is expecting them in the evening. Dallas says that Newland should definitely go see her because Ellen was once \"Newland1s Fanny\", the \"woman Newland would have chucked everything for, but didn1t. Dallas reveals that May said, on her death bed, that she asked Newland to give up the thing he wanted most, and he did. Newland says simply, \"She didn1t ask. Dallas then remarks that May and Newland never told each other anything; they lived in a silent \"deaf and dumb asylum. PARAGRAPH>When Newland and Dallas arrive in Ellen1s neighborhood; Newland decided that he doesn1t want to go up and see her. When Dallas asks him what she should say on his behalf, he says, say that I1m \"Old-fashioned. PARAGRAPH>Dallas goes to see Ellen and Newland sits on the bench outside her building for a long time; when a servant comes to shut her shutters, Newland decides to leave the neighborhood. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: This chapter is written to show, quite ironically, that all the prohibitions that \"bent and bound\" Newland no longer exist a generation later. His son Dallas is able to live the life that Newland would have lived if he had not had Society choosing the women he mustt marry, the profession he would have, the way he would speak. Dallas makes fun of Newland for living such a life without passion, living in a \"deaf and dumb asylum\" for so many years. Newland even recognizes that the death of May has liberated him to finally be with his true love, Ellen, but habit has made him a coward and trapped in the same day-to-day life. PARAGRAPH>What is so sad about the ending is that earlier in the novel there was always someone to blame for why Newland and Ellen could not be together. First, Ellen was still married; then the wedding was moved forward; then May was pregnant. But now, at the end, there is nothing stopping Newland from meeting Ellen. But Newland has become so inculcated by his old society values that he can1t even act when there are no prohibitions. PARAGRAPH>Now, the theme of the book becomes tricky. Prior to this chapter, one could make an easy case that Society prevented people from realizing their dreams. But now we see, that it is Newland1s own cowardice that prevents him from being happy. Society becomes just an excuse for why people don1t seek out their dreams. Beaufort is an example of a man from his own generation who found happiness despite the regulations, his own financial destruction and the disdain of society. Wharton1s point seems to be that people should not blame their society for their inability to act  the rules and norms of society change rapidly, so it is only one1s personal standards that can be constant and abided by", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-30-34"}