{"name": "Chapter 31", "summary": "Chapter Thirty-One Summary: Newland begins walking home from Catherine1s. In his mind, he wrestles with the plausibility of really having an affair with Ellen. He goes to the Beaufort1s home, since Catherine informed him that Ellen is there. He meets Ellen there and they decide to meet the next day at the Art Museum. At the museum, they look at relics. Elen says, \"it seems cruel that after a while nothing matters any more than these little things, that used to necessary and important to forgotten people, and now have to be guessed at under a magnifying glass and labeled: Use Unknown. 1 Ellen realizes that her presence so near to Newland will endanger his marriage; she is deeply afraid of having a tawdry affair and becoming \"just like the others\". So, she and Newland decide that they will \"come to each other\"  once and then she will return to Europe. Then Ellen exclaims that she is late and leaves Newland in the museum. Newland returns home and May is out; she returns and says that she just came back from a long talk with Ellen. May seems happy and sad; she suddenly has a better esteem for Ellen. At the same time, she flings her arms around Newland in a tearful embrace exclaiming, \"You haven1t kissed me today. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: It1s fascinating that Newland and Ellen arrange their meeting in the museum. Here we see an inversion of public and private spaces: the museum, a very public location is now a \"private\" romantic trysting place. This sort of inversion is apparent in other interesting interactions between Ellen and Newland throughout the book. PARAGRAPH>Ellen1s and Newland1s reaction to the artifacts explains one of the ironies of the book. While this entire novel is about the forbidding conventions of society that interfere with the machinations of a love-affair, those conventions, like the relics, are soon to become obsolete with \"Use Unknown. The conventions of New York society are symbolized by the relics sitting in the case; yet ironically, Ellen and Newland still feel confined by the conventions even though they realize the conventions are soon to become archaic. PARAGRAPH>May1s meeting with Ellen is very suspicious; we will find out in later chapters why this meeting will be important", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-30-34"}