{"name": "Chapter 8", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Eight Summary: This chapter gives some background on Ellen1s past. Ellen1s parents had been avid travelers and they died early in Ellen1s life. She lived with her aunt Medora Manson who was sort of eccentric. She would dress Ellen in crimson merino and amber beads and did not allow her to mourn for her parents as long as was \"proper\". PARAGRAPH>She was the only young woman present at the reception for the Duke. After dinner, to many people1s surprise, the Duke headed straight to Ellen where they talked for a while. Then, she left his side,  and sat next to Newland. Ellen asks if Newland1s engagement to May was arranged or just sheerly romantic. Newland balks  no marriages are arranged in America, he says. Upon getting up, she tells Newland that she expects him to visit her tomorrow after five PM. Then, there is a line of people ready to speak to Ellen; these are the same people that had rejected the invitation to meet her earlier. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: This chapter is full of ironies. First, Newland becomes enraptured with Ellen because she defies propriety  yet, this is the one thing that is supposed to make her unacceptable. For example, she explains that the Duke is very dull and Newland thinks it is \"undeniably exciting\" that she would know him well enough to make the claim and be uninhibited enough to express it. Also ironic is that Newland would claim that his relationship with May is just romantic when it is clear that they are together simply because they are the \"perfect match\" in terms of the family backgrounds and not because they had fallen in love on their own. It is also ironic that although May is incredibly beautiful, it is the touch of Ellen1s fan that excites him like a caress. Also, it is the Duke who finds May the \"most handsome woman in the room\"; yet, he is incredibly dull. It makes us wonder if May is handsome only to \"dull\" people. Is Newland beginning to break from convention and take less interest in her. PARAGRAPH>This chapter is also brilliant in that Wharton clearly articulates some of the stranger codes of this society. Women should not, for example, leave a man1s side and walk across a room unescorted to join the company of another man. Why are these codes important to this society. Are they stifling or liberating. PARAGRAPH>Also, the contrast between May and Ellen is striking and important in this chapter. Ellen is described as aging; with \"paled red cheeks. May, on the other hand, looks like an immortal goddess, dressed in white like \"Diana alighting from the chase. When Ellen is described, she is always described by her humanness  she ages, looks plain and experienced. May is described as superhuman and impossibly innocent in her brilliant white. This contrast runs through the novel", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10"}