{"name": "The Custom-House Introductory", "summary": "The Custom House Introductory to The Scarlet Letter  A writer of story-books! What kind of a business in life,\u2014what mode of glorifying God, or being serviceable to mankind in his day and generation,\u2014may that be? See Important Quotations Explained  This introduction provides a frame for the main narrative of The Scarlet Letter. The nameless narrator, who shares quite a few traits with the book\u2019s author, takes a post as the \u201cchief executive officer,\u201d or surveyor, of the Salem Custom House. (\u201cCustoms\u201d are the taxes paid on foreign imports into a country; a \u201ccustomhouse\u201d is the building where these taxes are paid.) He finds the establishment to be a run-down place, situated on a rotting wharf in a half-finished building. His fellow workers mostly hold lifetime appointments secured by family connections. They are elderly and given to telling the same stories repeatedly. The narrator finds them to be generally incompetent and innocuously corrupt. The narrator spends his days at the customhouse trying to amuse himself because few ships come to Salem anymore. One rainy day he discovers some documents in the building\u2019s unoccupied second story. Looking through the pile, he notices a manuscript that is bundled with a scarlet, gold-embroidered piece of cloth in the shape of the letter \u201cA.\u201d The narrator examines the scarlet badge and holds it briefly to his chest, but he drops it because it seems to burn him. He then reads the manuscript. It is the work of one Jonathan Pue, who was a customs surveyor a hundred years earlier. An interest in local history led Pue to write an account of events taking place in the middle of the seventeenth century\u2014a century before Pue\u2019s time and two hundred years before the narrator\u2019s. The narrator has already mentioned his unease about attempting to make a career out of writing. He believes that his Puritan ancestors, whom he holds in high regard, would find it frivolous and \u201cdegenerate.\u201d Nevertheless, he decides to write a fictional account of Hester Prynne\u2019s experiences. It will not be factually precise, but he believes that it will be faithful to the spirit and general outline of the original. While working at the customhouse, surrounded by uninspiring men, the narrator finds himself unable to write. When a new president is elected, he loses his politically appointed job and, settling down before a dim fire in his parlor, begins to write his \u201cromance,\u201d which becomes the body of The Scarlet Letter.  Read a translation of \t\t\t\t The Custom House Introductory to The Scarlet Letter\u00a0\u2192 Analysis This section introduces us to the narrator and establishes his desire to contribute to American culture. Although this narrator seems to have much in common with Nathaniel Hawthorne himself\u2014Hawthorne also worked as a customs officer, lost his job due to political changes, and had Puritan ancestors whose legacy he considered both a blessing and a curse\u2014it is important not to conflate the two storytellers. The narrator is not just a stand-in for Hawthorne; he is carefully constructed to enhance the book aesthetically and philosophically. Moreover, Hawthorne sets him up to parallel Hester Prynne in significant ways. Like Hester, the narrator spends his days surrounded by people from whom he feels alienated. In his case, it is his relative youth and vitality that separates him from the career customs officers. Hester\u2019s youthful zest for life may have indirectly caused her alienation as well, spurring her to her sin. Similarly, like Hester, the narrator seeks out the \u201cfew who will understand him,\u201d and it is to this select group that he addresses both his own story and the tale of the scarlet letter. The narrator points out the connection between Hester and himself when he notes that he will someday be reduced to a name on a custom stamp, much as she has been reduced to a pile of old papers and a scrap of cloth. The narrator\u2019s identification with Hester enables the reader to universalize her story and to see its application to another society. Despite his devotion to Hester\u2019s story, the narrator has trouble writing it. First, he feels that his Puritan ancestors would find it frivolous, and indeed he is not able to write until he has been relieved of any real career responsibilities. Second, he knows that his audience will be small, mostly because he is relating events that happened some two hundred years ago. His time spent in the company of the other customhouse men has taught the narrator that it will be difficult to write in such a way as to make his story accessible to all types of people\u2014particularly to those no longer young at heart. But he regards it as part of his challenge to try to tell Hester\u2019s story in a way that makes it both meaningful and emotionally affecting to all readers. His last step in preparing to write is to stop battling the \u201creal world\u201d of work and small-mindedness and to give himself up to the \u201cromance\u201d atmosphere of his story. The narrator finds writing therapeutic. Contrary to his Puritan ancestors\u2019 assertions, he also discovers it to be practical: his introduction provides a cogent discourse on American history and culture. Hawthorne wrote at a time when America sought to distinguish itself from centuries of European tradition by producing uniquely \u201cAmerican\u201d writers\u2014those who, like Hawthorne, would encourage patriotism by enlarging the world\u2019s sense of America\u2019s comparatively brief history.<PARAGRAPH>Yet Hawthorne, like the narrator, had to balance the need to establish a weighty past with the equally compelling need to write an interesting and relevant story. Neither the narrator nor Hawthorne wants to see his work pigeonholed as \u201conly\u201d American. Americanness remains both a promise and a threat, just as the eagle over the customhouse door both offers shelter and appears ready to attack. The tale of the scarlet letter may add to the legitimacy of American history and culture, but in order to do so it must transcend its Americanness and establish a universal appeal: only then can American culture hold its own in the world. Hester\u2019s story comes to us twice removed. It is filtered first through John Pue and then through the narrator. Awareness of the story\u2019s various stages of treatment gives the reader a greater sense of its remoteness from contemporary life, of its antique qualities\u2014it is a history with a history. Yet the story\u2019s survival over the years speaks to the profundity of its themes: the narrator has found, in American history and in Hester\u2019s life, a tale rich in philosophical meaning.", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210228013713/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/scarlet/section1/"}