ACT V. Scene I.

The street, near Leonato's house.

Enter Leonato and his brother [ Antonio].


  Ant. If you go on thus, you will kill yourself,
    And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
    Against yourself.

  Leon. I pray thee cease thy counsel,
    Which falls into mine ears as profitless
    As water in a sieve. Give not me counsel,
    Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
    But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
    Bring me a father that so lov'd his child,
    Whose joy of her is overwhelm'd like mine,
    And bid him speak to me of patience.
    Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
    And let it answer every strain for strain,
    As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
    In every lineament, branch, shape, and form.
    If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
    Bid sorrow wag, cry 'hem' when he should groan,
    Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
    With candle-wasters--bring him yet to me,
    And I of him will gather patience.
    But there is no such man; for, brother, men
    Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
    Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
    Their counsel turns to passion, which before
    Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
    Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
    Charm ache with air and agony with words.
    No, no! 'Tis all men's office to speak patience
    To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
    But no man's virtue nor sufficiency
    To be so moral when he shall endure
    The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel.
    My griefs cry louder than advertisement.

  Ant. Therein do men from children nothing differ.

  Leon. I pray thee peace. I will be flesh and blood;
    For there was never yet philosopher
    That could endure the toothache patiently,
    However they have writ the style of gods
    And made a push at chance and sufferance.

  Ant. Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.
    Make those that do offend you suffer too.

  Leon. There thou speak'st reason. Nay, I will do so.
    My soul doth tell me Hero is belied;
    And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince,
    And all of them that thus dishonour her.

              Enter Don Pedro and Claudio.


  Ant. Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.

  Pedro. Good den, Good den.

  Claud. Good day to both of you.

  Leon. Hear you, my lords!

  Pedro. We have some haste, Leonato.

  Leon. Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord.
    Are you so hasty now? Well, all is one.

  Pedro. Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.

  Ant. If he could right himself with quarrelling,
    Some of us would lie low.

  Claud. Who wrongs him?

  Leon. Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou!
    Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
    I fear thee not.

  Claud. Mary, beshrew my hand
    If it should give your age such cause of fear.
    In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.

  Leon. Tush, tush, man! never fleer and jest at me
    I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
    As under privilege of age to brag
    What I have done being young, or what would do,
    Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
    Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me
    That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by
    And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
    Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
    I say thou hast belied mine innocent child;
    Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
    And she lied buried with her ancestors-
    O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
    Save this of hers, fram'd by thy villany!

  Claud. My villany?

  Leon. Thine, Claudio; thine I say.

  Pedro. You say not right, old man.

  Leon. My lord, my lord,
    I'll prove it on his body if he dare,
    Despite his nice fence and his active practice,
    His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.

  Claud. Away! I will not have to do with you.

  Leon. Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd my child.
    If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
    And. He shall kill two of us, and men indeed
    But that's no matter; let him kill one first.
    Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.
    Come, follow me, boy,. Come, sir boy, come follow me.
    Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence!
    Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.

  Leon. Brother--

  Ant. Content yourself. God knows I lov'd my niece,
    And she is dead, slander'd to death by villains,
    That dare as well answer a man indeed
    As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
    Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!

  Leon. Brother Anthony--

  Ant. Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
    And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
    Scambling, outfacing, fashion-monging boys,
    That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
    Go anticly, show outward hideousness,
    And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words,
    How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
    And this is all.

  Leon. But, brother Anthony--

  Ant. Come, 'tis no matter.
    Do not you meddle; let me deal in this.

  Pedro. Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
    My heart is sorry for your daughter's death;
    But, on my honour, she was charg'd with nothing
    But what was true, and very full of proof.

  Leon. My lord, my lord--

  Pedro. I will not hear you.

  Leon. No? Come, brother, away!--I will be heard.

  Ant. And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
                                                    Exeunt ambo.

                  Enter Benedick.


  Pedro. See, see! Here comes the man we went to seek.

  Claud. Now, signior, what news?

  Bene. Good day, my lord.

  Pedro. Welcome, signior. You are almost come to part almost a fray.

  Claud. We had lik'd to have had our two noses snapp'd off with two
    old men without teeth.

  Pedro. Leonato and his brother. What think'st thou? Had we fought,
    I doubt we should have been too young for them.

  Bene. In a false quarrel there is no true valour. I came to seek
    you both.

  Claud. We have been up and down to seek thee; for we are high-proof
    melancholy, and would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou use thy
    wit?

  Bene. It is in my scabbard. Shall I draw it?

  Pedro. Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?

  Claud. Never any did so, though very many have been beside their
    wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrel--draw to
    pleasure us.

  Pedro. As I am an honest man, he looks pale. Art thou sick or
    angry?

  Claud. What, courage, man! What though care kill'd a cat, thou hast
    mettle enough in thee to kill care.

  Bene. Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career an you charge it
    against me. I pray you choose another subject.

  Claud. Nay then, give him another staff; this last was broke cross.

  Pedro. By this light, he changes more and more. I think he be angry
    indeed.

  Claud. If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.

  Bene. Shall I speak a word in your ear?

  Claud. God bless me from a challenge!

  Bene. [aside to Claudio] You are a villain. I jest not; I will make
    it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare. Do
    me right, or I will protest your cowardice. You have kill'd a
    sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me hear
    from you.

  Claud. Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.

  Pedro. What, a feast, a feast?

  Claud. I' faith, I thank him, he hath bid me to a calve's head and
    a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my
    knife's naught. Shall I not find a woodcock too?

  Bene. Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.

  Pedro. I'll tell thee how Beatrice prais'd thy wit the other day. I
    said thou hadst a fine wit: 'True,' said she, 'a fine little
    one.' 'No,' said I, 'a great wit.' 'Right,' says she, 'a great
    gross one.' 'Nay,' said I, 'a good wit.' 'Just,' said she,
'it
    hurts nobody.' 'Nay,' said I, 'the gentleman is wise.'
'Certain,'
    said she, a wise gentleman.' 'Nay,' said I, 'he hath the
    tongues.' 'That I believe' said she, 'for he swore a thing to me
    on Monday night which he forswore on Tuesday morning. There's a
    double tongue; there's two tongues.' Thus did she an hour
    together transshape thy particular virtues. Yet at last she
    concluded with a sigh, thou wast the proper'st man in Italy.

  Claud. For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.

  Pedro. Yea, that she did; but yet, for all that, an if she did not
    hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. The old man's
    daughter told us all.

  Claud. All, all! and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the
    garden.

  Pedro. But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the
    sensible Benedick's head?

  Claud. Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick, the married
    man'?

  Bene. Fare you well, boy; you know my mind. I will leave you now to
    your gossiplike humour. You break jests as braggards do their
    blades, which God be thanked hurt not. My lord, for your many
    courtesies I thank you. I must discontinue your company. Your
    brother the bastard is fled from Messina. You have among you
    kill'd a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he
    and I shall meet; and till then peace be with him.
                                                         [Exit.]

  Pedro. He is in earnest.

  Claud. In most profound earnest; and, I'll warrant you, for the

    love of Beatrice.

  Pedro. And hath challeng'd thee.

  Claud. Most sincerely.

  Pedro. What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and
    hose and leaves off his wit!

  Enter Constables [Dogberry and Verges, with the Watch, leading]
                      Conrade and Borachio.


  Claud. He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to
    such a man.

  Pedro. But, soft you, let me be! Pluck up, my heart, and be sad!
    Did he not say my brother was fled?

  Dog. Come you, sir. If justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er
    weigh more reasons in her balance. Nay, an you be a cursing
    hypocrite once, you must be look'd to.

  Pedro. How now? two of my brother's men bound? Borachio one.

  Claud. Hearken after their offence, my lord.

  Pedro. Officers, what offence have these men done?

  Dog. Marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they
    have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and
    lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified
    unjust things; and to conclude, they are lying knaves.

  Pedro. First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee
    what's their offence; sixth and lastly, why they are committed;
    and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.

  Claud. Rightly reasoned, and in his own division; and by my troth
    there's one meaning well suited.

  Pedro. Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to
    your answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be
    understood. What's your offence?

  Bora. Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine answer. Do you
    hear me, and let this Count kill me. I have deceived even your
    very eyes. What your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow
    fools have brought to light, who in the night overheard me
    confessing to this man, how Don John your brother incensed me to
    slander the Lady Hero; how you were brought into the orchard and
    saw me court Margaret in Hero's garments; how you disgrac'd her
    when you should marry her. My villany they have upon record,
    which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my
    shame. The lady is dead upon mine and my master's false
    accusation; and briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a
    villain.

  Pedro. Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?

  Claud. I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it.

  Pedro. But did my brother set thee on to this?

  Bora. Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.

  Pedro. He is compos'd and fram'd of treachery,
    And fled he is upon this villany.

  Claud. Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
    In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first.

  Dog. Come, bring away the plaintiffs. By this time our sexton hath
    reformed Signior Leonato of the matter. And, masters, do not
    forget to specify, when time and place shall serve, that I am an
    ass.

  Verg. Here, here comes Master Signior Leonato, and the sexton too.

          Enter Leonato, his brother [Antonio], and the Sexton.


  Leon. Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes,
    That, when I note another man like him,
    I may avoid him. Which of these is he?

  Bora. If you would know your wronger, look on me.

  Leon. Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd
    Mine innocent child?

  Bora. Yea, even I alone.

  Leon. No, not so, villain! thou beliest thyself.
    Here stand a pair of honourable men--
    A third is fled--that had a hand in it.
    I thank you princes for my daughter's death.
    Record it with your high and worthy deeds.
    'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.

  Claud. I know not how to pray your patience;
    Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself;
    Impose me to what penance your invention
    Can lay upon my sin. Yet sinn'd I not
    But in mistaking.

  Pedro. By my soul, nor I!
    And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
    I would bend under any heavy weight
    That he'll enjoin me to.

  Leon. I cannot bid you bid my daughter live-
    That were impossible; but I pray you both,
    Possess the people in Messina here
    How innocent she died; and if your love
    Can labour aught in sad invention,
    Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb,
    And sing it to her bones--sing it to-night.
    To-morrow morning come you to my house,
    And since you could not be my son-in-law,
    Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter,
    Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
    And she alone is heir to both of us.
    Give her the right you should have giv'n her cousin,
    And so dies my revenge.

  Claud. O noble sir!
    Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me.
    I do embrace your offer; and dispose
    For henceforth of poor Claudio.

  Leon. To-morrow then I will expect your coming;
    To-night I take my leave. This naughty man
    Shall fact to face be brought to Margaret,
    Who I believe was pack'd in all this wrong,
    Hir'd to it by your brother.

  Bora. No, by my soul, she was not;
    Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me;
    But always hath been just and virtuous
    In anything that I do know by her.

  Dog. Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this
    plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass. I beseech you let
    it be rememb'red in his punishment. And also the watch heard them
    talk of one Deformed. They say he wears a key in his ear, and a
    lock hanging by it, and borrows money in God's name, the which he
    hath us'd so long and never paid that now men grow hard-hearted
    and will lend nothing for God's sake. Pray you examine him upon
    that point.

  Leon. I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.

  Dog. Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent youth,
    and I praise God for you.

  Leon. There's for thy pains. [Gives money.]

  Dog. God save the foundation!

  Leon. Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.

  Dog. I leave an arrant knave with your worship, which I beseech
    your worship to correct yourself, for the example of others.
    God keep your worship! I wish your worship well. God restore you
    to health! I humbly give you leave to depart; and if a merry
    meeting may be wish'd, God prohibit it! Come, neighbour.
                                   Exeunt [Dogberry and Verges].

  Leon. Until to-morrow morning, lords, farewell.

  Ant. Farewell, my lords. We look for you to-morrow.

  Pedro. We will not fall.

  Claud. To-night I'll mourn with Hero.
                                 [Exeunt Don Pedro and Claudio.]

  Leon. [to the Watch] Bring you these fellows on.--We'll talk with
      Margaret,
    How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
                                                         Exeunt.





