Scene II.

A room in Leonato's house.

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and Leonato.


  Pedro. I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go
    I toward Arragon.

  Claud. I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.

  Pedro. Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your
    marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear
    it. I will only be bold with Benedick for his company; for, from
    the crown of his head to the sole of his foot, he is all mirth.
    He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bowstring, and the little
    hangman dare not shoot at him. He hath a heart as sound as a
    bell; and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks,
    his tongue speaks.

  Bene. Gallants, I am not as I have been.

  Leon. So say I. Methinks you are sadder.

  Claud. I hope he be in love.

  Pedro. Hang him, truant! There's no true drop of blood in him to be
    truly touch'd with love. If he be sad, he wants money.

  Bene. I have the toothache.

  Pedro. Draw it.

  Bene. Hang it!

  Claud. You must hang it first and draw it afterwards.

  Pedro. What? sigh for the toothache?

  Leon. Where is but a humour or a worm.

  Bene. Well, every one can master a grief but he that has it.

  Claud. Yet say I he is in love.

  Pedro. There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy
    that he hath to strange disguises; as to be a Dutchman to-day, a
    Frenchman to-morrow; or in the shape of two countries at once, as
    a German from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from
    the hip upward, no doublet. Unless he have a fancy to this
    foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no fool for fancy, as you
    would have it appear he is.

  Claud. If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing
    old signs. 'A brushes his hat o' mornings. What should that bode?

  Pedro. Hath any man seen him at the barber's?

  Claud. No, but the barber's man hath been seen with him, and the
     old ornament of his cheek hath already stuff'd tennis balls.

  Leon. Indeed he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.

  Pedro. Nay, 'a rubs himself with civet. Can you smell him out by
    that?

  Claud. That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.

  Pedro. The greatest note of it is his melancholy.

  Claud. And when was he wont to wash his face?

  Pedro. Yea, or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say
    of him.

  Claud. Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is new-crept into a
    lutestring, and now govern'd by stops.

  Pedro. Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him. Conclude, conclude,
    he is in love.

  Claud. Nay, but I know who loves him.

  Pedro. That would I know too. I warrant, one that knows him not.

  Claud. Yes, and his ill conditions; and in despite of all, dies for
    him.

  Pedro. She shall be buried with her face upwards.

  Bene. Yet is this no charm for the toothache. Old signior, walk
    aside with me. I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak
    to you, which these hobby-horses must not hear.
                                  [Exeunt Benedick and Leonato.]

  Pedro. For my life, to break with him about Beatrice!

  Claud. 'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this played their
    parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one
    another when they meet.

                 Enter John the Bastard.


  John. My lord and brother, God save you.

  Pedro. Good den, brother.

  John. If your leisure serv'd, I would speak with you.

  Pedro. In private?

  John. If it please you. Yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I
    would speak of concerns him.

  Pedro. What's the matter?

  John. [to Claudio] Means your lordship to be married tomorrow?

  Pedro. You know he does.

  John. I know not that, when he knows what I know.

  Claud. If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.

  John. You may think I love you not. Let that appear hereafter, and
    aim better at me by that I now will manifest. For my brother, I
    think he holds you well and in dearness of heart hath holp to
    effect your ensuing marriage--surely suit ill spent and labour
    ill bestowed!

  Pedro. Why, what's the matter?

  John. I came hither to tell you, and, circumstances short'ned
    (for she has been too long a-talking of), the lady is disloyal.

  Claud. Who? Hero?

  John. Even she--Leonato's Hero, your Hero, every man's Hero.

  Claud. Disloyal?

  John. The word is too good to paint out her wickedness. I could say
    she were worse; think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to
    it. Wonder not till further warrant. Go but with me to-night, you
    shall see her chamber window ent'red, even the night before her
    wedding day. If you love her then, to-morrow wed her. But it
    would better fit your honour to change your mind.

  Claud. May this be so?

  Pedro. I will not think it.

  John. If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you
    know. If you will follow me, I will show you enough; and when you
    have seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly.

  Claud. If I see anything to-night why I should not marry her
    to-morrow, in the congregation where I should wed, there will I
    shame her.

  Pedro. And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with
    thee to disgrace her.

  John. I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses.
    Bear it coldly but till midnight, and let the issue show itself.

  Pedro. O day untowardly turned!

  Claud. O mischief strangely thwarting!

  John. O plague right well prevented!
    So will you say when you have seen the Sequel.
                                                         Exeunt.





