Scene III.

A street.

Enter Dogberry and his compartner [Verges], with the Watch.


  Dog. Are you good men and true?

  Verg. Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation,
    body and soul.

  Dog. Nay, that were a punishment too good for them if they should
    have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Prince's watch.

  Verg. Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogberry.

  Dog. First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?

  1. Watch. Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George Seacoal; for they can write
    and read.

  Dog. Come hither, neighbour Seacoal. God hath bless'd you with a
    good name. To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune, but
    to write and read comes by nature.

  2. Watch. Both which, Master Constable--

  Dog. You have. I knew it would be your answer. Well, for your
    favour, sir, why, give God thanks and make no boast of it; and
    for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no
    need of such vanity. You are thought here to be the most
    senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch. Therefore
    bear you the lanthorn. This is your charge: you shall comprehend
    all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Prince's
    name.

  2. Watch. How if 'a will not stand?

  Dog. Why then, take no note of him, but let him go, and presently
    call the rest of the watch together and thank God you are rid of
    a knave.

  Verg. If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the
    Prince's subjects.

  Dog. True, and they are to meddle with none but the Prince's
    subjects. You shall also make no noise in the streets; for for
    the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable, and not to be
    endured.

  2. Watch. We will rather sleep than talk. We know what belongs to
    a watch.

  Dog. Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I
    cannot see how sleeping should offend. Only have a care that your
    bills be not stol'n. Well, you are to call at all the alehouses
    and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.

  2. Watch. How if they will not?

  Dog. Why then, let them alone till they are sober. If they make you
    not then the better answer, You may say they are not the men you
    took them for.

  2. Watch. Well, sir.

  Dog. If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your
    office, to be no true man; and for such kind of men, the less you
    meddle or make with them, why, the more your honesty.

  2. Watch. If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on
    him?

  Dog. Truly, by your office you may; but I think they that touch
    pitch will be defil'd. The most peaceable way for you, if you do
    take a thief, is to let him show himself what he is, and steal
    out of your company.

  Verg. You have been always called a merciful man, partner.

  Dog. Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who
    hath any honesty in him.

  Verg. If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the
    nurse and bid her still it.

  2. Watch. How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?

  Dog. Why then, depart in peace and let the child wake her with
    crying; for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baes will
    never answer a calf when he bleats.

  Verg. 'Tis very true.

  Dog. This is the end of the charge: you, constable, are to present
    the Prince's own person. If you meet the Prince in the night,
    you may stay him.

  Verg. Nay, by'r lady, that I think 'a cannot.

  Dog. Five shillings to one on't with any man that knows the
    statutes, he may stay him! Marry, not without the Prince be
    willing; for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is
    an offence to stay a man against his will.

  Verg. By'r lady, I think it be so.

  Dog. Ha, ah, ha! Well, masters, good night. An there be any matter
    of weight chances, call up me. Keep your fellows' counsels and
    your own, and good night. Come, neighbour.

  2. Watch. Well, masters, we hear our charge. Let us go sit here
    upon the church bench till two, and then all to bed.

  Dog. One word more, honest neighbours. I pray you watch about
    Signior Leonato's door; for the wedding being there tomorrow,

    there is a great coil to-night. Adieu. Be vigitant, I beseech
    you.                           Exeunt [Dogberry and Verges].

                     Enter Borachio and Conrade.


  Bora. What, Conrade!

  2. Watch. [aside] Peace! stir not!

  Bora. Conrade, I say!

  Con. Here, man. I am at thy elbow.

  Bora. Mass, and my elbow itch'd! I thought there would a scab
    follow.

  Con. I will owe thee an answer for that; and now forward with thy
    tale.

  Bora. Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drizzles
    rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.

  2. Watch. [aside] Some treason, masters. Yet stand close.

  Bora. Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.

  Con. Is it possible that any villany should be so dear?

  Bora. Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villany
    should be so rich; for when rich villains have need of poor ones,
    poor ones may make what price they will.

  Con. I wonder at it.

  Bora. That shows thou art unconfirm'd. Thou knowest that the
    fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.

  Con. Yes, it is apparel.

  Bora. I mean the fashion.

  Con. Yes, the fashion is the fashion.

  Bora. Tush! I may as well say the fool's the fool. But seest thou
    not what a deformed thief this fashion is?

  2. Watch. [aside] I know that Deformed. 'A bas been a vile thief
    this seven year; 'a goes up and down like a gentleman. I remember
    his name.

  Bora. Didst thou not hear somebody?

  Con. No; 'twas the vane on the house.

  Bora. Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this fashion is?
    how giddily 'a turns about all the hot-bloods between fourteen
    and five-and-thirty? sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoh's
    soldiers in the reechy painting, sometime like god Bel's priests
    in the old church window, sometime like the shaven Hercules in
    the smirch'd worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as

    massy as his club?

  Con. All this I see; and I see that the fashion wears out more
    apparel than the man. But art not thou thyself giddy with the
    fashion too, that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling
    me of the fashion?

  Bora. Not so neither. But know that I have to-night wooed Margaret,
    the Lady Hero's gentlewoman, by the name of Hero. She leans me
    out at her mistress' chamber window, bids me a thousand times
    good night--I tell this tale vilely; I should first tell thee how
    the Prince, Claudio and my master, planted and placed and
    possessed by my master Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this
    amiable encounter.

  Con. And thought they Margaret was Hero?

  Bora. Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio; but the devil my
    master knew she was Margaret; and partly by his oaths, which
    first possess'd them, partly by the dark night, which did deceive
    them, but chiefly by my villany, which did confirm any slander
    that Don John had made, away went Claudio enrag'd; swore he would
    meet her, as he was appointed, next morning at the temple, and
    there, before the whole congregation, shame her with what he saw
    o'ernight and send her home again without a husband.

  2. Watch. We charge you in the Prince's name stand!

  1. Watch. Call up the right Master Constable. We have here
    recover'd the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known
    in the commonwealth.

  2. Watch. And one Deformed is one of them. I know him; 'a wears a
    lock.

  Con. Masters, masters--

  1. Watch. You'll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.

  Con. Masters--

  2. Watch. Never speak, we charge you. Let us obey you to go with
    us.

  Bora. We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of
    these men's bills.

  Con. A commodity in question, I warrant you. Come, we'll obey you.
                                                         Exeunt.





