{"name": "book ii, Chapter XV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-ii-chapters-10-15", "summary": "At the end of the summer, the Cutters leave Black Hawk on a business trip, and Antonia comes to the Burdens to complain about feeling uneasy. Mr. Cutter had put all the silver and important documents under Antonia's bed and told her that she had to sleep there in order to keep them safe. Worried that Mr. Cutter is playing some sort of trick, she gets Jim to sleep at the Cutters in her bed, while she stays with Grandmother. On the third night, Jim awakes to find Mr. Cutter trying to grope him. They get into a fight, with Mr. Cutter beating Jim fiercely about the face. Jim runs back home and in the morning feels disgusted, ashamed, and angry at Antonia. He refuses to see her or a doctor and is worried about word getting around town. When Antonia and Grandmother go over to the Cutters' house to pack up Antonia's belongings, they find her room in a disarray. They also find Mrs. Cutter, who is indignant because her husband intentionally put her on the wrong train so that he could come back to Black Hawk for an intended rendezvous with Antonia. Jim notes that Mr. Cutter came up with a needlessly complex plan specifically to outrage Mrs. Cutter, and he comments that it was obviously Mr. Cutter's greatest joy to make his wife upset.", "analysis": "This section of the book ends on a rather sinister note of violence and messed-up sexuality. It is not a promising conclusion to Jim's life at Black Hawk, and it provides an interesting sequel to Jim's earlier characterization as \"queer. Though Jim and Antonia never become sexually involved, in this chapter Jim gets to sleep in her bed. However, this switching of beds confuses Wick Cutter, who mistakes Jim for Antonia. Cutter starts to grope Jim, and after the two get into a fight, Jim feels ashamed, doesn't want anyone to see him, and is worried that the situation will incite a lot of gossip. After being considered \"queer\" for devoting all his attention to Antonia, this story would, if word got about, insinuate that Jim was queer for another reasonnamely, for being involved with men. While doesn't mind the first connotation of the word, in this case he is resentful of Antonia for once again making him seem \"queer. This episode of marital infidelity and aggressive sexuality is a fitting beginning for the next segment of Antonia's life, which is not the happiest for her. In the Wick Cutter scenario, Antonia is blameless and at the mercy of a rascal, and she is similarly not responsible for what happens to her during the next few years of her life"}