{"name": "book iv, Chapter III", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-iv", "summary": "On the way to see Widow Steavens, Jim looks at the country and seems to remember every single aspect of it. Mrs. Steavens asks him to stay the night, and after dinner she begins to tell Antonia's story: The summer before she was supposed to be married, Antonia used to come to the Widow Steaven's house and sew her fine wedding linen, singing happily in Bohemian. Larry Donovan would write letters to her while working on the railroad, and he told her that they would have to move to Denver. When it came time for her to meet him, Ambrosch did the right thing and gave her a very nice dowry. In Denver, she sent a couple of postcards saying that they would get married soon, after Larry got his promotion. One day, though, Antonia came back on a wagon, and the next day Mrs. Steavens went to visit to see what had happened. Antonia tells her that Larry had gotten fired and only lived with her in Denver until her money ran out, and then he left to go to Mexico to cheat railway passengers. Antonia did not try to get a civil marriage because she didn't want to support him. Mrs. Steavens cries when she hears the story because she thinks Antonia is a good girl. After her marriage fiasco, Antonia starts working in the fields all the time and doesn't visit anyone. Mrs. Steavens worries about her and visits her as much as she can. One day Antonia reminisces about her childhood with Jim and her father, and she says that she feels like she won't live very long so she's just trying to enjoy the fall. During the winter Antonia wears men's outerwear. When she goes into labor, Mrs. Shimerda comes running to the house saying that Ambrosch is behaving like a devil, and Mrs. Steavens goes over and warns Ambrosch not to touch the child. Now the baby is a year and eight months, and Antonia, a good mother, loves it dearly.", "analysis": "In the first paragraph of this chapter, it becomes clear exactly how important the land is to Jim. After seeing the world and all that it has to offer, the country still has a kind of harmony unattainable elsewhere. It is as important to him as an actual person, and indeed, in the novel it seems to acquire a life of its own. Jim is seeing the country from an adult perspective for the first time, and the fact that he sees it in much the same way as he did when he was a child renders the power and pull it has timeless and universal. After being disgraced in her marriage, Antonia shuts herself off from outside society and tries to regain her independence by working the land as she used to. In being jilted, Antonia was helpless and at the mercy of another person. As a young girl, she discovered masculine independence and strength by plowing the ground, and after her marriage scandal, she returns to plowing as a way to rebuild the confidence she once had. She works industriously, begins wearing man's clothing, and starts talking about farming all the time. In this way, she hopes to compensate for the dependency she experienced in waiting for Larry Donovan to marry her. In other words, Antonia returns to the land because it has nurtured and strengthened her in the past, and she hopes that it will do the same again now"}