{"name": "Act I", "summary": "After a six-months wedding trip, the bride and groom have returned home. Aunt Julia, George's aunt, arrives to welcome them the following morning. As the curtain rises, the motherly old lady enters the well-furnished living room. She hands a bouquet of flowers to Bertha, the servant, who places them among the others which decorate the room at every corner. The aunt and the maid converse about the newlyweds, remarking with wonder and pride that the orphan nephew Miss Tesman raised is now a professor married to General Gabler's daughter.\nAt this point George enters, greeting his aunt with warmth and affection. She inquires about the honeymoon, expecting to hear details of the romantic journey the young couple took touring southern Europe. Instead, George delightedly recalls his tours through the archives and the collections of various libraries in order to gather research materials for his intended book, \"The Domestic Industries of Brabant during the Middle Ages.\" His aunt, still curious, asks if George has \"anything special\" to tell her, if he has \"any expectations,\" but George merely answers that he expects to be appointed a professor. Aunt Julia mentions George's former colleague Eilert L\u00f6vborg. Despite publishing a recent book, she says, L\u00f6vborg has fallen a victim to his own misguided excesses. She is glad that her nephew's abilities will no longer be eclipsed by L\u00f6vborg's.\nThis brilliant but undisciplined young man was in love with Hedda some years ago, and they were close comrades. Confessing to her all his extravagant dissipations, his ambitions, the young man exposed his soul to this sheltered girl who was fascinated by a knowledge of life forbidden to her. When the friendship became serious, Hedda threatened L\u00f6vborg with her pistol, and he disappeared from her life from that moment on. George has no knowledge of his wife's former relationship with his friend.\nThe brief mention of L\u00f6vborg prefaces Hedda Gabler's entrance. She is tall and lovely, about twenty-eight years old, and responds coldly to the warmth of Miss Tesman's greeting. She is obviously bored by George's relatives and shows no interest when her husband exclaims with pleasure over the pair of his old slippers Aunt Julia has brought him. Embroidered by Rina, the invalid sister of Miss Tesman, the slippers recall for George cherished memories of his childhood.\nHedda abruptly changes the subject, complaining that the servant has thrown her old bonnet on one of the chairs. The hat, however, belongs to Aunt Julia, who has just purchased it in honor of George's bride. To overcome the embarrassment, George hastily admires the bonnet, then bids his aunt admire Hedda's splendid appearance and to note how she has filled out from the journey. Angry, Hedda insists she looks the same as always, but Miss Tesman is enraptured at the implied pregnancy. Emotionally, she blesses Hedda Tesman \"for George's sake.\" Promising to call each day, she takes her leave.\nThe maid announces an unexpected caller, a younger schoolmate of Hedda and a former acquaintance of George. Nervous and shy, Thea Elvsted explains the purpose of her visit. For the past year, Eilert L\u00f6vborg has lived in her house as tutor to her husband's children. The writer's conduct this past year has been irreproachable, Thea says, and he has managed to complete his successful new book while at the Elvsteds' without once succumbing to temptation. Now that L\u00f6vborg has left their village, she is worried, for he has already remained a week \"in this terrible town\" without sending news of his whereabouts. Thea begs the Tesmans to receive him kindly if Eilert should visit them. Eager to extend hospitality to his former friend, George goes to write a letter of invitation.\nLeft alone with Thea, Hedda aggressively questions the reluctant younger woman, promising that they shall be close friends and address one another as \"du.\" Thea admits that her marriage is not a happy one. She has nothing in common with her elderly husband, who married her because it is cheaper to keep a wife rather than a housekeeper to look after the children.\nGaining confidence, Thea tells Hedda how a great friendship grew between L\u00f6vborg and herself until she gained an influence over him. \"He never wrote anything without my assistance,\" she proudly declares; sharing L\u00f6vborg's work was the happiest time she has known all her life. The relationship means so much to her that Thea has run away from home in order to live where Eilert L\u00f6vborg lives.\nYet her happiness is insecure, she tells Hedda. Although L\u00f6vborg had mentioned it only once, a woman's shadow stands between them. Hedda intently leans forward, eager to hear more. All that L\u00f6vborg said, Thea replies, is that this woman threatened to shoot him with a pistol when they parted. Mrs. Elvsted has heard about a red-haired singer whom Eilert used to visit, and she is especially worried now that this woman is in town again.\nThe maid announces Judge Brack, a family friend who has arranged George's affairs so that he could borrow money for his wedding trip and the villa that Hedda had set her heart on. A handsome mustached gentleman, carefully groomed and youthfully dressed, enters. About forty-five years old, Brack is very smooth in manner and bows gracefully when he and Thea are introduced.\nThe judge talks with George about his debts while Hedda sees her guest to the door. When she returns, Brack announces his bad news: because L\u00f6vborg's book has been received so well, the writer might favorably compete for George's promised professorship. George is thunderstruck, but Hedda shrugs indifferently. \"There will be a sort of sporting interest in that,\" she says, and her husband apologizes for being unable to provide the necessities she expected: a livened footman, a saddle horse, means for \"going out into society.\" After Brack leaves, Hedda concludes wearily, \"I shall have one thing at least to kill time with in the meanwhile \u2014 my pistols, George.\" She crosses to the next room, smiling coldly at her startled husband. \"General Gabler's pistols!\" she adds mockingly, and the curtain rings down.", "analysis": "This first act, besides introducing characters, acquaints the audience with Hedda Gabler's surroundings in her new life as Mrs. Tesman. Brought up as a general's daughter accustomed to travel in aristocratic social circles, Hedda must confront her future as a housewife in a middle-class household. The fact that she is pregnant reinforces her potential role as homemaker. The nature of her doom is underscored by the character of Miss Juliana Tesman, who represents the older generation of domestic womanhood who has devoted her life to the care of others.\nGeorge Tesman, good natured and sentimental, assumes that the duty of a husband is merely to satisfy the domestic requirements of his wife so that she can be happy in the confines of her home. With this in mind, he agrees that they shall keep an open house \u2014 in Hedda's chosen home \u2014 and maintain the luxuries important to proper entertaining. Believing that a woman naturally falls into household routines once she is married, George has no further insight into Hedda's temperament. George's research into the \"domestic industries of medieval Brabant\" is an ironic symbol of his conservative, simple-minded views of married life, as well as a symbol that indicates his inability to encompass other than material details.\nAs to his heroine, Ibsen establishes her main symptoms of disaffection with life: a profound emotional coldness, an incapacity to interest herself in anything besides social pleasures, and a destructlive desire to control the lives of others. Hedda cannot respond to the warmth of Aunt Julia, she cannot abide the idea of expecting a child, and was totally bored during her wedding trip.\nTo further express her emotional sterility, Ibsen shows how Hedda is unable to reciprocate in a relationship. Like a young child, she can only receive without knowing how to give in return. Without reciprocating, she accepts George's love and support; by pretending friendship, she learns all about Thea's personal life yet reveals no confidences of her own. Later on, when L\u00f6vborg recalls his previous relationship with Hedda, he describes how she extracted detailed confessions from him yet withheld her own self-revelations. This intense, almost morbid interest in the lives of others is another aspect of her empty emotional life. At the same time that investigating and analyzing other people's lives is one way for Hedda to gain some understanding of her own unsatisfied nature, she reveals her personal frigidity and adolescent self-centeredness.\nThis first act also demonstrates a pathological quality in Hedda's personality. Cruelly insulting Aunt Julia by complaining that it is the servant's bonnet lying in the chair, Hedda tries to undermine Miss Tesman's sense of worth. Compelling Thea to reveal her innermost feelings, she seems to search for Mrs. Elvsted's weaknesses so she can later use this knowledge for her own selfish purposes. Having established that his heroine is emotionally empty yet eager to learn how other people face life's experiences, Ibsen shows how the imperious and unsubmissive Hedda tries to destroy the personal values of those whose satisfactions she cannot attain.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201130174449/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/h/hedda-gabler/summary-and-analysis/act-i"}