{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 13", "summary": "Chapter 13:<PARAGRAPH>At the outset of spring, a stranger  an exquisitely beautiful young woman of exotic appearance  appears at the family's cottage. Felix is ecstatic to see her, kisses her hands, and refers to her as his \"sweet Arabian\"; later, the creature learns that her true name is Safie. PARAGRAPH>The creature notes that her language is different from that of the cottagers, and that the four humans have great difficulty in understanding one another. They communicate largely through gesticulation, which the creature is initially unable to interpret; he soon realizes, however, that the cottagers are attempting to teach Safie their language. He secretly takes part in her lessons and, in this way, finally begins to master the art of speech. PARAGRAPH>The book, from which Safie's lessons are taken, called the Ruins of Empires, provides the creature with a cursory knowledge of history. He grows to understand the manners, governments, and religions of modern Man, and weeps over the atrocities that human beings commit against one another. Upon hearing of man's obsession with wealth and class, the creature turns away in disgust; he wonders what place he can have among such people, since he owns no property, and is absolutely ignorant of the circumstances of his birth. PARAGRAPH>The creature curses his newfound knowledge, which has caused him to regard himself as a monster and an outcast. He despairs of ever gaining the fellowship of his beloved cottagers, as he is certain that they will recoil from his hideous appearance. At chapter's end, he is friendless, loveless, and almost completely without hope. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The language of Chapter 13 is extremely baroque, and lends the landscape a romantic, unreal quality: skies are described as \"cloudless\"; there are \"a thousand scents of delight, and a thousand sights of beauty\"; Safie is not merely brunette, but has \"shining raven hair. This sort of diction elevates seemingly ordinary events to the level of the spectacular: it reveals the extent to which the creature idealizes the cottagers and all that is associated with them. He worships them, and longs for their love and acceptance. The creature's essential humanity now becomes clear to the reader: he feels sympathy, affection, and desire; he is capable of aesthetic appreciation ; he has mastered language; and he is capable of self-analysis and reflection. PARAGRAPH>In referring to the Ruins of Empires, Shelley subtly reminds the reader of the ways in which humanity itself is monstrous: people commit unspeakable violence against one another, and exploit those who do not possess the trivial virtues of money and noble birth. The creature's horror at these revelations reveals his essential goodness; it also serves to echo the terrified disgust with which the villagers met his own deformity. Once again, Shelley forces us to reconsider the question of monstrousness  here, it seems that it is the neglectful and selfish Frankenstein, and not his suffering creation, who truly deserves to be called a monster. PARAGRAPH>With the creature decrial of his own knowledge, he and Frankenstein become more closely aligned in the reader's mind; indeed, they are nearly indistinguishable. Both creator and creation are made outcasts by what they know; both long for nothing so passionately as they do their former innocence", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420003408/https://www.gradesaver.com/frankenstein/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-16"}