{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 24", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 24:<PARAGRAPH>Frankenstein has lost the capacity for voluntary thought; his entire consciousness is occupied by fantasies of revenge. He resolves to leave Geneva forever because the country has become hateful to him in the absence of his loved ones. Taking a sum of money and his mother's jewels, he goes off in search of the monster. PARAGRAPH>Before leaving Geneva, however, he visits the graves of his family. He kisses the earth and vows to avenge their deaths; he calls upon \"the wandering ministers of vengeance\" and upon the spirits of the dead to aid him in his quest. Suddenly, Victor hears a \"fiendish laugh,\" as though hell itself were mocking him. From out of the darkness, the creature whispers that he is \"satisfied\" that Frankenstein has determined to live. PARAGRAPH>For months, he pursues the creature over the better part of the earth. At times, he is guided in his search by peasants who have been frightened by the hideous apparition; at others, the creature himself leaves Frankenstein some clue of his whereabouts, so that Victor will not despair and abandon his quest. Victor feels that some good spirit protects him throughout this journey; it alone saves him from death. He has grown to despise his life, and only finds refuge in sleep; in dreams he is once again among his beloved dead. PARAGRAPH>The creature cuts taunting messages into trees and stones, in order to remind his creator of the absolute power he has over him. He provides Frankenstein with food and advises him to prepare himself for the intolerable cold of the North: it is into these icy wastelands that the creature intends to lead him. Though Frankenstein knows that this final journey will mean certain death, he pursues the monster without hesitation. PARAGRAPH>Upon seeing the creature traversing the ice on a dogsled, Frankenstein weeps tears of hope and joy. When he has almost overtaken his enemy, however, he inexplicably loses all trace of him. Shortly thereafter, the ice breaks apart, and Victor is set adrift on a single jagged floe. He is on the brink of death when Walton's ship appears in the distance. PARAGRAPH>Though Victor looks forward to the peace that death will bring him, he despises the idea of dying with his task is unfulfilled. He begs Walton to kill the creature if he shows himself to him  no matter how eloquent and persuasive he seems. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Strangely enough, this final chapter of Victor's narration, in which he is suffering a decline, finds him more dynamic than he has been since the days of his first experiment. Revenge invigorates him, intoxicates him: the joy he feels at seeing the creature's sledge marks the first time he has been happy in innumerable months. PARAGRAPH>Frankenstein liberates himself from his prison of guilt, opting instead for one of wrath. In a certain sense, the creature has finally succeeded in gaining the companionship he always desired. Frankenstein is doomed to share the creature's life, and to follow him wherever he may go: the two are as close as a parent and child, or a lover and his beloved. It no longer matters who occupies which position: each reciprocates the obsession of the other. PARAGRAPH>The chase appears almost childish: the creature taunts his creator, and Frankenstein pursues him with no regard for sense or reason. If nothing else, it presents Frankenstein with a challenge; it once again calls forth the lust for conquest that motivated his scientific endeavors. The creature is his master, his leader, and his animating force. Now it is the monster that brings his maker to life: without his desire for revenge, Frankenstein would surely have died long ago. PARAGRAPH>", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420003408/https://www.gradesaver.com/frankenstein/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-24"}