{"name": "Chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219155156/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/boxcar-children/summary/chapter-7", "summary": "It's morning, and Jessie and Henry are discussing the excitement from the night before. They don't say anything about it to the younger kids, though. Jessie wonders if the \"intruder\" was a rabbit, but Henry thinks it might have been a person. Henry says the dog will protect them. They'll just carry on as if nothing happened, though they can't let Benny go into the woods by himself. Henry is very excited to get to work, so he runs the whole way to the doctor's house. It's garden day, and the doctor's mother, Mrs. Moore, is going to tell Henry what's up in the garden. Mrs. Moore thins vegetables with Henry for a while before leaving him to work on his own. Eventually, she comes back and sends Henry home for lunch. She doesn't want any of the vegetables he pulled, so he's taking those with him. Henry goes back to the boxcar, where Benny has been building a fireplace all day. Jessie and Violet helped, and they've set up the kettle over it and everything. The fireplace was good timing because Henry brought home all of those vegetables along with some meat he picked up at the store. The children prepare the food and start the fire. They're going to have stew for dinner, but in the meantime, it's another lunch of milk-soaked bread. Henry heads back to the doctor's house. Dr. Moore wants him to clean the garage. What a treat. No, seriously--Henry thinks that's a treat. Henry begins to organize the garage, setting aside a pile of bent nails for his own use. When the doctor gets home, he's very excited to find the garage so organized. The doctor notices he has four hammers and, deciding he doesn't need that many, gives one to Henry. The doctor asks Henry to return on Monday to pick cherries from his orchard. He says he could use a few extra sets of hands. Hmm, do you think he knows about Henry's brother and sisters? Back to the boxcar. Henry smells the stew. Oh, and look--Jessie has made a ladle from more garbage. The children feast on the stew. When they're finished, Henry begins to make Benny's cart. He decides he'll build the swimming pool the next day, which is Sunday. After Henry builds the cart, the children bed down in the boxcar. Fingers crossed they don't hear that strange noise again tonight.", "analysis": ""}