{"name": "Chapter 6", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219155156/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/boxcar-children/summary/chapter-6", "summary": "It's time for dinner, which means Henry is finally going to reveal what's in those bundles. Nothing too exciting: bread, milk, dried meat, and a bone for the dog. Dinner is bread soaked in milk. Jessie declares how fun it is to eat with spoons. Poor Jessie. Henry tells the kids about his day: He walked into town and stumbled upon a doctor mowing his lawn. Henry offered to help and, boom, he was hired. You go, Henry. Impressed with Henry's lawn-mowing skills, the doctor tells Henry he wants him to work every day. The doctor paid Henry $1 for his work, and the cook gave him a huge bag of cookies. Score. In town, Henry bought a tablecloth, which Violet can't wait to hem to the right length. The meal finished, the girls wash the dishes, and Henry heads back into town. That afternoon, Jessie makes a broom, and Violet works on the tablecloth. Watch and Benny take a nap. Henry returns later in the day with a special treat: butter. The children feast. Jessie asks Henry about his day. He washed the doctor's car and the windows. Very industrious. Hot and tired from the day's work, Henry looks at the brook and wonders if he could build a swimming pool. Benny offers his wheels for the pool for some reason, but Henry decides he'll make a cart so Benny can haul stones. Bedtime. Everyone falls asleep straight away except for Henry, who's up obsessing over the pool. Suddenly, he notices that the dog is on high alert. Watch starts to growl, and now Jessie is awake. She and Henry are frightened, and they decide to close the door to the boxcar. Uh-oh, Watch is still growling--Jessie wonders if there's a person out in the woods. A stick breaks, and Watch begins to bark. If there really is a person in the woods, now they know about the boxcar. Yikes. Poor, frightened Henry grabs the broom and waits expectantly for an intruder ... but no one comes. Whew. After a long wait, Henry opens the boxcar door. Watch promptly goes to sleep, letting Henry and Jessie know all is well once more. Finally, they go to sleep, too.", "analysis": ""}