{"name": "Act III, scene ii", "summary": "Act III, scene ii begins with Coriolanus swearing that he will never change his behavior towards the plebeians, even if it means his death. At first, he brushes aside the patricians. attempts to persuade him to change his mind. Thus far, he maintains his integrity. But he cannot resist the powerful influence of his mother, who tells him that he must speak to the people not as his heart prompts him, \"But with such words that are but roted in / Your tongue, though but bastards, and syllables / Of no allowance to your bosom's truth. This speech is shocking in that it demands deliberate dishonesty from a man whose life's habit has been honesty and truth to himself. The violence of the departure from the truth that Volumnia requires is contained in the word \"bastards. The word carries some force to modern ears but would have been even more jarring to an audience of Shakespeare's time, when illegitimacy meant a betrayal of social and religious codes, and threatened the basis of inherited wealth and thus family cohesion. Volumnia is ordering Coriolanus to betray himself. Coriolanus's acquiescence to her will is a tragic fall from integrity, and he is aware of its magnitude, likening himself to a prostitute: \"Away, my disposition, and possess me / Some harlot's spirit. He goes on to ask that his \"throat of war. be turned into a eunuch's thin tone, or a girl's voice that lulls babies to sleep. In other words, he is about to be false to his nature. In Shakespeare's plays, this is a serious and often fatal sin. PARAGRAPH>In the light of this self-betrayal, it is a bitter irony that Volumnia's final words to him as he prepares to leave for the market place are \"Do your will. Coriolanus is certainly not doing his will, but hers. PARAGRAPH>Coriolanus's integrity and simplicity are contrasted with the manipulative cunning of the tribunes, Sicinius and Brutus, against which this great warrior has no defense. They correctly predict that they have only to provoke him to anger to ruin his chances of being consul. Coriolanus falls into their trap immediately; they do not even have to try hard. By their earlier briefing of the plebeians  to claim that they only voted for Coriolanus because the tribunes persuaded them to, the tribunes kept favor with Coriolanus's supporters. They continue with this ploy by now having the people cry for Coriolanus to be cast off the Tarpeian rock, and then pronouncing the relatively milder punishment of banishment. They are giving the impression of being merciful when in fact they are engineering Coriolanus's downfall. What they seem is not what they are. With Coriolanus, on the other hand, outward appearance and inner self are one and the same. until Volumnia persuades him, by bribing him with the promise of her approval or \"praise,. to \"perform a part / Thou hast not done before", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212214204/https://www.novelguide.com/coriolanus/summaries/act-3-scenes-2-3"}