{"name": "part 2, Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter17-chapter20", "summary": "In Chapter 19, Lucy and her mother go to London to visit the Miss Alans and make arrangements for the trip. The Miss Alans express surprise that Cecil is allowing her to make the trip and that he will not even be present to see her off. Still intent on keeping the broken engagement a secret until she has left England, Lucy does not tell the Miss Alans the truth. Now over her disappointment, Mrs. Honeychurch is relieved that Lucy is not marrying Cecil, and she doesn't understand why Lucy is keeping it a secret. Furthermore, she still doesn't understand why Lucy insists on leaving Windy Corner. You're tired of Windy Corner,\" she blurts out. Lucy is mixed up. It is true that she cannot be content at home, but this is because she is in a turmoil. She keeps telling herself that she does not love George and that she must go to Greece to get away from him. She admits to her mother that when she gets back from Greece, she'd like to live in London, that she wants more independence. Her mother grows angry and says that Lucy reminds her of Charlotte Bartlett, in the way she is always worrying and taking back words. Lucy is shocked, believing that she and Charlotte are nothing alike. After shopping in London and buying a Baedeker for Lucy, the two women return home. Their carriage passes by Cissie Villa, which is locked up. They learn that the Emersons have left. Lucy starts to wonder if she has made a big muddle. The women stop at the Rectory to pick up Miss Bartlett, who asks to be taken to church. Lucy, not wanting to go to church, will wait in the Rectory. To her surprise, she sees Mr. Emerson there by the fire. He apologizes to Lucy for George's behavior. I taught him to trust in love,\" he explains. When love comes, that is reality. Lucy protests that George has behaved \"abominably,\" and Mr. Emerson asks her to be kind, as George has \"gone under\"--he is very depressed and does not want to live. Mr. Emerson reveals that the same had happened to George's mother. They had agreed not to baptize George, but when the boy became ill from typhoid, his mother, believing the illness a judgment from God, became depressed and died. This is what Mr. Eager had meant; from Mr. Eager's point of view, Mr. Emerson had killed his wife by refusing to baptize his son. Lucy feels very sorry, and is sad to hear about George. She pleads with Mr. Emerson not to leave the villa, but to stay, because at all events, she will be going to Greece. Mr. Emerson is surprised to hear that she is going to Greece, and even more so when he finds out that it is not with Cecil. She admits to him that she has left Cecil, and gives him her reasons. You are in a muddle,\" he tells her, and guesses the real reason for her trip--she loves George. Lucy begins to cry. The tickets have been bought, and she has lied to everyone. Mr. Beebe enters again, and Mr. Emerson tells him that Lucy has lied. He is disappointed in her, but Mr. Emerson gives her courage. Remember the mountains over Florence and the view. Truth counts, Truth does count. Later, she will wonder at how he was able to strengthen her, to make her see the holiness of desire", "analysis": ""}