{"name": "part 2, Chapter 8", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter5-chapter8", "summary": "\"Mediaeval,\" opens at Lucy's family home outside of London, a country estate called Windy Corner. Lucy's mother, Mrs. Honeychurch, and her brother Freddy are waiting in the drawing-room as Lucy is being proposed to by Cecil Vyse. It is revealed that during her time in Rome, Lucy and Cecil became quite close and Cecil has already proposed twice, but been refused by Lucy. This time, Lucy says yes. Freddy does not like Cecil, and showed disapproval when Cecil asked his permission to marry his sister. Mrs. Honeychurch says she does like Cecil, as he's good, clever, rich, and well-connected. Cecil enters the room to announce the engagement and immediately draws open the curtains. Lucy can be seen outside, against a beautiful view of the Surrey countryside. Cecil is tall and refined, well-educated and strong, but he seems self-conscious and fastidious, suggesting a man who is celibate rather than passionate. In Mr. Beebe's words, \"Mr. Vyse is an ideal bachelor. Cecil sees Lucy as a figure in a Leonardo painting, full of mystery. Immediately following the betrothal, while Freddy and Mrs. Honeychurch are outside congratulating Lucy, Mr. Beebe arrives for tea and shares some gossip with Cecil. Sir Harry Otway has bought two villas in town, called Cissie and Albert. Cecil declares his ignorance about town affairs. Changing the subject, Mr. Beebe asks what his profession is, and Cecil explains that he has none; he is independently wealthy. Unaware of the engagement, Mr. Beebe changes the subject again, talking freely to Cecil about Lucy, predicting that she will one day live life as wonderfully and heroically as she plays the piano. He is taken aback, and visibly disappointed, when Cecil abruptly announces that Lucy is going to marry him. Shortly thereafter, however, Mr. Beebe gives his blessing, and a cheery mood prevails as they all enjoy their tea.", "analysis": "Lucy is moved by George, and her encounters with him and his father have had an influence on her values. She now sees Miss Lavish and Mr. Eager for the hypocrites they are. Her encounter with George in the Piazza, when she faints and is caught by him, changes something in her. For the first time, she is keeping a secret from others, and for the first time it is left to her alone to decide what to do. It seems that Lucy is on the brink of taking control of her life, of choosing what is right for herself, when she enters the clearing where George stands, surrounded by violets. But just as she receives a kiss from George, Charlotte appears, \"brown against the view. Lucy, unsure of herself and her feelings and looking to her cousin for approval, allows herself to be manipulated. She runs away from the beauty and truth and returns to the safe, bland embrace of the society she knows, reassured that she is doing the proper and correct thing by leaving George. Lucy is in a \"muddle\"--a word that recurs throughout the book to describe her confusion between what she actually feels and what she thinks she ought to feel. The driver has urged her towards \"Courage and love,\" but, as Lucy exclaims, \"It is so hard to be absolutely truthful. She ends by lying to herself in order to please her cousin and do what she thinks is expected of her. There are two pairs of lovers in Chapter 6 who are parted--first, the driver and his girlfriend, and then George and Lucy. Non fate guerra al Maggio,\" says Mr. Emerson in defense of the driver and his girlfriend, quoting Lorenzo de Medici. To Mr. Emerson, springtime in the fields and springtime among lovers are the same thing, and should be admired equally; one should not be considered improper. This moral, one of the main messages of the novel, applies also to George and Lucy. English mores may call George's kiss improper, the novel implies, but true love, which includes passion of the body, should be considered natural and beautiful. For Forster, Italy is the land of Classical times and the Renaissance, associated with art, beauty, and humanism, while England represents the Middle Ages. Strict codes of conduct govern behavior, and love that in Forster's view should be beautiful and natural is labeled improper. Accordingly, Chapter 6, in which George first kisses Lucy, takes place in the riotously pagan springtime hillside of Italy, with a driver called Phaethon and his girlfriend Persephone"}