{"name": "part 1, Chapter 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter1-chapter4", "summary": "Chapter 1 opens at the Pension Bertolini, a small, English-owned hotel in Florence, Italy. Lucy Honeychurch, a young English girl, and her older, unmarried cousin and chaperone, Charlotte Bartlett, have just arrived at the hotel and are disappointed to find that their rooms do not have a view of the Arno River as promised. Another guest, Mr. Emerson, overhears them complaining of the situation at dinner. He insists that they exchange with him and his son George, as their rooms do have a view. Thinking Mr. Emerson very rude and ill-bred, Charlotte refuses the offer and determines that they will leave this hotel. At that moment, another guest enters the dining room. This is Mr. Beebe, a clergyman whom the two women know from England and who, coincidentally, is about to move to Lucy's parish. Mr. Beebe sets them at ease and they decide to stay in the hotel. The other guests of the pension, all English, enfold Lucy and Charlotte into their society, giving them helpful advice as to where they should stay and what they should do in Florence. The Emersons are left out of the conversation, but as Lucy and Charlotte leave the table, Lucy bows at George and he smiles at her. After dinner, Charlotte asks Mr. Beebe what they should do about the Emersons' offer to switch rooms. Mr. Beebe advises them to accept. He explains that Mr. Emerson has no tact and no manners, but that he would never think of holding the women under any obligation; he is simply a man who means exactly what he says. Charlotte concludes disapprovingly that Mr. Emerson is a Socialist. Miss Alan, a little old lady who has overheard everything, agrees that Mr. Emerson has no tact, but wisely observes that sometimes people do things which are \"most indelicate, and yet at the same time--beautiful. Lucy and Charlotte switch rooms with the men, Charlotte making a point of taking the room that had belonged to George. Later that night, she is puzzled to find, pinned above the washstand, a piece of paper on which is written a large question mark", "analysis": ""}