{"name": "part 2, Chapter 20", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter17-chapter20", "summary": "Chapter 20 is titled \"The End of the Middle Ages\" because it marks the beginning of Lucy's Renaissance, her rebirth as a happily married woman. The Miss Alans go to Greece, but they go alone. Lucy and George, newly married, go back to the Pension Bertolini in Florence, where they first met. George has his head in Lucy's lap and is being silly and childish, which endears him to Lucy. He gets up to look out the window at the view, feeling full of gratitude that he is here with Lucy, and thinking of all the people who helped him to get there. Lucy's happiness is less complete. All of Windy Corner is upset, and Freddy has written an indignant letter protesting their \"elopement. The two have had to marry without Mrs. Honeychurch's consent. Cecil has grown cynical about women, and Mr. Beebe still has not forgiven them. George and Lucy can only hope that if they act the truth, people who really love them will come back to them in the end. A carriage driver pesters them from the street below, trying to sell them on a ride in the countryside. Lucy thinks of Charlotte, and how rude she would be to such a man. She grows cross thinking of Charlotte and how her cousin had tried to ruin her happiness with George. George stops her. On the day that Lucy spoke to Mr. Emerson, Charlotte had known very well that the old man was in the Rectory, and yet she did not stop Lucy. It even seemed, on reflection, that Charlotte had deliberately arranged it so that Lucy would talk to Mr. Emerson. Charlotte, deep down, could have been hoping for them to be together all along, although she objected on the surface. At the Rectory she had given them one last chance to be happy. Lucy rejects the idea, but then decides that \"it is just possible. The two of them are enwrapped in youthful love, but as they contemplate the mystery of how they came together, they are conscious of something deeper and more mysterious than this--a love eternal as the river outside their window.", "analysis": "Cecil is a supremely unlikable character--priggish, supercilious, and chauvinistic--but Forster never allows the objects of his satires to become caricatures. Cecil has a great deal of humanity, particularly here in the scene where his heart is broken by Lucy. He accepts her criticisms with humility and grace, and there is a sense that Lucy has transformed him"}