{"name": "act 4, scene 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210118050344/https://www.sparknotes.com/shakespeare/lear/section9/", "summary": "Cordelia enters, leading her soldiers. Lear has hidden from her in the cornfields, draping himself in weeds and flowers and singing madly to himself. Cordelia sends one hundred of her soldiers to find Lear and bring him back. She consults with a doctor about Lear's chances for recovering his sanity. The doctor tells her that what Lear most needs is sleep and that there are medicines that can make him sleep. A messenger brings Cordelia the news that the British armies of Cornwall and Albany are marching toward them. Cordelia expected this news, and her army stands ready to fight", "analysis": "Act 4, scenes 3-5 In these scenes, we see Cordelia for the first time since Lear banished her in Act 1, scene 1. The words the gentleman uses to describe Cordelia to Kent seem to present her as a combination idealized female beauty and quasi-religious savior figure. The gentleman uses the language of love poetry to describe her beauty--her lips are \"ripe,\" the tears in her eyes are \"as pearls from diamonds dropped,\" and her \"smiles and tears\" are like the paradoxically coexisting \"sunshine and rain\" . But the gentleman also describes Cordelia in language that might be used to speak of a holy angel or the Virgin Mary herself: he says that, as she wiped away her tears, \"she shook / The holy water from her heavenly eyes\" . Cordelia's great love for her father, which contrasts sharply with Goneril and Regan's cruelty, elevates her to the level of reverence. The strength of Cordelia's daughterly love is reinforced in Act 4, scene 4, when Cordelia orders her people to seek out and help her father. We learn that the main reason for the French invasion of England is Cordelia's desire to help Lear: \"great France / My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied,\" she says . The king of France, her husband, took pity on her grief and allowed the invasion in an effort to help restore Lear to the throne. When Cordelia proclaims that she is motivated not by ambition but by \"love, dear love, and our aged father's right,\" we are reminded of how badly Lear treated her at the beginning of the play . Her virtue and devotion is manifest in her willingness to forgive her father for his awful behavior. At one point, she declares, \"O dear father, / It is thy business that I go about\" , echoing a biblical passage in which Christ says, \"I must go about my father's business\" . This allusion reinforces Cordelia's piety and purity and consciously links her to Jesus Christ, who, of course, was a martyr to love, just as Cordelia becomes at the play's close. The other characters in the play discuss Lear's madness in interesting language, and some of the most memorable turns of phrase in the play come from these descriptions. When Cordelia assesses Lear's condition in Act 4, scene 4, she says he is As mad as the vexed sea; singing aloud;Crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,With hordocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow.   Lear's madness, which is indicated here by both his singing and his self-adornment with flowers, is marked by an embrace of the natural world; rather than perceiving himself as a heroic figure who transcends nature, he understands that he is a small, meaningless component of it. Additionally, this description brings to mind other famous scenes of madness in Shakespeare--most notably, the scenes of Ophelia's flower-bedecked madness in Hamlet.  These scenes set up the resolution of the play's tension, which takes place in Act 5. While Lear hides from Cordelia out of shame, she seeks him out of love, crystallizing the contrast between her forgiveness and his repentance. Regan and Goneril have begun to become rivals for the affection of Edmund, as their twin ambitions inevitably bring them into conflict. On the political and military level, we learn that Albany's and Cornwall's armies are on the march toward the French camp at Dover. The play is rushing toward a conclusion, for all the characters' trajectories have begun to converge."}