{"name": "Chapter XVII", "summary": "Chapter XVII Not long after the funeral, Isabella arrives at Thrushcross Grange, out of breath and laughing hysterically. She has come at a time when she knows Edgar will be asleep, to ask Nelly for help. Isabella reports that the conflict between Hindley and Heathcliff has become violent. Hindley, she says, tried to stay sober for Catherine's funeral, but could not bear to go. Instead, he began drinking heavily that morning. While Heathcliff kept a vigil over Catherine's grave, Hindley locked him out of the house and told Isabella that he planned to shoot him. Isabella warned Heathcliff about Hindley's plan, and when Hindley aimed his knife-gun out the window at Heathcliff, the latter grabbed it and fired it back at its owner's wrist, wounding Hindley. Heathcliff forced his way in the window, then beat Hindley severely. The next morning, Isabella reminded Hindley what Heathcliff had done to him the previous night. Hindley grew enraged, and the men began fighting again. Isabella fled to Thrushcross Grange, seeking a permanent refuge from Wuthering Heights. Soon after her visit to Nelly, Isabella leaves for London, where she gives birth to Heathcliff's son, Linton. Isabella corresponds with Nelly throughout the following twelve years. Heathcliff learns of his wife's whereabouts, and of his son's existence, but he doesn't pursue either of them. Isabella dies when Linton is twelve years old. PARAGRAPH>Six months after Catherine's death, Hindley dies. Nelly returns to Wuthering Heights to see to the funeral arrangements, and to bring young Hareton back to Thrushcross Grange. She is shocked to learn that Hindley died deeply in debt, and that Heathcliff, who had lent Hindley large amounts of money to supply his gambling addiction, now owns Wuthering Heights. Heathcliff does not allow Hareton to return to Thrushcross Grange with Nelly, saying that he plans to raise him on his own. He also intimates that he plans to recover his son Linton at some point in the future. And so, Nelly tells Lockwood, Hareton, who should have lived as the finest gentleman in the area, is reduced to working for his keep at Wuthering Heights. A common, uneducated servant, he remains friendless and without hope", "analysis": "Chapters XV-XX  Wuthering Heights is, in many ways, a novel of juxtaposed pairs: Catherine's two great loves for Heathcliff and Edgar; the two ancient manors of Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange; the two families, the Earnshaws and the Lintons; Heathcliff's conflicting passions of love and hate. Additionally, the structure of the novel divides the story into two contrasting halves. The first deals with the generation of characters represented by Catherine, Heathcliff, Hindley, Isabella, and Edgar, and the second deals with their children--young Catherine, Linton, and Hareton. Many of the same themes and ideas occur in the second half of the novel as in the first half, but they develop quite differently. While the first half ends on a note of doom and despair with Catherine's death and Heathcliff's gradual descent into evil, the novel as a whole ends on a note of hope, peace, and joy, with young Catherine's proposed marriage to Hareton Earnshaw.<PARAGRAPH>In the first of the chapters in this section, we witness the event that marks the dividing line between the two halves of the novel: Catherine's death. The episodes surrounding her passing--her dramatic illness, her confrontation with Heathcliff, Heathcliff's conflict with Edgar, and Heathcliff's curse upon her soul to walk the earth after her death  rank among the most intense scenes in the book. In fact, many readers view the second half of the novel, in which Catherine figures only as a memory, as a sort of anticlimax. While the latter chapters may never reach the emotional heights of the earlier ones, however, they remain crucial to the thematic development of the novel, as well as to its structural symmetry. Young Catherine grows up sheltered at Thrushcross Grange, learning only in piecemeal fashion about the existence of Heathcliff and his reign at Wuthering Heights. Unbeknownst to her, Heathcliff's legal claim on the Grange  may jeopardize her own eventual claim on it. Edgar Linton, however, painfully aware of this threat, searches for a way to prevent Heathcliff from taking the property. These events underscore the symbolic importance of the two houses. Wuthering Heights represents wildness, ungoverned passion, extremity, and doom. The fiery behavior of the characters associated with this house--Hindley, Catherine, and Heathcliff--underscores such connotations. By contrast, Thrushcross Grange represents restraint, social grace, civility, gentility, and aristocracy--qualities emphasized by the more mannered behavior of the Lintons who live there. The names of the two houses also bear out the contrast. While the adjective \"wuthering\" refers to violent storms, the thrush is a bird known for its melodious song, as well as being a symbol of Christian piety. In addition, whereas \"Heights\" evoke raw and imposing cliffs, \"Grange\" refers to a domestic site, a farm--especially that of a gentleman farmer. The concepts juxtaposed in the contrast of the two estates come into further conflict in Catherine's inability to choose between Edgar and Heathcliff. While she is attracted to Edgar's social grace, her feelings for Heathcliff reach heights of wild passion. As the second generation of main characters matures, its members emerge as combinations of their parents' characteristics, blending together qualities that had been opposed in the older generation. Thus young Catherine is impetuous and headstrong like her mother, but tempered by the gentling influence of her father. Linton, on the other hand, represents the worst of both of his parents, behaving in an imperious and demanding manner like Heathcliff, but also remaining fragile and simpering like Isabella. Hareton appears as a second Heathcliff, rough and unpolished, but possessed of a strength of character that refuses to be suppressed, despite Heathcliff's attempts to stunt his development.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210122133215/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/wuthering/section4/"}