{"name": "part 1, Chapter 4", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 4<PARAGRAPH>Watson picks up the narrative of the present day. White Mason is a friendly, quiet, but capable man. He meets Holmes, Watson, and MacDonald at Birlstone and helps everyone get settled, all the while talking about the case. He explains to Holmes how he checked the hammer that was found near the body  and the gun, which had the initials P, E, and N on it. PARAGRAPH>Holmes informs them it is an American gun put out by the Pennsylvania Small Arms Company; this knowledge surprises and pleases Mason. PARAGRAPH>The group discuss the possibility of whether an outsider was in the house, or if the murder was staged. MacDonald proffers his interpretation. He assumes the murder was premeditated, but wonders why the killer would choose such a loud weapon. Holmes asks about signs of someone climbing out of the moat, but there were none. PARAGRAPH>The men walk toward Manor House and Watson contemplates that the scene seems fit for a tragedy. As they near the house Mason points out the window and informs Holmes of how shallow the moat is: three feet at the deepest. PARAGRAPH>Ames admits the group to the house. The conversation returns to the murder. Suicide is ruled out, but the issue of the loud weapon remains. It seems unlikely that the person made the muddy footprint, opened the window, marked the sill, took the ring off, and left before Cecil found Douglas. Surely someone came in earlier that day, hid, and then killed Douglas, using the sawed-off shotgun because the murder was personal. Douglas probably came in, put down the candle, struggled, grabbed the hammer, and was then shot. The man left the card and escaped across the moat. PARAGRAPH>Holmes listens; even though the men ask for his opinion, he demurs until he has more facts. He asks for Ames, and questions him. He inquires about the mark, and Ames said he had seen it before. Ames also says Douglas was a bit more nervous the last day he saw him than usual. PARAGRAPH>After this line of questioning Holmes turns to the card, which MacDonald says seems like it belongs to a secret society; he also considers the strangeness of the wedding ring and the fact that there has been no arrest yet. PARAGRAPH>A knock sounds, and Cecil Barker interrupts to say they've found the killer's bicycle hidden in a clump of evergreens not far off", "analysis": "The novel begins like many of the stories of Sherlock Holmes: a case is presented, Holmes gets involved, and the particulars of the crime are laid out before the reader. However, midway through the novel a major shift takes place in that the backstory of one of the characters takes over; now we are twenty years prior, in the coalfields of Pennsylvania, and dealing with a band of rapacious and murderous Irish union men. It is an abrupt shift and one that disconcerted readers looking for more of the perspicacious British detective, but Doyle was working through his own issues with his Irish identity.<PARAGRAPH>In these first few chapters, though, we see the classic duo of Holmes and Watson. Watson narrates the tale  and, as per usual for the Holmes canon, readers fashion of a portrait of the famous detective through the eyes of his friend. Holmes comes across as relaxed, confident, ever sagacious, and sharp; he welcomes the new mystery and seems energized and vitalized by it. Critic Anthony Boucher  says \"this is a ripe, mature Holmes, free from external eccentricities...Here is Holmes in the perfect thinking mind, in crypt-analysis, in observation, in deduction...Holmes  at his most completely charming...There is more overt humor here than is usual...there is a certain fey quality.\"<PARAGRAPH>The first mystery  is the identity of Porlock and what Moriarty might be up to. It has been suggested Porlock was actually Mycroft, Sherlock Holmes's elder brother, but Doyle never stated this definitively. Porlock is shadowed in mystery and fear, and his connection to that most cunning of Holmes's enemies, Moriarty, is also ambiguous. Moriarty never makes an actual appearance in the novel; instead, he is fashioned through the comments of Holmes and MacDonald; this adds to the character's mystique, especially as it becomes clear that, without nearly any evidence, he is indelibly connected to this case.<PARAGRAPH>The second mystery is the actual case itself. What arguably makes the Sherlock Holmes collection so appealing is that readers have the opportunity to play detectives as well, using Watson as their stand-in to survey the evidence and then see if they can figure the case out. Here the evidence can be easily summed up: the dead body, shot close-range by a sawed-off American shotgun; a stain of blood on the windowsill; muddy shoeprints near the windowsill; one dumbbell; a mysterious card near the body; a missing wedding ring; reports of the timing of the shot; a bicycle in the hedges. Keen readers then pick up on the bluster of Barker and the strangely emotionless behavior of Mrs. Douglas. Watson's encounter with the two in the garden only adds to the rumors of Douglas's jealousy regarding their friendship.<PARAGRAPH>Still more clues begin to present themselves in terms of Douglas's past and the sense that he was under some sort of dark cloud. It is clear he came to England to escape some sort of persecution in America, and it is connected with the shadowy \"Valley of Fear.\" This ominous appellation is a physical place as well as a symbolic one in the sense that Douglas is psychologically stuck in that infernal valley.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408023714/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-valley-of-fear/study-guide/summary-part-i-chapters-1-4"}