{"name": "part 2, Chapter 4", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 4<PARAGRAPH>The next morning McMurdo sees a newspaper report detailing the attack; it seems Mr. Stanger survived and recognized some of the men. PARAGRAPH>A note arrives from the landlady. It is unsigned and asks McMurdo to meet Stanger up on Mason Hill. McMurdo has no idea who wrote it, but he walks to the hill out of curiosity. In the isolated area he finds Brother Morris. PARAGRAPH>Morris asks the surprised McMurdo if he can talk to him in confidence. McMurdo is clear that he is loyal to McGinty but will listen to his brother and not squeal on him. Morris goes into an anguished account of the violence he has had to perpetrate; he says that he wants to leave but fears for his wife and kids. He never knew the union was like this, and feels his conscience and religion threatened; he has even been excommunicated. He says the union brings terror to the valley and McMurdo should be aware of that. PARAGRAPH>McMurdo arrogantly says that he is fine, but that he may consider Morris' warning some day. Morris says that before they disband they ought to consider what they will say when asked why they talked; they agree to say that Morris offered McMurdo a clerkship and the young man refused. PARAGRAPH>Later that day McGinty pays McMurdo a visit. They exchange pleasantries and McGinty abruptly asks what he was talking to Morris about. McMurdo laughs, repeats the lie, and sets McGinty's mind at ease when the Bodymaster asks further questions regarding Morris criticizing the union. PARAGRAPH>As they talk the door suddenly bursts open. Captain Marvin and two other men enter forcefully and arrest McMurdo. Despite McGinty's threats, McMurdo is taken away for his involvement in the beating of Stanger. PARAGRAPH>Amazingly, though, nothing comes of the trial. There is no evidence, the witnesses admit the light was unclear and they saw no one definitively, and even Stanger says he saw little. The alibis stand, McMurdo and the others are acquitted, and the police are even implicitly censured. However, the people seem angry with the murderers getting off, and they shake their fists at the Brothers", "analysis": "Doyle does a thorough job of depicting the menace of the Scowrers. There are beatings of critical news editors, murders of local businessmen who get in the way, threats to members of the lodge who offer constructive criticism, and utter disregard of the authority figures. It seems at this point like the Scowrers are unbeatable: like the mafia, they have ties everywhere, and no one wants to try to stop them for fear of losing their own lives or having their families targeted.<PARAGRAPH>There certainly is law enforcement, as embodied by Captain Marvin, but the law's efficacy at this point in the story is questionable. One of the most interesting things about Marvin is how he was introduced to American readers, as opposed to his introduction to British readers. For the former, he simply says \"Captain Marvin is my name\" ; for the latter he says, \"Captain Marvin is my name--of the Coal and Iron .\" Before Marvin even says this in the American edition Doyle introduces him thusly: \"Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man entered with the quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine police\" .<PARAGRAPH>This is much more important than it might seem on the surface in terms of what it means contextually. Critic Marino Alvarez takes on this topic, suggesting that by simply using the term \"mine\" Doyle implied a peacekeeping force rather than a regulatory power controlled by the colliers . Marino also suggests that because Doyle and the Sherlock Holmes stories were so popular in America at the time, Doyle's American editor did not want to associate the novel with the incredibly unpopular iron and mine police. Alvarez writes, \"there is evidence to suggest that the deletion...may have been to stem further incitement among miners and laborers and the American public about this private police agency.\" The Coal and Iron Police collaborated with the state police as well as the Pinkertons in order to \"quell liberties of those whom they perceived as either chasing a disturbance or were perceived as potential disruptors.\"<PARAGRAPH>Doyle had visited New York in 1914 before the novel was released there, and it is likely that he and his editor discussed altering the words. The reading public had been growing more vocally critical of late about the Coal and Iron Police's tactics, as well as other widespread abuses of laborers. Alvarez's argument thus seems plausible.<PARAGRAPH>The character of McMurdo is compelling at this point in the story, which is to say before his true identity is revealed. He is bold and courageous, self-assured and arrogant. McGinty sees in him someone he can admire. He does not seem to be afraid of law enforcement, any of the Scowrers, or anyone at the mines. He has little sympathy for those affected by the Scowrers' violent tactics, though he does stop Baldwin from killing Stanger. He seems to truly love Ettie, but conceals from her his true character. When she surprises him one night and catches a glimpse of his eyes she almost catches on, but he explains this away. it is ironic at this point that she loves a man who is just as violent as Baldwin.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408023714/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-valley-of-fear/study-guide/summary-part-ii-chapters-3-5"}