{"name": "part 2, Chapter 5", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 5<PARAGRAPH>McMurdo's reputation skyrockets even more. He is considered a good companion, a cheery fellow, a bloodthirsty and smart schemer, and impressive for getting out of trouble with the law. PARAGRAPH>However, while things are going well in some areas of McMurdo's life, Shafter has forbidden him from coming to see Ettie. Ettie still loves McMurdo, but things are difficult for them. PARAGRAPH>One night Ettie goes to surprise McMurdo. She creeps up behind him, but, to her horror, he reacts fiercely and springs for her throat. He then recognizes her and apologizes, but she is unnerved by the look she saw in his eyes. She cries and begs him to stay away from these violent men. She proposes leaving the Valley of Fear. McMurdo says he cannot do this right now, but finally says that he will work to make it possible for them to get out of the valley within six-to-eight months. Ettie is elated. PARAGRAPH>It is not long before McMurdo starts to see just how vast this organization actually is. McGinty himself answers to Evans Potts, the County Delegate and a man of immense power. PARAGRAPH>Scanlan and McMurdo learn that two men in Potts' employ need a place to stay while they are in town on business and thus will be staying at the boarding house. Lawler, an elderly man, and Andrews, a cheerful young boy, arrive. They are both friendly but will not tell any details of why they were sent. The only thing they mention is that they are assassins and abstainers from drink. PARAGRAPH>That night, when Lawler and Andrews quietly leave to carry out their business, Scanlan and McMurdo follow them. They walk through the snow, watch the men pick up others to help the job, and then head to Crow Hill, a huge mining operation run by Josiah H. Dunn. McMurdo and Scanlan hide themselves and watch the group of men stand off to the side near the miners. PARAGRAPH>The morning whistle sounds the ten-minute alarm. The mine engineer, a Scotsman named Menzies, orders the cages lowered. A young man also walks out and notices the group of men gathered. He asks who they are; Andrews steps forward and shoots him dead. When Menzies protests, he too is killed. The other miners scatter. PARAGRAPH>Scanlan and McMurdo retreat, both surprised. Scanlan feels poorly about what happened, but McMurdo does not seem sympathetic to the dead men. PARAGRAPH>The brothers celebrate at Union House that night. The killing of the mine manager, along with another killing carried out by Baldwin, contributes to the revelry. McGinty knows the time is right to keep his enemies unstable; he decides another killing must occur, so he calls McMurdo over and tells him he has a job for him and two other men. PARAGRAPH>McGinty explains that the district will never be right until the businessman Chester Wilcox is dead. McMurdo wonders what the man did and why his wife and children also have to be killed. McGinty gruffly asks if he has a problem with carrying out his orders, and McMurdo says he does not. He takes a night to do reconnaissance, and gets his other two young men ready. PARAGRAPH>Two nights later, McMurdo and the two other men meet and travel to Wilcox's house, which they blow up with a powder bag. Unfortunately for the murderers, Wilcox and his family were warned and were not there. McMurdo is furious and says he will take care of it. A few weeks later, news comes of Wilcox's death. PARAGRAPH>These are just some of the bloody deeds that took place in the Valley of Fear; \"never had the cloud above them been so dark and hopeless as in the early summer of the year 1875\"", "analysis": "Doyle does a thorough job of depicting the menace of the Scowrers. There are beatings of critical news editors, murders of local businessmen who get in the way, threats to members of the lodge who offer constructive criticism, and utter disregard of the authority figures. It seems at this point like the Scowrers are unbeatable: like the mafia, they have ties everywhere, and no one wants to try to stop them for fear of losing their own lives or having their families targeted.<PARAGRAPH>There certainly is law enforcement, as embodied by Captain Marvin, but the law's efficacy at this point in the story is questionable. One of the most interesting things about Marvin is how he was introduced to American readers, as opposed to his introduction to British readers. For the former, he simply says \"Captain Marvin is my name\" ; for the latter he says, \"Captain Marvin is my name--of the Coal and Iron .\" Before Marvin even says this in the American edition Doyle introduces him thusly: \"Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man entered with the quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine police\" .<PARAGRAPH>This is much more important than it might seem on the surface in terms of what it means contextually. Critic Marino Alvarez takes on this topic, suggesting that by simply using the term \"mine\" Doyle implied a peacekeeping force rather than a regulatory power controlled by the colliers . Marino also suggests that because Doyle and the Sherlock Holmes stories were so popular in America at the time, Doyle's American editor did not want to associate the novel with the incredibly unpopular iron and mine police. Alvarez writes, \"there is evidence to suggest that the deletion...may have been to stem further incitement among miners and laborers and the American public about this private police agency.\" The Coal and Iron Police collaborated with the state police as well as the Pinkertons in order to \"quell liberties of those whom they perceived as either chasing a disturbance or were perceived as potential disruptors.\"<PARAGRAPH>Doyle had visited New York in 1914 before the novel was released there, and it is likely that he and his editor discussed altering the words. The reading public had been growing more vocally critical of late about the Coal and Iron Police's tactics, as well as other widespread abuses of laborers. Alvarez's argument thus seems plausible.<PARAGRAPH>The character of McMurdo is compelling at this point in the story, which is to say before his true identity is revealed. He is bold and courageous, self-assured and arrogant. McGinty sees in him someone he can admire. He does not seem to be afraid of law enforcement, any of the Scowrers, or anyone at the mines. He has little sympathy for those affected by the Scowrers' violent tactics, though he does stop Baldwin from killing Stanger. He seems to truly love Ettie, but conceals from her his true character. When she surprises him one night and catches a glimpse of his eyes she almost catches on, but he explains this away. it is ironic at this point that she loves a man who is just as violent as Baldwin.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408023714/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-valley-of-fear/study-guide/summary-part-ii-chapters-3-5"}