{"name": "book 3, Chapter 31", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-33", "summary": "Lydgate and Rosamond become closer, as Lydgate is about to be sucked into a relationship which he is unprepared for because of the nature of Middlemarch society. Mrs. Bulstrode and Mrs. Plymdale gossip about Rosamond's pride, and how Lydgate might suit her; Mrs. Plymdale thinks that the match would be unwise for Lydgate, since Rosamond has expensive habits, and Mrs. Bulstrode goes to speak to Rosamond out of concern. When Mrs. Bulstrode sees Rosamond and her fine garments, she knows that Mrs. Plymdale was at least right about that one point. Mrs. Bulstrode speaks to her, telling her that if she marries Lydgate, she will not be able to keep her expensive habits; Rosamond admits that he has made no offer of marriage to her, and seems intent on ignoring her aunt's good advice. Then, Mrs. Bulstrode approaches Lydgate, and tells him that he should not press his advantages as a romantic-seeming outsider with the Middlemarch girls; Lydgate sees that others believe him to be engaged to Rosamond, and wants to avoid marriage at all costs. However, Lydgate ends up going by the house after an absence of two weeks, to deliver bad news about Mr. Featherstone's health; Rosamond cries when she sees him again, and this display of affection touches him enough to abandon his plans and reasonable thinking, and propose to her. Rosamond accepts, and they are engaged.", "analysis": "Rosamond's first priority in all things seems to be \"playing the part prettily,\" as she is in Mrs. Bulstrode's frank discussion with her. Rosamond refuses to take good, practical advice, even when it is offered to her in a sincere way; she is stubborn and wants to hold onto this stubbornness, and proves vain about more than just her looks. Vanity is a key issue that Rosamond needs to overcome; not only does she pride herself on looking and acting beautifully, she likes to think that her ideas and manner of living are above reproach, and her character needs no correction. Lydgate's pride is his failing, and his own issue to get over; he blames Mrs. Bulstrode's diction for his stung feelings when she speaks to him about Rosamond, rather than his own character issues. However, Lydgate, unlike Rosamond, is not too vain to think that his character and his perception are beyond reproach; he takes Mrs. Bulstrode's talking to him to mean that Rosamond is set on him, and others expect them to marry, and decides to serve his original intention of remaining single. Lydgate had not previously realized the power of other people's expectations, another theme in the novel. He wants to disprove that his situation is metaphorically akin to being tempted by a siren, as Farebrother states that Lydgate's situation might be; the allusion particularly upsets Lydgate, as he realizes that the sirens, whom Farebrother alludes to, might stand for the expectations and ideas of those around him. Rosamond seems to be more in love with the way Lydgate compliments her and flatters her vanity, more than Lydgate as a person. She is a rather mild version of Ariadne, Eliot says, with the allusion emphasizing Rosamond's relatively shallow feelings and the sometime ridiculousness of her expectations. Lydgate proposes to her out of his great weakness, pride; he is somewhat proud of the fact that Rosamond is unhappy without him, for the brief period of time that he avoids her home. He sees that Rosamond looks up to him and has some feelings for him, and this cements their engagement. Since Rosamond and Lydgate's relationship is based on their mutual need to feed their flawed natures, it is doomed to fail; there are greater considerations for marriage than the fulfillment of pride and vanity, and intellectually and ideologically, they are ill-suited"}