{"name": "book 7, Chapter 61", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-56-66", "summary": "Sure enough, Raffles has been back to Bulstrode's home, and refuses to go away until Bulstrode sees him. Raffles finds Bulstrode at the bank, as he tells his wife; but he is afraid to tell his wife much, lest she lose her confidence in him. It is revealed that Bulstrode married Will's maternal grandmother, after hiding from her that her daughter, Will's mother, was alive and had a son that the grandmother's riches were supposed to go to. However, Bulstrode prevented this from happening, for his own sake; and when the woman died, Bulstrode was left with the entire fortune, and Will and his mother with none. Bulstrode was also involved in various questionable trades, and these are the things that could destroy his reputation in Middlemarch. Bulstrode decides that he must do something to satisfy fate, and slow his own demise; he decides to speak to Will Ladislaw, and perhaps set things straight with him. Will, however, is still unsettled by being approached by Raffles. He is shocked to discover the tenuous relation between Bulstrode and himself, and even more shocked when Bulstrode goes on to claim that he wants to be generous toward Will. Bulstrode tries to make it sound as if he is doing something out of generosity and his natural goodness, though it is more out of guilt and the thought that this good deed might save him. However, Will knows that Bulstrode made his money in a dishonest way, and is too proud to accept money from him, especially since that money is tainted by Bulstrode's wrongs. Bulstrode is saddened by the judgment on him, but is aware that Will won't tell anyone.", "analysis": "Unfortunately for Bulstrode, his troubles with Raffles are not quite over. Bulstrode is hardly a victim, however; he engaged himself in questionable business, including the selling of stolen property, so that he could gain money. But this, and the marriage and deception of Will's grandmother, Bulstrode tries to attribute to being God's wishes; he uses false piety as an excuse for the wrong things that he has done, and now he is going to pay. The lies and deceptions that have bound Bulstrode's sinful days to his honest ones in Middlemarch are coming apart; and, Raffles' continuing presence foreshadows a comeuppance for Bulstrode if he fails to appease Raffles. Bulstrode and Will are juxtaposed in this chapter, in both morals and attitude. Bulstrode's weak character and avarice are juxtaposed with Will's strength, honor, and disregard for money if he hasn't earned it. Both of the men present opposite fronts; Bulstrode tries his best to appear benevolent and generous, while Will is proud, curt, and merciless. Just as Bulstrode once justified taking tainted money through piety, now he is trying to absolve himself by making a show of generosity and righteousness before Will. Bulstrode hasn't really changed; in both cases, he is trying to cover up his stark self-interest, selfishness, and greed by making a show of his goodness and justness. For Bulstrode to truly be absolved, he would probably have to confess his wrongs, and then try and live out his life. His trying to gain absolution through another self-serving act is truly a paradox, and backfires completely on Bulstrode"}