{"name": "book 8, Chapter 68", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77", "summary": "Raffles comes again to Bulstrode's, and Bulstrode must let him stay at the house for fear that he might go into the town and tell people about Bulstrode's story. Bulstrode tries his best to conceal who the man is and what he is doing there from his wife, but he still causes alarm throughout the household; his wife may not know exactly who Raffles is, but surely she has some idea that he is a friend from Bulstrode's less honest past. Bulstrode tells Raffles that he may get money from Bulstrode as long as he does not come back to Middlemarch; he takes Raffles to a nearby town, gives him money, and tells him to leave. He knows this might not be a permanent solution, but it is the best that Bulstrode can come up with at this given time. Bulstrode tries to dispose of all his businesses and such, including the bank; he also gives Caleb Garth the management of Stone Court in his absence. Caleb, in turn, sees that it could be a good opportunity for Fred to learn more about the business, and gain his own experience; Mrs. Garth is a bit wary, but Caleb is decided. Fred is also allowed to live at Stone Court while he manages it, and hopefully will be able to afford to wed Mary sometime soon.", "analysis": "It seems that there is a growing paradox inherent in Bulstrode's situation; the more he is secretive and underhanded about his past, the worse he will look when the whole truth comes out. Mrs. Bulstrode, though she does not know the whole truth, already knows enough from her husband's behavior to have some idea of what he is up to. Also, his attempts to cover things up and move away will probably look even more suspicious than if he had stayed. Either way, the harm to his marriage will be irreparable; and his feeble attempts to save himself cannot really stop what is coming. Will Bulstrode be able to avoid the workings of fate. It seems that no character in the novel can escape without learning some lesson; even those who are mildly flawed, like Lydgate, find themselves in very trying situations. It is doubtful, considering the great trials that a good person like Dorothea has had to undergo, that Bulstrode, with sins greater than almost anyone else's in the novel, could escape unscathed. Once again, fate is a major theme in the novel, and correction of flaws seems to be another related one; many of the characters in this novel have been placed in situations where it is certain that their faults will be tried, and hopefully, ironed out. The only positive that seems to be inherent in Bulstrode's situation is that it will give Fred a chance to prove himself, with the management of Stone Court. Either Fred is going to fail miserably, or succeed admirably; and his performance with the Stone Court assignment will probably determine whether he ends up with Mary or not. Hopefully, Fred has heeded Farebrother's lesson well, and has succeeded in reforming himself into a more industrious, responsible person. It seems that Fred has done well so far, and perhaps marriage to Mary will be enough incentive to keep him going"}