{"name": "book 3, Chapter 25", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-33", "summary": "Fred goes to Stone Court to tell Mary the news; he is not as repentant as he should be, and wants comforting words from Mary about his irresponsibility. He still doesn't see the entire magnitude of what he did; he tries to rationalize things with his good intentions, and by claiming that he is not so bad, compared to what other people do. Mary is upset, and says that she cannot trust him, and that he should be more sorry for what he did. Caleb comes later, to ask for whatever she has saved up; Mary gives it gladly. Caleb Garth is worried that his daughter has some feelings for", "analysis": "Mr. Garth makes a good point about marital relations: \"a woman has to put up with the life her husband makes for her\". The statement is a very accurate piece of social commentary, and certainly demonstrated as a valid theme within the book so far. Dorothea has been suffering because the life her husband has made for her is very lonely and gives her little of value to do. If Mary does decide to marry Fred, she will have to bear the brunt of his irresponsibility and spendthrift qualities; since women are economically and socially dependent upon men, and divorce is out of the question, women are forced to put up with the personalities of their husbands and the living that they choose to make. A woman's decision to marry was something she could not afford to think lightly of, as her future would be almost entirely determined by the match she made. Another good bit of advice, which Dorothea would have benefited from hearing, is Caleb Garth's observations on how a relationship changes from courting to marriage. When couples first dream of marriage, \"they may think it all holidaybut it soon turns into working day\". This truth is one that plagues Dorothea and Casaubon's marriage, as their idealistic views of their union have failed to prepare them for the realities of marriage. Caleb Garth may be too trusting of his fellow man, but he is a great source of wisdom and sense in the book"}