{"name": "book 3, Chapter 33", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-33", "summary": "Mary Garth is sitting with Mr. Featherstone at night, as she usually does, reflecting on the events of the day, and sitting in silence, for the most part. She figures that the issue of Featherstone's will shall disappoint everyone involved. Mr. Featherstone suddenly tells her to open the chest with his will in it, and burn one of them; Mary refuses, even when she is offered a sizable amount of money to do so. Mary is scared of his sudden energy, and does not think that he is in his right mind; Mr. Featherstone drifts off to sleep, and by the morning he is dead.", "analysis": "Mary is quite a paradox; she is sweet, modest, and uncomplicated, yet she has a great deal of wisdom about human nature, and a keen sense of humor, neither of which can be guessed from her day-to-day dealings. She seems very plain, but inside she is anything but; few people in the book suspect that this difference between what Mary is in her common interactions, and what she is to herself, which makes their judgments of her particularly laden with irony. Mary also has a great deal of foresight, which few people have seen in action; she knows that everyone will be disappointed by Featherstone's will, though there is more to be decided on this issue still. By the end of the chapter, whether Mary has done or not done the right thing is a pressing question. Mr. Featherstone's frantic tone must have put her off; he is acting \"like an aged hyena,\" the simile denoting his nervous energy, and his uncharacteristic behavior. Mary did manage to avoid the temptation of money, which is the weakness of many in the book, especially Fred; and, she also did nothing that could have haunted her later, or made suspicion fall on her, which was also a good decision. But what the repercussions of Mary's upright behavior will be, is soon to be seen"}