{"name": "book 5, Chapter 42", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-34-44", "summary": "Lydgate is at least back from his honeymoon with Rosamond, and is immediately called to Casaubon, whose health seems to be getting worse. He is also haunted by the idea that he has never been given credit for his studies, and that the Key to All Mythologies will never be finished; he is starting to admit that he has failed in his life-long project. Casaubon is disappointed also with Dorothea; she does all her duties as a wife, but he suspects that she is critical of him secretly, and this disturbs him a great deal. Casaubon's vitriol against Will, and against Dorothea's suspected affection for Will, takes him over; he concedes to write a passage into his will \"protecting\" Dorothea from marrying eager, potentially deceptive suitors like Will. Lydgate finally arrives, and Casaubon asks that he be told exactly what his condition is. Lydgate tells him that he has a heart ailment, but cannot be sure that it will cut his life short, or have any immediate effect. Lydgate goes once Casaubon has heard enough, and Dorothea comes out to fetch him; he withdraws from her, and soon she becomes angry at him for treating her so. Dorothea realizes that she has reduced herself in order to try and please him, but he seems to be satisfied with nothing; she is tired of not being herself, and resents him greatly. However, when he says that he needs her help, she forgets her anger, and goes to join him.", "analysis": "The theme of gender roles and accepted notions of gender comes back to haunt Casaubon; he has been led to believe that women are supposed to be self-sacrificing, supportive, emotionally giving, etc. and no different from the flat, narrow stereotype of the typical wife. Ironically, he believes that Dorothea is a woman, but does not believe that this makes her a person; the idea that she might have opinions about him, a mind of her own, or the ability to make her own decisions disturbs him, as if she should lack these basic human qualities because she is a woman. The Key to All Mythologies becomes a symbol of Casaubon's failure as a scholar, and as a human being; his life's work has finally come to an unpublishable heap of meaningless papers, and his obsessive devotion to these papers has cost him any real relationships he might have had. Casaubon's life among moldy books has gained him nothing, in the end; he has gained no recognition, because he cannot seem to distill his learning into anything of practical use. He is too involved in his directionless studies that he leaves no time to get to know his wife, or form any friendships with neighbors, or with family like Will. He is socially insecure and more than a bit jealous of people, like Will, who are able to operate in society in the ways he cannot; this is another hindrance to him, in finding and making acquaintances. Casaubon's tone, as he speaks of \"protecting\" his wife and of the potential influence Will would have on her, becomes bitter, informed by suspicion, and prone to justify invention with a gloss of rational-sounding diction. His thoughts are structured like a lawyer's argument, the diction stiff and sometimes precise, though the sentiments contained within, and the presumptions of character, are mostly the stuff of Casaubon's paranoia. However, the fact that Casaubon is putting a formal hindrance in Dorothea and Will's way foreshadows that they will finally become a couple; such a mean-spirited, vain attempt on Casaubon's part must be proved as wrong as the spirit in which it was written. Eliot's personification of death adds drama and immediacy to Casaubon's situation; it also foreshadows that something is to happen to Casaubon soon, and that his illness shall not be drawn out by any means. The subdued, solemn images and surroundings are also conducive, and sympathetic, to some dramatic event. Dorothea being described as being possibly a \"heaven-sent angel\" is also further hint about Casaubon's fast approaching fate; the metaphor is correct in characterizing her as a kind of loving, sympathetic creature, but not even Casaubon is his state will accept her affection. This chapter sees Dorothea finally come close to revolt; she has shaken off her naivete about the marriage, and settled into anger, rather than pity or self-consciousness. If Casaubon has been displeased with her so far, he in unlikely to find any satisfaction; she knows that she has been trying hard to suppress herself, in order to please him, and can no longer do this. However, she sinks into her old ways once again, when he comes to get her, and asks for her help. Dorothea is so affection-starved that she will continue to distort herself in order to please, but in light of her realization, this tendency might not be long-lived"}