                [The DUKE's castle.]

                Enter LORENZO and BALTHAZAR.

  LORENZO.  My lord, though Bel-imperia seem thus coy,
    Let reason hold you in your wonted joy:
    In time the savage bull sustains the yoke,
    In time all haggard hawks will stoop to lure,
    In time small wedges cleave the hardest oak,
    In time the flint is pierc'd with softest shower;
    And she in time will fall from her disdain,
    And rue the sufferance of your friendly pain.

  BAL.  No; she is wilder, and more hard withal,
    Then beast or bird, or tree or stony wall!
    But wherefore blot I Bel-imperia's name?
    It is my fault, not she that merits blame.
    My feature is not to content her sight;
    My words are rude and work her no delight;
    The lines I send her are but harsh and ill,
    Such as do drop from Pan and Marsya's quill;
    My presents are not of sufficient cost;
    And, being worthless, all my labours lost.
    Yet might she love me for my valiancy.
    Aye; but that's slander'd by captivity.
    Yet might she love me to content her sire.
    Aye; but her reason masters her desire.
    Yet might she love me as her brother's friend.
    Aye; but her hopes aim at some other end.
    Yet might she love me to uprear her state.
    Aye; but perhaps she loves some nobler mate.
    Yet might she love me as her beauty's thrall.
    Aye; but I fear she cannot love at all.

  LOR.  My lord, for my sake leave these ecstasies,
    And doubt not but we'll find some remedy.
    Some cause there is that lets you not be lov'd:
    First that must needs be known, and then remov'd.
    What if my sister love some other knight?

  BAL.  My summer's day will turn to winter's night.

  LOR.  I have already found a stratagem
    To sound the bottom of this doubtful theme.
    My lord, for once you shall be rul'd by me;
    Hinder me not what ere you hear or see:
    By force or fair means will I cast about
    To find the truth of all this question out.
    Ho, Pedringano!

  PED.          Signior.

  LOR.                  Vien qui presto!

                Enter PEDRINGANO.

  PED.  Hath your lordship any service to command me?

  LOR.  Aye, Pedringano, service of import.
    And, not to spend the time in trifling words,
    Thus stands the case:  it is not long, thou know'st,
    Since I did shield thee from my father's wrath
    For thy convenience in Andrea's love,
    For which thou wert adjudg'd to punishment;
    I stood betwixt thee and thy punishment,
    And since thou knowest how I have favour'd thee.
    Now to these favours will I add reward,
    Not with fair words, but store of golden coin
    And lands and living join'd with dignities,
    If thou but satisfy my just demand;
    Tell truth and have me for thy lasting friend.

  PED.  Whate'er it be your lordship shall demand,
    My bounden duty bids me tell the truth,
    If case it lie in me to tell the truth.

  LOR.  Then, Pedringano, this is my demand;
    Whom loves my sister Bel-imperia?
    For she reposeth all her trust in thee.
    Speak, man, and gain both friendship and reward:
    I mean, whom loves she in Andrea's place?

  PED.  Alas, my lord, since Don Andrea's death
    I have no credit with her as before,
    And therefore know not if she love or no.

  LOR.  Nay, if thou dally, then I am thy foe,
    And fear shall force what friendship cannot win.
    Thy death shall bury what thy life conceals.
    Thou die'st for more esteeming her than me!

                [Draws his sword.]

  PED.  Oh stay, my lord!

  LOR.  Yet speak the truth, and I will guerdon thee
    And shield thee from whatever can ensue,
    And will conceal whate'er proceeds from thee;
    But, if thou dally once again, thou diest!

  PED.  If madame Bel-imperia be in love--

  LOR.  What, villain!  ifs and ands?

  PED.  Oh stay, my lord!  she loves Horatio!

                BALTHAZAR starts back.

  LOR.  What!  Don Horatio, our knight-marshall's son?

  PED. Even him, my lord.

  LOR.  Now say but how know'st thou he is her love,
    And thou shalt find me kind and liberal.
    Stand up, I say, and fearless tell the truth.

  PED.  She sent him letters,--which myself perus'd,--
    Full-fraught with lines and arguments of love,
    Preferring him before Prince Balthazar.

  LOR.  Swear on this cross that what thou say'st is true,
    And that thou wilt conceal what thou hast told.

  PED.  I swear to both, by him that made us all.

  LOR.  In hope thine oath is true, here's thy reward.
    But, if I prove thee perjur'd and unjust,
    This very sword whereon thou took'st thine oath
    Shall be the worker of thy tragedy.

  PED.  What I have said is true, and shall, for me,
    Be still conceal'd from Bel-imperia.
    Besides, your Honour's liberality
    Deserves my duteous service ev'n till death.

  LOR.  Let this be all that thou shall do for me:
    Be watchful when and where these lovers meet,
    And give me notice in some secret sort.

  PED.  I will, my lord.

  LOR.  Then thou shalt find that I am liberal.
    Thou know'st that I can more advance thy state
    Than she:  be therefore wise and fail me not.
    Go and attend her as thy custom is,
    Least absence make her think thou dost amiss.

                Exit PEDRINGANO.

    Why, so, Tam armis quam ingenio:
    Where words prevail not, violence prevails.
    But gold doth more than either of them both.
    How likes Prince Balthazar this stratagem?

  BAL.  Both well and ill; it makes me glad and sad:
    Glad, that I know the hind'rer of my love;
    Sad, that I fear she hates me whom I love;
    Glad, that I know on whom to be reveng'd;
    Sad, that she'll fly me if I take revenge.
    Yet must I take revenge or die myself;
    For love resisted grows impatient.
    I think Horatio be my destin'd plague:
    First, in his hand he brandished a sword,
    And with that sword he fiercely waged war,
    And in that war he gave me dangerous wounds,
    And by those wounds he forced me to yield,
    And by my yielding I became his slave;
    Now, in his mouth he carries pleasing words,
    Which pleasing words do harbour sweet conceits,
    Which sweet conceits are lim'd with sly deceits,
    Which sly deceits smooth Bel-imperia's ears,
    And through her ears dive down into her heart,
    And in her heart set him, where I should stand.
    Thus hath he ta'en my body by his force,
    And now by sleight would captivate my soul;
    But in his fall I'll tempt the Destinies,
    And either lose my life or win my love.

  LOR. Let's go, my lord;  our staying stays revenge.
    Do but follow me, and gain your love;
    Her favour must be won by his remove.

                Exeunt.