[The Duke's Castle]

                Enter HORATIO and BEL-IMPERIA.

  HOR.  Now, madame, since by favour of your love
    Our hidden smoke is turn'd to open flame,
    And that with looks and words we feed our thought,--
    Two chief contents where more cannot be had,--
    Thus in the midst of love's fair blandishments
    Why show you sign of inward languishments?

                PEDRINGANO showeth all to the PRINCE and
                LORENZO, placing them in secret.

  BEL.  My heart, sweet friend, is like a ship at sea:
    She wisheth port, where, riding all at ease,
    She may repair what stormy times have worn,
    And, leaning on the shore, may sing with joy
    That pleasure follows pain, and bliss annoy.
    Possession of thy love is th' only port
    Wherein my heart, with fears and hopes long toss'd,
    Each hour doth wish and long to make resort,
    There to repair the joys that it hath lost,
    And, sitting safe, to sing in Cupid's choir
    That sweetest bliss is crown of love's desire.

                BALTHAZAR, above.

  BAL.  O sleep, mine eyes; see not my love profan'd!
    Be deaf, my ears; hear not my discontent!
    Die, heart; another joys what thou deserv'st!

  LOR.  Watch still, mine eyes, to see this love disjoin'd!
    Hear still, mine ears, to hear them both lament!
    Live, heart, to joy at fond Horatio's fall!

  BEL.  Why stands Horatio speechless all this while?

  HOR.  The less I speak, the more I meditate.

  BEL.  But whereon dost thou chiefly meditate?

  HOR.  On dangers past and pleasures to ensue.

  BAL. On pleasures past and dangers to ensue!

  BEL.  What dangers and what pleasures dost thou mean?

  HOR.  Dangers of war and pleasures of our love.

  LOR.  Dangers of death, but pleasures none at all!

  BEL. Let dangers go; thy war shall be with me,
    But such a war as breaks no bond of peace.
    Speak thou fair words, I'll cross them with fair words;
    Send thou sweet looks, I'll meet them with sweet looks;
    Write loving lines, I'll answer loving lines;
    Give me a kiss, I'll countercheck thy kiss:
    Be this our warring peace, or peaceful war.

  HOR.  But, gracious madame, then appoint the field
    Where trial of this war shall first be made.

  BAL.  Ambitious villain, how his boldness grows!

  BEL.  Then be thy father's pleasant bow'r the field,--
    Where first we vow'd a mutual amity.
    The court were dangerous; that place is safe.
    Our hour shall be when Vesper 'gins to rise,
    That summons home distressful travelers.
    There none shall hear us but the harmless birds:
    Haply the gentle nightingale
    Shall carroll us asleep ere we be ware,
    And, singing with the prickle at her breast,
    Tell our delight and mirthful dalliance.
    Till then, each hour will seem a year and more.

  HOR.  But, honey-sweet and honourable love,
    Return we now into your father's sight;
    Dang'rous suspicion waits on our delight.

  LOR.  Aye, danger mix'd with jealous despite
    Shall send thy soul into eternal night!

                Exeunt.

