                [The Spanish court.]

                Enter the KING OF SPAIN, PORTINGAL
                AMBASSADOR, DON CIPRIAN, &c.

  KING.  Brother of Castille, to the prince's love
    What says your daughter Bel-imperia?

  CIP.  Although she coy it, as becomes her kind,
    And yet dissemble that she loves the prince,
    I doubt not, aye, but she will stoop in time;
    And, were she froward,--which she will not be,--
    Yet herein shall she follow my advice,
    Which is to love him or forgo my love.

  KING.  Then, lord ambassador of Portingal,
    Advise thy king to make this marriage up
    For strengthening of our late-confirmed league;
    I know no better means to make us friends.
    Her dowry shall be large and liberal;
    Besides that she is daughter and half heir
    Unto our brother here, Don Ciprian,
    And shall enjoy the moiety of his land,
    I'll grace her marriage with an uncle's gift,
    And this is it:  in case the match go forward,
    The tribute which you pay shall be releas'd;
    And, if by Balthazar she have a son,
    He shall enjoy the kingdom after us.

  AMBASS.  I'll make the motion to my sovereign liege,
    And work it if my counsel may prevail.

  KING.  Do so, my lord; and, if he give consent,
    I hope his presence here will honour us
    In celebration of the nuptial day,--
    And let himself determine of the time.

  AMBASS.  Wilt please your Grace command me ought beside?

  KING.  Commend me to the king; and so, farewell!
    But where's Prince Balthazar, to take his leave?

  AMBASS.  That is perform'd already, my good lord.

  KING.  Amongst the rest of what you have in charge,
    The prince's ransom must not be forgot:
    That's none of mine, but his that took him prisoner,--
    And well his forwardness deserves reward:
    It was Horatio, our knight-marshall's son.

  AMBASS.  Between us there's a price already pitch'd,
    And shall be sentwith all convenient speed.

  KING.  Then once again farewell, my lord!

  AMBASS.  Farwell, my lord of Castile, and the rest!

                Exit.

  KING.  Now, brother, you must make some little pains
    To win fair Bel-imperia from her will;
    Young virgins must be ruled by their friends.
    The prince is amiable, and loves her well;
    If she neglect him and forgo his love,
    She both will wrong her own estate and ours.
    Therefore, whiles I do entertain the prince
    With greatest pleasure that our court affords,
    Endeavor you to win your daughter's thought.
    If she give back, all this will come to naught.

                Exeunt.



