                [San Luigi's Park.]

                Enter PEDRINGANO with a pistol.

  PED.  Now, Pedringano, bid thy pistol hold;
    And hold on, Fortune!  Once more favour me!
    Give but success to mine attempting spirit,
    And let me shift for taking of mine aim.
    Here is the gold!  This is the gold propos'd!
    It is no dream that I adventure for,
    But Pedringano is posses'd thereof.
    And he that would not strain his conscience
    For him that thus his liberal purse hath stretch'd,
    Unworthy such a favour, may he fail,
    And, wishing, want, when such as I prevail!
    As for the fear of apprehension,
    I know, if need should be, my noble lord
    Will stand between me and ensuing harms.
    Besides, this place is free from all suspect.
    Here therefore will I stay and take my stand.

                Enter the WATCH.

  I WATCH.  I wonder much to what intent it is
    That we are thus expressly charg'd to watch.

  II WATCH.  This by commandment in the king's own
    name.

  III WATCH.  But we were never wont to watch and ward
    So near the duke his brother's house before.

  II WATCH.  Content yourself, stand close, there's somewhat
    in't.

                Enter SERBERINE.

  SER. [aside]  Here, Serberine, attend and stay thy pace;
    For here did Don Lorenzo's page appoint
    That thou by his command shouldst meet with him.
    How fit a place, if one were so dispos'd,
    Methinks this corner is to close with one.

  PED. [aside]  Here comes the bird that I must seize upon;
    Now, Pedringano, or never play the man!

  SER.  [aside]  I wonder that his lordship stays so long,
    Or wherefore should he send for me so late.

  PED.  For this, Serberine; and thou shalt ha't!

                Shoots.

    So, there he lies; my promise is perform'd.

                The WATCH.

  I WATCH.  Hark, gentlemen, this is a pistol shot!

  II WATCH.  And here's one slain; stay the murderer!

  PED.  Now, by the sorrows of the souls in hell,

                He strives with the WATCH.

    Who first lays hands on me, I'll be his priest!

  III WATCH.  Sirrah, confess, and therein play the priest.
    Why hast thou thus unkindly kill'd the man?

  PED.  Why, because he walk'd abroad so late.

  III WATCH.  Come sir, you had been better kept your bed
    Then have committed this misdeed so late.

  II WATCH.  Come to the marshall's with the murderer!

  I WATCH.  On to Hieronimo's!  help me here
    To bring the murder'd body with us too.

  PED.  Hieronimo?  Carry me before whom you will;
    What e'er he be, I'll answer him and you.
    And do your worst, for I defy you all!

                Exeunt.