                [A room in the DUKE's castle.]

                Enter LORENZO, BALTHAZAR and the PAGE.

  LOR.  Boy, talk no further; thus far things go well.
    Thou art assur'd that thou sawest him dead?

  PAGE.  Or else, my lord, I live not.

  LOR.                  That's enough.
    As for this resolution at his end,
    Leave that to him with whom he sojourns now.
    Here, take my ring, and give it Christophel,
    And bid him let my sister be enlarg'd,
    And bring her hither straight.

                Exit PAGE.

    This that I did was for a policy,
    To smooth and keep the murder secret,
    Which as a nine days wonder being o'er-blown,
    My gentle sister will I now enlarge.

  BAL.  And time, Lorenzo; for my lord the duke,
    You heard, enquired for her yester-night.

  LOR.  Why!  and, my lord, I hope you heard me say
    Sufficient reason why she kept away;
    But that's all one.  My lord, you love her?

  BAL.                          Aye.

  LOR.  Then in your love beware; deal cunningly;
    Salve all suspicions; only soothe me up,
    And, if she hap to stand on terms with us,
    As for her sweet-heart, and concealment so,
    Jest with her gently; under feigned jest
    Are things conceal'd that else would breed unrest.
    But here she comes.

                Enter BEL-IMPERIA.

  LOR.  Now, sister.

  BEL.                          Sister?  No!
    Thou art no brother, but an enemy,
    Else wouldst thou not have us'd thy sister so:
    First, to affright me with thy weapons drawn,
    And with extremes abuse my company;
    And then to hurry me like whirlwind's rage
    Amidst a crew of thy confederates,
    And clap me up where none might come at me,
    Nor I at any to reveal my wrongs.
    What madding fury did possess thy wits?
    Or wherein is't that I offended thee?

  LOR.  Advise you better, Bel-imperia;
    For I have done you no disparagement,--
    Unless, by more discretion then deserv'd,
    I sought to save your honour and mine own.

  BEL.  Mine honour?  Why, Lorenzo, wherein is't
    That I neglect my reputation so
    As you, or any, need to rescue it?

  LOR.  His Highness and my father were resolv'd
    To come confer with old Hieronimo
    Concerning certain matters of estate
    That by the viceroy was determined.

  BEL.  And wherein was mine honour touch'd in that?

  BAL.  Have patience, Bel-imperia; hear the rest.

  LOR.  Me, next in sight, as messenger they sent
    To give him notice that they were so nigh:
    Now, when I came, consorted with the prince,
    And unexpected in an arbor there
    Found Bel-imperia with Horatio--

  BEL.   How then?

  LOR.  Why, then, rememb'ring that old disgrace
    Which you for Don Andrea had endur'd,
    And now were likely longer to sustain
    By being found so meanly accompanied,
    Thought rather, for I knew no readier mean,
    To thrust Horatio forth my father's way.

  BAL.  And carry you obscurely somewhere else,
    Lest that his Highness should have found you there.

  BEL.  Ev'n so, my lord?  And you are witness
    That this is true which he entreateth of?
    You, gentle brother, forg'd this for my sake?
    And you, my lord, were made his instrument?
    A work of worth!  worthy the noting too!
    But what's the cause that you conceal'd me since?

  LOR.  Your melancholy, sister, since the news
    Of your first favorite Don Andrea's death
    My father's old wrath hath exasperate.

  BAL.  And better was't for you, being in disgrace,
    To absent yourself and give his fury place.

  BEL.  But why I had no notice of his ire?

  LOR.  That were to add more fuel to your fire,
    Who burnt like Aetna for Andrea's loss.

  BEL.  Hath not my father then enquir'd for me?

  LOR.  Sister, he hath; and this excus'd I thee.

                He whispereth in her ear.

    But, Bel-imperia, see the gentle prince;
    Look on thy love; behold young Balthazar,
    Whose passions by thy presence are increas'd,
    And in whose melancholy thou may'st see
    Thy hate, his love, thy flight, his following thee.

  BEL.  Brother, you are become an orator--
    I know not, ay, by what experience--
    Too politic for me, past all compare,
    Since I last saw you.  But content yourself;
    The prince is meditating higher things.

  BAL.  'Tis of thy beauty, then, that conquers kings,
    Of those thy tresses, Ariadne's twines,
    Wherewith my liberty thou hast surpris'd,
    Of that thine ivory front, my sorrow's map,
    Wherein I see no hav'n to rest my hope.

  BEL.  To love and fear, and both at once, my lord,
    In my conceit, are things of more import
    Then women's wit are to be busied with.

  BAL.  'Tis I that love.

  BEL.                  Whom?

  BAL.                                  Bel-imperia.

  BEL.  But I that fear.

  BAL.                  Whom?

  BEL.                                  Bel-imperia.

  LOR.  Fear yourself?

  BEL.                  Aye, brother.

  LOR.                                  How?

  BEL.                                          As those
    That, when they love, are loath and fear to lose.

  BAL.  Then, fair, let Balthazar your keeper be.

  BEL.  No, Balthazar doth fear as well as we;
    Et tremulo metui pavidum junxere timorem,
    Est vanum stolidae proditionis opus.

                Exit.

  LOR.  Nay, and you argue things so cunningly,
    We'll go continue this discourse at court.

  BAL. Led by the loadstar of her heav'nly looks,
    Wends poor oppressed Balthazar,
    As o'er the mountains walks the wanderer
    Incertain to effect his pilgrimage.

                Exeunt.