{"name": "Chapter 18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-18", "summary": "Coverdale notices the dove again as he looks out his window. He remembers the dreams he had last night, where Hollingsworth and Zenobia shared a passionate kiss and Priscilla faded away. In order to forget such scenes, he spends time looking at the boardinghouse across the way. The young man is gone and the children are playing. He sees a young woman in airy drapery, then sees another one who he is shocked to discover is actually Zenobia. He realizes the other must be Priscilla. The flower is in Zenobia's hair, and he marvels at how she moves in such a beautiful fashion. To his surprise he also sees Westervelt in the apartment, noticing how he and Zenobia seem to have a mutual dislike of each other. Coverdale knows that Zenobia has maintained a place in town, and retired to it occasionally with Priscilla, but feels that it is a odd coincidence that the place he chose is right across from it and he is now looking at these Blithedale residents. He becomes uncomfortable and \"began to long for a catastrophe\" to jolt everyone and let everything come to fruition. He sees Priscilla dressed more elegantly and fancifully than usual, and that she has that common expression of seeming to be listening to something. He looks at Westervelt and compares the man's smile to that of the Devil; he also notes his \"cat-like circumspection\" , which at that moment led him to look across the way and see Coverdale. Embarrassed, he knows he cannot pull away so he keeps looking. Zenobia looks across and sends barbs of scorn. She then salutes and dismisses him with brief gesture, and lowers the shades pertly", "analysis": "Theater, masks, stories, and art pervade the text. Despite the Community's lofty purposes, and their stated goal to till the earth, they are mostly artists and intellectuals who derive more pleasure from their games and leisure activities. Zenobia's story and Coverdale's exit to the city mark a turning point in the novel, where the narrative becomes more dreamlike, fragmented, unreliable, and infused with the language of the spiritual and the dramatic. Eliot's Pulpit is a fascinating yet often overlooked component of the novel, one that is tied in with larger questions about the relationship between the past and the present. It is related to the Puritans, who were moral and convicted but at the same time hypocritical and deluded. Critic Byron Stay writes of Eliot's Pulpit, explaining that the author \"uses the wilderness setting...to represent Puritan strength in order to contrast the Blithedalers with their seventeenth-century counterparts.\" The Pulpit \"mirrors and distorts the self-perceptions of the characters\" and shows how they have very flimsy identities. It is a \"neutral territory\" where the characters inability to embody early ideals becomes plain. First, Stay explains who Eliot was: a Puritan apostle to the Indians and a writer, whom Hawthorne admired as a man with true character and a representative of \"the survival of Puritan integrity in a world dominated by Puritan brutality.\" The Blithedalers may think that they are like him, but Hawthorne makes it clear that they are not. They think they are beyond \"Puritan frigidity\" but they truly aren't. Hollingsworth's philanthropy is false, and overall the Blithedalers have much more in common with the nonsectarian founders of Massachusetts Bay than they do with the Pilgrims of Plymouth. Their vision is much more self-interested than spiritual. Stay writes that the characteristics of the rock itself are telling; \"The jaggedness of the rock suggests the Puritan-like callousness which undergirds the Blithedale experiment and foreshadows its impending disintegration. It also points to the psychological fissures which threaten each character from within.\" Since Coverdale only notices its softness, it is clear he cannot see the real truth behind appearances. If there is a focus on softness in the beginning, the shift to hardness later reveals the breakdowns each character is experiencing. The return to Eliot's Pulpit at the end of the novel, in which Zenobia holds sway, alludes to the witch trials of Salem and failures of Puritanism. Stay concludes, \"Against the backdrop of Eliot's Pulpit, the utopians repeat Puritan history, but because they lack the Puritans' sense of moral direction, they are ultimately reduced to playing out a parody of Puritan barbarism.\" The characters' disintegration is the \"decline that Hawthorne saw in the character of the mid-century American.\" Leo B. Levy also looks at the novel in its historical context, noting how \"the extinction of predominantly rural America at the moment of its proposed revival at Blithedale threatens all traditional ties and institutions.\" Coverdale is between the old and the new, judging his friends according to traditional standards but aware of the changes imposing themselves on him as well. Both Coverdale and Hollingsworth embody \"the sternness of the Puritan age\", while Coverdale is indicative of the ultimate failure of uniting urban culture with the country -he is \"a new kind of individual\" and \"the displaced person\". Hawthorne is making his views  clear through Coverdale; the author \"saw the value of an internal narrator whose integrity could be doubted precisely because he was so damaged by the conditions he describes as any of the other characters.\" Coverdale displays his voyeuristic tendencies to full effect here, obsessing over his friends across the way. His position at the window mirrors that of the hermitage. The vortex, the voyage into chaos that is Coverdale's obsession, manifests strongly here. Zenobia's story of the Veiled Lady is important, as it foreshadows the revelation of Priscilla later in the novel, and is also a part of the general theme of veiling and masks in the novel. The Blithedalers love to dress up, play roles and act, and, less in a spirit of fun, mask their true intentions and identities. Everyone has a secret, and ambiguity reigns."}