{"name": "Chapter 23", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24", "summary": "Coverdale wanders about, ruminating on what he has heard. He spends many hours thinking about the three people -Priscilla, Hollingsworth, Zenobia -who loom so large in his life. He stays away from Blithedale, his hands losing their coarseness. He begins to think of Blithedale as another life, and allows himself to joke about it with outsiders. He does not wander far, though, staying in town. One night he attends a Lyceum-Hall performance of the Veiled Lady. The crowd gathers and seats themselves. Coverdale notices Hollingsworth before him and whispers dramatically in his ear, asking where he left Zenobia. He says sadly that he left her at Blithedale. People near Coverdale talk of mesmerism and strange, romantic stories. Coverdale scoffs at them, and thinks, \"we have fallen on an evil age. The audience grows impatient. A man comes out, dressed in Oriental clothing; it is Westervelt, whom Coverdale recognizes. After being asked, Hollingsworth says he does not know who the man is. The Professor speaks of psychological phenomena, a new era for the world. The Veiled Lady comes out, moving gracefully and freely. He claims her veil has been dipped in \"the fluid medium of spirits\". He suggests the crowd try to disconcert her; they attempt to do this by yelling, but she remains motionless and collected. As he is talking, she rises, apparently without his consent. Coverdale notices Hollingsworth on the platform. He looks to the Veiled Lady and announces she is safe, and she must come with him. Priscilla, the Veiled Lady, throws off the veil and looks startled at those around her. Coverdale says, \"the true heart-throb of a woman's affection was too powerful for the jugglery that had hitherto environed her\". She runs to Hollingsworth with a scream, and \"was safe forever\"", "analysis": "This set of chapters features incredible revelations : Priscilla is the Veiled Lady; Priscilla and Zenobia are sisters; Hollingsworth chooses Priscilla over Zenobia; Westervelt's role as manipulative mesmerist is made clear. Coverdale also reveals himself as an unreliable narrator, and the tone of the work shifts markedly into one that is more fragmented and dreamlike. Coverdale is one of critics' favorite topics, and with good reason. He is a voyeur, looking out panoptically, part of the action to an extent but more a watcher and a commenter. His preoccupation with his friends is unhealthy; he is jealous and embittered by their triangle and thus we cannot totally trust his observations. Kelley Griffith Jr. writes, \"the narrator is biased, unreliable, unlikeable, and he distorts his characters\" and that he has \"a highly sensitive, ironical, intelligent, though disturbed mind\". His narrative is reminiscent of those of postmodern writers in that it is like an interior monologue. The dream is the primary device Hawthorne uses to give form to the novel. While the first half of the novel moves logically, the second half starting from Coverdale's removal to the city is dreamlike, with \"chaotic ordering of events and  refusal to fructify many of the crucial developments in the first half.\" Griffith notes three types of dreams -the utopian dream of the Blithedalers; the dream created by imagination and memory; and the dream one has when sleeping. Coverdale has the second two quite often, and threads the first part of his narrative with references to daydreams and dreams. Hawthorne also \"equates Coverdale's fits of imagination with a dream state\"; the meeting with Westervelt can come under scrutiny. Coverdale's dreams cannot be trusted, especially as they intrude on his daily life. There is certainly a shift in the second part of the novel, which Griffith calls \"literally a different story\" and \"a voyage through chaos - mental chaos\". Coverdale falls into the same stupefied state as the pigs he marvels at on his way out; his total lack of surprise at seeing his friends in the boarding house across the way is also consistent with a dream rather than reality. His sluggish, languid existence is dreamlike to say the least, and we cannot fully trust what he is recounting. The episode with Moodie-as-Fauntleroy is also suspicious. Griffith writes, \"the saloon contains art works which either idealize reality or overemphasize it\". Moodie's story is told while drunk, and Coverdale admits to some artistic license. Coverdale's return to Blithedale is also dreamlike and hellish, a phantasmagoria of strange creatures and interludes. Overall, Coverdale works his friends and their situations up in his imagination and \"brings in his own guilt resulting from his moral obligation to them .\" John Harmon McElroy and Edward L. McDonald agree, writing in their article that the coincidences in the second half of the novel defy rationality. Coverdale knew Zenobia had an apartment in the city, yet he marvels that he manages to look right into it from his hotel. Anther \"coincidence\" is that he happens to be at the Lyceum hall where Hollingsworth is. There are many questions about Coverdale's role in passing along information, such as Moodie's plan to take the money from Zenobia and give it to Priscilla. The authors also find it odd that Coverdale has such a somber attitude about visiting Blithedale again when he is there ostensibly to visit friends. Finally, mesmerism was something that Hawthorne despised, and its ridiculousness and dangerousness are revealed in the chapter with Priscilla-as-the-Veiled-Lady. Westervelt, with consent from Moodie, brought her into it against her will, and it seems likely that Zenobia and Hollingsworth helped push her back into it. Hollingsworth then becomes her savior, but it is likely that that happens because he knows he can use her fortune  to build his visionary edifice."}