{"name": "Chapter 8", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-7-12", "summary": "On May Day, Priscilla and Zenobia frolic together. Coverdale notices Zenobia gave Priscilla a weed for her hair. Zenobia comes over to talk about Priscilla with Coverdale, mentioning that she finds the girl's wildness singular. When Coverdale says women are happier than men, she chides him, saying women only have one task assigned by fate and men have many. Priscilla sits before Hollingsworth, and he leads her back to them. Coverdale's health is improved, and he feels as if \"I crept out of a life of old conventionalisms, on my hands and knees, as it were, and gained admittance into the freer region that lay beyond. In this respect, it was like death. He feels like another man, and in the sunshine thinks his compatriots have realized some of Fourier's ideals. There are new people in the community, some young, some old, and some boarders. It is a \"society such as has seldom met together; nor, perhaps, could it reasonably be expected to hold together long. The bond seems negative, not positive, and they never follow their written constitution. In terms of clothing, they look rather like beggars, and have a clerical or scholarly air. They do well enough at the yeoman life, but their neighbors mock them and tell slanderous rumors. This, Coverdale assumes, is due to envy. He sees them as spiritualizing labor, but comes to believe that the yeoman and the scholar can never be one. Zenobia teases Coverdale about this, and says he is fated to be Silas Foster. Hollingsworth comments that he no longer makes verses either. Zenobia asks Hollingsworth about himself, but does not laugh, as she never does with him. Coverdale thinks that Hollingsworth is making disciples out of Priscilla and Zenobia", "analysis": "In this next set of chapters, Hawthorne proffers more questions and a few answers. We find out that Priscilla is Moodie's daughter, but that is all; we do not know his relationship with Zenobia, or anything else about Priscilla's past. We find out Hollingsworth's true purpose in being at Blithedale. We meet Westervelt, a dapper but insidious and mysterious young man whom Coverdale assumes has an indiscreet relationship with Zenobia. And we are left wondering at the relationships springing up between Hollingsworth, Zenobia, and Priscilla. While it is hinted that Zenobia and Hollingsworth are involved, Priscilla's role complicates it. In terms of Priscilla, she is a much more enigmatic character than commonly assumed. Critics tend to focus on Hawthorne's \"dark ladies\" - Hester, Zenobia - and their various mysteries, and pay less attention to the virginal young woman that also populate his pages. Priscilla is certainly described in ways that indicate purity, as in her paleness, quietness, and slight stature, but Hawthorne complicates this by associating her with wildness and by placing clues about her probably less-than-moral past. Coverdale continues to act the part of the voyeur. He has his \"hermitage,\" a lofty hideout where he can sit alone and watch those perambulating below. Hawthorne always associates Coverdale with these sorts of spaces; later in the novel his room at the hotel is a perfect, 19th century version of Rear Window in which he can spy on those in the boardinghouse across the way. He also articulates his growing obsession, commenting that he knows it is perhaps better not to pry into people's characters too much, lest you find something you never should have seen, but that he could not help it. He is also apt to refer to his three friends as a problem he cannot solve, indicating just how concerned he is with them. It is probably during this time in the narrative that the three of them begin to be suspicious of Coverdale and his interest in them, although the actual break is never officially known. Some readers may wonder about Charles Fourier and his place within the novel. The French social theorist wrote of an alternative social organization based on independent cooperative units, with each unit containing 1620 individuals who took care of each others needs from the material to the social to the sexual. It was assumed that Brook Farm incorporated some of Fourier's principles, although it was not the case when Hawthorne participated. As Annette Kolodny writes in her annotations to the novel, Hollingsworth grows angry in his discussion about Fourier with Coverdale because the theorist \"proposed satisfying, rather than repressing, individuals' instinctive and selfish needs, including the sexual. Only when gratified, Fourier argued, would self-interest and instinctual desires cease to disrupt and distort human relations; a unrepressed society, in his view, fostered harmony and cooperation.\" Most characters in Blithedale are nowhere near this progressive perspective; Zenobia is the only one who would espouse this degree of comfort with sexual freedom. Coverdale maintains the position of judge, while Hollingsworth's singular focus on his philanthropic endeavors precludes him from fully engaging with these sorts of complications. Another real-world personage to note briefly is Margaret Fuller, a contemporary of Hawthorne's. Fuller, a women's rights activist and writer, is usually associated with Zenobia, but Hawthorne playfully confuses his readers by suggesting Priscilla's resemblance to her."}