{"name": "Chapters 13-16", "summary": "Chapter 13: Mr. Bennet reveals that he has received a letter from a stranger who will be arriving to stay with them a few days.  After amusing himself for a while with their curiosity, he tells them that it is Mr. Collins, his cousin.  The Bennet's estate will go to Mr. Collins on Mr. Bennet's death, as the Bennets have no sons.  Mr. Collins writes how guilty he feels about his future inheritance of their property, and tells how he has become a clergyman and has been given the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh.  Mr. Bennet finds the letter full of self-importance.  Mr. Collins arrives, admires everything, and has perfect manners, and it soon becomes clear that he intends to marry one of the Bennet sisters.\n\tChapter 14: At dinner Mr. Collins expounds on the virtues of Lady Catherine de Bourgh extensively, as well as her residence, Rosings Park.  He also speaks of Miss De Bourgh, Lady Catherine's daughter, and how good he is at flattering both of the women.  Mr. Bennet concludes that Mr. Collins is as absurd as he had expected him to be.\n\tChapter 15: Mr. Collins has decided to ask Jane to marry him, but when he tells Mrs. Bennet of his desire, she tells him that she expects Jane to be soon engaged to another (Mr. Bingley), and Collins soon changes to Elizabeth.  Lydia, Kitty, Jane, Elizabeth and Collins walk to Meryton and come across Mr. Denny, an officer acquainted with Lydia.  With him is a stranger, whom they soon learn is Mr. Wickham, recently come to town to accept a commission in the corps of Mr. Denny.  While the group is talking in the street, Bingley and Darcy soon come upon them.  Elizabeth notices the effect of their meeting upon Darcy and Wickham, as both change color.  The sisters and Mr. Collins soon move on to Mrs. Philips' house, where they are invited to dinner the next day, and as some of the officers are invited, Mrs. Philips will invite Mr. Wickham as well.\n\tChapter 16: The Bennet's carriage takes the five sisters and Mr. Collins to dinner at the Philips' the next day, where Mr. Wickham will also be dining. Wickham and Elizabeth spend quite some time talking, and she tells him that everyone is disgusted with Darcy's pride. Wickham tells Elizabeth that Darcy's father was \"one of the best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend [he] ever had.\" He states that the late Mr. Darcy had bequeathed him with enough money to provide for him amply, but that Darcy did not honor the will.  Elizabeth is shocked, and believes that Darcy should be publicly disgraced.  They speak again of Darcy's pride, and Wickham states that Miss Darcy (Darcy's sister) is also \"very, very proud.\" Wickham also tells Elizabeth that Darcy is the nephew of Lady Catherine, and that it is intended that he will marry her daughter.  Elizabeth ends the evening thinking only of Wickham and what he had told her.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020001144/https://www.novelguide.com/pride-and-prejudice/summaries/chap13-16"}