{"name": "chapter xxv", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025235/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Looking_Backward_Bellamy/Looking_Backward_Study_Guide17.html", "summary": "Julian West has become so impressed with Edith Leete that his curiosity about womens position in the new society is finally aroused. He finds her more like a noble and innocent boy than any girl ever known. He broaches the topic with Doctor Leete by stating that women must have no other occupation nowadays, aside from the cultivation of charm and beauty. Doctor Leete corrects him. Women are members of the industrial army but they have shorter terms: five to fifteen years. They do not leave it when they get married. Women work shorter hours than men and have more frequent vacations. Men permit women to work because they know work is good for women both physically and mentally. Julian West objects that women cannot be under the same discipline and ranking as men. Doctor Leete assures him that they are not. Women have their own general-in-chief. The womens chief sits on the Presidents cabinet and has veto power over any legislation that has to do with women. Women also serve as judges. If a woman is tried, her judge will be a woman. Doctor Leete argues that the twentieth century reformers went wrong in theorizing that women and men should be treated the same. He finds profound differences between the genders. He is horrified that the nineteenth century provided no employment to women except that in unnatural rivalry with men. He adds that men have given women a world of their own and that women are happy in it. He compares the happy women of the twentieth century to the sickly and unhappy women of the nineteenth century. He notes that in this time, women marry out of love, not out of economic necessity, and they are therefore more capable of making men happy. Julian West wonders if careers keep women from marrying. Doctor Leete assures him that women still like to marry. In fact, only women who have been married and have had children are allowed to enter the higher positions in the industrial army. Doctor Leete also notes that women are issued credit cards of the same amount as anyone else. Women are not dependent on their husbands, and children are not dependent on their parents for financial support. All individuals receive support directly from the state, not through any intermediary. He exclaims over the lack of dignity and humanity of the old system that made people rely on their relations to survive. Julian West admits to being complicit in the nineteenth-century subjection of women. However, he then adds that the condition of women could not have been improved until the general economy was improved. To change womens economic dependence on men, the state had to change the mode of social organization. Doctor Leete tells him that the change in the relations between women and men has been significant, especially in courtship. Now there is no guile or coquetry. Doctor Leete goes on to explain that since there are no economic constraints on marriage choices, the principle of natural selection is in place and the species has improved both mentally and physically.", "analysis": ""}