{"name": "Chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10", "summary": "Mrs. Archer and Newland discuss the problem of Ellen1s reception with Mrs. Van der Luyden, who insists that she must discuss the problem with her husband. Mrs. Archer insists that Larry Lefferts discouraged everyone from coming in order to distract attention from his own affairs with women; Mr. Van der Luyden says that as long as the Mingotts have accepted Ellen into their family then everyone else should accept her into society as well. Since he and his wife cannot attend the dinner in the Leffertses place, due to Louisa1s health, they instead invite Ellen to a reception dinner with the Duke of St. Austrey. This reception is of such high prestige that it exonerates Ellen of any marks on her reputation.", "analysis": "This chapter is interesting because it reveals the many levels of stratification in New York society. When Ellen is \"judged\" by the Leffertses, Mrs. Archer can appeal to a higher authority: the van der Luydens, who are indisputably of better reputation. This chapter gives a deep sense of the politics of the times. Also interesting is the description of the \"immortal\" nature of the van der Luydens. Mrs. van der Luyden is described as \"looking exactly like her portrait;\" like Catherine, earlier, van der Luyden never ages. She seems \"rather gruesomely preserved in the airless atmosphere of a perfectly irreproachable existence, as bodies caught in glaciers keep for years a rosy life-in-death. There are many reasons why Wharton chooses to describe her this way. Perhaps Wharton is trying to draw a dichotomy between the \"mortals\" and the immortals\". The mortals are people like Ellen Olenska, Ned Winsett and regular common folks. These people are alive; they age and they are relatively left out of the scheme of the great New York Society. People who are \"immortal\" are the van der Luydens, the Mingotts, the Archers, the Wellands, the Leffertses. These families are like the gods of the New York pantheon. In making clear this distinction, Wharton can play with the problem of categorizing Newland. Is he a mortal or an immortal. Where does he fit in. Another reason why these great families may be described as \"alive but dead\" is that they are quietly losing power as time moves on. Wharton is clear in telling us that the great American aristocracies are dying dinosaurs in the early twentieth century. By describing them as, already in a sense, dead, she can drive home the point that much of this codified society is already beginning to die out"}