{"name": "Chapter 32", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-30-34", "summary": "Newland and his wife and mother go to the Opera. He goes to watch the performance of _Faust_. Mrs. van der Luyden comments that she saw Catherine1s carriage parked outside of the Beaufort1s home. May quickly lies for Catherine saying that she is certain that the carriage was there without Catherine knowing. The van der Luydens realize that Ellen had taken the carriage to the Beauforts. Mrs. Archer tries to make excuses: \"Imprudent people are often kind. Newland watches the Opera with some disgust thinking, \"the same large blonde victim is succumbing to the same small brown seducer. May is wearing her wedding dress for the first time in two years. Wharton explains that \"it was the custom, in old New York, for brides to appear in this costly garment during the first year or two of marriage. Newland decides that he absolutely must leave and whispers to May that he has a beastly headache and wants to go home. In the carriage, Newland opens the window, needing air. Stepping out of the carriage, May tears her wedding dress. Newland asks if she1d like some brandy \"because she looks very pale\" but May blushes and says no. Newland tries to talk to May about Ellen; but May cleverly guides the conversation to explain that Ellen will be returning to Europe soon. Newland is obviously shaken by the news and May leaves the room quietly saying \"my head aches too.", "analysis": "At this point in the novel, it has been exactly two years since the start of the novel. Newland1s impression of the Opera has radically changed. He no longer feels that the Opera is beautiful and romantic; rather, the Opera is boring and predictable with the \"same blonde victim\" and the \"same small brown seducer. Romance entirely has become a farce to Newland who watches with much skepticism. May wears her wedding dress on this evening. This symbol has a lot of significances. Perhaps May is just wearing the dress because she remembers that she was engaged exactly two years prior. But she may also be wearing it because she realizes that she is about to lose her husband to Ellen and wants to remind her husband of his marital vows. She also may be wearing it because her discussion with Ellen the day before had been \"successful;\" perhaps she had been able to convince Ellen to leave her husband alone and return to Europe. In this case, her wearing of the wedding dress signifies that she believes her wedding is beginning again, anew. In any case, her wedding dress tears while she exits the cab symbolically signifying that some part of her marriage is scarred, torn. Also, something may be wrong with May; she no longer drinks and blushes when Newland asks. She has headaches and looks very pale. All these clues foreshadow the momentous next chapter"}