{"name": "Chapters 29-30", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020200836/https://www.novelguide.com/jane-eyre/summaries/chap29-30", "summary": "For three days and nights Jane stays in bed and they tend to her. When she is finally able to arise, she finds her clothes have all be cleaned and are waiting for her, and she goes downstairs. She there sees Hannah, the older woman, and after a talk they come to an understanding and Jane forgives her for not letting her in, and they become friends. Soon the rest of the household return from their walk to Morton. The two sisters are Diana and Mary Rivers, and the brother is Mr. St. John Rivers. Jane learns that their father has recently died, and that that is why they are all at Moor House, as the house is called. Mr. St. John is the clergyman in Morton, where Jane had gone for help. . The household tries to talk to Jane more. She tells them that she will not disclose where she had been before then, but she does tell much of her life, including her stay at Lowood School and that she had been a private governess. She also tells them that her name is an alias, but that she fears disclosure, so will not tell them her real name. She asks Mr. St. John to find her some work, no matter how humble, and he says he will try. . Chapter 30: Jane's stay at Moor House is quite pleasant. Diana, Mary and she get along very well and have much in common. They loan her books, and she draws for them, and they converse much. Jane does not get along so well with Mr. St. John though, but she explains that he is not much at the house and that his disposition is not like the others'. A month passes since Jane's arrival, and soon the sisters are to return to their jobs as governesses. Jane asks St. John if he had found any work for her, and he says that he had. He tells her that he is opening a school for girls in Morton, and that if she were the mistress of it she would have a house and a housemaid and some money. He feels that it is beneath her station and she will not be very happy with it, but Jane accepts the position. . That evening St. John brings home a letter that he had received. He says that their uncle John had died. They explain that they had never met him, but that he had come into a fortune that they thought they might have seen a part of as their uncle never married and had no children. His will however has left all his money to another who is no more closely related than they are. The next day Jane leaves for her house in Morton, and the day after Diana and Mary return to their jobs. Soon after St. John and Hannah close up the house and return to the parsonage.", "analysis": ""}