{"name": "act 3, Scene 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421072939/https://www.gradesaver.com/julius-caesar/study-guide/summary-act-3", "summary": "Brutus and Cassius tell the plebeians to follow them in order to hear an explanation for the murder. They split the multitude into two parties and Cassius leaves to speak to one group while Brutus speaks to the other. Brutus tells the masses that he loved Caesar more than any of them, but that he killed Caesar because he loved Rome more. He says, \"As Caesar loved me, I weep for him. As he was fortunate, I rejoice at it. As he was valiant, I honor him. But as he was ambitious, I slew him\". Brutus then asks them if they wish him to die for his actions, to which the crowd replies, \"Live, Brutus, live, live. Lastly, he begs them listen to Mark Antony and to let him depart alone. Thus, he leaves Mark Antony alone to give his oration. Antony's speech begins with the famous lines, \"Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears\". His speech continually praises Brutus as \"an honourable man\" who has killed Caesar for being ambitious yet also describes Caesar as the most honorable and generous of men. In this way, Antony appears to praise his friend while respecting the men who murdered him, when in fact, Antony is inciting hte crowd against Brutus, Cassius and the conspirators. The plebeians are easily swayed and conclude that Caesar was not ambitious, and was wrongly murdered. Next, after the plebeians beg, Antony reads Caesar's will after descending into the masses and standing next to Caesar's body. He shows them the stab wounds and names the conspirators who gave Caesar the wounds. The crowd starts to surge away in anarchy, crying, \"Revenge. About. Seek. Burn. Fire. Kill. Slay. Antony stops them and finally reads the will, in which Caesar has given every Roman citizen seventy-five drachmas and the freedom to roam his land. The plebeians react in a frenzy of anger against the men who killed Caesar, and carry away the body. Antony says, \"Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot. Take thou what course thou wilt\". The servant of Octavius arrives and tells Antony that Octavius is already in Rome and is waiting for him at Caesar's house", "analysis": "The images of Caesar throughout the play are those of constancy and greatness. Caesar himself exclaims, \"But I am constant as the northern star\" , \"Hence! wilt thou lift up Olympus?\" . Cassius even angrily compares Caesar to the Colossus, saying, \"Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world / Like a Colossus, and we petty men / Walk under his huge legs and peep about\" . Thus when Caesar falls, the world falls into chaos. There is no one able to replace Caesar's power immediately after his death, and so anarchy reigns until Octavius eventually seizes power in the final lines of the play. Caesar's greatest flaw is his refusal to acknowledge his mortality. Often referring to himself in the third person, he develops a sense of greatness and godliness that distracts him from taking appropriate precautions. Artemidorus tries to hand him a note warning him about the dangers of the conspirators, but Caesar refuses because Artemidorus informs him that the note is personal. \"What touches us ourself shall be last served\" . The moments immediately following Caesar's death are highly ironic, as the murderers cry out, \"Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!\"  They have committed an extralegal act and yet now cry out in the name of liberty. Next, they dip their hands in Caesar's blood: \"Stoop, Romans, stoop. And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords; Then walk we forth even to the marketplace, And, waving our red weapons o'er our heads, Let's all cry out 'peace, freedom, and liberty!'\" . Cassius remarks, \"How many ages hence / Shall this our lofty scene be acted over, / In states unborn and accents yet unknown!\" . These lines, alluding to Shakespeare's retelling of Julius Caesar's story, were used even during the French Revolution, due to their simultaneous expression of grotesque death and the rallying cry of \"peace, freedom, and liberty!\". Brutus and the other conspirators fail to grasp the hypocrisy of their actions. Mark Antony does not believe the conspirators are justified in crying \"peace\", and is the first to condemn their actions. When Antony states, \"Let each man render me his bloody hand\" , he is marking them for revenge rather than celebrating their actions. Even Trebonius, who did not stab Caesar, but prevented Antony from protecting him, is marked by Antony.  Antony shakes hands with Trebonius last, transferring Caesar's blood, collected from his previous handshakes, to his clean hands. At this moment, Antony symbolizes anarchy, blaming the conspirators and marking them for revenge. He shows his taste for chaos when finally left alone with Caesar, saying, \"O pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth / That I am meek and gentle with these butchers\" . His final words indicate his goals, stating, \"Domestic fury and fierce civil strife / Shall cumber all the parts of Italy\" . Indeed, Anarchy does rule by the final scene of Act III, in which innocent Cinna the poet is killed because his namesake was one of the murderers. This scene, in which the plebeians are unwilling to listen to Cinna, expresses the death of not only order but also of literature and reason. Cinna cries out, \"I am Cinna the Poet\" , at which the crowd simply changes its charges against him to, \"Tear him for his bad verses\" . The death of Cinna is an attack on men of words and literature, and marks the first time a poet, often an icon of political rebellion, is ignored. Later on in the play, a poet tries to separate Brutus and Cassius during a great argument, but is ignored and sent away.  Perhaps, with these examples, Shakespeare is asking the audience to give more weight to the work of poets and writers in the affairs of the world. Critics often point out Brutus' tactical errors which lead to his eventual loss. Brutus' first grave mistake is allowing Mark Antony to live. However, his greatest mistake is allowing Antony to speak to the crowds. Cassius' fears are justified when Antony turns the crowd against the conspirators. Furthermore, Brutus leaves Antony alone with the crowd, thereby losing all control of the situation. Antony realizes the nature of the people he is dealing with, and tells the crowd, \"You are not wood, you are not stones, but men\" . This contrasts with Murellus in the very first scene who calls the crowd, \"You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things\" . Antony is able to influence the crowd because he flatters them and uses repetition and poetry to drive his points home. With this careful manipulation, Antony overcomes Brutus, who instead addressed the crowd in prose, syllogisms and logic. However, although a powerful speaker, Antony relies on Caesar's body and will to win the crowd over.  Thus, the audience sees the continual influence Caesar maintains over events, even after his death. Antony says that he would, \"put a tongue / In every wound of Caesar that should move / The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny\" ."}