{"name": "Chapter 28", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416215230/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmWuthering56.asp", "summary": "Zillah enters the room where Nelly has been kept for five days in order to give her a message. Heathcliff says that she may now return to the Grange. Before she departs, Nelly learns that Cathy is now married to Linton; she also tries unsuccessfully to take Cathy home with her. Nelly finally leaves, hoping to come back with a rescue party for Cathy. At Thrushcross Grange, Nelly tells Edgar about everything that has happened at the Heights. Although she paints Heathcliff as a total villain, she says little about Cathy's new husband, for she does not want to cause Edgar unnecessary worry. Edgar, not knowing the extent of Heathcliff's treachery or Linton's illness, decides to leave everything to Cathy and her future children. Wanting to draw up a will, Edgar sends for his lawyer, who never comes. The lawyer is now working for Heathcliff, who has instructed him not to go to the Grange to witness Edgar's will. Four men from the Grange are sent to the Heights, but they return without Cathy. Nelly resolves to go personally with armed men the next day. However, Cathy herself returns at three o'clock in the morning. Linton has assisted in her escape. Nelly begs the girl to hide the truth from her dying father and say that she is happy with Linton. Cathy agrees to this lie in order to make her father's last hours peaceful. Edgar Linton dies a happy man. Heathcliff's lawyer arrives and assumes control of Thrushcross Grange for his evil client. He demands that Edgar be buried in the chapel. However, Nelly knows Edgar's true wish in this matter and successfully insists that her father be buried next to Catherine.", "analysis": "Notes There are two crucial events in this chapter: Cathy's marriage to Linton during her imprisonment at the Heights and the death of Edgar Linton. With Linton's help, Cathy manages to escape to Edgar's side just before his death. The reunion between father and daughter is very touching: \"Catherine's despair was as silent as her father's joy. . . his raised eyes. . .dilating with ecstasy.\" Unfortunately, because of Heathcliff's treachery, Edgar is unable to change his will before he passes away. Thus, both Cathy and her property are in the hands of a man who hates her. The chapter also shows Nelly's kindness and loyalty to her master and his family. Her feelings for the dying Edgar and for her young mistress, Catherine, are profoundly kind and affectionate. In sharp contrast to the caring Nelly and the gentle Edgar, Heathcliff emerges as a true devil. Evidence of his villainy is seen in his advice to his son. He tells Linton never to be soft-hearted towards Catherine, even though she is now his wife. He also brings the lawyer to seize the Grange as soon as Edgar has died."}