{"name": "Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210226180124/http://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anneofgreengables/section5/", "summary": "A Concert, a Catastrophe, and a Confession Anne explains to Marilla that in celebration of Diana's birthday, Mrs. Barry has agreed to let Diana invite Anne to a Debating Club concert and spend the night in the Barrys' spare bedroom. Anne can hardly contain her excitement, but Marilla declares that she cannot go because little girls have no business at late-night concerts. Matthew disagrees with Marilla's decision and tells her so until she relents and gives Anne permission to go. On the day of the concert, Anne and Diana take pleasure in everything from getting dressed to riding Diana's cousins' pung sleigh to listening to scholars recite poetry and sing at the concert. After the concert, they return to the Barrys' house. They change into their nightgowns, and Anne proposes that they race to the spare bedroom. The girls charge in and leap onto the bed, landing right on Diana's crotchety aunt, Miss Josephine Barry, who arrived for her visit unexpectedly early. Anne is disappointed at having to sleep with the toddler, Minnie May, rather than in the spare bedroom, but the following day returns to Green Gables happy and satisfied. Later, Mrs. Rachel reports that the Barry house has been in an uproar all afternoon. Aunt Josephine, angered at being awoken in the middle of the night, has decided to cut short her visit and rescind her offer to pay for Diana's music lessons. She is a rich old lady, used to being treated decorously, and will not listen to Diana's pleas. Anne wants to remedy the situation since she, not Diana, proposed the race into the spare bedroom. She goes to the Barry house and enters the old lady's room, terrified but bold, and begins to confess. The old lady is amused by Anne's elevated way of speaking. She agrees to give Diana her music lessons and stay the full month at Avonlea, under the condition that Anne talk to her at the Barrys' and then visit her in town", "analysis": ""}