{"name": "Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210226180124/http://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anneofgreengables/section3/", "summary": "Anne's Apology Anne remains in her room the entire next day, sulking and barely touching the food Marilla brings her. Matthew, concerned about Anne, waits for Marilla to leave the house and then creeps up to Anne's room. He has not been upstairs for four years. He sneaks in and whispers to Anne that she should apologize to Mrs. Rachel, since Marilla is not likely to change her mind about the punishment. Anne admits that she is not as furious as she was, but says apologizing would be too humiliating. However, to oblige Matthew, she promises to go to Mrs. Rachel's. Stunned by his success with Anne, Matthew hurries away so Marilla won't find him interfering with Anne's punishment. Anne tells Marilla she is willing to apologize, and they walk to Mrs. Rachel's house. During the first half of the walk, Anne's gait and countenance suggest her shame, but midway through the walk, her step quickens and her eyes become dreamy. Upon arriving at Mrs. Rachel's, Anne resumes slumping and throws herself on her knees before the older woman, clasping her hands and begging for forgiveness, saying, I could never express all my sorrow, no, not if I used up a whole dictionary. I'm a dreadfully wicked and ungrateful girl, and I deserve to be punished and cast out by respectable people for ever. Mrs. Rachel accepts the apology readily. In her way, Mrs. Rachel atones for her own thoughtlessness by telling Anne that her red hair might darken into auburn as she grows up. She tells Marilla that despite Anne's odd ways, she likes her. Marilla feels uneasy about Anne's apology. She recognizes that Anne enjoyed her punishment, making her apology theatrical and flowery. Although Marilla feels the punishment has backfired, she would feel odd chastising Anne for apologizing too well. As they walk home, Anne slips her hand into Marilla's, saying how happy she is to be going to a place that feels like home. At the touch of the little girl's hand, Marilla feels a rush of motherly warmth that is both pleasurable and disarming. She tries to restore her usual emotional control and fends off this unfamiliar feeling of affection by moralizing to Anne about good behavior", "analysis": ""}