{"name": "Chapter 15", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210226180124/http://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anneofgreengables/section4/", "summary": "A Tempest in the School Teapot Anne and Diana take the most scenic route to school every day, walking on roads Anne has renamed Lover's Lane and Willowmere and Violet Vale. Anne is thrilled to have a bosom friend in Diana and is willing to overlook Diana's average imagination. Because Anne loves Diana so much, she lets Diana call a place the Birch Path, even though the name lacks Anne's spark of originality. Marilla had worried that Anne's temper, talkativeness, and oddities would cause her trouble at school, but Anne turns out to be a smart pupil and quickly adjusts. The other girls include her in their potluck lunches and exchange of small gifts. Anne dislikes boys and does not like the idea of flirting with them, though she is humiliated by the thought that boys are unlikely to flirt with her. Anne's world expands from the quiet life at Green Gables to the bustling gossipy schoolroom at Avonlea. Her usual chatter to Marilla about flowers and nature changes to reports on school. The teacher, Mr. Phillips, pays little attention to the pupils in his one-room school and lets them run amok as he sits in the back row flirting with the oldest student, Prissy Andrews. Prissy is sixteen and studying for her entrance exam to college. Though Anne has received little schooling previously and is consequently one reading level behind her peers, she is quickly recognized as the smartest in the class. She takes pride in her intelligence, although she says she would rather be beautiful than smart. As Diana and Anne walk to school one day, Diana warns Anne she should not take for granted her status as smartest pupil, since Gilbert Blythe, the handsomest and smartest boy at school, will soon return to class. When she sees Gilbert, Anne agrees that he is handsome. But, unlike all the other girls, she is uninterested in him. Intrigued by the new girl who refuses to look at him, Gilbert tries to get her attention. He reaches across the aisle and whispers \"Carrots,\" as he tweaks her braid. Anne's quick temper flares, and she jumps up, yelling at him and smashing a slate over his head. Mr. Phillips, busy flirting with Prissy, ignores Gilbert's attempt to take the blame, refuses to listen to Anne's side of the story, and punishes her by making her stand in front of the class for the rest of the day. Several times, Gilbert tries to apologize and make peace with Anne, but she ignores him each time. The next day, Mr. Phillips decides to make an example of pupils who return to school late after the lunch break. The boys and Anne, who is daydreaming alone, arrive late. Rather than go through the trouble of punishing all the latecomers, Mr. Phillips picks Anne out of the crowd and makes her sit next to Gilbert Blythe, a punishment Anne thinks unfair and humiliating. At the end of the day, Anne packs up her desk and solemnly tells Diana that sitting next to Gilbert was excruciating and that she will never return to school. Anne goes home and tells Marilla she will not go back to school. Marilla sympathizes with Anne. She goes to Mrs. Rachel for advice and decides that she will let Anne stay at home until she wants to return to school", "analysis": ""}