On reaching our hut I motioned to Infadoos to enter with us.

"Now, Infadoos," I said, "we would speak with thee."

"Let my lords say on."

"It seems to us, Infadoos, that Twala the king is a cruel man."

"It is so, my lords. Alas! the land cries out because of his cruelties.
To-night ye shall see. It is the great witch-hunt, and many will be
smelt out as wizards and slain. No man's life is safe. If the king
covets a man's cattle, or a man's wife, or if he fears a man that he
should excite a rebellion against him, then Gagool, whom ye saw, or
some of the witch-finding women whom she has taught, will smell that
man out as a wizard, and he will be killed. Many must die before the
moon grows pale to-night. It is ever so. Perhaps I too shall be killed.
As yet I have been spared because I am skilled in war, and am beloved
by the soldiers; but I know not how long I have to live. The land
groans at the cruelties of Twala the king; it is wearied of him and his
red ways."

"Then why is it, Infadoos, that the people do not cast him down?"

"Nay, my lords, he is the king, and if he were killed Scragga would
reign in his place, and the heart of Scragga is blacker than the heart
of Twala his father. If Scragga were king his yoke upon our neck would
be heavier than the yoke of Twala. If Imotu had never been slain, or if
Ignosi his son had lived, it might have been otherwise; but they are
both dead."

"How knowest thou that Ignosi is dead?" said a voice behind us. We
looked round astonished to see who spoke. It was Umbopa.

"What meanest thou, boy?" asked Infadoos; "who told thee to speak?"

"Listen, Infadoos," was the answer, "and I will tell thee a story.
Years ago the king Imotu was killed in this country and his wife fled
with the boy Ignosi. Is it not so?"

"It is so."

"It was said that the woman and her son died upon the mountains. Is it
not so?"

"It is even so."

"Well, it came to pass that the mother and the boy Ignosi did not die.
They crossed the mountains and were led by a tribe of wandering desert
men across the sands beyond, till at last they came to water and grass
and trees again."

"How knowest thou this?"

"Listen. They travelled on and on, many months' journey, till they
reached a land where a people called the Amazulu, who also are of the
Kukuana stock, live by war, and with them they tarried many years, till
at length the mother died. Then the son Ignosi became a wanderer again,
and journeyed into a land of wonders, where white people live, and for
many more years he learned the wisdom of the white people."

"It is a pretty story," said Infadoos incredulously.

"For years he lived there working as a servant and a soldier, but
holding in his heart all that his mother had told him of his own place,
and casting about in his mind to find how he might journey thither to
see his people and his father's house before he died. For long years he
lived and waited, and at last the time came, as it ever comes to him
who can wait for it, and he met some white men who would seek this
unknown land, and joined himself to them. The white men started and
travelled on and on, seeking for one who is lost. They crossed the
burning desert, they crossed the snow-clad mountains, and at last
reached the land of the Kukuanas, and there they found _thee_, O
Infadoos."

"Surely thou art mad to talk thus," said the astonished old soldier.

"Thou thinkest so; see, I will show thee, O my uncle.

"_I am Ignosi, rightful king of the Kukuanas!_"

Then with a single movement Umbopa slipped off his "moocha" or girdle,
and stood naked before us.

"Look," he said; "what is this?" and he pointed to the picture of a
great snake tattooed in blue round his middle, its tail disappearing
into its open mouth just above where the thighs are set into the body.

Infadoos looked, his eyes starting nearly out of his head. Then he fell
upon his knees.

"_Koom! Koom!_" he ejaculated; "it is my brother's son; it is the king."

"Did I not tell thee so, my uncle? Rise; I am not yet the king, but
with thy help, and with the help of these brave white men, who are my
friends, I shall be. Yet the old witch Gagool was right, the land shall
run with blood first, and hers shall run with it, if she has any and
can die, for she killed my father with her words, and drove my mother
forth. And now, Infadoos, choose thou. Wilt thou put thy hands between
my hands and be my man? Wilt thou share the dangers that lie before me,
and help me to overthrow this tyrant and murderer, or wilt thou not?
Choose thou."

The old man put his hand to his head and thought. Then he rose, and
advancing to where Umbopa, or rather Ignosi, stood, he knelt before
him, and took his hand.

"Ignosi, rightful king of the Kukuanas, I put my hand between thy
hands, and am thy man till death. When thou wast a babe I dandled thee
upon my knees, now shall my old arm strike for thee and freedom."

"It is well, Infadoos; if I conquer, thou shalt be the greatest man in
the kingdom after its king. If I fail, thou canst only die, and death
is not far off from thee. Rise, my uncle."

"And ye, white men, will ye help me? What have I to offer you! The
white stones! If I conquer and can find them, ye shall have as many as
ye can carry hence. Will that suffice you?"

I translated this remark.

"Tell him," answered Sir Henry, "that he mistakes an Englishman. Wealth
is good, and if it comes in our way we will take it; but a gentleman
does not sell himself for wealth. Still, speaking for myself, I say
this. I have always liked Umbopa, and so far as lies in me I will stand
by him in this business. It will be very pleasant to me to try to
square matters with that cruel devil Twala. What do you say, Good, and
you, Quatermain?"

"Well," said Good, "to adopt the language of hyperbole, in which all
these people seem to indulge, you can tell him that a row is surely
good, and warms the cockles of the heart, and that so far as I am
concerned I'm his boy. My only stipulation is that he allows me to wear
trousers."

I translated the substance of these answers.

"It is well, my friends," said Ignosi, late Umbopa; "and what sayest
thou, Macumazahn, art thou also with me, old hunter, cleverer than a
wounded buffalo?"

I thought awhile and scratched my head.

"Umbopa, or Ignosi," I said, "I don't like revolutions. I am a man of
peace and a bit of a coward"--here Umbopa smiled--"but, on the other
hand, I stick up for my friends, Ignosi. You have stuck to us and
played the part of a man, and I will stick by you. But mind you, I am a
trader, and have to make my living, so I accept your offer about those
diamonds in case we should ever be in a position to avail ourselves of
it. Another thing: we came, as you know, to look for Incubu's (Sir
Henry's) lost brother. You must help us to find him."

"That I will do," answered Ignosi. "Stay, Infadoos, by the sign of the
snake about my middle, tell me the truth. Has any white man to thy
knowledge set his foot within the land?"

"None, O Ignosi."

"If any white man had been seen or heard of, wouldst thou have known?"

"I should certainly have known."

"Thou hearest, Incubu," said Ignosi to Sir Henry; "he has not been
here."

"Well, well," said Sir Henry, with a sigh; "there it is; I suppose that
he never got so far. Poor fellow, poor fellow! So it has all been for
nothing. God's will be done."

"Now for business," I put in, anxious to escape from a painful subject.
"It is very well to be a king by right divine, Ignosi, but how dost
thou propose to become a king indeed?"

"Nay, I know not. Infadoos, hast thou a plan?"

"Ignosi, Son of the Lightning," answered his uncle, "to-night is the
great dance and witch-hunt. Many shall be smelt out and perish, and in
the hearts of many others there will be grief and anguish and fury
against the king Twala. When the dance is over, then I will speak to
some of the great chiefs, who in turn, if I can win them over, will
speak to their regiments. I shall speak to the chiefs softly at first,
and bring them to see that thou art indeed the king, and I think that
by to-morrow's light thou shalt have twenty thousand spears at thy
command. And now I must go and think, and hear, and make ready. After
the dance is done, if I am yet alive, and we are all alive, I will meet
thee here, and we can talk. At the best there must be war."

At this moment our conference was interrupted by the cry that
messengers had come from the king. Advancing to the door of the hut we
ordered that they should be admitted, and presently three men entered,
each bearing a shining shirt of chain armour, and a magnificent
battle-axe.

"The gifts of my lord the king to the white men from the Stars!" said a
herald who came with them.

"We thank the king," I answered; "withdraw."

The men went, and we examined the armour with great interest. It was
the most wonderful chain work that either of us had ever seen. A whole
coat fell together so closely that it formed a mass of links scarcely
too big to be covered with both hands.

"Do you make these things in this country, Infadoos?" I asked; "they
are very beautiful."

"Nay, my lord, they came down to us from our forefathers. We know not
who made them, and there are but few left.[1] None but those of royal
blood may be clad in them. They are magic coats through which no spear
can pass, and those who wear them are well-nigh safe in the battle. The
king is well pleased or much afraid, or he would not have sent these
garments of steel. Clothe yourselves in them to-night, my lords."

The remainder of that day we spent quietly, resting and talking over
the situation, which was sufficiently exciting. At last the sun went
down, the thousand watch fires glowed out, and through the darkness we
heard the tramp of many feet and the clashing of hundreds of spears, as
the regiments passed to their appointed places to be ready for the
great dance. Then the full moon shone out in splendour, and as we stood
watching her rays, Infadoos arrived, clad in his war dress, and
accompanied by a guard of twenty men to escort us to the dance. As he
recommended, we had already donned the shirts of chain armour which the
king had sent us, putting them on under our ordinary clothing, and
finding to our surprise that they were neither very heavy nor
uncomfortable. These steel shirts, which evidently had been made for
men of a very large stature, hung somewhat loosely upon Good and
myself, but Sir Henry's fitted his magnificent frame like a glove. Then
strapping our revolvers round our waists, and taking in our hands the
battle-axes which the king had sent with the armour, we started.

On arriving at the great kraal, where we had that morning been received
by the king, we found that it was closely packed with some twenty
thousand men arranged round it in regiments. These regiments were in
turn divided into companies, and between each company ran a little path
to allow space for the witch-finders to pass up and down. Anything more
imposing than the sight that was presented by this vast and orderly
concourse of armed men it is impossible to conceive. There they stood
perfectly silent, and the moon poured her light upon the forest of
their raised spears, upon their majestic forms, waving plumes, and the
harmonious shading of their various-coloured shields. Wherever we
looked were line upon line of dim faces surmounted by range upon range
of shimmering spears.

"Surely," I said to Infadoos, "the whole army is here?"

"Nay, Macumazahn," he answered, "but a third of it. One third is
present at this dance each year, another third is mustered outside in
case there should be trouble when the killing begins, ten thousand more
garrison the outposts round Loo, and the rest watch at the kraals in
the country. Thou seest it is a great people."

"They are very silent," said Good; and indeed the intense stillness
among such a vast concourse of living men was almost overpowering.

"What says Bougwan?" asked Infadoos.

I translated.

"Those over whom the shadow of Death is hovering are silent," he
answered grimly.

"Will many be killed?"

"Very many."

"It seems," I said to the others, "that we are going to assist at a
gladiatorial show arranged regardless of expense."

Sir Henry shivered, and Good said he wished that we could get out of it.

"Tell me," I asked Infadoos, "are we in danger?"

"I know not, my lords, I trust not; but do not seem afraid. If ye live
through the night all may go well with you. The soldiers murmur against
the king."

All this while we had been advancing steadily towards the centre of the
open space, in the midst of which were placed some stools. As we
proceeded we perceived another small party coming from the direction of
the royal hut.

"It is the king Twala, Scragga his son, and Gagool the old; and see,
with them are those who slay," said Infadoos, pointing to a little
group of about a dozen gigantic and savage-looking men, armed with
spears in one hand and heavy kerries in the other.

The king seated himself upon the centre stool, Gagool crouched at his
feet, and the others stood behind him.

"Greeting, white lords," Twala cried, as we came up; "be seated, waste
not precious time--the night is all too short for the deeds that must
be done. Ye come in a good hour, and shall see a glorious show. Look
round, white lords; look round," and he rolled his one wicked eye from
regiment to regiment. "Can the Stars show you such a sight as this? See
how they shake in their wickedness, all those who have evil in their
hearts and fear the judgment of 'Heaven above.'"

"_Begin! begin!_" piped Gagool, in her thin piercing voice; "the hyaenas
are hungry, they howl for food. _Begin! begin!_"

Then for a moment there was intense stillness, made horrible by a
presage of what was to come.

The king lifted his spear, and suddenly twenty thousand feet were
raised, as though they belonged to one man, and brought down with a
stamp upon the earth. This was repeated three times, causing the solid
ground to shake and tremble. Then from a far point of the circle a
solitary voice began a wailing song, of which the refrain ran something
as follows:--

"_What is the lot of man born of woman?_"

Back came the answer rolling out from every throat in that vast
company--

"_Death!_"

Gradually, however, the song was taken up by company after company,
till the whole armed multitude were singing it, and I could no longer
follow the words, except in so far as they appeared to represent
various phases of human passions, fears, and joys. Now it seemed to be
a love song, now a majestic swelling war chant, and last of all a death
dirge ending suddenly in one heart-breaking wail that went echoing and
rolling away in a volume of blood-curdling sound.

Again silence fell upon the place, and again it was broken by the king
lifting his hand. Instantly we heard a pattering of feet, and from out
of the masses of warriors strange and awful figures appeared running
towards us. As they drew near we saw that these were women, most of
them aged, for their white hair, ornamented with small bladders taken
from fish, streamed out behind them. Their faces were painted in
stripes of white and yellow; down their backs hung snake-skins, and
round their waists rattled circlets of human bones, while each held a
small forked wand in her shrivelled hand. In all there were ten of
them. When they arrived in front of us they halted, and one of them,
pointing with her wand towards the crouching figure of Gagool, cried
out--

"Mother, old mother, we are here."

"_Good! good! good!_" answered that aged Iniquity. "Are your eyes keen,
_Isanusis_ [witch doctresses], ye seers in dark places?"

"Mother, they are keen."

"_Good! good! good!_ Are your ears open, _Isanusis_, ye who hear words
that come not from the tongue?"

"Mother, they are open."

"_Good! good! good!_ Are your senses awake, _Isanusis_--can ye smell
blood, can ye purge the land of the wicked ones who compass evil
against the king and against their neighbours? Are ye ready to do the
justice of 'Heaven above,' ye whom I have taught, who have eaten of the
bread of my wisdom, and drunk of the water of my magic?"

"Mother, we can."

"Then go! Tarry not, ye vultures; see, the slayers"--pointing to the
ominous group of executioners behind--"make sharp their spears; the
white men from afar are hungry to see. _Go!_"

With a wild yell Gagool's horrid ministers broke away in every
direction, like fragments from a shell, the dry bones round their
waists rattling as they ran, and headed for various points of the dense
human circle. We could not watch them all, so we fixed our eyes upon
the _Isanusi_ nearest to us. When she came to within a few paces of the
warriors she halted and began to dance wildly, turning round and round
with an almost incredible rapidity, and shrieking out sentences such as
"I smell him, the evil-doer!" "He is near, he who poisoned his mother!"
"I hear the thoughts of him who thought evil of the king!"

Quicker and quicker she danced, till she lashed herself into such a
frenzy of excitement that the foam flew in specks from her gnashing
jaws, till her eyes seemed to start from her head, and her flesh to
quiver visibly. Suddenly she stopped dead and stiffened all over, like
a pointer dog when he scents game, and then with outstretched wand she
began to creep stealthily towards the soldiers before her. It seemed to
us that as she came their stoicism gave way, and that they shrank from
her. As for ourselves, we followed her movements with a horrible
fascination. Presently, still creeping and crouching like a dog, the
_Isanusi_ was before them. Then she halted and pointed, and again crept
on a pace or two.

Suddenly the end came. With a shriek she sprang in and touched a tall
warrior with her forked wand. Instantly two of his comrades, those
standing immediately next to him, seized the doomed man, each by one
arm, and advanced with him towards the king.

He did not resist, but we saw that he dragged his limbs as though they
were paralysed, and that his fingers, from which the spear had fallen,
were limp like those of a man newly dead.

As he came, two of the villainous executioners stepped forward to meet
him. Presently they met, and the executioners turned round, looking
towards the king as though for orders.

"_Kill!_" said the king.

"_Kill!_" squeaked Gagool.

"_Kill!_" re-echoed Scragga, with a hollow chuckle.

Almost before the words were uttered the horrible dead was done. One
man had driven his spear into the victim's heart, and to make assurance
double sure, the other had dashed out his brains with a great club.

"_One_," counted Twala the king, just like a black Madame Defarge, as
Good said, and the body was dragged a few paces away and stretched out.

Hardly was the thing done before another poor wretch was brought up,
like an ox to the slaughter. This time we could see, from the
leopard-skin cloak which he wore, that the man was a person of rank.
Again the awful syllables were spoken, and the victim fell dead.

"_Two_," counted the king.

And so the deadly game went on, till about a hundred bodies were
stretched in rows behind us. I have heard of the gladiatorial shows of
the Caesars, and of the Spanish bull-fights, but I take the liberty of
doubting if either of them could be half so horrible as this Kukuana
witch-hunt. Gladiatorial shows and Spanish bull-fights at any rate
contributed to the public amusement, which certainly was not the case
here. The most confirmed sensation-monger would fight shy of sensation
if he knew that it was well on the cards that he would, in his own
proper person, be the subject of the next "event."

Once we rose and tried to remonstrate, but were sternly repressed by
Twala.

"Let the law take its course, white men. These dogs are magicians and
evil-doers; it is well that they should die," was the only answer
vouchsafed to us.

About half-past ten there was a pause. The witch-finders gathered
themselves together, apparently exhausted with their bloody work, and
we thought that the performance was done with. But it was not so, for
presently, to our surprise, the ancient woman, Gagool, rose from her
crouching position, and supporting herself with a stick, staggered off
into the open space. It was an extraordinary sight to see this
frightful vulture-headed old creature, bent nearly double with extreme
age, gather strength by degrees, until at last she rushed about almost
as actively as her ill-omened pupils. To and fro she ran, chanting to
herself, till suddenly she made a dash at a tall man standing in front
of one of the regiments, and touched him. As she did this a sort of
groan went up from the regiment which evidently he commanded. But two
of its officers seized him all the same, and brought him up for
execution. We learned afterwards that he was a man of great wealth and
importance, being indeed a cousin of the king.

He was slain, and Twala counted one hundred and three. Then Gagool
again sprang to and fro, gradually drawing nearer and nearer to
ourselves.

"Hang me if I don't believe she is going to try her games on us,"
ejaculated Good in horror.

"Nonsense!" said Sir Henry.

As for myself, when I saw that old fiend dancing nearer and nearer, my
heart positively sank into my boots. I glanced behind us at the long
rows of corpses, and shivered.

Nearer and nearer waltzed Gagool, looking for all the world like an
animated crooked stick or comma, her horrid eyes gleaming and glowing
with a most unholy lustre.

Nearer she came, and yet nearer, every creature in that vast assemblage
watching her movements with intense anxiety. At last she stood still
and pointed.

"Which is it to be?" asked Sir Henry to himself.

In a moment all doubts were at rest, for the old hag had rushed in and
touched Umbopa, alias Ignosi, on the shoulder.

"I smell him out," she shrieked. "Kill him, kill him, he is full of
evil; kill him, the stranger, before blood flows from him. Slay him, O
king."

There was a pause, of which I instantly took advantage.

"O king," I called out, rising from my seat, "this man is the servant
of thy guests, he is their dog; whosoever sheds the blood of our dog
sheds our blood. By the sacred law of hospitality I claim protection
for him."

"Gagool, mother of the witch-finders, has smelt him out; he must die,
white men," was the sullen answer.

"Nay, he shall not die," I replied; "he who tries to touch him shall
die indeed."

"Seize him!" roared Twala to the executioners; who stood round red to
the eyes with the blood of their victims.

They advanced towards us, and then hesitated. As for Ignosi, he
clutched his spear, and raised it as though determined to sell his life
dearly.

"Stand back, ye dogs!" I shouted, "if ye would see to-morrow's light.
Touch one hair of his head and your king dies," and I covered Twala
with my revolver. Sir Henry and Good also drew their pistols, Sir Henry
pointing his at the leading executioner, who was advancing to carry out
the sentence, and Good taking a deliberate aim at Gagool.

Twala winced perceptibly as my barrel came in a line with his broad
chest.

"Well," I said, "what is it to be, Twala?"

Then he spoke.

"Put away your magic tubes," he said; "ye have adjured me in the name
of hospitality, and for that reason, but not from fear of what ye can
do, I spare him. Go in peace."

"It is well," I answered unconcernedly; "we are weary of slaughter, and
would sleep. Is the dance ended?"

"It is ended," Twala answered sulkily. "Let these dead dogs," pointing
to the long rows of corpses, "be flung out to the hyaenas and the
vultures," and he lifted his spear.

Instantly the regiments began to defile through the kraal gateway in
perfect silence, a fatigue party only remaining behind to drag away the
corpses of those who had been sacrificed.

Then we rose also, and making our salaam to his majesty, which he
hardly deigned to acknowledge, we departed to our huts.

"Well," said Sir Henry, as we sat down, having first lit a lamp of the
sort used by the Kukuanas, of which the wick is made from the fibre of
a species of palm leaf, and the oil from clarified hippopotamus fat,
"well, I feel uncommonly inclined to be sick."

"If I had any doubts about helping Umbopa to rebel against that
infernal blackguard," put in Good, "they are gone now. It was as much
as I could do to sit still while that slaughter was going on. I tried
to keep my eyes shut, but they would open just at the wrong time. I
wonder where Infadoos is. Umbopa, my friend, you ought to be grateful
to us; your skin came near to having an air-hole made in it."

"I am grateful, Bougwan," was Umbopa's answer, when I had translated,
"and I shall not forget. As for Infadoos, he will be here by-and-by. We
must wait."

So we lit our pipes and waited.


[1] In the Soudan swords and coats of mail are still worn by Arabs,
whose ancestors must have stripped them from the bodies of
Crusaders.--Editor.


