{"name": "Chapter 29", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-26-30", "summary": "The article is published in the Morning Chronicle and the effect is immediate. The whites begin to murmur of violence and the blacks try to arm themselves. No white person will sell them firearms, however, and so they make do with old military rifles and revolvers. An armed contingent guards the office of the editor of the Afro-American Banner; feeling in danger, he disappears from town one evening. The three conspirators are very happy with the work that they have accomplished. General Belmont proposes that they begin the \"final act of this drama. He tells them how he witnessed Paterno's revolution against Igorroto in Nicaragua and how Paterno, with the arms and men, easily drove out the ruling government. This, Belmont tells them, is their chance to drive out the Republicans from Wellington. McBane goes one step further and suggests that several should be killed, but Carteret refuses to participate in premeditated homicide. The group goes down a list of all blacks and Republicans who should be kicked out of town. It is decided that the black preachers and Dr. Miller can stay, though Carteret admits to having a personal grievance against Miller. McBane calls this hypocrisy and says, \"If this nigger doctor annoys the major, we'll drive him out with the rest. This is a white man's country, and a white man's city, and no nigger has any business here when a white man wants him gone. This brutal statement of the fact \"robbed the enterprise of all its poetry, and put a solemn act of revolution upon the plane of a mere vulgar theft of power. The hour of the revolution is fixed, but the conspirators overlook one fact -- \"God, or Fate, or whatever one may choose to call the Power that holds the destinies of man in the hollow of his hand", "analysis": "The character of Mr. Ellis represents the northern white audience that Chesnutt addresses his novel to. Chesnutt would not have addressed his book to a Southern audience, as speaking out against lynching and racial violence in such a way would have been condemned and met with violent resistance. Instead, like writers such as Harriet Beecher Stowe, Chesnutt addressed his book to a sympathetic Northern audience that, through public opinion, might be able to improve the condition of the black community in the South. Mr. Ellis is representative of those white Northerners who were still undetermined about what action to take regarding the lynchings and racial violence in the South. Ellis is educated and has a sense of moral outrage over the practice, but he is not sure of the path to take. He compares himself to Brutus, a reference to Lucius Junius Brutus who was a founder of the Roman republic. When Brutus's sons rebelled against the republic, Brutus turned them both in and ordered their executions. Brutus's actions carry with them a perception of both nobility and disgust. Ellis is concerned that his actions to correct the accusations against Sandy will be considered too disgusting and will result in his own lack of standing in the community. However, he also understands that his failure to do anything will result in a murder. This, Chesnutt suggests, is the plight of the white Northern observer. They do not want to over-object to the violent situation in the South, since the nation was just beginning to recover from a bloody civil war, yet their inaction was tantamount to murder. Though Sandy was acquitted of the false accusations, Ellis cannot escape blood on his own hands. By declining to intervene, Ellis cost Mr. Delamere his life. Chesnutt means to alert his northern readers that silence on the subject of lynching and violence will always result in death. Chapter Twenty-Eight is the beginning of the novel's final act. There is a sense of uneasy normalcy returning to Wellington, though it is questionable how normal any community can seem with an everpresent air of violence. The narrator's comment that \"a new Pharaoh\" has come to the North is a reference to the Bible story of the Hebrew enslavement. In this story, a new Pharaoh comes to rule over an Egypt that does not remember the contribution of Joseph and of the Hebrews to Egyptian society. The new Pharaoh then enslaves the Hebrew people. This refers to the conclusion of Reconstruction and the new policies of the United States government to encourage national unity. This national unity came at the sacrifice of black civil rights. The United States government, Chesnutt suggests, turned over the issue of civil rights to the Southern states. This quote also references the analogy of Hebrew exodus to the ending of slavery. Throughout the period of slavery in the United States, slaves often compared their plight to this Biblical story, believing that God would bring them out of captivity just as he did for the Hebrew people. African American spirituals such as \"Go Down Moses\" and \"Pharaoh's Army Got Drowned\" also make reference to this story. By creating an analogy between the Hebrew exodus and slavery, African American slaves were able to create a method of non-violent resistance to their white slave owners and slave drivers."}