{"name": "Chapter 18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20", "summary": "Sandy finishes his evening chores and goes out for the night. Usually, he would go to the church, but since being disallowed from attending services he decides to go to \"the lower part of town\" to visit some friends. On the way, he meets Josh Green who invites him to have a drink with him. The one drink turns into many and by the time Sandy stumbles home at eleven o'clock, he is quite drunk. As he walks home, Sandy sees someone walking ahead of him wearing his same suits and looking just like him. Sandy is convinced that he is seeing his own ghost and that \"whichever one of us is de ha'nt, de uther must be dead an' don' know it. When he gets home, he goes up to Tom's room and startles him with his knock. Sandy asks if he has seen anyone come in or out of the house and, sensing that Sandy is drunk, Tom tells him that he has not. As Sandy turns to leave, Tom tells him that he can pay him back the money that he borrowed. He counts out five ten dollar gold coins and then gives Sandy an extra coin for the interest. He hands Sandy an old silk purse, telling him that he had owned the purse since he was a boy, and Sandy leaves very pleased. Tom spends the remainder of the evening \"burning several articles\" from his drawers on a little iron stove. He then wakes very early the next morning and tells the cook that he is going fishing all day and will not return until later", "analysis": "Chesnutt continues this theme of economic justice in the next chapter focusing on Captain McBane. In Southern hierarchy, the slave drivers and poor whites of the antebellum South have retained few rights and those that they did have come only because of race. McBane represents this crude class of poor white Southerners who, by the fortune of capitalism, was able to pull himself into respectable society. Chesnutt uses an aside by his narrator in Chapter Seventeen to reveal to the reader McBane's true feelings and aspirations -- just as McBane seeks to attack the black community, he also plans to \"assault society in its citadel\" by seeking to become a member at the Clarendon Club. That Tom Delamere speaks on his behalf is only a demonstration of the decline of white aristocracy from its principles and its past. The narrative of Sandy's false imprisonment and near lynching in the book's middle chapters is a sub-plot of the novel's larger narrative. Chesnutt has been slowly building up this sub-plot, with Sandy's dismissal from the Methodist Church and Delamere's gambling problems as the crises leading to the murder of Mrs. Ochiltree. This sub-plot foreshadows the riot that will take place in the novel's closing chapters. It also involves several characters that will prove pivotal during the riot, most importantly Josh Green. Chesnutt uses this sub-plot to illustrate the common practice of false accusations that often led to the lynchings of black men. Though Polly Ochiltree is a despised woman, Chesnutt demonstrates how the town's white males will use her murder and alleged rape to persecute a black man -- any black man -- as a defense of feminine honor. Chesnutt suggests that Southern white culture used female sexuality as a veil to disguise their racial hatred and contempt. This also ties into laws of mixed marriage and mixed race children, which were considered impure. Chesnutt argues that racial purity is a delusion of hatred, not of honor. This \"shocking crime\" is the basis for a proposed lynching. Lynching was a crime committed by white mobs throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries against black men and, sometimes, women. The black person would be accused of a crime, often rape, and the mob would carry out a violent act of justice, usually hanging or burning at the stake, as a way to punish the criminal. The act, however, was actually meant as a mode of violent oppression and warning to the black community. The Marrow of Tradition can be seen as an argument through storytelling against the practice of lynching. According to Chesnutt, lynching is a misuse of justice because it undermines the democratic legal proceedings upheld by the public. It is a perversion of justice meant not to keep order but to subject a people to an unjust order of racial domination."}