{"name": "Chapter 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-5", "summary": "The narrative goes back to a few days after the baby's birth. Major Carteret returns to work where the office throws a big celebration for him. All of the employees of the office come to congratulate him and smoke a cigar. Jerry, Mammy Jane's grandson who works at the paper, comes as well, and he is pleased with the Major nods at him and hands him a cigar, though he won't shake his hand. After the celebration, the Major returns to his desk where he starts to write an editorial on the state of politics. Things are not going well for the Democratic Party. Only recently, the \"Fusion\" party, a combination of Republicans and Populists, had taken control of the state. African Americans had filled a number of elected seats. The Major's editorial is on the \"unfitness of the negro to participate in government. due to his limited education, his lack of experience, his criminal tendencies, and more especially to his hopeless mental and physical inferiority to the white race. Jerry comes in and announces to visitors, General Belmont and Captain McBane. The General is \"a dapper little gentleman\" with blue eyes and a Vandyke beard and Carteret cordially shakes his hand. The General comes from good ancestry, was an important part of Democratic politics, and had owned slaves. The Captain is \"burly\" with an unbrushed coat and a diamond-studded shirt with tobacco stains on it. He had made a fortune by holding a contract with the state for providing convict labor. Major Carteret greets the Captain with a \"perceptible diminution of the warmth with which he had welcomed the other. The men begin to talk about several instances of \"negro domination\": a black justice of the peace called a white man before his bench, a group of black girls forced a group of white girls off the sidewalk, and a white and black convict crossed the city chained together in the charge of a black officer. The men declare, \"Something must be done, and that quickly. Major Carteret sees a chance for something to be done, and the men begin to talk seriously of a solution to this problem. Jerry overhears some of this conversation, but cannot follow it all, partly because he cannot hear it all and \"partly because of certain limitation which nature had placed in the way of Jerry's understanding anything very difficult or abstruse. The men call Jerry into the office and both the Captain and the General give him money to go buy shots of liquor. When Jerry returns with the drinks , all three men share a toast to \"White supremacy everywhere\" and \"no nigger domination. Overhearing this part, Jerry cannot understand why they would make a toast to \"no nigger damnation. He vows to keep his eyes and ears open because he knows something is happening. He says to himself, \"Ef dere's gwine ter be anudder flood 'roun' here, I wants ter git in de ark wid de w'ite folks, -- I may haf ter be anudder Ham, an' sta't de cullud race all over ag'in", "analysis": "The Marrow of Tradition is a novel that deals with the complex issues of racial tension between white and black in the late nineteenth century U.S. South. The tensions of the novel are not just between races, however, but also internal to the African American community as well. It is a novel filled with characters of complex identity; race is an internal matter as much as an external social and political matter. The book's title comes from a line in a poem by Charles Lamb, a nineteenth century English writer. The book's epigraph contains a few lines from the poem; \"I like you and your book, ingenious Hone! / In whose capacious all-embracing leaves / The very marrow of tradition's shown.\" This poem refers to an 1824 book written by a British bookseller entitled The Every-Day Book. This volume was a chronicle of everyday British life with commentary upon both important days and events, such as Saints' Day and the major religious happenings of the year, as well as the banal everyday street life of London. Lamb praises the book in his poem because, as he says, it embraces all of life and an essence of an antiquarian tradition. Chesnutt uses this quote ironically because this \"marrow of tradition\" is a white tradition. It does not include an African American point of view. This quote illustrates the book's overarching theme: the tyranny of the white ruling class in their efforts to recover a slaveholding tradition, and the struggles of African Americans to overcome this tyranny. The book's setting is Wilmington, North Carolina. It is based upon the Wilmington Massacres of 1898. The book falls into the genre of \"historical fiction,\" a work in which the setting, events, and characters are often drawn from real life, but fictionalized into a coherent and gripping narrative. The author's intention is to capture the spirit, meaning, and conditions of the historical event instead of the actual details. The book is thus a novel instead of a work of non-fiction. The novel is also a didactic work of fiction. It is an argument against racial prejudice and the violent act of lynching. Marrow focuses on families and relationships more than events. This allows Chesnutt to explore the complex set of emotions that fostered the violence of the Massacre. Since the novel was written in 1901, the novel's setting exudes a mood of an antebellum South; there is an anxiety felt by all the characters for a time that is passing and a future that is uncertain. The novel shifts points of view between many characters, though the main points of view are from the novel's three interconnected families: the Carterets, the Millers, and the Delameres. The first chapter introduces the white family upon which much of the novel's action revolves around, the Carterets. There are brief passages of back-story that illuminate the character's feelings and philosophy towards race in the novel's present. Major Carteret is a Civil War veteran from a proud family who lost everything in the war. Chesnutt's use of the place name \"Appomattox\" is an example of metonymy; in this case, it represents all of the fighting that Carteret participated in during the Civil War. The reader learns that, after the war, Carteret is able to advance in life only because of his wife's family and their money. Slave nursemaids raised Olivia Carteret, but she has a half-sister that is African American, a child borne from an affair her father had with his African American maid. Mrs. Carteret's own anxiety over her ability to bear children causes her to go into a state of shock when she meets this bastard child and her early labor is the novel's first action. Chesnutt's writing is highly stylized. He focuses less on describing specifics of place and more on the interior and exterior characteristics of his characters. His language can be described as often flowery or ornate, and he goes into detail in describing a character's physical appearance. Their exterior appearance mirrors their interior thoughts and motivations; for instance, in chapter three Major Carteret and General Belmont are described as neat and formal in appearance, while Captain McBane is described as disheveled and sloppy. Though all three men harbor sinister motivations against African Americans, Captain McBane's appearance alerts the reader to his greater propensity for cruelty and violence. The physical characteristics often have double meanings in Chesnutt's writing. Tom Delamere is often contrasted with the term \"manly\" or \"manliness.\" This reference is also a pun suggesting the loss of white Southern masculine identity in the post-Reconstruction South. The pun is in the reference to Alexander Manly, an African American newspaper editor whose editorial criticizing lynching was a catalyst for the Wilmington race riot on which Chesnutt's novel is based. Manly was threatened and expelled from the community, an act that Chesnutt suggests is representative of cowardice and of the lack of \"manliness\" on the part of white supremacists. Chapter Five first introduces the reader to the injustice of Southern Jim Crow laws. Jim Crow laws, named after a play performed in the early nineteenth century demonstrating white superiority to the African American race, mandated \"Separate but Equal\" status for all African American citizens of U.S. Southern states. This meant that African Americans were forced to use separate and inferior public and private services. In the case of Dr. Miller, this means using an inferior train coach. The reader is given glimpses of the anger brewing in the African American population of Wilmington and the events that cause such anger."}