{"name": "Chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10", "summary": "The town's black newspaper contains an editorial on lynching. It argues that lynchings are an attempt by the white ruling classes to maintain an unjust rule over the African American race. It also argues that neither religion, nor nature, nor state law should forbid interracial marriage. McBane and Carteret are outraged. McBane angrily declares that the editor be \"horsewhipped and run out of town. General Belmont tells them that the article might be put to good use later. Carteret, still furious, declares that the article \"violates an unwritten law of the South. If we are to tolerate this race of weaklings among us, until they are eliminated by the stress of competition, it must be upon terms which we lay down. The General calls in Jerry and sends him to Brown's for two \"Calhoun cocktails. McBane is rude to Jerry and this annoys Carteret. McBane, he thinks to himself, is from a lower class of white people. Even though he is rich now, his father had been nothing more than a slave driver. For his own part, Jerry is troubled that General Belmont did not offer him the change and he decides that he will pretend that he forgot to give it to him and keep it for himself. As the men drink, Belmont suggests that the men shelve the article for the time being. They should focus, instead, on working up public opinion against the black community. When it is election time, they will print the editorial and divide the electorate along racial lines, winning the state \"for white supremacy. As the men leave the office, Belmont suggests that Carteret speak to Tom Delamere about his card playing and drinking habits, as they are not suitable for men of their aristocratic heritage. Over the next few months, the three men work tirelessly to influence opinion against the African American race in the South. The narrator claims, \"How well bait took is a matter of history -- but the promised result is still in the future. the negro question was, for a century, the pivot of American politics", "analysis": "This section of the novel opens with the drama surrounding Dodie's respiratory affliction and the surgery needed to fix it. This illness, and the drama surrounding it, represents two important social conditions during the time about which Chesnutt writes. The first is the way that Dodie represents the hopes of continued white domination of Southern culture. His father puts these hopes upon the child. The Major's hope is that this continued custom of white male primogeniture continues through his aristocratic family. Chesnutt clearly sees this institution as in decline. The second social condition that the child represents is the anxiety of this white ruling class regarding their domination through lineage. Chesnutt uses the state of feminine hysteria to symbolize this anxiety. This hysteria is first seen in Mrs. Carteret's panic at seeing her half-nephew while riding along the road in the first chapter. It is continued through Dodie's accident with the rattle. Mrs. Carteret's hysteria is so severe that she is absent for much of this emergency. Dodie's escape from a traumatic surgery that likely would have killed him or shortened his life is Chesnutt's commentary on the decline of the Southern aristocracy; it is not a sharp decline but, instead, happens in fits and starts and maintains its power through sheer luck. Tom Delamere's descent into drinking and card playing -- vices that the reader first learns about in the book's second chapter and which is elaborated upon in Chapter Ten -- is another symbol of this aristocratic decline. Ellis's thought that \"it takes three or four generations to make a gentleman, and as many more to complete the curve and return to the base from which it started...Tom Delamere belonged somewhere on the downward slant,\" is again Chesnutt's belief in the political and social leveling that would occur sometime in the future. It is important to note Chesnutt's tone of hope throughout the novel. Chesnutt's narrator frames this hope for racial conciliation in the closing paragraphs of Chapter Nine, when he declares that the strife of racial conflict might have divided the nation and sent it into the bloody Civil War but that it would one day be settled \"upon principles of justice and equity.\" Chapters Seven, Eight, and Nine begin to deal with the anxiety over race felt by this Southern aristocratic society. In the novel's opening chapters, the Carteret family maintain their strict distance between African Americans, but in these chapters, the reader begins to see that part of the hatred towards the African American community is a result of the anxiety that this race would use its numbers and influence to rise into social prominence. Two quotes illustrate this: the first is the statement in Chapter Eight that \"Negro citizenship was a grotesque farce -- Sambo and Dinah raised from the kitchen to the cabinet were a spectacle to make the gods laugh.\" The names \"Sambo\" and \"Dinah\" are derogatory racial names. These names date back to the early nineteenth century and appear in novels such as Vanity Fair and Uncle Tom's Cabin. This colloquial expression, \"raised from the kitchen to the cabinet,\" implies the unreasonable social advance of a person or group of people. The second quote that illustrates this anxiety is Carteret's claim that the African American race is to be \"eliminated by the stress of competition.\" This refers to the idea of Social Darwinism. Social Darwinism is the use of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution and the survival of the fittest in the context of social interaction and advancement. Carteret is expressing a common belief of many in the white ruling class of that day -- the African American race, because of its inferior intelligence and physical traits, would soon be eliminated from society through the gradual process of natural selection. The anxiety is also demonstrated in Chapter Nine, as Carteret, Belmont, and McBane read over the town's African American newspaper. Though it is a crude newspaper, Belmont cannot help but note that it is an intelligent publication put together by a race of people for whom learning and reading had been forbidden in the previous generation. A few other references are worth noting in this section. The first is Belmont's ordering of  a \"Calhoun.\" This is a reference to John C. Calhoun, a politician from South Carolina and the seventh Vice President of the United States. He was an advocate of slavery and states' rights. This reference is a demonstration of the way that the white ruling classes instilled their political and racial culture into common society. Belmont's statement that their day is an \"age of crowds\" is a reference to the theory of mass psychology first developed in Europe in 1895 and which would be advanced in the twentieth century by figures such as Sigmund Freud. Belmont sees the psychological benefits of using the media to influence a critical mass for the political cause. Finally, Janet's thought that \"blood is thicker than water\" is a colloquial expression meaning that the bonds of family are stronger than those of unrelated people. Her comment that such bonds may turn to \"gall and wormwood\" is an allusion to Deuteronomy 29 in the Hebrew Bible in which God warns the people of Israel that their unfaithfulness to him would result in the destruction of the people."}