{"name": "Chapter 40", "summary": "Chapter 40<PARAGRAPH>Dombey and Edith's marriage continues to deteriorate. One night, he arrogantly informs her that he is not pleased with the way she is behaving: he wants her to spend less money and behave more deferentially to him. He notices that she seems agitated when he mentions Carker and threatens her with the humiliating possibility of having Carker deliver his rebukes to her if she does not alter her behavior. He also mentions that he is making arrangements for Mrs. Skewton to go to Brighton, as recommended for her health, and to be cared for by Mrs. Pipchin. Edith responds that she knows they are unsuited for each other, do not love each other, and will never enjoy a happy marriage, but that in order to make life bearable and minimize the harm to others, she thinks that they should try to lead separate lives and tolerate each other. Mr. Dombey refuses, insisting that he expects the deference and respect he has the right to demand. The next day, Mrs. Skewton, Florence, and Edith leave for Brighton. One day, while Edith and her mother are out for a walk, they encounter the haggard Mrs. Brown and Alice. Edith is struck by the resemblance between herself and Alice, and also realizes that Mrs. Brown was the gypsy woman she had met at Leamington prior to her marriage", "analysis": "This section is perhaps the darkest in the novel. It unflinchingly addresses the dark possibilities that have been implied from the beginning: are there situations in which there is no hope? Will individuals remain stubbornly incapable of recognizing the error of their perspectives? While Mrs. Skewton is a relatively minor character, her death adds a bleak note to the novel in that she dies without ever realizing the tragic impact her actions have had, or coming to understand that her toxic view of the world was wrong. Her death therefore endorses the possibility that characters may not be capable of reform, change, or growth.<PARAGRAPH>This possibility looms even larger as Dombey and Edith's marriage disintegrates. While Edith can be spiteful in her behavior towards him, she proposes a number of possibilities meant to allow them to live in relative peace. She is also very concerned that Florence not be impacted by their antagonism. Dombey, however, rejects all of her attempts at trying to make conditions in the household more bearable. In his interactions with his wife, Dombey shows even more explicit coldness and cruelty than what he has demonstrated to his daughter. He demands subservience from Edith, clearly believing that his position as a man entitles him to dictate the terms of their marriage. He also uses his intelligence to maximize damage: since he can tell that she dislikes Carker, he knows it will be especially humiliating for her to have Carker be involved in the intimate details of their life. Dombey shows that he has no compassion in what he is willing to do to make it clear that he is superior to others.<PARAGRAPH>Carker also demonstrates his ability to cruelly manipulate people. He knows that Florence is Edith's weak spot, and he uses this knowledge to blackmail Edith and push her into situations she would not otherwise agree to. Edith's helpless position between the two men, both of whom only want to break her to their will and don't care for her well-being, helps to create sympathy for her, which is especially important given that, in the eyes of a Victorian audience, her decision to leave her husband for another man would be shocking and highly immoral. Her wildness in her interaction with Florence is also important in that it demonstrates she is not taking her decision lightly, and would not resort to this drastic step if she had any other options. Her disgust with the valuable luxuries Dombey has given her also provides a kind of moral redemption: she is unwilling to sacrifice her integrity just so that she can enjoy costly clothes and jewelry.<PARAGRAPH>Florence is perpetually put in the middle of conflicts between her father and stepmother, and when Edith leaves, she attempts to comfort her father. While his reaction speaks to the grief and rage he is experiencing, it is a devastating blow to Florence. Years of psychological violence are finally manifested in a physical strike. There is also the indication of how their relationship has only soured further as Florence has matured from child into woman. Dombey's misogynistic rage at the realization that his wife has betrayed him extends to Florence as well. Dickens carefully omits the language Dombey uses in this critical scene but he implies that Dombey presumably uses a sexualized slur against Edith, perhaps explicitly making the connection to the implied references to prostitution. To use this kind of language in front of his young, sheltered daughter would be hugely taboo and constitute another kind of violence, confirming for Florence that her father has no respect for her well-being.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-41-47"}