{"name": "Chapter 22", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 22<PARAGRAPH>Back in London, John Carker expresses worries to his brother James about their sister Harriet. James says that once Harriet chose one brother over the other, he had no further interest in her. James Carker has also received a letter from Mr. Dombey saying that if Walter had not already left, someone else should be sent instead so that Walter could remain in London. Meanwhile, Carker has two people waiting to see him at the office: Sol Gills and Biler Toodle. The latter has come asking for work. Carker summons him into the office and shakes him violently, accusing him of being a thief. Biler says that he is not, explaining that he has had difficulty since he stopped attending school, but was bullied so much when he did go that he didn't feel he had any choice except to stop. Carker calls in Sol, who has come with his payment on the money Dombey loaned him. Carker asks him to hire Rob Toodle  as his assistant, which Sol agrees to do. Later that day, Carker and Rob go together to the Toodle household. Mr. Carker makes it clear that he has gone out of his way to secure work for Rob, earning the gratitude and good feeling of the Toodle family. Carker then explains to Rob that he wants to be kept informed about what happens at Sol Gills's shop, and in particular he wants to know whether Florence comes to visit. He makes it clear that Rob is not to tell anyone that he is reporting this information to Carker. Meanwhile, Toots has taken up residence in London and regularly comes to call at the Dombey house, as he is in love with Florence. With hopes of winning Florence's heart, he believes he has to get close to Susan and tries to flirt with her. While he is doing so, Diogenes thinks she is being threatened and attacks him. As he wrestles with the dog, Carker happens to be passing by the house on his way back from meeting the Toodle family. He takes the opportunity to introduce himself to Toots", "analysis": "This section reveals how the status and wealth of the Dombey family makes it hard for them to cultivate genuine relationships with others, or to know whom to trust. When Bagstock implies that Miss Tox has been aspiring to marry Dombey, Dombey is dismissive of this idea. While it will turn out that Tox is actually a faithful and benevolent character, this does make it clear that she has had her own motivations for cultivating a relationship with the Dombey family. Bagstock of course is scheming and being disingenuous in revealing this information, in that he has own reasons for wanting to ensure that Tox and Dombey never marry. Bagstock also plays an active role in introducing Dombey to Mrs. Skewton and Edith Granger, two characters that quickly assess him as a potential match and start calculating how to ensure that he wants to marry Edith.<PARAGRAPH>At the same time as Dombey finds himself at the center of a web of schemes, Florence is also attracting attention. While Carker's precise plans are not yet clear, he is clearly interested in her connection to Sol and Walter. His recruitment of Rob Toodle as a spy introduces the theme of surveillance into the novel. Carker will both observe the Dombey house himself and make sure that he knows the whereabouts of Florence. Furthering the idea of Florence's intuitive wisdom, she is immediately uncomfortable with Carker. Because, unlike her father, she is not blinded by pride and vanity, she can see Carker for what he truly is.<PARAGRAPH>As Florence gets older, she also becomes the subject of interest as a marriage prospect, especially now that she is the sole heiress to the Dombey fortune. While relatively kind and benign, the Skettles family is clearly aspiring to a match between Florence and their young son. Carker is also very interested in whether or not Florence might have hopes of marrying Walter. Because of her position, Florence is rarely taken on her own terms: she represents a kind of asset to be used in mergers and acquisitions.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-20-25"}