{"name": "Chapter 34", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 34<PARAGRAPH>In a dilapidated home, old Mrs. Brown is shocked by the return of her daughter Alice Marwood. Alice makes it clear that she is bitter about her childhood neglect and the fact that she was taught to be vain about her good looks, falling into ruin and eventually a career as a prostitute and thief. She was arrested and sentenced to deportation. The experience hardened her, and she now takes a cynical view of the world. Mrs. Brown explains that in her daughter's absence she has survived by begging and theft, and that she has also been observing the Dombey family closely. She mentions an unnamed \"he\" who is close to the Dombey family, and who is clearly hated by both Alice and her mother. Mrs. Brown says that Dombey's recent marriage will give them an opportunity to create strife. She continues to demonstrate her knowledge by explaining that she knows about the siblings of \"him\"-clearly Mr. Carker. Alice realizes with horror that the woman who helped her and gave her money was Carker's sister. She hurries back to the house, accompanied by her mother. John Carker is now at home and both he and Harriet are surprised to see Alice reappear. Alice returns the money, vehemently cursing everything associated with the Carker family. She and her mother then return to their miserable dwelling", "analysis": "This section plays with the theme of both failed and rekindled hopes. On the one hand, it seems increasingly clear that Walter's ship has been wrecked, and he has perished. However, the uncertain nature of there being no body to offer confirmation of his death makes this series of events difficult for others to accept, and the question of whether hope should be held out for his return haunts Cuttle. Moreover, Cuttle's basic hope and trust in human nature receives a serious blow: when he realizes that Carker lied to him and manipulated him, he is forced to confront the reality that not everyone can be trusted. The impact of that blow is clearly seen in the isolation Cuttle experiences. At the same time, however, he is unwilling to accept that Sol is also lost, and stubbornly nurses hope of his friend's return. In a parallel fashion, Miss Tox has very good reason to accept that her relations with the Dombey family are over, and yet she stubbornly clings to the hope of knowing what is happening with the family, initiating a relationship with the Toodle family for this purpose. In a novel with many characters and various plots, Dickens often uses these types of parallel experiences to highlight a shared, communal similarity between otherwise very different individuals.<PARAGRAPH>At the same time, Florence's initially bright hopes for a new family dynamic are challenged. It is clear that the relationship between her father and Edith is not a loving one, and shows few signs of improving. Not only will it not help Florence to draw closer to her father, but it also seems that she will be caught up in the middle, and used as a kind of pawn.<PARAGRAPH>The introduction of another plot develops the themes of disappointed hopes and bad parenting, as well as offering additional support for Carker's villainy. Alice Marwood serves as a foil character to Edith: like Edith, a greedy mother corrupted her in her youth. However, Alice's experiences have been much harsher for two reasons: she has explicitly transgressed against Victorian sexual norms, first by living as Carker's mistress, and then by working as a prostitute. While Edith may be ashamed of her behavior, she has still always behaved in ways that are socially sanctioned, and even encouraged. The key to this difference, as Alice makes clear, is the difference in their social standing. Because of their aristocratic heritage, Edith may be bought and sold, but it will be as a wife, ensuring she has legal rights and protections. For a poor woman like Alice, the best to hope for was an illicit position as a mistress; therefore, when Carker discarded her, she had no recourse.<PARAGRAPH>Alice's storyline also highlights the idea of vengeance and eventual consequences. Although it seems like Carker is profiting from his schemes as he draws ever more intimately into the Dombey family, Alice and her mother's hatred and desire to punish him shows that his past may still catch up with him. By extension, this also suggests that Dombey may eventually face consequences for the way he cruelly discards people around him.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-32-40"}