{"name": "Chapter 49", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 49<PARAGRAPH>Florence wakes up in the evening and Cuttles makes her dinner. Cuttle brings up Walter several times, lamenting his loss. They go to the shop to buy some things for Florence and when they return, Cuttle seems to have something he wants to tell her, but won't reveal it. The following night, Cuttle muses on the experience of being at sea, and offers to tell Florence a story. He tells the story of a ship that encountered a severe storm, leading to a large loss of life. One noble young man, as well a second-mate and one other sailor, survived by climbing aboard a piece of wreckage. After drifting for days, they were retrieved, with two of them, including the noble young man, still alive. The ship that picked them up took them on a long voyage, during which the other remaining sailor died. But the noble young man was finally able to return home. By this point, it is obvious that Cuttle is telling the story of Walter's ship, and his miraculous survival. As Florence realizes this, Walter emerges into the room. After a happy reunion, Walter is shocked to learn that Florence no longer has a home or family", "analysis": "This section reveals that the fallout of the collapse of the Dombey marriage and Florence's departure from her home has mixed results. For Florence, this seems to be a liberating transition. While she is clearly traumatized by feeling that she no longer has any family, the individuals who welcome her demonstrate that love and loyalty can be displayed without blood relations. Indeed, Cuttle, Toots, and Susan rally around her with the unconditional love more typically expected from family members. They love her for who she is, whether or not she has a prestigious social position and wealth. Toots, primarily a comic character, also shows genuine integrity in prioritizing Florence's happiness above his own, and respecting her choice to marry Walter without demonstrating any of the jealousy and bitterness that is so insidious in much of the novel.<PARAGRAPH>Moreover, now that Florence is no longer linked with her father, she can more freely choose the kind of family she wants to create for herself, which she does by agreeing to marry Walter. Walter is clear that he would not have approached her or considered himself worthy of her in her former social position, and certainly her father would never have agreed to the match. The pain of Florence's estrangement is offset by her new autonomy and freedom: she can choose to give herself to Walter without needing to seek anyone's approval. While Florence can sometimes seem to be unappealingly passive and dutiful, this section reveals her autonomy, and indeed, her power. As Hilary Schor explains, \"in weaving the web of connection that will bring about the novel's happy ending  she moves from the highest realms of English society to the casual working class poverty of the Toodles and the decaying gentility of the Toxes and the Gills\" .<PARAGRAPH>While Florence's future prospects seem to blossom once she leaves her father's house, Dombey has not learned from the experience and is fixated on preserving his public image and getting revenge on Carker. Some of this desire is shaped by social expectation that he should not tolerate a grave insult, especially from someone who is his social inferior. Dombey's desire for revenge plays into the schemes of Alice and Mrs. Brown; in a sense, others are still manipulating him. He is also fixated on the past, rather than attempting to move forward now that his marriage has ended.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-48-52"}