{"name": "Chapter 54", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 54<PARAGRAPH>Edith is waiting at a hotel in France. After two attendants serve supper to her, Carker arrives for their planned rendezvous. He is surprised that she has not followed his instructions to hire a new maid, but is pleased that they are alone. He plans for them to continue on to Sicily. When he approaches her, Edith seizes a knife and threatens him. She makes it clear that she has arranged for them to meet alone but that she is planning to leave and has no intentions of the two being lovers, or continuing on together. She has always hated him, and staged the elopement only for the purpose of hurting and shaming both Dombey and Carker, as well as escaping from her marriage. Carker is furious but he is also frightened of Edith, and doesn't know what to do. She also reveals that Dombey has located them, and will be coming in pursuit of revenge. Sure enough, a commotion begins in the inn, distracting Carker enough that Edith is able to slip away through a hidden passage she had prepared in advance. Carker is now distressed, overwhelmed, and afraid, and escapes from the hotel room through the same passage", "analysis": "As the novel approaches its conclusion, closure starts to emerge in some of the plotlines. Florence and Walter are finally married, and the wedding, especially now that Sol how returned, signals that Florence has finally found the security and love she has always craved. The marriage, however, rather than providing a domestic retreat from the world as might be expected, will radically broaden her horizons in that she will sail with Walter to China. A wife accompanying her husband to sea was not typical at this time, and shows that Florence gives Walter the complete love and devotion she has always longed to offer to her father. It also reveals a new boldness to her: having taken the radical step of leaving her father's house, she can now survey her future fearlessly, and if she has love at long last, she does not have anything to be anxious about.<PARAGRAPH>Carker's plot is also resolved with a punishment for his many evil deeds: a train, which is personified as a kind of demon, kills him. While it is possible that Dombey might have been intending to kill him, as was Alice's fear, this accidental death prevents that fate. It evokes instead a kind of poetic justice where Carker's paranoia emerges because he has made it impossible for him to trust anyone. He becomes obsessed with the idea of being watched just as he himself has been ever watchful in his spying and plotting. In effect, he is his own downfall.<PARAGRAPH>There are also surprises that emerge even at this late juncture. Alice, despite her deep hatred of Carker, panics at the thought that she may have enabled his murder and attempts to save him. This shows that even her cynicism and bitterness have not completely hardened her, and that it is always possible for a character to have a change of heart and try to show forgiveness and compassion.<PARAGRAPH>Edith is also revealed as having different intentions than might be expected. She is not actually involved in an adulterous affair, and reveals that she has in fact outwitted Carker, playing him to her purposes. While clever, this scheme has deep consequences for Edith in that her reputation is ruined and she will never be socially accepted again. Her sense of shame and moral disgust has become a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy. And yet, Edith is willing to tolerate this because she is free and will no longer have to live a lie. The Dombey household dynamic was so poisonous for both Edith and Florence that even the drastic risks they take in liberating themselves are presented as worthwhile.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-53-57"}