{"name": "Chapter 52", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 52<PARAGRAPH>Alice and Mrs. Brown argue about whether Dombey will come to see them. Mrs. Brown has stopped him in the street to hint that she knows the whereabouts of Edith and Carker. She is thus the source of Dombey's possible information, hinted at in the previous chapter. As they are having this conversation, Dombey does in fact arrive. He says that he will pay them for information leading to the location of Edith and Carker, if the information turns out to be accurate. Alice haughtily tells him that while her mother might sell this information for profit, her motive is making Carker suffer. Mrs. Brown then goes on to explain that she is in fact waiting for someone else to arrive, and this individual will be the one to provide information. She also explains that Dombey will have to hide and secretly listen to the conversation. He reluctantly agrees, and a short time later, Rob arrives. He has brought a parrot, abandoned by Carker after his disappearance, and wants Mrs. Brown to care for it. He is very cautious about responding to the hints she drops about his master; however, through manipulation and physical threats, the two women overwhelm him. Rob admits that he is still being paid, but has no specific tasks. He is coaxed to talk about the night Edith left, explaining that Carker and Edith left the city separately with plans to meet later at an appointed place. Rob eventually admits that Edith's coach was bound for Dijon, a city in France. He then falls asleep, and Dombey emerges from his hiding place, pays Mrs. Brown, and leaves the house in a hurry. Alice and Mrs. Brown are satisfied that he will find a way to exact revenge on Carker", "analysis": "This section reveals that the fallout of the collapse of the Dombey marriage and Florence's departure from her home has mixed results. For Florence, this seems to be a liberating transition. While she is clearly traumatized by feeling that she no longer has any family, the individuals who welcome her demonstrate that love and loyalty can be displayed without blood relations. Indeed, Cuttle, Toots, and Susan rally around her with the unconditional love more typically expected from family members. They love her for who she is, whether or not she has a prestigious social position and wealth. Toots, primarily a comic character, also shows genuine integrity in prioritizing Florence's happiness above his own, and respecting her choice to marry Walter without demonstrating any of the jealousy and bitterness that is so insidious in much of the novel.<PARAGRAPH>Moreover, now that Florence is no longer linked with her father, she can more freely choose the kind of family she wants to create for herself, which she does by agreeing to marry Walter. Walter is clear that he would not have approached her or considered himself worthy of her in her former social position, and certainly her father would never have agreed to the match. The pain of Florence's estrangement is offset by her new autonomy and freedom: she can choose to give herself to Walter without needing to seek anyone's approval. While Florence can sometimes seem to be unappealingly passive and dutiful, this section reveals her autonomy, and indeed, her power. As Hilary Schor explains, \"in weaving the web of connection that will bring about the novel's happy ending  she moves from the highest realms of English society to the casual working class poverty of the Toodles and the decaying gentility of the Toxes and the Gills\" .<PARAGRAPH>While Florence's future prospects seem to blossom once she leaves her father's house, Dombey has not learned from the experience and is fixated on preserving his public image and getting revenge on Carker. Some of this desire is shaped by social expectation that he should not tolerate a grave insult, especially from someone who is his social inferior. Dombey's desire for revenge plays into the schemes of Alice and Mrs. Brown; in a sense, others are still manipulating him. He is also fixated on the past, rather than attempting to move forward now that his marriage has ended.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-48-52"}