{"name": "Chapter 23", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 23<PARAGRAPH>Florence continues to lead a lonely life in the Dombey house, with only Susan and Diogenes for company. She clings to the idea that she will someday be able to earn her father's love. She is finally persuaded to go and visit the Skettles, but before she does so, she learns that there has been a delay and absence of news about Walter's ship. She decides to go and see Sol Gills, feeling anxious about Walter. When she arrives at the shop, she meets Rob Toodle. He explains that Sol is not at home, and is indeed very anxious about Walter. Florence and Susan decide to go and see Captain Cuttle, in case he can offer any helpful news about the ship that they can convey to Uncle Sol. When they arrive, Captain Cuttle reassures them that he does not think Walter will be in any danger. He also says that they could get a second opinion from a seafarer named Bunsby who might be able to offer further reassurance. Florence, Susan, and Cuttle go to meet Bunsby and then they all go back to see Sol. Sol is clearly agitated and anxious, even though Bunsby is confident that nothing bad has happened to Walter's ship. Everyone, including Captain Cuttle, leaves the house feeling worried about Sol Gills", "analysis": "This section reveals how the status and wealth of the Dombey family makes it hard for them to cultivate genuine relationships with others, or to know whom to trust. When Bagstock implies that Miss Tox has been aspiring to marry Dombey, Dombey is dismissive of this idea. While it will turn out that Tox is actually a faithful and benevolent character, this does make it clear that she has had her own motivations for cultivating a relationship with the Dombey family. Bagstock of course is scheming and being disingenuous in revealing this information, in that he has own reasons for wanting to ensure that Tox and Dombey never marry. Bagstock also plays an active role in introducing Dombey to Mrs. Skewton and Edith Granger, two characters that quickly assess him as a potential match and start calculating how to ensure that he wants to marry Edith.<PARAGRAPH>At the same time as Dombey finds himself at the center of a web of schemes, Florence is also attracting attention. While Carker's precise plans are not yet clear, he is clearly interested in her connection to Sol and Walter. His recruitment of Rob Toodle as a spy introduces the theme of surveillance into the novel. Carker will both observe the Dombey house himself and make sure that he knows the whereabouts of Florence. Furthering the idea of Florence's intuitive wisdom, she is immediately uncomfortable with Carker. Because, unlike her father, she is not blinded by pride and vanity, she can see Carker for what he truly is.<PARAGRAPH>As Florence gets older, she also becomes the subject of interest as a marriage prospect, especially now that she is the sole heiress to the Dombey fortune. While relatively kind and benign, the Skettles family is clearly aspiring to a match between Florence and their young son. Carker is also very interested in whether or not Florence might have hopes of marrying Walter. Because of her position, Florence is rarely taken on her own terms: she represents a kind of asset to be used in mergers and acquisitions.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-20-25"}