{"name": "Chapter 21", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 21<PARAGRAPH>Shortly after arriving, Bagstock and Dombey run into Mrs. Skewton, an acquaintance of Bagstock's, and her young widowed daughter Mrs. Edith Granger. Bagstock explains that Edith lost both her first husband, and a young son, and, while very beautiful, has rejected many offers of a second marriage. They are not wealthy, but come from a good family", "analysis": "This section reveals how the status and wealth of the Dombey family makes it hard for them to cultivate genuine relationships with others, or to know whom to trust. When Bagstock implies that Miss Tox has been aspiring to marry Dombey, Dombey is dismissive of this idea. While it will turn out that Tox is actually a faithful and benevolent character, this does make it clear that she has had her own motivations for cultivating a relationship with the Dombey family. Bagstock of course is scheming and being disingenuous in revealing this information, in that he has own reasons for wanting to ensure that Tox and Dombey never marry. Bagstock also plays an active role in introducing Dombey to Mrs. Skewton and Edith Granger, two characters that quickly assess him as a potential match and start calculating how to ensure that he wants to marry Edith.<PARAGRAPH>At the same time as Dombey finds himself at the center of a web of schemes, Florence is also attracting attention. While Carker's precise plans are not yet clear, he is clearly interested in her connection to Sol and Walter. His recruitment of Rob Toodle as a spy introduces the theme of surveillance into the novel. Carker will both observe the Dombey house himself and make sure that he knows the whereabouts of Florence. Furthering the idea of Florence's intuitive wisdom, she is immediately uncomfortable with Carker. Because, unlike her father, she is not blinded by pride and vanity, she can see Carker for what he truly is.<PARAGRAPH>As Florence gets older, she also becomes the subject of interest as a marriage prospect, especially now that she is the sole heiress to the Dombey fortune. While relatively kind and benign, the Skettles family is clearly aspiring to a match between Florence and their young son. Carker is also very interested in whether or not Florence might have hopes of marrying Walter. Because of her position, Florence is rarely taken on her own terms: she represents a kind of asset to be used in mergers and acquisitions.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-20-25"}