{"name": "Chapter 6", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 6<PARAGRAPH>The next day, Florence, Paul, Nipper, and Richards set off for Stagg's Garden, a working class neighborhood in Camden Town. Polly is delighted to be reunited with her children, and they all enjoy a pleasant visit. However, because Polly's eldest son Biler has not yet come home from school, they take a longer route on the walk back hoping to run into him. Other neighborhood children are bullying Biler, and Polly hurries to help him. At the same time, there is a warning cry that a bull is on the loose. Florence panics and runs, only to realize she has lost sight of Nipper and Richards. An old woman who introduces herself as Old Mrs. Brown offers to help her, but takes her instead to a strange, run down house. Mrs. Brown steals all of Florence's expensive clothing, giving her cheap rags to put on instead, and then leaves her in the street. Florence starts trying to navigate her way to her father's office. She stops at a loading dock to ask the way; at that time Walter happens to be there, supervising a shipment. Florence explains who she is, and Walter immediately takes charge of her. By this time, it is evening and the offices are closed, so Walter suggests they go to his uncle's house. As they have this conversation, Walter recognizes Mr. Carker, who also works at the firm. Walter suggests that Carker go tell Mr. Dombey that his daughter has been found, but Carker declines. Walter leaves Florence safely with his uncle and goes to the Dombey house to report that Florence is safe. Nipper brings Florence back to the house where she receives a cool welcome. As punishment, Richards is fired, although Nipper is allowed to stay", "analysis": "The opening chapters introduce the web of characters whose lives will intersect over the course of the novel. Several of the major themes immediately become clear. A number of different family dynamics are presented and contrasted. Mr. Dombey is able to give his children economic privilege and elevated social standing, but he also sees them as projections of his own ego. He values his infant son because of the potential for continuing a family legacy, and is not only disinterested in, but also actively jealous of Florence. On the other hand, the Toodle family, or Uncle Sol and his nephew Walter, while in much more precarious economic straits, and in fact dependent on the Dombeys for their income, show much more genuine love. The idea of families being created from unlikely combinations of individuals, which will reoccur as eclectic groups of characters form bonds throughout the novel, takes root as it becomes clear that Susan Nipper and Richards are the ones actually providing love to Florence and Paul. At the same time, their position as working-class employees ensures that they are viewed with suspicion: Mr. Dombey insists on isolating Richards from her family, and even renaming her, because he fears what influence she might have on Paul.<PARAGRAPH>Efforts to insulate the Dombey children, however, prove unsuccessful. There is an irony to the impetus for the catastrophic expedition to Stagg's Garden: a misguided belief on Dombey's part that he is benefiting Biler Toodle by providing him with some form of education only makes his mother more aware of the poignancy of him growing up without her. Not only the decision to leave the Dombey mansion, but also to take the children to a working class neighborhood, would be a direct reflection of Dombey's worst fears for his son. And while Florence does indeed have a traumatic experience, her horizon is also permanently broadened by the contact she makes with Walter and his uncle. Without this serendipity, she would almost certainly never have encountered someone from so far outside of her own social position. Despite Dombey's attempts to control his children, just as he controls his business, the complex social and economic web around him will still impact his life.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-6"}