{"name": "Chapter X", "summary": "Chapter X<PARAGRAPH>As Chapter X opens, Catherine is openly repenting her misguided suspicions of General Tilney. She resolves to be more rational in her opinion of others in the future. Soon, Catherine forgets about her suspicions and remembers that Isabella has yet to write to her from Bath. Her worries are confirmed when she receives a letter from James stating that his engagement has been broken off and condemning Isabella for making him a miserable man. Most shockingly of all, James asserts that Isabella is now engaged to Captain Tilney. Catherine is naturally appalled by this news. After she starts crying at the breakfast table, she has no choice but to share the contents of her brother's letter with Henry and Miss Tilney. Henry says that it is not likely for his brother to marry Isabella since she lacks a fortune, but he is temporarily persuaded after readings James' letter. Both of the Tilney siblings disapprove of Isabella's behavior. Catherine realizes that Isabella only wants to marry to gain a higher social status. Upon reflection, however, Catherine also realizes that she is not as afflicted by the loss of Isabella's friendship as she might have been. Isabella, after all, was never really a true friend", "analysis": "In Vol. II Chapter X Austen reverts to a more realistic style, documenting how Catherine's social relations have changed in the aftermath of her Gothic fantasy. Catherine realizes that her reading influenced her to invest in a \"voluntary, self-created delusion:\" aided by her knowledge of Radcliffe's novel, Catherine had cast herself as the heroine of a dubious murder plot without considering the facts of her situation. General Tilney's imperfections are not of the murderous kind, and Catherine comes to be aware of the danger of fictionalizing reality when others' reputations are at stake. Although Henry's admonishment marks the end of her Gothic-tinged reverie, Catherine does not fully return to the \"anxieties of common life\" until she receives James' letter in the mail. Austen reminds us of the plot sequence she first developed in Volume I by inserting James' letter as evidence of Isabella's consummate disloyalty. James' letter to Catherine exposes Isabella's false duplicity in a stark manner, but we are not surprised to find out that Isabella has broken her engagement: Austen has made her fickle nature clear well before now.<PARAGRAPH>In Chapter XI, Catherine's feelings of anger against Isabella are mended when she visits Henry at Woodston. Woodston's tasteful simplicity stands in sharp contrast to the ostentatious luxury of Northanger Abbey. The possibility of Catherine's marital happiness with Henry in the future is foreshadowed through her appreciative wonder upon viewing his empty sitting room, which is waiting to be furnished. Woodston reflects Henry's character of modest good taste, just as Northanger Abbey reflects the General's constant desire to install the latest improvements in order to display his wealth. Much like Isabella, the General is invested in external appearances over internal merit.<PARAGRAPH>Isabella's letter forms the core of Vol.II, Chapter XII. Her letter may be interpreted as the insincere counterpart to James' earlier letter. In contrast to James' genuinely anguished tone in his communication to Catherine, Isabella attempts to hide behind a mask of ignorance. She professes not to know why James appeared \"uncomfortable\" when he left town: Isabella consistently resorts to understatements and rhetorical evasions in her letter. Luckily, Catherine is acute enough to see through her former friend's technique. Catherine interprets Isabella's letter as a tasteless and desperate attempt to redeem what little chance she has of reuniting with James. She finally detects Isabella's \"shallow artifice\" and all of its shameful implications, but Catherine would rather not address the false concerns raised in the letter: this is why she chooses not to reply.<PARAGRAPH>Although the dissolution of Catherine's Gothic fantasy seems to mark the approaching resolution of Vol. II's central plot, Austen reopens the grounds for conflict when General Tilney casts Catherine out of his house in Chapter XIII. General Tilney's behavior is both mysterious and infuriating to his daughter. Likewise, Catherine cannot discern any obvious cause for her sudden demotion in status. Overnight, Catherine has transformed from a favored guest to a detestable intruder in General Tilney's eyes. Catherine is as eager to find out the reasons for her abrupt dismissal as she was to detect the underlying circumstances surrounding Mrs. Tilney's death. However, she is frustrated by the General's refusal to see her and Miss Tilney's lack of information. Eager to restore a semblance of propriety to her family's treatment of Catherine, Miss Tilney does everything in her power to make her guest comfortable, but their silence on the morning of Catherine's departure marks the insufficiency of all last-minute niceties. Some critics assert that General Tilney's dismissal of Catherine marks the climactic moment of the novel.<PARAGRAPH>Vol. II, Chapter XIV-XI mark the novel's quick resolution. Back at Fullertone, Catherine's pining for Henry is fulfilled when he makes a sudden appearance and proposes marriage. After General Tilney's rude behavior is explained to Catherine as the product of misguided greed, she does not have any more cause to wonder about her involuntary leave-taking. Henry's steadfast devotion is assured, as is Catherine's joy at entering the Tilney family. Austen's depiction of Catherine and Henry's engagement and subsequent marriage is condensed into a brief overview of the events. We do not hear the details of their wedding. Instead, Austen tells us that \"in the tell-tale compression of the pages...we are all hastening together to perfect felicity.\" The conventions of the marriage plot dictate the happy conclusion of the novel--Austen remains aware of the limitations of her chosen form even as she subscribes to its rules.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210622234141/https://www.gradesaver.com/northanger-abbey/study-guide/summary-volume-ii-chapters-x-xvi"}