{"name": "Chapter V", "summary": "Chapter V<PARAGRAPH>Catherine leaves Bath at the beginning of Chapter V. She is excited to go see the Tilney family home, but the trip there is not altogether pleasant. First, General Tilney yells at his son Captain Tilney for being late to breakfast. Once they are underway, the General is angry with the waiters at an inn where they stop for lunch. The highlight of the trip comes when Catherine switches carriages and gets to ride with Henry. PARAGRAPH>Henry tells Catherine that he normally splits his time between Northanger Abbey and Woodston, where he maintains a parsonage house. Catherine, however, is more interested to hear about Northanger Abbey. Henry invents a scary story for Catherine about the Abbey, borrowing details from the Gothic novels he has read. Catherine is completely engrossed in the story about a haunted chamber and a secret passageway, but Henry cuts the story short because he is \"too much amused by the interest he had raised. When they reach the Abbey, Catherine discovers that it is a modernized house. The General announces that it is dinnertime, and Miss Tilney urges Catherine to hurry in her preparations for dinner", "analysis": "In Vol. II, Chapter V, Catherine is inducted into the hospitality of the Tilney family. Yet despite her infatuation with Henry and friendship with his sister, Catherine is not altogether comfortable with the family. This is the result of General Tilney's despotic character. Before this chapter, Austen has only hinted at the tension between the father and his children, but in Chapter V we see the General's impatient and demanding side in its full light.<PARAGRAPH>Austen's style changes dramatically in Vol. II, Chapter VII. Whereas in Vol. I the prose centers around witty exchanges of dialogue, in Vol. II, Chapter VI these exchanges give way to lengthy descriptions of Northanger Abbey's rooms and environs. In Chapter VI, Austen mocks the melodramatic plots of Gothic novels by undermining Catherine's expectations of finding important Tilney family documents. Rather than revealing family secrets, the antique cedar chest that Catherine finds in her bedroom turns out to contain nothing more than a folded bedsheet. Through this humorous detail, Austen insists on the ordinary nature of the Tilney family estate even as Catherine indulges her fantastical desire to uncover a supernatural--or at least a previously undisclosed--history in the furnishings.<PARAGRAPH>Austen's technique of skewering Gothic conventions continues in Vol. II Chapter VII. Catherine's false hope of discovering a Tilney family secret is exposed once again when she believes she has found a hidden document in her bedroom cabinet.<PARAGRAPH>When Catherine wakes up to find that she was mistaken about the document, her hopes are deflated, and Austen returns to the realistic mode of depiction that characterized Volume I. This mode is characterized by an intense concern with the material details of everyday life, a concern that is shared by Captain Tilney. For the wealthy landowner, Catherine's visit provides the occasion to display the accumulated status symbols of a lifetime. Captain Tilney's attachment to his possessions is epitomized when he shows Catherine the greenhouses, where he has hired a \"whole parish\" of people to cultivate his favorite exotic fruits. Catherine notes that there seem to be a \"village of hot-houses\" in the garden. Austen's language here tells us that Captain Tilney's garden replicates the structure of feudal society, in which impoverished peasants toiled for the landed gentry. At the same time, his greenhouses are enabled by the latest modern innovations of the day, ones that he can afford to install on the basis of his wealth. In 18th century England, only the most privileged subset of society could enjoy such fruits as fresh pineapples. Captain Tilney scathingly notes that his staff could only grow \"one hundred in the last year,\" but Austen lets us know how rare a feat this is through Catherine's admission that she has never seen a greenhouse of this size. However, Catherine's favorable impressions of Captain Tilney's wealth is eclipsed by her surmise that he may have caused the death of his wife.<PARAGRAPH>Catherine's suspicions of Captain Tilney come to a head in Chapter VIII and IX. Impressionable and naive, Catherine imagines that Captain Tilney has the gloomy \"air and attitude of a Montoni,\" the villain of The Mysteries of Udolpho. Although Catherine has no proof for her conviction that Captain Tilney was cruel and murderous towards his wife, she convinces herself that he conforms to the character traits of the evil men she has read about in books. Catherine revises her assessment of Captain Tilney at the end of Chapter VIII when she hypothesizes that Captain Tilney only locked up his wife in a secret chamber instead of killing her outright. This belief, however, only makes her more determined to examine Mrs. Tilney's former bedroom in hopes of finding a clue.<PARAGRAPH>Once Catherine runs into Henry after exiting the bedroom in Chapter IX, she realizes that her suspicions were unfounded. Henry's speech to Catherine in Chapter IX is one of the most famous parts of Austen's novel. Under the light of rational scrutiny, Catherine's claims about the family's alleged secret unravel. Henry asks Catherine a series of rhetorical questions designed to test her unfounded convictions about his mother's death. He asks her if it is likely for a murder to go by undetected in a country where \"every man is surrounded by a neighborhood of voluntary spies\" and where \"roads and newspaper lay every thing open,\" reminding her of the advanced communications--and local gossip--that characterize their modern age. When Catherine realizes how foolish she has been, her literary fantasy comes to an end.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210622234141/https://www.gradesaver.com/northanger-abbey/study-guide/summary-volume-ii-chapters-v-ix"}