{"name": "Chapter IX", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter IX<PARAGRAPH>Catherine goes to church the next day with the Tilneys and sees a monument in honor of Mrs. Tilney in front of the family pew. She wonders how the General can appear so calm as he is standing so close to it, but she decides that he is a man who can live \"without any feeling of humanity or remorse. PARAGRAPH>After church, Catherine and Miss Tilney go to Miss Tilney's bedroom to see the portrait of her mother. Catherine is disappointed that the portrait does not look exactly Miss Tilney, but she tries to detect a resemblance between mother and daughter nonetheless. The two girls proceed to the hallway that leads to Mrs. Tilney's former bedroom. General Tilney calls Miss Tilney away just as they are about to enter the hallway. Catherine resolves to explore Mrs. Tilney's former bedroom alone since she doesn't want Miss Tilney to get in trouble with her father. PARAGRAPH>Before dinner that night, Catherine ventures to the bedroom by herself. She is astonished to find that it is a sunny room with modern furnishings. She thinks that the General has removed all traces of his wife from the room in order to hide his crimes. Catherine leaves the room since she doesn't want anyone to find her trespassing, but she runs into Henry in the hallway. Catherine confesses that she has been to see his mother's bedroom. She tells Henry about her conjecture that his father was not very fond of his mother, who died very suddenly. Henry angrily rebuffs Catherine and tells her that while his mother died from a seizure, she received the best medical attention. Furthermore, his father cared for his mother very much. Catherine is ashamed to realize that her suspicions were unfounded, and she rushes off to her room in tears", "analysis": "In Vol. II, Chapter V, Catherine is inducted into the hospitality of the Tilney family. Yet despite her infatuation with Henry and friendship with his sister, Catherine is not altogether comfortable with the family. This is the result of General Tilney's despotic character. Before this chapter, Austen has only hinted at the tension between the father and his children, but in Chapter V we see the General's impatient and demanding side in its full light.<PARAGRAPH>Austen's style changes dramatically in Vol. II, Chapter VII. Whereas in Vol. I the prose centers around witty exchanges of dialogue, in Vol. II, Chapter VI these exchanges give way to lengthy descriptions of Northanger Abbey's rooms and environs. In Chapter VI, Austen mocks the melodramatic plots of Gothic novels by undermining Catherine's expectations of finding important Tilney family documents. Rather than revealing family secrets, the antique cedar chest that Catherine finds in her bedroom turns out to contain nothing more than a folded bedsheet. Through this humorous detail, Austen insists on the ordinary nature of the Tilney family estate even as Catherine indulges her fantastical desire to uncover a supernatural--or at least a previously undisclosed--history in the furnishings.<PARAGRAPH>Austen's technique of skewering Gothic conventions continues in Vol. II Chapter VII. Catherine's false hope of discovering a Tilney family secret is exposed once again when she believes she has found a hidden document in her bedroom cabinet.<PARAGRAPH>When Catherine wakes up to find that she was mistaken about the document, her hopes are deflated, and Austen returns to the realistic mode of depiction that characterized Volume I. This mode is characterized by an intense concern with the material details of everyday life, a concern that is shared by Captain Tilney. For the wealthy landowner, Catherine's visit provides the occasion to display the accumulated status symbols of a lifetime. Captain Tilney's attachment to his possessions is epitomized when he shows Catherine the greenhouses, where he has hired a \"whole parish\" of people to cultivate his favorite exotic fruits. Catherine notes that there seem to be a \"village of hot-houses\" in the garden. Austen's language here tells us that Captain Tilney's garden replicates the structure of feudal society, in which impoverished peasants toiled for the landed gentry. At the same time, his greenhouses are enabled by the latest modern innovations of the day, ones that he can afford to install on the basis of his wealth. In 18th century England, only the most privileged subset of society could enjoy such fruits as fresh pineapples. Captain Tilney scathingly notes that his staff could only grow \"one hundred in the last year,\" but Austen lets us know how rare a feat this is through Catherine's admission that she has never seen a greenhouse of this size. However, Catherine's favorable impressions of Captain Tilney's wealth is eclipsed by her surmise that he may have caused the death of his wife.<PARAGRAPH>Catherine's suspicions of Captain Tilney come to a head in Chapter VIII and IX. Impressionable and naive, Catherine imagines that Captain Tilney has the gloomy \"air and attitude of a Montoni,\" the villain of The Mysteries of Udolpho. Although Catherine has no proof for her conviction that Captain Tilney was cruel and murderous towards his wife, she convinces herself that he conforms to the character traits of the evil men she has read about in books. Catherine revises her assessment of Captain Tilney at the end of Chapter VIII when she hypothesizes that Captain Tilney only locked up his wife in a secret chamber instead of killing her outright. This belief, however, only makes her more determined to examine Mrs. Tilney's former bedroom in hopes of finding a clue.<PARAGRAPH>Once Catherine runs into Henry after exiting the bedroom in Chapter IX, she realizes that her suspicions were unfounded. Henry's speech to Catherine in Chapter IX is one of the most famous parts of Austen's novel. Under the light of rational scrutiny, Catherine's claims about the family's alleged secret unravel. Henry asks Catherine a series of rhetorical questions designed to test her unfounded convictions about his mother's death. He asks her if it is likely for a murder to go by undetected in a country where \"every man is surrounded by a neighborhood of voluntary spies\" and where \"roads and newspaper lay every thing open,\" reminding her of the advanced communications--and local gossip--that characterize their modern age. When Catherine realizes how foolish she has been, her literary fantasy comes to an end.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210622234141/https://www.gradesaver.com/northanger-abbey/study-guide/summary-volume-ii-chapters-v-ix"}