{"name": "Chapter 25", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 25<PARAGRAPH>Silas wakes the day after the fire in a depressed haze. The morning papers cover the fire at the Beacon Street house, and they even expose the truth about Silas' expired insurance policy. Silas visits the burned shell of the house, but he is still slightly optimistic. He has faith that he will be able to buy out the West Virginia competition, since they are naive and do not have much capital as of yet. James Bellingham, however, tells Silas that this is likely an idle hope and that he should sell his own business out to the competition. Silas rejects this idea, however, as part of \"that conspiracy by which Lapham's creditors were trying to drive him to the wall\". He feels isolated and alone in the world and wishes to deal no more with aristocrats of James Bellingham or Tom Corey's ilk. PARAGRAPH>Impulsively, Slias goes to New York to meet with the West Virginia competition, two brothers who have an office there. He can read their naivete and knows that they do not know what a bonanza their business is yet, so he makes them three offers. He offers to either buy them out, sell to them, or to join their business interests and form a partnership. They think on this for a while, and Lapham sees a great deal of himself in these rugged country men, who look at the world with the \"same amused, undaunted, provincial eyes\" as he once did. Pending the approval of a third brother at Kanawha Falls in West Virginia, they decide to partner with Lapham for an investment of capital. This soothes Lapham, who feels that in his old age, he cannot afford another ruin or great risk. He thinks to himself about all the immense personal and financial losses he has incurred recently. Upon going home, however, Silas realizes that he cannot raise the capital he needs to partner with the brothers, since his friends refuse to lend to him. His vanity prevents him from continuing to go around and ask for money, and he thinks even of selling both his house and the vacant lot as securities to raise money. He regrets his kindness towards others, since it has only brought him financial misfortune. PARAGRAPH>The next day, however, his luck seems to change when someone buys one of the patents of Mr. Rogers. Later, Rogers himself arrives to tell Silas that the English buyers are real and coming into town to discuss the mill properties with Silas. He says that they are willing to buy at full price, but also tells Silas that he has not told them of the railroad's potential interest in the area. Silas tries to rebuff Rogers, but he tells Silas that he must at least meet with the men at Young's, and give them a reason that he will not sell to them. Silas eventually assents and goes to meet the men, immediately telling them of Roger's scoundrel behavior. Shockingly, however, they do not believe him, do not care, or else see Silas' refusal to sell as a negotiating tactic. They plan on building a colonial commune by the milling properties and maintain interest for a fair figure, but Silas does not think he can trust these men. Something about them strikes Silas as incredibly untrustworthy, and he still cannot bring himself to deal with them or the wealthy patrons they represent. The men insist that Silas stay and drink a while with them, but he recalls the embarrassment of his drinking at the Coreys' and leaves without ceremony. On his way home, he reflects that this pivotal decision of whether or not to sell rests on him and him alone. PARAGRAPH>Upon reaching his home, however, Silas is surprised to find Mr. Rogers crying to Persis and making a plea to her. Silas asks what Rogers is on about, and he tells Silas that, if this deal falls through, he and his invalid wife--as well as his children--will be ruined. Silas looks to Persis for counsel, but she seems swayed by Rogers or else still blames Silas for his earlier mistreatment of Rogers. He tries to send Persis to bed as Rogers tries to convince him that selling would be fair for all parties involved. When this does not work, Rogers appeals to the past and tries to guilt Silas into helping him out in this instance. When this too fails, Rogers himself offers to buy the property back at full price so that Silas would not have any legal liabilities, even if the sale goes poorly. At this, Silas commands Persis out of the room, since she seems curious at all that Rogers is saying. When Silas and Rogers are alone, however, Rogers refuses to tell Silas what he would do with the property if Silas sold it back to him. Silas asks for more time to decide, and Rogers leaves. Persis asks Silas throughout the night if he needs help or counsel, but Silas puzzles alone over the decision all night. In the morning, Silas goes into the office and finds the railroad's offer for the mills, which significantly lowers the value of the properties and also precludes Lapham's willingness to sell to the shady Englishmen. Rogers arrives and looks over the offer, then accuses Silas of ruining him again. As the chapter closes, Silas reflects again that his steadfast morals have brought him only the sensation of feeling \"like a thief and murderer\"", "analysis": "These final chapters of Howells' novel detail the acceleration and conclusion of Silas' fall from wealth and status. As Silas himself struggles to reconcile his personal and professional struggles, as well as understand the choices that got him into such a tough place to begin with, he touches on many of the prominent themes and conflicts that have been present throughout the novel. Chief among these are the difference between ethical and dubious business practices, the divide between the country and the city, the distinction between will and chance, and the relationship between people of different classes or socioeconomic statuses.<PARAGRAPH>First, a primary focus of these concluding chapters is Silas' devotion to fair business and his upstanding morals, which ultimately proves to be both one of the things that ruins him as well as one of the things that salvages his public and private reputation. When Rogers offers Silas an easy out in the form of dealings with the Englishmen, for example, he will not do business with them because he thinks them to be unsavory characters. Further, Silas' eventual and official refusal to sell the milling properties even back to Rogers results in the latter's ruination as well. His magnanimous reluctance to let Zerilla and Mrs. Millon brave the world without his assistance causes a deal of anger and uncertainty on Persis' part. Finally, when the New York agent comes to examine the Lapham works with Silas, his failure to withhold the truth of his economic hardships also prevents this deal from moving forward and saving him from bankruptcy.<PARAGRAPH>At the same time, however, Silas' inability to act in any morally gray fashion is what commends him to his creditors, his wife, and the public eye. When Lapham finally goes bust after his negotiations with the West Virginians peters out, for example, his \"prudence  good sense\" are some of the things that salvage his public reputation . Moreover, when Silas comes clean about Zerilla and her mother to Persis, Persis is left feeling not upset, but rather grateful that she was deceived, and she admires the purity of Silas' heart and spirit. It is also this same good heart and spirit that allows Silas to stay in close contact with the West Virginians, who eventually partner with him, provide him an avenue out of his debts, and give Tom good work abroad. Finally, Silas' commitment to honesty and integrity, which he also has instilled in Penelope, plays a key role in making the Corey family come around to the union of Penelope and Tom  .<PARAGRAPH>Second, it is no mistake of Howells' that Silas' commitment to a simple and virtuous system of morals is associated with the West Virginians and his return to the countryside. Indeed, the divide between the urban and rural is felt quite acutely on the issue of morals, and this tension is drawn out in a matter that recalls Bartley Hubbard's assertion in Chapter 1 that Silas was raised on \"the Old Testament and Poor Richard's Almanac\" . For example, Silas finds respite from the predatory creditors of the city in the brothers from West Virginia--not just because they are naive in business and treat Silas well, but also because he sees himself in them . Further, the connection and kinship among simple country people does not just benefit Silas Lapham--when Reverend Sewell and his wife come, for example, they are fascinated by the \"moral spectacle\" of his regression to his simple country roots . Or, in a less voyeuristic and more selfish sense, consider also how the widening of the divide between urban and rural folk--primarily in the form of Silas' move back to Lapham, Vermont--is one of the things that allows the relationship between the Coreys and the Laphams to remain cordial and unstrained . As additional evidence of this point, when Tom and Penelope threaten to upend this peaceful divide with their union, consider that their timely choice to go abroad allows these divisions to continue in a nonconfrontational fashion.<PARAGRAPH>Third, many of these triumphs resulting from the urban-rural divide may also be considered victories that significantly rely on an equal mixture of willpower and good fortune. Appropriately, the dynamic relationship between what can be willed and what remains outside of our control is another central focus of these chapters. When Silas accidentally burns down the house on Beacon Street, for example, it calls our attention to both the fragility and contingency of Silas' fortune. At the same time, however, it also invites us to consider the discovery of the paint on the Lapham property--as well as the prosperity that follows--to be the result of good fortune, rather than hard work. Silas himself seems to admit as much in his final quote: \"seems sometimes it was a hole opened for me, and I crept out of it\" . One other thing to consider about the role of chance or accident in the burning of the Beacon Street home is that it particularly devastates the family insofar as their insurance policy has just expired the week before.<PARAGRAPH>On a complementary note, while many of the characters in these last few chapters look backwards to understand events as the result of chance, they also accept fate as a sufficient justification for failing both to take action or to will a different result in the present. For example, even though Silas and Persis cannot seem to get it straight in their head that Penelope's marriage to Tom is just and correct, they resign themselves to accept the marriage and are proud that Penelope is marrying someone she loves . Additionally, while Bromfield and Anna have a significant amount of reservations regarding Tom's marriage to Penelope at the end of Chapter 26, they know that they can do nothing about it and that the two will marry regardless of what they do. This recalls Bromfield's earlier stated position in Chapter 20 that all of his aristocratic dissolution was in vain because things have \"come to this  at last\" .<PARAGRAPH>Finally, the issues mentioned above all touch deeply on the relationship of the different social classes in Gilded Age society. Importantly, however, just as many of these other conflicts in the novel remain ambiguous and unresolved, so too do we get little closer on the class front. Silas and the Coreys did not reconcile, after all, without Silas losing all access to upward mobility and moving far away. Moreover, even though Tom and Penelope provide a potential hybrid avenue for the different classes to get along and move forward, their post-marital relationship is not fleshed out by Howells, and it is not without its own troubles and issues. Thus, at the end of The Rise of Silas Lapham, we are made to wonder deeply about the nature of closure; whether such things as perfect heroism, morals, or closure even exist; and how Gilded Age America will reconcile the various and deeply rooted cultural and economic issues that have been traced throughout the course of this Realist masterpiece. While it is certainly a comedy of manners that lampoons the wealthy and advocates for the downtrodden, it is also a powerful statement about the limitations of poverty and the strong psychological compulsion to strive. These are the very same tensions that would carry literature out of Realism and propel it towards Modernism just a few short decades later.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20220429102908/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-rise-of-silas-lapham/study-guide/summary-chapters-2427"}