
Michaelmas eve happening on the next day, we were invited to burn nuts
and play tricks at neighbour Flamborough's. Our late mortifications had
humbled us a little, or it is probable we might have rejected such an
invitation with contempt: however, we suffered ourselves to be
happy. Our honest neighbour's goose and dumplings were fine, and the
lamb's-wool, even in the opinion of my wife, who was a connoiseur, was
excellent. It is true, his manner of telling stories was not quite so
well. They were very long, and very dull, and all about himself, and we
had laughed at them ten times before: however, we were kind enough to
laugh at them once more.

Mr Burchell, who was of the party, was always fond of seeing some
innocent amusement going forward, and set the boys and girls to blind
man's buff. My wife too was persuaded to join in the diversion, and it
gave me pleasure to think she was not yet too old. In the mean time, my
neighbour and I looked on, laughed at every feat, and praised our own
dexterity when we were young. Hot cockles succeeded next, questions
and commands followed that, and last of all, they sate down to hunt
the slipper. As every person may not be acquainted with this primaeval
pastime, it may be necessary to observe, that the company at this play
themselves in a ring upon the ground, all, except one who stands in the
middle, whose business it is to catch a shoe, which the company shove
about under their hams from one to another, something like a weaver's
shuttle. As it is impossible, in this case, for the lady who is up
to face all the company at once, the great beauty of the play lies in
hitting her a thump with the heel of the shoe on that side least capable
of making a defence. It was in this manner that my eldest daughter was
hemmed in, and thumped about, all blowzed, in spirits, and bawling for
fair play, fair play, with a voice that might deafen a ballad singer,
when confusion on confusion, who should enter the room but our two great
acquaintances from town, Lady Blarney and Miss Carolina Wilelmina Amelia
Skeggs! Description would but beggar, therefore it is unnecessary to
describe this new mortification. Death! To be seen by ladies of such
high breeding in such vulgar attitudes! Nothing better could ensue from
such a vulgar play of Mr Flamborough's proposing. We seemed stuck to the
ground for some time, as if actually petrified with amazement.

The two ladies had been at our house to see us, and finding us from
home, came after us hither, as they were uneasy to know what accident
could have kept us from church the day before. Olivia undertook to be
our prolocutor, and delivered the whole in a summary way, only saying,
'We were thrown from our horses.' At which account the ladies were
greatly concerned; but being told the family received no hurt, they were
extremely glad: but being informed that we were almost killed by the
fright, they were vastly sorry; but hearing that we had a very good
night, they were extremely glad again. Nothing could exceed their
complaisance to my daughters; their professions the last evening were
warm, but now they were ardent. They protested a desire of having a more
lasting acquaintance. Lady Blarney was particularly attached to Olivia;
Miss Carolina Wilelmina Amelia Skeggs (I love to give the whole name)
took a greater fancy to her sister. They supported the conversation
between themselves, while my daughters sate silent, admiring their
exalted breeding. But as every reader, however beggarly himself, is fond
of high-lived dialogues, with anecdotes of Lords, Ladies, and Knights
of the Garter, I must beg leave to give him the concluding part of
the present conversation. 'All that I know of the matter,' cried Miss
Skeggs, 'is this, that it may be true, or it may not be true: but this I
can assure your Ladyship, that the whole rout was in amaze; his Lordship
turned all manner of colours, my Lady fell into a sound; but Sir Tomkyn,
drawing his sword, swore he was her's to the last drop of his blood.'
'Well,' replied our Peeress, 'this I can say, that the Dutchess never
told me a syllable of the matter, and I believe her Grace would keep
nothing a secret from me. This you may depend upon as fact, that the
next morning my Lord Duke cried out three times to his valet de chambre,
Jernigan, Jernigan, Jernigan, bring me my garters.'

But previously I should have mentioned the very impolite behaviour of Mr
Burchell, who, during this discourse, sate with his face turned to the
fire, and at the conclusion of every sentence would cry out FUDGE!
an expression which displeased us all, and in some measure damped the
rising spirit of the conversation.

'Besides, my dear Skeggs,' continued our Peeress, 'there is nothing
of this in the copy of verses that Dr Burdock made upon the
occasion.'--'FUDGE!'

'I am surprised at that,' cried Miss Skeggs; 'for he seldom leaves
any thing out, as he writes only for his own amusement. But can your
Ladyship favour me with a sight of them?'--'FUDGE!'

'My dear creature,' replied our Peeress, 'do you think I carry such
things about me? Though they are very fine to be sure, and I think
myself something of a judge; at least I know what pleases myself. Indeed
I was ever an admirer of all Doctor Burdock's little pieces; for except
what he does, and our dear Countess at Hanover-Square, there's nothing
comes out but the most lowest stuff in nature; not a bit of high life
among them.'--'FUDGE!'

'Your Ladyship should except,' says t'other, 'your own things in the
Lady's Magazine. I hope you'll say there's nothing low lived there? But
I suppose we are to have no more from that quarter?'--'FUDGE!'

'Why, my dear,' says the Lady, 'you know my reader and companion has
left me, to be married to Captain Roach, and as my poor eyes won't
suffer me to write myself, I have been for some time looking out for
another. A proper person is no easy matter to find, and to be sure
thirty pounds a year is a small stipend for a well-bred girl of
character, that can read, write, and behave in company; as for the chits
about town, there is no bearing them about one.'--'FUDGE!'

'That I know,' cried Miss Skeggs, 'by experience. For of the three
companions I had this last half year, one of them refused to do
plain-work an hour in the day, another thought twenty-five guineas
a year too small a salary, and I was obliged to send away the third,
because I suspected an intrigue with the chaplain. Virtue, my dear
Lady Blarney, virtue is worth any price; but where is that to be
found?'--'FUDGE!'

My wife had been for a long time all attention to this discourse; but
was particularly struck with the latter part of it. Thirty pounds and
twenty-five guineas a year made fifty-six pounds five shillings English
money, all which was in a manner going a-begging, and might easily
be secured in the family. She for a moment studied my looks for
approbation; and, to own a truth, I was of opinion, that two such places
would fit our two daughters exactly. Besides, if the 'Squire had any
real affection for my eldest daughter, this would be the way to make her
every way qualified for her fortune. My wife therefore was resolved that
we should not be deprived of such advantages for want of assurance,
and undertook to harangue for the family. 'I hope,' cried she, 'your
Ladyships will pardon my present presumption. It is true, we have no
right to pretend to such favours; but yet it is natural for me to wish
putting my children forward in the world. And I will be bold to say my
two girls have had a pretty good education, and capacity, at least the
country can't shew better. They can read, write, and cast accompts; they
understand their needle, breadstitch, cross and change, and all manner
of plain-work; they can pink, point, and frill; and know something of
music; they can do up small cloaths, work upon catgut; my eldest can cut
paper, and my youngest has a very pretty manner of telling fortunes upon
the cards.'--'FUDGE!'

When she had delivered this pretty piece of eloquence, the two ladies
looked at each other a few minutes in silence, with an air of doubt and
importance. At last, Miss Carolina Wilelmina Amelia Skeggs condescended
to observe, that the young ladies, from the opinion she could form
of them from so slight an acquaintance, seemed very fit for such
employments: 'But a thing of this kind, Madam,' cried she, addressing
my spouse, requires a thorough examination into characters, and a more
perfect knowledge of each other. Not, Madam,' continued she, 'that I in
the least suspect the young ladies virtue, prudence and discretion; but
there is a form in these things, Madam, there is a form.'

My wife approved her suspicions very much, observing, that she was very
apt to be suspicious herself; but referred her to all the neighbours
for a character: but this our Peeress declined as unnecessary, alledging
that her cousin Thornhill's recommendation would be sufficient, and upon
this we rested our petition.


