
When we were returned home, the night was dedicated to schemes of future
conquest. Deborah exerted much sagacity in conjecturing which of the
two girls was likely to have the best place, and most opportunities
of seeing good company. The only obstacle to our preferment was in
obtaining the 'Squire's recommendation; but he had already shewn us too
many instances of his friendship to doubt of it now. Even in bed my
wife kept up the usual theme: 'Well, faith, my dear Charles, between
ourselves, I think we have made an excellent day's work of it.'--'Pretty
well,' cried I, not knowing what to say.--'What only pretty well!'
returned she. 'I think it is very well. Suppose the girls should come to
make acquaintances of taste in town! This I am assured of, that London
is the only place in the world for all manner of husbands. Besides, my
dear, stranger things happen every day: and as ladies of quality are so
taken with my daughters, what will not men of quality be! Entre nous, I
protest I like my Lady Blarney vastly, so very obliging. However, Miss
Carolina Wilelmina Anielia Skeggs has my warm heart. But yet, when they
came to talk of places in town, you saw at once how I nailed them.
Tell me, my dear, don't you think I did for my children there?'--'Ay,'
returned I, not knowing well what to think of the matter, 'heaven grant
they may be both the better for it this day three months!' This was one
of those observations I usually made to impress my wife with an opinion
of my sagacity; for if the girls succeeded, then it was a pious wish
fulfilled; but if any thing unfortunate ensued, then it might be looked
upon as a prophecy. All this conversation, however, was only preparatory
to another scheme, and indeed I dreaded as much. This was nothing less
than, that as we were now to hold up our heads a little higher in the
world, it would be proper to sell the Colt, which was grown old, at a
neighbouring fair, and buy us an horse that would carry single or double
upon an occasion, and make a pretty appearance at church or upon a
visit. This at first I opposed stoutly; but it was as stoutly defended.
However, as I weakened, my antagonist gained strength, till at last it
was resolved to part with him.

As the fair happened on the following day, I had intentions of going
myself, but my wife persuaded me that I had got a cold, and nothing
could prevail upon her to permit me from home. 'No, my dear,' said she,
'our son Moses is a discreet boy, and can buy and sell to very good
advantage; you know all our great bargains are of his purchasing. He
always stands out and higgles, and actually tires them till he gets a
bargain.'

As I had some opinion of my son's prudence, I was willing enough to
entrust him with this commission; and the next morning I perceived his
sisters mighty busy in fitting out Moses for the fair; trimming his
hair, brushing his buckles, and cocking his hat with pins. The business
of the toilet being over, we had at last the satisfaction of seeing
him mounted upon the Colt, with a deal box before him to bring home
groceries in. He had on a coat made of that cloth they call thunder and
lightning, which, though grown too short, was much too good to be thrown
away. His waistcoat was of gosling green, and his sisters had tied his
hair with a broad black ribband. We all followed him several paces, from
the door, bawling after him good luck, good luck, till we could see him
no longer.

He was scarce gone, when Mr Thornhill's butler came to congratulate
us upon our good fortune, saying, that he overheard his young master
mention our names with great commendation.

Good fortune seemed resolved not to come alone. Another footman from the
same family followed, with a card for my daughters, importing, that the
two ladies had received such pleasing accounts from Mr Thornhill of us
all, that, after a few previous enquiries, they hoped to be perfectly
satisfied. 'Ay,' cried my wife, I now see it is no easy matter to get
into the families of the great; but when one once gets in, then, as
Moses says, one may go sleep.' To this piece of humour, for she intended
it for wit, my daughters assented with a loud laugh of pleasure. In
short, such was her satisfaction at this message, that she actually put
her hand in her pocket, and gave the messenger seven-pence halfpenny.

This was to be our visiting-day. The next that came was Mr Burchell,
who had been at the fair. He brought my little ones a pennyworth of
gingerbread each, which my wife undertook to keep for them, and give
them by letters at a time. He brought my daughters also a couple of
boxes, in which they might keep wafers, snuff, patches, or even money,
when they got it. My wife was usually fond of a weesel skin purse, as
being the most lucky; but this by the bye. We had still a regard for
Mr Burchell, though his late rude behaviour was in some measure
displeasing; nor could we now avoid communicating our happiness to him,
and asking his advice: although we seldom followed advice, we were all
ready enough to ask it. When he read the note from the two ladies, he
shook his head, and observed, that an affair of this sort demanded the
utmost circumspection.--This air of diffidence highly displeased my
wife. 'I never doubted, Sir,' cried she, 'your readiness to be against
my daughters and me. You have more circumspection than is wanted.
However, I fancy when we come to ask advice, we will apply to persons
who seem to have made use of it themselves.'--'Whatever my own conduct
may have been, madam,' replied he, 'is not the present question; tho' as
I have made no use of advice myself, I should in conscience give it to
those that will.'--As I was apprehensive this answer might draw on
a repartee, making up by abuse what it wanted in wit, I changed the
subject, by seeming to wonder what could keep our son so long at the
fair, as it was now almost nightfall.--'Never mind our son,' cried my
wife, 'depend upon it he knows what he is about. I'll warrant we'll
never see him sell his hen of a rainy day. I have seen him buy such
bargains as would amaze one. I'll tell you a good story about that,
that will make you split your sides with laughing--But as I live, yonder
comes Moses, without an horse, and the box at his back.'

As she spoke, Moses came slowly on foot, and sweating under the deal
box, which he had strapt round his shoulders like a pedlar.--'Welcome,
welcome, Moses; well, my boy, what have you brought us from the
fair?'--'I have brought you myself,' cried Moses, with a sly look, and
resting the box on the dresser.--'Ay, Moses,' cried my wife, 'that we
know, but where is the horse?' 'I have sold him,' cried Moses, 'for
three pounds five shillings and two-pence.'--'Well done, my good boy,'
returned she, 'I knew you would touch them off. Between ourselves, three
pounds five shillings and two-pence is no bad day's work. Come, let us
have it then.'--'I have brought back no money,' cried Moses again. 'I
have laid it all out in a bargain, and here it is,' pulling out a bundle
from his breast: 'here they are; a groce of green spectacles, with
silver rims and shagreen cases.'--'A groce of green spectacles!'
repeated my wife in a faint voice. 'And you have parted with the
Colt, and brought us back nothing but a groce of green paltry
spectacles!'--'Dear mother,' cried the boy, 'why won't you listen to
reason? I had them a dead bargain, or I should not have bought them. The
silver rims alone will sell for double money.'--'A fig for the silver
rims,' cried my wife, in a passion: 'I dare swear they won't sell for
above half the money at the rate of broken silver, five shillings an
ounce.'--'You need be under no uneasiness,' cried I, 'about selling the
rims; for they are not worth six-pence, for I perceive they are only
copper varnished over.'--'What,' cried my wife, 'not silver, the rims
not silver!' 'No,' cried I, 'no more silver than your saucepan,'--'And
so,' returned she, 'we have parted with the Colt, and have only got
a groce of green spectacles, with copper rims and shagreen cases! A
murrain take such trumpery. The blockhead has been imposed upon, and
should have known his company better.'--'There, my dear,' cried I, 'you
are wrong, he should not have known them at all.'--'Marry, hang the
ideot,' returned she, 'to bring me such stuff, if I had them, I would
throw them in the fire.' 'There again you are wrong, my dear,' cried
I; 'for though they be copper, we will keep them by us, as copper
spectacles, you know, are better than nothing.'

By this time the unfortunate Moses was undeceived. He now saw that he
had indeed been imposed upon by a prowling sharper, who, observing
his figure, had marked him for an easy prey. I therefore asked the
circumstances of his deception. He sold the horse, it seems, and walked
the fair in search of another. A reverend looking man brought him to a
tent, under pretence of having one to sell. 'Here,' continued Moses, 'we
met another man, very well drest, who desired to borrow twenty pounds
upon these, saying, that he wanted money, and would dispose of them
for a third of the value. The first gentleman, who pretended to be my
friend, whispered me to buy them, and cautioned me not to let so good an
offer pass. I sent for Mr Flamborough, and they talked him up as finely
as they did me, and so at last we were persuaded to buy the two groce
between us.'


