{"name": "book 2, Chapter 2", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 2: A Sight<PARAGRAPH>An old clerk at Tellson's gives Jerry Cruncher a message to deliver to Mr. Lorry at Old Bailey, where Charles Darnay is being tried. Jerry makes his way into the trial and is reassured by an onlooker that this is indeed the treason case. The man gruesomely describes the quartering that is certain to follow as punishment. When the young gentleman prisoner, Charles Darnay, is brought in, the whole courtroom stares at him. He had pleaded not guilty the previous day. Darnay's gaze rests immediately on Dr. Manette and his daughter, who are to be witnesses for the prosecution", "analysis": "As in Shakespearean tragedies, the great elements of tragedy are provided by the upper classes, while the lower classes provide comic relief, often by the distinct color and topics of their language.  In Chapter 1, the Cruncher family provides comic relief from the heavy sentimentality of the reuniting of the Manettes.  Jerry Cruncher uses laughably vivid language to censure his wife's sense of religion: \"You're a nice woman!  What do you mean by flopping yourself down and praying agin me?\"  There is humor in the fact that Jerry objects to the very characteristics that actually make his wife nice.  For a man who claims not to believe in religion, Jerry has a very real fear of the success of prayer, believing that he has been \"religiously circumwented into the worst of luck.\"<PARAGRAPH>Physical appearance and names continue to be accurate indicators of the conditions of the humans they belong to.  Despite Jerry's favorite appellation of himself as an \"honest tradesman,\" the details illustrate that the opposite is more likely the case.  The last name of Cruncher is illustrative of the morbid nature of his job, which is echoed by the younger Cruncher's hobby of \"inflicting bodily and mental injuries of an acute description\" on boys younger and weaker than himself on Fleet Street.<PARAGRAPH>The boy is a physical double; he is destined to develop into his father.  He wears a slightly less dangerous version of the spikes that adorn his father's head.  These spikes, which an earlier chapter described as making him an undesirable player of leapfrog, are portrayed as more hazardous in this chapter; they might \"tear his sheets to ribbons.\" The father and son are also united in their resemblance to animals, looking like a pair of monkeys as they absently survey Fleet Street.<PARAGRAPH>Also in Chapter 1, Dickens drops more clues to foreshadow the unsavory nature of Jerry Cruncher's real business.  One as yet inexplicable detail is the rustiness that surrounds Jerry.  Others include the fact that while he returns home from Tellson's with clean boots, he wakes up in the morning to a set of muddy boots.<PARAGRAPH>Like France, England has its prisons that admit young men and release old men. In England, the prisons are transformed into \"acceptable\" social structures. Tellson's Bank serves as one of these prisons. It has very elderly clerks who have committed themselves to service, or kept themselves \"in a dark place\" since their youth. It has a \"condemmed hold\" for those who need to visit the House. Everything in Tellson's points towards death and decay: the letters and deeds are decaying from being kept for so long. The Bank is also down the street from the Temple Bar Courts, which send several people to gruesome deaths everyday.<PARAGRAPH>Old Bailey is described in Chapter 2 as a perfect example of the precept, \"Whatever is is right,\" a direct quotation from Alexander Pope, an eighteenth- century satirist.  The phrase is the last line of the first Epistle of his Essay on Man, which Pope wrote to laud man's abilities and the great possibilities of his relationship with God.  The first Epistle is mainly concerned with theodicy, that is, explaining why a perfect God would allow suffering in a world of his own creation.<PARAGRAPH>The French philosopher Voltaire challenged the optimism of \"whatever is is right\" in his satire Candide. In his own way, consistent with his self-image as a social crusader, Dickens also finds this optimism unlikely. It seems  unforgivable that Old Bailey is allowed to continue in its abuses, despite the fact that it has handed down incorrect and probably unjust sentences.<PARAGRAPH>Trials, like the famous madhouse named Bedlam, not only were designed to deal with criminals and the insane, but they also served as entertainment for the general public.  Families would go on outings to Old Bailey to jeer at criminals. Dickens strongly critiques this excessive interest in human suffering, illustrating that the only reason for the interest in Mr. Darnay's person is the possibility of his severe sentence. Dickens condemns this monstrous interest in viewing a body that is later to be mangled as \"at the root of it, Ogreish.\"<PARAGRAPH>Dickens also presents another version of the Paris mobs - in this case, it becomes the English crowd at the courts. Dickens thus presents a foreshadowing of future events: the mob, hungry for blood, eagerly watches a man who is under the threat of death.<PARAGRAPH>The accused man's name is Charles Darnay. Observant readers will notice that the CD of Darnay's initials are also the initials for Charles Dickens. Some scholars suggest that Darnay is an idealized version of Dickens. Darnay is clearly an idealized man, with his handsome looks and calm demeanor. However, he is placed under a mirror on the stand, and he looks into it. Dickens uses the mirror to suggest that Darnay will be presented with a mirror image of himself - an image we will see in chapter 3.<PARAGRAPH>Darnay's acquittal in Chapter 3 is the second example of resurrection in the novel. His conviction is almost certain before the appearance of Mr. Carton, and this is what has brought out the crowd.  Dickens compares the onlookers to blueflies, noting their buzz after any piece of evidence in Darnay's disfavor is disclosed.  The title of the chapter refers to the crowd's disappointment when there is no blood for them to see, and the final image of the chapter is of the masses buzzing Old Bailey in search of other carrion to feed on.<PARAGRAPH>Dickens included frequent biblical references, and these would have been very familiar to the audience of his day.  In Chapter 2, he depicts the mirror that hangs over the bar as having recorded innumerable criminal faces.  He reflects on how haunted Old Bailey would be if the mirror would give up its previous reflections, \"as the ocean is one day to give up its dead.\"  Dickens alludes here to Revelations 20:13--\"And the sea gave up the dead that were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works.\"<PARAGRAPH>A more obvious biblical reference is the portrayal of Barsad by the defense lawyer as \"one of the greatest scoundrels upon the earth since accursed Judas-which he certainly did look rather like.\"  This is, of course, a reference to Judas Iscariot, the apostle who betrayed Jesus in return for money.  The assertion that he looks like Judas is absurd, because there is no record of how Judas looked, but it is representative of the wild accusations and poetic license used in courts of the day.  Barsad's characterization as Judas highlights the thematic connection of Darnay's acquittal with Jesus's resurrection.<PARAGRAPH>Dickens presents Sydney Carton as a lowly clerk. However, he is actually a powerful man. His power is a covert power that stems from his powers of observation. After all, he is the first one to see Darnay's resemblance to him, and he calls for help for the fainting Lucie, who is ignored by the crowd. Carton's observations will become a force later in the book, especially when his resemblance to Darnay holds importance again.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210410065304/https://www.gradesaver.com/tale-of-two-cities/study-guide/summary-book-ii-chapters-1-3"}