{"name": "Chapters Nineteen\u2013Twenty", "summary": "Art has no influence upon action. . . . The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame. See Important Quotations Explained   Chapter Nineteen  Several weeks have passed, it seems, and Dorian visits Lord Henry. Dorian claims that he wants to reform himself and be virtuous. As evidence of his newfound resolve, Dorian describes a recent trip to the country during which he passed up an opportunity to seduce and defile an innkeeper\u2019s innocent daughter. Lord Henry dismisses Dorian\u2019s intentions to reform, and he turns the conversation to other subjects\u2014Alan Campbell\u2019s recent suicide and the continued mystery of Basil Hallward\u2019s disappearance. Dorian asks if Lord Henry has ever considered that Basil might have been murdered. Lord Henry dismisses the idea, noting that Basil lacked enemies. Dorian then asks: \u201cWhat would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?\u201d Lord Henry laughs and responds that murder is too vulgar for a man like Dorian. The conversation drifts away from Basil. Lord Henry then asks Dorian, \u201c\u2018[W]hat does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose\u2019\u2014how does the quotation run?\u2014\u2018his own soul\u2019?\u201d Dorian starts nervously; Lord Henry explains that he heard a street preacher posing this question to a crowd. He mocks the man in his typical fashion, but Dorian cuts him short, insisting that the soul is very real. Lord Henry laughs at the suggestion, wondering aloud how Dorian has managed to remain so young after all these years. He wishes he knew Dorian\u2019s secret and praises Dorian\u2019s life as being \u201cexquisite.\u201d He commends Dorian\u2019s mode of living and begs him not to spoil it by trying to be virtuous. Dorian somberly asks his friend not to loan anyone else the \u201cyellow book,\u201d which has had such a corrupting effect upon his own character, but Lord Henry discounts his \u201cmoraliz[ing]\u201d and remarks that \u201c[a]rt has no influence upon action. . . . The books that the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.\u201d Before leaving, Lord Henry invites Dorian to visit him the next day.  Chapter Twenty  That night, Dorian goes to the locked room to look at his portrait. He hopes his decision to amend his life will have changed the painting, and he considers that perhaps his decision not to ruin the innkeeper\u2019s daughter\u2019s reputation will be reflected in the painted face. But when Dorian looks at his portrait, he sees there is no change\u2014except that \u201cin the eyes there was a look of cunning, and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of the hypocrite.\u201d He realizes his pitiful attempt to be good was no more than hypocrisy, an attempt to minimize the seriousness of his crimes that falls far short of atonement. Furious, he seizes a knife\u2014the same weapon with which he killed Basil\u2014and drives it into the portrait in an attempt to destroy it. From below, Dorian\u2019s servants hear a cry and a clatter. Breaking into the room, they see the portrait, unharmed, showing Dorian Gray as a beautiful young man. On the floor is the body of an old man, horribly wrinkled and disfigured, with a knife plunged into his heart. It is not until the servants examine the rings on the old man\u2019s hands that they identify him as Dorian Gray.", "analysis": "Chapters Nineteen\u2013Twenty The contrast between Lord Henry and Dorian in Chapter Nineteen is instructive. When the novel begins, Lord Henry appears as a figure of worldly wisdom who seduces the na\u00efve Dorian with fawning compliments and a celebration of selfishness and hedonism. Now that Dorian has actually lived the philosophy that Lord Henry so eloquently champions, however, he stands as proof of the limitations\u2014indeed, even the misguided notions\u2014of that philosophy. In the novel\u2019s final pages, Dorian is world-weary and borne down by the weight of his sins, while Lord Henry seems almost childishly na\u00efve as he repeats his long-held but poorly informed beliefs. When Dorian all but confesses to Basil\u2019s murder, Lord Henry flippantly dismisses him, since his worldview holds that \u201c[c]rime belongs exclusively to the lower orders.\u201d Only Lord Henry, who has never actually done any of the things he has inspired Dorian to do, could have the luxury of this thought. By keeping himself free from sin, even as he argues the virtues of sinning, Lord Henry lacks the terrible awareness of guilt and its debilitating effects. While the street preacher\u2019s rhetorical question about earthly gain at the cost of spiritual loss (from the New Testament, Mark 8:36) haunts Dorian, it holds no real meaning for Lord Henry. At this stage, however, not even truthful self-awareness is enough to save Dorian. In his final moments, he attempts to repent the murder of Basil, the suicides of Sibyl Vane and Alan Campbell, and his countless other sins by refraining from seducing and ruining a na\u00efve village girl. The discrepancy between the enormity of his crimes and this minor act of contrition is too great. Furthermore, he realizes that he does not want to confess his sins but rather have them simply go away. The portrait reflects this hypocrisy and drives him to his final, desperate act. He decides it is better to destroy the last evidence of his sin\u2014the painting of his soul\u2014than face up to his own depravity. The depravity he seeks to destroy is, in essence, himself; therefore, by killing it, he kills himself.<PARAGRAPH>The end of the novel suggests a number of possible interpretations of Dorian\u2019s death. It may be his punishment for living the life of a hedonist, and for prizing beauty too highly, in which case the novel would be a criticism of the philosophy of aestheticism. But it is just as possible that Dorian is suffering for having violated the creeds of aestheticism. In other words, one can argue that Dorian\u2019s belief that his portrait reflects the state of his soul violates the principles of aestheticism, since, within that philosophy, art has no moral component. This reading is more in keeping with Wilde\u2019s personal philosophies and with the events of his life. In fact, elements of The Picture of Dorian Gray have an almost prophetic ring to them. Like Basil Hallward, Wilde would meet a tragic end brought about by his unrestrained worship of a beautiful young man. Additionally, like Alan Campbell, whom Dorian blackmails with vague threats of exposed secrets, Wilde would be punished for sexual indiscretions. Given the public nature of Wilde\u2019s trial and entire life\u2014he was, in many ways, the first celebrity personality\u2014it is impossible to ignore these parallels while reading The Picture of Dorian Gray. In De Profundis, Wilde\u2019s long letter to his lover, written from prison, he admits the limitations of the modes of thought and living that structured his life:  I let myself be lured into long spells of senseless and sensual ease. I amused myself with being a flaneur, a dandy; a man of fashion. . . . Tired of being on the heights, I deliberately went to the depths in the search for new sensation. What the paradox was to me in the sphere of thought, perversity became to me in the sphere of passion. Desire, at the end, was malady, or a madness, or both. I grew careless of the lives of others, I took pleasure where it pleased me, and passed on. I forgot that every little action of the common day makes or unmakes character, and that therefore what one has done in the secret chamber one has someday to cry aloud on the house-tops. I ceased to be lord over myself. I was no longer the captain of my soul, and did not know it. I allowed pleasure to dominate me. I ended in horrible disgrace.  The philosophy that The Picture of Dorian Gray proposes can be extremely seductive and liberating. But Wilde\u2019s words here reveal that society, conscience, or more likely both together ultimately make living that philosophy extremely difficult and even painful.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210228142327/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/doriangray/section10/"}