{"name": "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn: Summary & Analysis | Chapter 8 | Study Guide | CliffsNotes", "summary": "Huck\u00a0wakes up on Jackson's Island to hear a ferryboat firing a cannon. He knows that this will bring a drowned body to the surface and realizes that they must be searching for him. Huck also remembers that another way to find a body is with a loaf of bread filled with quicksilver. He scouts the shoreline and finds a large loaf, then wonders if prayer really works. Someone, after all, had prayed that the bread find his body, and that prayer had worked.\nConfident that he is now safe, Huck explores the island until he stumbles upon fresh campfire ashes. Huck climbs a tree for safety but curiosity sends him back to the site, and he discovers Miss Watson's slave,\u00a0Jim. After convincing Jim that he is not a ghost, Huck learns that Jim has run away because Miss Watson was going to sell him down the river to New Orleans.\nDuring the evening, Jim impresses Huck with his knowledge of superstition.<PARAGRAPH>", "analysis": "Huck's contemplation of prayer brims with humor as he tries to fathom the logic of how the quicksilver bread found him. The combination of a superstitious practice (quicksilver bread) and a religious custom (prayer) shows that Huck's beliefs include a portion of both. As reluctant as he is to embrace Miss Watson's religion, he still holds a fearful respect of its power. The same is true for the practice of superstition.\nWhen Huck first stumbles upon Jim, he does not immediately ask why Jim is on the island, nor does he worry that Jim will tell anyone he is alive. Instead, Huck's first reaction is one of joy at the companionship. More important, Jim's reintroduction extends the important theme of freedom and civilization from Huck to Jim, and sets up the circumstances that will lead to their odyssey down the Mississippi.\nHuck's continued struggle with society's restrictions and laws now includes the more serious issue of race and slavery. Huck's comment that \"people would call me a low-down Abolitionist and despise me for keeping mum\" shows that his society does not tolerate those who denounce slavery. This is Huck's first important break with society, but a break that would make his return nearly impossible, as he realizes. The stance is similar to Twain's own boyhood experience where slavery was an accepted practice in the South. Although Huck has shown the tendency to reject society's beliefs, he cannot immediately dismiss its influence and teachings.\nThis chapter also serves to establish the relationship between Huck and Jim and their roles in contrast to one another. Whereas Huck's initial representation of Jim was stereotypical, in this chapter, Jim quickly reveals himself as an authority on superstition. Huck's literal nature does not allow him to be impressed easily, but his belief in signs and superstition elevates Jim, who \"knowed all kinds.\" In addition, Twain was fond of using a twin image in order to develop his themes. In some works the image is obvious (for example, Pudd'nhead Wilson and The Prince and the Pauper). In others, the image is more subtle. In this work, Tom and Huck are twins with differing dominate personality characteristics: Tom, the romantic, and Huck, the realist. Likewise, Jim and Huck are twin-like, each searching for his own kind of freedom, but one black, the other white.\nGlossary\ncorn-pone corn meal.\nsand in my craw courage.\nfan-tods the nervous fidgets.\nplug er dog-leg a plug of cheap chewing tobacco.\ntaller tallow, the nearly colorless solid fat extracted from the natural fat of cattle or sheep, used in making candles and soaps.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201101055818/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/a/the-adventures-of-huckleberry-finn/summary-and-analysis/chapter-8"}