{"name": "Chapter XXXIV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210213065711/https://www.novelguide.com/tess-of-the-durbervilles/summaries/phase4-chapter25-34", "summary": "Tess and Angel stay their first night as man and wife in the shoddy old d'Urberville mansion, where portraits of earlier d'Urberville women spook Tess. Angel, who is pleased to have a wife of noble lineage, notices that despite the terrifying countenances of the framed women, they bear a resemblance to his new wife. A package arrives from Angel's father. It contains diamond heirloom jewelry for a shocked Tess who looks more brilliant than the diamonds to her admiring new husband after she puts them on. However, almost immediately a man arrives late with their luggage and explains he was delayed by the suicide of Retty the milkmaid. Marian, another lovelorn milkmaid has also taken to drink. The newlyweds attempt to shake off the disastrous news, and Angel confesses to Tess about an earlier sexual indiscretion with a stranger. Deeply relieved, Tess finally confesses her own past to Angel without flinching, safe in the knowledge that he will forgive her because her \"crime\" with Alec d'Urberville is \"just the same\".", "analysis": ". Angel's family doesn't know what to make of their son's choice for a wife. Despite the rationality behind his decision--a farm woman is worth more to him than one familiar with the niceties of upper-class Victorian society-- they, especially his mother, are snobs and worry about their social standing and their position in the church. They immediately characterize Tess as low class and suggest Angel marry Mercy Chance instead. In addition, they are appalled that Angel's manners have deteriorated during the time he has spent away. Perhaps he has been contaminated by Tess who is sure to lower their social standing in the eyes of their neighbors. Both of Angel's brothers have entered the church and are also displeased with his choice of a common woman. Intellectuals, they are emotionally frozen. While Angel seems removed from his family, such training has also worked its way deep into his psyche and this will become increasing apparent. Is he saying one thing--that he totally accepts and loves Tess despite her lack of social and financial standing--or is he also a snob and a hypocrite. He has given up the church to live a more humble existence on the land, but his actions in the future bear watching. Consider that although Angel has earlier claimed to dislike ancient families, he is happy to learn of Tess's lineage and prompts her to use d'Urberville instead of Durbeyfield: \"he could take her on a visit to his parents and impart the knowledge while triumphantly producing her as worthy of such an ancient line\". In short, Angel, like Tess, is not what he seems. Tess idealizes him entirely and sees him as a pagan god wandering around in the fertile fields--a man of Nature in search of a natural woman: \"It seemed natural enough to him now that Tess was again in sight to choose a mate from unrestrained Nature and not from the abodes of Art\". But, Tess takes on Angel's gestures and mimics his words and thus becomes less of what he makes her out to be, or indeed what he says he wants her to be. In the Victorian era, women's sexuality was denied, and they took on the role of Angel of the House, above men spiritually, and the moral guide of their children. A true lady merely tolerated sex for procreation. Tess's denial of Angel's advances makes Tess appear even more pure: \"I know you to be the most honest, most spotless creature that ever lived\". However, Angel fails to see Tess as a living breathing human, and when anyone is placed this high, down is the only direction they can move. While Tess does make several attempts to tell Angel the truth about her past, in fairness she chooses not to tell him out of fear that she will lose him. Yes, writing him the letter and attempting to tell him immediately before the wedding count as sincere efforts, but in reality, she held back the truth and married him: \"I can't bear to let anyone have him but me. Yet it is a wrong to him, and may kill him when he knows. Tess uses her mother's advice to justify her actions and chooses not to risk losing Angel. To Tess's credit, however, she decides to tell her new husband the truth, even though at this point she could have continued to withhold it"}