{"name": "Chapter XLIV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210213065711/https://www.novelguide.com/tess-of-the-durbervilles/summaries/phase5-chapter35-44", "summary": "Tess decides to pay Angel's parents a visit in hopes of information about Angel. She wears boots for the fifteen-mile walk and hides them in a bush. She mingles with village people leaving church, and discovers that the two men behind her are Angel's brothers. She overhears their remarks about Angel's marriage. Then they find Tess's boots and take them to give to a poor parishioner. On her dejected walk home \"full in the conviction that a crisis in her life was approaching,\" she stops at a barn to rest. Inside she hears a clergyman preaching passionately and recognizes the voice of Alec d'Urberville.", "analysis": ". While life at Talbothays Dairy in \"Phase the Third\" was Edenic, as the novel progresses the setting becomes ever gloomier. This contributes to Hardy's pervasive pessimistic sense of tragedy and enhances the characters and the plot. For instance, the site of the doomed honeymoon, the d'Urberville mansion, is gray and dark, and the presence of portraits add to the feeling of Gothic disquiet. All is shadow, with light used merely to contrast dark. Even the outside is shadowy and evil. The sleepwalking Angel carries the passive Tess to, what else, a graveyard, where he places her in a stone coffin. Hardy utilizes the Gothic conventions which were popular in the Victorian era, as witnessed by such popular novels as Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre, the story of another pure woman in danger of being disgraced in an old mansion by a love affair. In this section, Hardy heightens his condemnation of society's double standard which shrugs its shoulders at men--boys will be boys--but that castigates women for the same behavior. Angel confides in Tess about a sexual indiscretion with an older woman but, instead of feeling horror, she is gladdened because now she feels she can confess to Angel about her own past without his passing judgment on her for actions that are \"just the same\". In this, Tess could not be more wrong: the double standard is fully in force. And, instead of standing up to her new husband for his pious judgmental position, she kneels in front of him and offers to be his slave, passively allows him to place her in a coffin and even to kill herself if he wishes. In short Hardy is adamant, \"God's not in his heaven; all's wrong with the world\". Angel's sleepwalking should be viewed as a metaphor. He lies in a dream world. He invents his own religion, so to speak, where he is one with mystical Nature and eschews his family's beliefs. He sees in Tess a pure pagan woman of Nature and not a real-life human being. He fails to give his parents a chance to meet Tess and judges them for rejecting their new daughter-in-law before they meet her. He condemns the aristocracy for its behavior towards the lower classes, yet no one could be as mean-spirited and cruel to an innocent woman. When he leaves for Brazil, he is in effect a coward, running away from the reality he cannot accept. His \"was the face of a man who was no longer passion's slave\". His pride overwhelms his judgment. His cruelty to Izz Huett, when he is in need of female adoration, should also not be overlooked. Here is another country woman who loves him purely and simply and who accepts his advances only to be thrown back wailing in the dirt. Tess is forced to leave Marlott to avoid the condemnation of her parents and her neighbors--proper society--to enter into the frozen world of Flintcomb-Ash, where she might as well be dead. Simply, there is no way she can ever regain her stolen virginity. Thus, as the novel progresses Hardy tightens his deterministic thesis--people are victims of fate and regardless of how they fight, they are doomed. From the foreshadowing regarding death and dying--biers, pheasants, portraits, graveyards and coffins--there is no way Tess can avoid an early death. She is powerless; her fate was divined before she was born. In this line of thinking, however, there is an inherent flaw. Hardy also condemns society for Tess's ills--church, aristocracy, a double-standard for men and women. How then how can fate be at issue"}