{"name": "Chapter 24", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-25", "summary": "Finally, the \"silent spell is broken\" and the two break out in conversation. Newland asks why she has not returned to Europe and Ellen says, \"Because of you. Then she says one of the most interesting passages in the book: \"At least it was you who made me understand that under the dullness there are things so fine and sensitive and delicate that even those I most cared for in my other life look cheap in comparison. It seems as it I1d never before understood with how much that is hard and shabby and base the most exquisite pleasures may be paid for. Ellen thanks Newland for making her the woman she is. And Newland says that he1s not much of a man at all, \"I1m the man who married one woman because another one told him to. Ellen continues that it is their sacrifice that has made May1s life so lovely. And, Newland insists that she dare not base her happiness on the success of his marriage since, \" gave his firs glimpse of a real life, and at the same moment asked him to go on with a sham one. It1s beyond human enduring. She exclaims, \"But I1m enduring it. And the two realize that they will never be alone since they will both silently endure the same pain. Ellen says she will stay in America, as long as they continue to endure; as long as they do not disobey propriety for their love.", "analysis": "This scene is so powerful because, despite the depth of feeling and language, the two never touch. Also interesting is the plays on reality and pretend. What is real. What is the sham life. Newland changes his mind depending on whose company his is in. Also, it is interesting that their misery is all for the sake of preserving May1s happiness. Is May, in a sense, the free individual since all cater to her happiness. Certainly, this may be true since it is her reality that all seem to cater to entertain"}