{"name": "Chapter 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-5", "summary": "Newland becomes annoyed as he realizes that everyone is paying attention to the box where his fiance is sitting. He doesn1t want the woman to whom he is engaged to be associated with a woman of questionable reputation. The strange woman is Ellen Olenska, a cousin of May. She has a bad reputation because she left her husband and ran off with his secretary. In New York Society, such behavior was not accepted. Newland suddenly wishes to sit next to his girlfriend, as if to protect her from the gossip. He also has a sudden urge to announce their engagement because he wants to distract attention from the foreign woman and place attention on the happy occasion of their engagement. He walks over to their box and is introduced to Ellen. Ellen explains that she remembers being kissed by him when they were little children and that returning to New York reminds her of her childhood. She can \"see\" everyone in their childhood underpants. Newland does not like her referring to New York society as being \"a dear old place. He considers his society to be a grand institution and Ellen seems to be slighting this society.", "analysis": "Here we see how Newland is fixated with Taste. He is annoyed that his fiance may be associated with a woman of ill-repute; he thinks that Ellen1s dress is too revealing and that the Mingotts should have not brought her to the Opera. Also interesting in this chapter is the motif of the military: \"Form was the mere visible representative and vicegerent of Taste. Thorley \"entered the lists\" as the ladies champion. Against whom are these members of New York Society mobilizing against. It is also interesting to examine which words are capitalized. Society, Family, Taste are capitalized words because they seem to Newland to be inflexible institutions that are very important. The remark that \"the persons of their world lived in an atmosphere of faint implications and pale delicacies\" is important as well. Will Newland be satisfied with this world. There is also a bit of foreshadowing in that Newland had kissed Ellen when she was little and that Ellen remembered the event. Is there some possibility of romance here. Food is an important motif in this book. Mrs. Manson Mingott and Mrs. Archer are looked down upon because they do not serve good food. Contrast is another important literary tool here. The old brownstone architecture is contrasted against the new cream-colored stones of the new inductees of the society. Ellen Olenska1s dark hair and red clothing are often contrasted against May1s blonde hair and white dress"}