{"name": "Chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416073116/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-age-of-innocence/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10", "summary": "Newland arrives at Ellen1s home in the artist district at five after five. He had had a bad day; he felt like a \"wild animal cunningly trapped\" because he had been forced to go from home to home announcing his engagement to May. He does not tell May of his meeting with Ellen. When he gets to Ellen1s home she is not there and he relaxes in her living room admiring her exotically decorated home. When she arrives, she explains that she had spent the day with Julius Beaufort looking for a new home because others do not find her home fashionable enough. Ellen is flippant about how she finds New York so safe like a little girl1s paradise. Newland thinks that she should not be so naive about how \"powerful an engine\" New York is and how she almost was crushed by it. She remarks how she had enjoyed the party at the van der Luydens; Archer says its unfortunate that they do not \"receive very often. Ellen, cleverly says, \"Perhaps that1s the reason for their great influence. They continue in this manner until the Duke of St. Austrey arrives with Mrs. Struthers. Struthers had not been invited to the Luydens1 party and she had wanted to meet Ellen and invite her to a party at her home. Soon after their arrival, Newland leaves. On his way home, he stops at the florist to send May her daily lilies. He decides to send her the flowers; but he also sends an anonymous bouquet of flaming yellow roses to Ellen.", "analysis": "In this chapter, Newland falls in love with Ellen, as signified by his calling her \"Ellen\" instead of \"Madame Olenska. In a society as proper as New York in the 1890s, calling a woman by her first name indicated that there was a significant emotional tie. He loves her because she defies the rules of society by seemingly not understanding them. She makes light of the powerful figures  Manson Mingott and the van der Luydens. She is close friends with one of the most respectable figures -- the Duke  while simultaneously friends with Beaufort, a man of no reputation. Also, intriguing is the fact that Ellen believes New York society to be plain and straightforward: \"I thought it so up and down like Fifth Avenue. And with all the cross streets numbered. Whereas Newland says, \"Everything may be labeled but everyone is not. This is ironic, too, because everyone is labeled people judge each other by family name. Another theme in the novel is suggested by Ellen when she says, \"The real loneliness is living among all these kind people who only ask one to pretend. The book is about pretenders; everyone pretends to be something they are not; everyone but Ellen. Newland was frustrated in a prior chapter by the realization that he, too, is being forced to pretend in his relationship with May"}