{"name": "Chapter 8", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210410230910/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-time-machine/study-guide/summary-chapters-7-8", "summary": "The TT finds the Palace of Green Porcelain falling into ruins. Inside, he finds a long gallery that functions as a museum, with skeletons of extinct creatures and a few surviving objects from the TT's time. After searching through other galleries which fail to interest him, he enters an enormous room with huge machines. He does not know what their functions are, but wonders if he can use them against the Morlocks. With Weena's prompting, the TT notices that the gallery slopes downward into darkness. He sees small footprints near the source of darkness, and feels the Morlocks are near. When he hears noises in the darkness similar to those from the well, he breaks off the lever of a machine. He restrains his desire to kill the Morlocks with his new \"mace,\" as it may impede his progress in regaining the Time Machine. The TT passes through a ruined library, then goes upstairs to a well-preserved gallery of chemistry. He finds a box of matches and a jar of camphor, a flammable substance which he decides to use as a candle. He does not find anything with which to break open the pedestal. He finds other weapons, but none as good as his broken lever. He also locates idols from several countries, and some dynamite which no longer works. He decides to camp out with a fire for protection, and feels hopeful that he will be able to pry open the pedestal with his lever.", "analysis": "It is fitting that the lever of a machine should play an important role here. Much as the rich have always used industry to enslave the poor, the TT relies on a relic of industry to defend himself against the Morlocks. He does not merely wish to defend himself, however; we see his bloodthirsty nature emerge as never before as he contemplates descending into the darkness and slaying the Morlocks. His taste for murder is a blend of modern and primal impulses. He has both the disgust for the poor befitting a member of the English aristocracy as well as the savage violence of a Neanderthal--even the lever, which he calls a \"mace\" , resembles more a blunt club. Continuing this primal regression, the TT has also regained fire. It is ironic that this is more useful than almost any of the more modern advancements the Palace displays. As the TT muses, the charred, ruined literature strikes him as an \"enormous waste of labour. While he means that the work has been in vain, since it is now ruined, he may be indirectly commenting on the worthlessness of high culture when compared to bare necessities like fire and shelter. Once again, the TT's travels in the future ironically bring him back to a more basic way of life"}