{"name": "Chapter LVIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210124215354/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/copperfield/section14/", "summary": "Absence David travels abroad and eventually settles in Switzerland. He mourns the deaths of Dora, Steerforth, and Ham and begins to feel the weight of his sorrows for the first time. David receives a letter from Agnes and reflects how much he loves her. He resolves not to make any decisions about love or marriage until a full year has passed since Dora's death. He decides to try to make himself a better man in the meantime.", "analysis": "The most dramatic moment in the novel, the tempest scene in Chapter LV resolves two intertwined plotlines by describing the deaths of Steerforth and Ham. The action of Chapter LV appears particularly vivid because it takes place at sea, whereas much of the rest of the novel consists of conversations that take place at characters' homes. We witness the action of Chapter LV directly and experience its emotional impact through David, which directs us toward the upcoming emotional resolution of David Copperfield. The tempest chapter brings together the intertwined subplots of the novel, resolving all of them in one fell swoop and enabling us to focus our attention on David for the rest of the novel. Although the storm is not the literary climax of the novel, it is emotionally climactic and draws us toward the close of the novel with a sense of relief and resolution. When the storm ends, the tone of the narrative changes from high drama to peaceful reflection as David discusses his maturity. David's narration no longer focuses on Peggotty's relations, or Steerforth's relationship, or even David's relationship. Instead, David himself becomes the subject of the story, and we learn important information about his character, which has developed from naive innocence to reflective adulthood. For this reason, some critics claim the tempest is the central moment of the book. However, although the tempest chapter provides an important release, that release resolves only incidental storylines. It also takes place well after the climax of the novel, which occurs in Chapter XXVIII, when Steerforth returns from Yarmouth and seals his relationship with Little Em'ly. Additionally, because David is the only character consistently present throughout the entire novel, the ultimate stages of his development are crucial to the novel--without them, the story would be incomplete. Dora's death signals an important transition for David, as his infatuation with Dora gives way to the calm, deep love he feels for Agnes. Agnes's physical and emotional proximity to Dora at the time of Dora's death foreshadow the important role Agnes will play in David's life after Dora's death. In the same way, David's distance from Dora at the time of her death is symbolic of his distance from her in life. Although David mourns Dora's illness and passing, we see his maturity in his calm reflection that perhaps it would have been better if he and Dora had never married. In his youth, danger and misfortune cause David to despair and romanticize his situation. His ability to think about Dora's death reflectively demonstrates that his character has developed significantly since the early chapters of the novel. The manner of Steerforth's death mirrors his capricious and self- centered nature. Hanging from the mast of his sinking ship, Steerforth seems as brazen and cocky as ever, boldly waving his red cap at those on the beach. His death, like his life, brings about the destruction of his companions--in this case, Ham. But Steerforth ultimately suffers in death the humiliation that should have been his in life, as his body washes up on the shore and is delivered, without ceremony, to his mother. David mourns the good in his friend until the end, but none of the other characters seem to notice Steerforth's death at all, with the exception of his family--a signal that Steerforth, despite all his bluster, has been a frivolous and insubstantial character. By allowing Steerforth to die in the midst of a terrible storm, far away from his friends and family, in a moment of brazen vanity, Dickens shapes Steerforth's death to reflect perfectly what he deserves based on the way he lives his life"}