{"name": "Chapter XXXVIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210124215354/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/copperfield/section10/", "summary": "A Dissolution of Partnership. Mr. Spenlow calls David away from the office one morning and announces that he has uncovered David's affair with Dora. Mr. Spenlow forbids David to continue seeing his daughter and threatens to disinherit her and send her abroad if David does not comply. David answers that he loves Dora and that Dora loves him. He says that he cannot possibly abandon her. That night, Mr. Spenlow dies in a carriage accident. Dora refuses to see David. Every time Miss Mills broaches the subject, Dora repeats over and over that it would be wrong for her to think of anything but her father. David is heartbroken but holds out hope that Dora will change her mind.", "analysis": "David's romanticization of his sudden poverty demonstrates that he still has much growing up to do before he becomes an adult. David views his newfound poverty as a grandly tragic situation from which he will inevitably rise. His romanticized view is particularly apparent when he discusses his adoration for Dora. He resolves to work every moment to obtain for her the life she wants. Although his diligence and dedication are admirable, his view of his poverty demonstrates that he still has not learned how difficult it is to combat poverty in his society. While David's intentions are good, his response shows that he still is boyishly immature. Because his romanticism prevents him from facing the reality around him, he is incapable of truly growing up as long as it persists. David's description of the murky relationship among Doctor Strong, Annie Strong, and Jack Maldon exmplifies how the older David sees views the world differently from the younger David. When David, as a boy, meets these three individuals for the first time, he has no suspicions that there may be an affair between Annie and Jack Maldon. But as the younger David carefully chronicles the interactions between the younger pair and the reactions of the other characters, the novel implies that Annie is in love with Jack Maldon. The adult David, as a narrator, never actually articulates his suspicions about the affair, but the tone in which he relates the incidents surrounding Jack Maldon's departure implies that he is suspicious. The younger David's blindness accentuates rather than lessens the suspicion. He witnesses events--Jack Maldon leaving the house with a red ribbon, for example--that he does not understand but that alert us to Jack Maldon and Annie Strong's affair. Although these insinuations about an affair ultimately become meaningless by the novel's end, the tension between the young David's ignorance and the older David's knowledge creates dramatic irony and adds suspense along the way. In David's reaction to Mr. Spenlow's discovery of his affair with Dora, we see that David is still too immature to understand reliability and constancy of heart. Though David believes that he is representing Dora's love well by standing up to her father, he is only being hard-headed when he should be giving way to the advice of the older and wiser Mr. Spenlow. Because constancy--the ability to remain faithful to the best interests of one's true love--is a chief characteristic of the morally good characters in David Copperfield, the distinction Dickens draws here between constancy and obstinacy is significant. Each of the good characters in the novel, especially Agnes, Doctor Strong, Ham, and Mr. Peggotty, are characterized by an unwavering faithfulness--a trait that David attempts to emulate. At this point, however, David is still too young to understand that immovability and unwavering faithfulness are not the same. In this light, the encounter with Mr. Spenlow, with all of David's brash romantic delusions, emphasizes how far David has yet to go in the process of becoming a man"}