{"name": "Act II, scene xi", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115184120/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/cyrano/section3/", "summary": "The cadets return to the room, stunned to see that not only is Christian still alive, but that he is embracing Cyrano. Lise's musketeer decides to follow Christian's lead and insults Cyrano's nose. Cyrano knocks him over a bench. The cadets, pleased to have their old Cyrano back, rejoice.", "analysis": "Act II, scenes vii-xi The structure of Act II is important for several reasons. It introduces the plot's main event: Cyrano's plan to woo Roxane for Christian by writing the letters himself. It shows Cyrano at the peak of his sensational popularity following his triumph at the theater and in the duel against a hundred men. It also shows how his pride and virtue compel him to shun his popularity. Rostand expresses in words the code of behavior to which Cyrano swears. Cyrano's refusal of Richelieu's patronage is significant. Rather than pander to money and power by taking a great offer to become financially and politically backed by the most powerful man in France, Cyrano prefers to live by the ideals and values that he holds dear. Moreover, Cyrano's argument with Le Bret over Cyrano's rash behavior shows his allegiance to integrity, impetuousness, bravery, wit, the pursuit of glory, and the idealization of love and women--all in the face of great enmity. These connote the most important, recurring themes of the play. Another important theme of Cyrano de Bergerac is the traditional contrast between inner worth and outward appearance, embodied mainly in the opposing characters of Cyrano and Christian. Christian and Cyrano are opposites in several ways. One is ugly, the other handsome. One is smart and artistic, the other simple. One is confident, the other noticeably shy but effectively charming. Cyrano, despite his awkward physical appearance, is the \"most delightful man under the sun,\" a consistently brilliant and soulful man. Christian is beautiful to look at, but he lacks wit, poetry, and fire. By working together to woo Roxane, they form a more powerful single character, a \"romantic hero. This romantic hero has the best of both worlds: Cyrano's inner beauty and Christian's outer beauty. Though together they form a romantic hero, Cyrano and Christian also risk becoming perceived as part fraud and part coward"}