{"name": "act iii, scene xi", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115184120/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/cyrano/section5/", "summary": "The couple comes out of the house. De Guiche coldly congratulates them but orders Roxane to bid her husband farewell: the guards will go to the war after all, and they will depart immediately. De Guiche triumphantly tells Cyrano that the wedding night will have to wait. Under his breath, Cyrano remarks that the news fails to upset him. Roxane, afraid for Christian, urges Cyrano to promise to keep him safe, to keep him out of dangerous situations, to keep him dry and warm, and to keep him faithful. Cyrano says that he will do what he can but that he cannot promise anything. Roxane begs Cyrano to promise to make Christian write to her every day. Brightening, Cyrano announces confidently that he can promise that.", "analysis": "Act III, scenes v-xiv The balcony scene is the most famous scene in Cyrano de Bergerac. It is at once brilliantly funny and genuinely touching. The humor of the play becomes more sophisticated in Act III. In the earlier parts of the play, most of the humor stems from Cyrano's outrageous behavior. Here, the humor begins to take the form of elaborate dramatic irony. For example, Roxane believes Cyrano to be Christian, and de Guiche doesn't recognize Cyrano when he claims to have fallen from space. The comic timing in this act is flawless. Cyrano's aside about how he secretly does not mind that the wedding night will be delayed comes at just the right moment. Another important source of humor in Act III is parody: the balcony scene derives a great deal of its humor by ridiculing the famous balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet. De Guiche, the play's main antagonist, begins to influence the plot directly in this act. In Act I, de Guiche was in love with Roxane. Now, he takes steps to fulfill his love. At first, Roxane and Cyrano thwart those attempts. Roxane bribes the Capuchin, and Cyrano distracts de Guiche with his spaceman ploy. But de Guiche's decision to send the cadets to war throws the whole plot into upheaval. De Guiche himself represents another reference to The Three Musketeers: in that play, Cardinal Richelieu is the principal villain, and here, the cardinal's nephew turns into the primary antagonist"}