{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 16", "summary": "Chapter 16: Chapter 16 marks a stark change in the monster's attitude toward men. No longer does he try to mold himself into human society; instead, he decides to take out his anger on mankind. He explains, \"There was non among the myriads of men that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness towards my enemies. No: from that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and, more than all, against him who had formed me and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. When he returns to the cottage, having resolved to try his luck once more with the human species, he discovers that they have left for good. Overhearing Felix speaking to some local men, he learns the trauma of the previous day has proven too much for the whole De Lacey family. Thus, the beast feels betrayed by the family he has grown to love, and he continues to develop a deep-ceded hatred for mankind. Traveling alone, the monster sees a girl fall into a river. Saving her from drowning, he drags her up, out of the current, setting her on dry ground. When the man who had been with her sees the child in his arms, he quickly snatches her away, fleeing the scene. When the monster follows the pair, the man fires a gun at the beast, striking him in the shoulder. Once again the beast curses mankind, promising to avenge the cruelty he has suffered. Several weeks later, now near Geneva, the monster encounters a small boy walking through the forest. Hoping to show the young boy that's he's not so hideous after all, the beast picks up the child, who begins to scream. When the boy  tells the monster that his dad is M. Frankenstein, the beast immediately identifies him with his enemy and creator, and strangles the child. Later that night, he encounters a young woman  sleeping on a pile of straw. In order to place the blame of the murder onto her, he puts the portrait that William had been carrying into her pocket. At the end of his speech, the monster relates his desire for Frankenstein to create a special being of his species \"as deformed and horrible\" as himself", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927043357/https://www.novelguide.com/frankenstein/summaries/chap15-16"}