{"name": "Part 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210614224521/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/the-power-and-the-glory/summary/part-4", "summary": "Mrs. Fellows lies in bed in a hotel room, her husband with her. They avoid speaking about their daughter, who seems to have died. They have tickets to leave. They hear the excitement in town. News of the priest's capture has spread. Captain Fellows wants to stay, or says he does, but his wife implores him to leave with her. Their conversation, full of fear and regret, suggests that their daughter might have lived had the captain acted in some way other than he did. They speak instead of the priest, wondering if it's the man they sheltered. The wife expects the priest deserves whatever he gets. The conversation turns back to Coral, however, as Captain Fellows remarks on the priest's influence on their daughter. Alone together, they feel deserted. The scene switches to the chief of police, who's being treated by Mr. Tench, the foreign dentist, in the chief's room. The dentist's hands are jumpy from indigestion, or so he says. Mr. Tench also can't see very well. Just the two features you want into your dentist! The chief can't talk much, seeing as his mouth is being worked on, but the dentist keeps a monologue going with news about his estranged wife sending him a letter. She wants a formal divorce, but she forgives him. Sounds from outside the room startle the dentist. He wonders if a revolution is about to happen. Nothing of the sort, the chief tells him, just a man to be shot for treason. He recognizes the priest and feels that he should do something. There's nothing to do. The priest makes jerky movements with his arms, tries unsuccessfully to say something, and falls dead with the bullets. The chief moans in pain. Mr. Tench feels deserted and resolves to leave. In the final scene of the novel, the pious mother finishes reading the story of the martyr Juan to her children. It's like a Hollywoodized, Disneyfied version of the whisky priest's death scene. Juan had spent the night in fearless prayer, waiting to meet his God. The Chief of Police, an evil man who'd murdered so many, is moved. Juan is led peacefully to the wall where he prays for his murderers, raising his crucifix. The boy, listening to this story, asks if the soldiers had loaded their guns and why they didn't stop Juan from this final act of public prayer. His mother answers that God decided otherwise. She resumes the story. Juan smiles at the soldiers, knowing he'll soon enter heaven. The girls are bored by this part of the story, but the boy is actually intrigued. He asks if the priest they sheltered was also a hero, and being told yes, feels that he's been deceived by the lieutenant. Just then he sees the police officer passing by. He spits at him. Late at night there's a knock at the door. With his father out, the boy goes to see who it is. A stranger is there, asking for the boy's mother. He is a priest. The boy kisses his hand.", "analysis": ""}