{"name": "Part 2: Chapter 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210614224521/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/the-power-and-the-glory/summary/part-2-chapter-4", "summary": "Knowing that, if he's to escape, he has to cross the mountains before the rains come, but also immediately in need of food, the priest returns to the home of Captain Fellow, hopeful that young Coral will be able to help him. The home is deserted. No food, only medicine bottles--for the mother, the priest assumes. He and a starving dog fight over a bone. In his victory, the priest at first supposes that he'll consume most of the remaining meat and give the remainder to the dog, but his hunger overpowers his compassion. He leaves the dog a meatless bone. The priest examines a book a poetry that Coral apparently left behind after their flight. The closing line of a poem reminds him of his own daughter. A storm breaks and the priest seeks shelter in a hut. It too is deserted, and the priest feels as though all life is receding before him, as if he is now meant to be alone. He continues on his way. The sound of water dripping almost brings him peace, but he's too alone and too afraid for tranquility. Someone is near him. In the flash of lightning, he sees the face of an Indian woman peering into the hut. She flees to the forest, but again approaches the hut cautiously. Believing that something of value resides in the hut, the priest searches it in the dark. His hand rests upon a face. It's a young boy, bleeding heavily and very near death. He's been shot three times. The boy has no hope of recovery, but the priest does what he can for him: water, pressure on the wounds, and prayer. To no avail. The priest asks the woman who shot the boy, but the language barrier prevents their understanding one another. The priest gathers that the American criminal was somehow involved. The woman seems to want the child buried at a church. Of course, no churches are near. With only sugar cube between them, the priest and the woman , make for the mountains. At dusk on the second day they come to a plateau with a grove of tall crosses, the first Christian symbols he has seen in more than five years. The woman lays the child at the foot of the cross and makes a peculiar sign of religious devotion. More rain is on the way, so the priest leaves the grieving woman and goes to look for shelter. Feeling as though he's neglected his responsibility to her, he returns, only to find that she has gone, leaving the child alone with a small lump of sugar. Figuring the dead boy won't need the sugar, the priest takes it. Feverish he climbs and finds himself in a forest with monkeys and snakes. Nature, he guesses, will be the death of him. Before fever, dehydration, or starvation can bring an end to his wandering, a man with a gun appears. The priest gives the stranger is real name, something he hasn't done for ten years. He wants no trouble or to bring trouble to anyone. He'll just keep going. The stranger follows him until the priest stops at the sight of a building that looks like a barracks, minus any soldiers. The stranger tells him it's not a barracks, but their church. The priest lies down against the white wall and falls asleep. He's escaped.", "analysis": ""}