{"name": "part 1, Chapter 15", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201204114018/https://www.novelguide.com/little-women/summaries/chap13-15", "summary": "November comes and the March sisters, Marmee, and Laurie are in the parlor when a telegram arrives. Marmee opens to find a message saying Father was extremely ill, and her presence was requested immediately. Everyone cries, and then jumps to action. Marmee decides to take the train the next morning, and sends Laurie to send a telegram saying so, and to drop a note to Aunt March. Everyone scattered with different tasks to do to prepare, and Beth went to tell Mr. Laurence. He came back offering anything he could to help them, even to escort Marmee to Washington where her husband was located. She told him that it was not necessary. While Meg was preparing Marmee's things downstairs, she ran into Mr. Brooke who informed her that he had business for Mr. Laurence to do in Washington D. C. and that he would escort Marmee. This plan seemed acceptable to all. Evening came and everyone minus Jo was in the parlor again, waiting for the morning departure. Marmee was worried because she did not know where Jo was so she sent Laurie out to look for her. As he was leaving she walked in and handed Marmee twenty-five dollars saying it was her contribution to the family. Marmee was astounded and asked how she had gotten the money. Jo then took off her bonnet to show that her long glorious hair, her one beauty, was cut short to her head. She explained that she had sold her hair to the barber to make a wig. At first, he was reluctant, but his wife convinced him because it was such a good cause. The family was shocked, but Jo said that she preferred it short anyway, and the extra money would come in handy. They went to bed, but Jo and Meg could not sleep. Not thinking anyone was awake, Jo began to cry and Meg asked her if she was all right. Jo told her how much she just needed to cry over losing her hair but she did not want anyone to know about it. Meg told her to think of happy thoughts, and Jo asked her what were her happy thoughts. Meg answered that they were of handsome faces and brown eyes, just like Mr. Brooke. The girls then fell asleep and Marmee came in later to kiss them and pray for them", "analysis": ""}