{"name": "part 2, Chapter 42", "summary": "Chapter 42 All Alone<PARAGRAPH>Despite her preparation, Jo is devastated at losing Beth, and feels despair at spending life attending only to household worries. She is comforted by her Mother, who shares her sorrow, and by her Father, whose ministry and counsel she seeks out. Through her work she tries to adopt Beth's spirit of cheerful housekeeping, taking care to make home cozy and comfortable. Jo sees how improved Meg is through her marriage, particularly her children, and wonders if it might in fact be enjoyable for her. PARAGRAPH>In the meantime, Mother suggests writing as a way for Jo to find more joy. Jo is wary, but finds herself writing a simple story that is greatly received by family, then friends, and even newspapers. Jo wonders at her success, but Father explains that rather than writing for money, Jo is simply writing the truth, with a direct simplicity that speaks to people's hearts. PARAGRAPH>When Laurie and Amy write of their engagement, Jo is genuinely happy for them, but begins to wish to find the love and joy they have. She wanders to the garret, where she comes across reminders of her winter in New York and Mr. Bhaer's friendship, and wishes to see him again", "analysis": "Despite her promise to Beth, it is difficult for Jo to do her duty to her parents.  Jo feels that her sacrifice goes unrewarded, while Amy enjoys her trip abroad.  Jo takes comfort in work and in her parents, and Hannah foreshadows that Jo, too, will be rewarded.  Indeed Jo is, as marked by the final stage of her growth in womanhood and through Mr. Bhaer's love for her.<PARAGRAPH>This section celebrates the generosity of the Laurences, recalling Marmee saying that money could be used nobly, and Jo telling Laurie in college that if he only spent money helping friends, no one would think the less of him.  Now he and his father are exceptionally generous and derive great joy from sharing their wealth.  Laurie and Amy's dedication to help \"poor gentlefolk\" reflect on the situation of the March family - and the Alcott family, who often benefited from the generosity of others.<PARAGRAPH>Part II, in addition to Part I, closes as the beginning of Part I opens, with the March sisters discussing their wishes.  Now they are reflecting back on their lives, rather than looking forward.  The family is still their core orientation, but the family has grown even more to include children.  Even Aunt March has found a place of welcome in the family, through remembrance of her generosity, albeit used differently than she imagined. The granddaughters Daisy and Beth are both reminiscent of the sister Beth, as is Jo's more tempered spirit.<PARAGRAPH>At the close of the book, all feel happy regardless of wealth. Jo is determined to contribute to her household and works in partnership with her husband.  She has grown into a \"little woman,\" but enjoys her boys immensely as a mother.  The harvest metaphor the girls use to discuss their families in the final paragraphs of the book signifies the hard work and patient cultivation that has one into creating the family's blessings.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210609010508/https://www.gradesaver.com/little-women/study-guide/summary-chapter-42-through-chapter-47"}