{"name": "part 2, Chapter 38", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 38 On the Shelf<PARAGRAPH>With Daisy and Demi, Meg and John's twins, come new challenges for the couple. Meg is completely absorbed in her babies for the first year of their lives, to the detriment of her happiness, John's, and their relationship. Meg ceases to give John her attention and time, and John responds by spending more time out of the house with friends. Once Daisy and Demi start to calm down and need less of her constant care, Meg finds herself alone at home in the evenings and misses John's company. She does not want to ask him to stay home, and so they continue, missing one another, until Marmee learns of the situation. Marmee shows Meg that in her duty to her children, she has forgotten her duty to her husband. She encourages Meg to include John in raising the children, especially Demi, drawing on her own experience with Mr. March. She encourages Meg to do more housework while Hannah attends to the babies and to take interest in the world's affairs, since they affect her as well as any man. Meg agrees, and surprises John with a nice supper and an attentive wife. Demi tries to join the supper, and learns that John is much stricter on discipline than Meg. This is initially hard for Meg, but she learns to trust that John will be kind as well as firm. They each try to take interest in the other's concerns of politics and sewing, and agree to go out more and make home more enjoyable for all, to great success", "analysis": "The theme of work is discussed in this section in Amy's lecture of Laurie.  She despises him because he is lazy and wasteful with money. Laurie always struggled with indolence; indeed, laziness, and wanting to pursue music rather than work for his grandfather, and loving Jo are Laurie's three main burdens. At Amy's urging, Laurie overcomes all three challenges in this section. Amy also overcomes her selfishness in denying Fred Vaughn.<PARAGRAPH>In contrast to Laurie is industrious Beth.  Beth's death draws out several key themes of the book.  Her own selflessness is celebrated and revered.  Her self-improvement continues to the end, striving to accept death cheerfully and faithfully. Beth asks Jo to care dutifully for Mother and Father, and Jo agrees, sacrificing her own dreams and ambitions.  She makes this sacrifice in part after learning the beauty of selflessness from Beth herself.<PARAGRAPH>Beth's death is also the impetus to bring Laurie and Amy together.  Their joining is romantic, but is also an act of making the family whole. Throughout the book, several characters refer to wanting Laurie to be officially part of their family.<PARAGRAPH>The motif of flowers continues to prevalent in this section.  At the Christmas Ball in Nice, Amy's use of flowers as her ornamentation makes Laurie admire her for covering \"poverty with flowers.\" At Valrosa, Laurie pricks himself on a thorny rose and thinks of Jo, and Amy gives him smaller, cream-colored ones, butting them in his buttonhole as she has seen lovers do. Laurie at first thinks the cream roses symbolize death, which foreshadows the loss of Beth, but later associates them with Amy.  In this exchange, Alcott foreshadows his proposal, choosing Amy instead of Jo. Amy continues to send Laurie pressed roses in her letters.<PARAGRAPH>In Meg and John's struggles with domesticity, the themes of duty and women's rights are relevant.  Meg feels John is not fulfilling his duty to her, when in fact she is the culprit.  Marmee urges her to balance her duty to children and to husband.  This domestic focus appears to subjugate women to the household, even if they are the rulers there, but Marmee also encourages Meg to stay interested in the world beyond the house. While Meg is not particularly able to follow politics, Marmee knows that they do affect her, as evidenced by the Civil War that took Father away.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210609010508/https://www.gradesaver.com/little-women/study-guide/summary-chapter-37-through-chapter-41"}