THE APOLOGY OF SOCRATES [1]

Among the reminiscences of Socrates, none, as it seems to me, is more
deserving of record than the counsel he took with himself [2] (after
        being cited to appear before the court), not only with regard to his
defence, but also as to the ending of his life. Others have written on
this theme, and all without exception have touched upon [3] the lofty
style of the philosopher, [4] which may be taken as a proof that the
language used by Socrates was really of that type. But none of these
writers has brought out clearly the fact that Socrates had come to
regard death as for himself preferable to life; and consequently there
is just a suspicion of foolhardiness in the arrogancy of his
address. [5] We have, however, from the lips of one of his intimate
acquaintances, Hermogenes, [6] the son of Hipponicus, an account of him
which shows the high demeanour in question to have been altogether in
keeping with the master's rational purpose. [7] Hermogenes says that,
        seeing Socrates discoursing on every topic rather than that of his
        impending trial, he roundly put it to him whether he ought not to be
        debating the line of his defence, to which Socrates in the first
        instance answered: "What! do I not seem to you to have spent my whole
        life in meditating my defence?" And when Hermogenes asked him, "How?"
        he added: "By a lifelong persistence in doing nothing wrong, and that
        I take to be the finest practice for his defence which a man could
        devise." Presently reverting to the topic, Hermogenes demanded: "Do
        you not see, Socrates, how often Athenian juries [8] are constrained by
        arguments to put quite innocent people to death, and not less often to
        acquit the guilty, either through some touch of pity excited by the
        pleadings, or that the defendant had skill to turn some charming
        phrase?" Thus appealed to, Socrates replied: "Nay, solemnly I tell
        you, twice already I have essayed to consider my defence, and twice
        the divinity [9] hinders me"; and to the remark of Hermogenes, "That is
        strange!" he answered again: "Strange, do you call it, that to God it
        should seem better for me to die at once? Do you not know that up to
        this moment I will not concede to any man to have lived a better life
        than I have; since what can exceed the pleasure, which has been mine,
        of knowing [10] that my whole life has been spent holily and justly?
        And indeed this verdict of self-approval I found re-echoed in the
        opinion which my friends and intimates have formed concerning me. [11]
        And now if my age is still to be prolonged, [12] I know that I cannot
        escape paying [13] the penalty of old age, in increasing dimness of
        sight and dulness of hearing. I shall find myself slower to learn new
        lessons, and apter to forget the lessons I have learnt. And if to
        these be added the consciousness of failing powers, the sting of
        self-reproach, what prospect have I of any further joy in living? It
        may be, you know," he added, "that God out of his great kindness is
        intervening in my behalf [14] to suffer me to close my life in the
        ripeness of age, and by the gentlest of deaths. For if at this time
        sentence of death be passed upon me, it is plain I shall be allowed to
        meet an end which, in the opinion of those who have studied the
        matter, is not only the easiest in itself, but one which will cause
        the least trouble to one's friends, [15] while engendering the deepest
        longing for the departed. For of necessity he will only be thought of
        with regret and longing who leaves nothing behind unseemly or
        discomfortable to haunt the imagination of those beside him, but,
        sound of body, and his soul still capable of friendly repose, fades
        tranquilly away."

        "No doubt," he added, "the gods were right in opposing me at that time
        (touching the inquiry, what I was to say in my defence), [16] when you
        all thought the great thing was to discover some means of
        acquittal; [17] since, had I effected that, it is clear I should have
        prepared for myself, not that surcease from life which is in store for
        me anon, but to end my days wasted by disease, or by old age, on which
        a confluent stream of evil things most alien to joyousness
        converges." [18]

        "No," he added, "God knows I shall display no ardent zeal to bring
        that about. [19] On the contrary, if by proclaiming all the blessings
        which I owe to god and men; if, by blazoning forth the opinion which I
        entertain with regard to myself, I end by wearying the court, even so
        will I choose death rather than supplicate in servile sort for leave
        to live a little longer merely to gain a life impoverished in place of
        death."

        It was in this determination, Hermogenes states, that, when the
        prosecution accused him of not recognising the gods recognised by the
        state, but introducing novel divinities and corrupting the young,
        Socrates stepped forward and said: "In the first place, sirs, I am at
        a loss to imagine on what ground [20] Meletus asserts that I do not
        recognise the gods which are recognised by the state, since, as far as
        sacrificing goes, the rest of the world who have chanced to be present
        have been in the habit of seeing me so engaged at common festivals,
        and on the public altars; and so might Meletus himself, if he had
        wished. And as to novel divinities, how, pray, am I supposed to
        introduce them by stating that I have a voice [21] from God which
        clearly signifies to me what I ought do do? Why, what else do those
        who make use of the cries of birds or utterances of men draw their
        conclusions from if not from voices? Who will deny that the thunder
        has a voice and is a very mighty omen; [22] and the priestess on her
        tripod at Pytho, [23] does not she also proclaim by voice the messages
        from the god? The god, at any rate, has foreknowledge, and premonishes
        those whom he will of what is about to be. That is a thing which all
        the world believes and asserts even as I do. Only, when they describe
        these premonitions under the name of birds and utterances, tokens [24]
        and soothsayers, I speak of a divinity, and in using that designation
        I claim to speak at once more exactly and more reverentially than they
        do who ascribe the power of the gods to birds. And that I am not lying
        against the Godhead I have this as a proof: although I have reported
        to numbers of friends the counsels of heaven, I have never at any time
        been shown to be a deceiver or deceived."

        As they listened to these words the judges murmured their dissent,
        some as disbelieving what was said, and others out of simple envy that
        Socrates should actually receive from heaven more than they
        themselves; whereupon Socrates returned to the charge. "Come," he
        said, "lend me your ears while I tell you something more, so that
        those of you who choose may go to a still greater length in refusing
        to believe that I am thus highly honoured by the divine powers.
        Chaerephon [25] once, in the presence of many witnesses, put a question
        at Delhi concerning me, and Apollo answered that there was no human
        being more liberal, or more upright, or more temperate than myself."
        And when once more on hearing these words the judges gave vent, as was
        only natural, to a fiercer murmur of dissent, Socrates once again
        spoke: "Yet, sirs, they were still greater words which the god spake
        in oracle concerning Lycurgus, [26] the great lawgiver of Lacedaemon,
        than those concerning me. It is said that as he entered the temple the
        god addressed him with the words: 'I am considering whether to call
        thee god or man.' Me he likened not indeed to a god, but in
        excellence [27] preferred me far beyond other men."

        "Still I would not have you accept this even on the faith of the god
        too rashly; rather I would have you investigate, point by point, what
        the god has said. I ask you, is there any one [28] else, you know of,
        less enslaved than myself to the appetites [29] of the body? Can you
        name another man of more independent spirit than myself, seeing that I
        accept from no one either gifts or pay? Whom have you any right to
        believe to be more just [30] than one so suited with what he has, that
        the things of others excite no craving in him? [31] Whom would one
        reasonably deem wise, rather than such a one as myself, who, from the
        moment I began to understand things spoken, [32] have never omitted to
        inquire into and learn every good thing in my power? And that I
        laboured not in vain, what more conclusive evidence than the fact that
        so many of my fellow-citizens who make virtue their pursuit, and many
        strangers also, choose my society in preference to that of others? [33]
        And how are we to explain the fact that though all know well enough
        that I am wholly unable to repay them in money, so many are eager to
        present me with some gift? [34] And what do you make of this--while no
        one dreams of dunning me for benefits conferred, hosts of people
        acknowledge debts of gratitude to myself? And what of this, that
        during the siege, [35] while others were pitying themselves [36] I lived
        in no greater straits than when the city was at the height of her
        prosperity? and of this, that while others provide themselves with
        delicacies [37] of the market at great cost, mine are the dainties of
        the soul more sweet than theirs, [38] procured without expense? If in
        all I have said about myself no one can convict me of lying, is it not
        obvious that the praise I get from gods and men is justly earned? And
        yet in spite of all, Meletus, you will have it that by such habits I
        corrupt the young. We know, I fancy, what such corrupting influences
        are; and perhaps you will tell us if you know of any one who, under my
        influence, has been changed from a religious into an irreligious man;
        who, from being sober-minded, has become prodigal; from being a
        moderate drinker has become a wine-bibber and a drunkard; from being a
        lover of healthy honest toil has become effeminate, or under the
        thrall of some other wicked pleasure."

        "Nay, bless my soul," exclaimed Meletus, "I know those whom you
        persuaded to obey yourself rather than the fathers who begat
        them." [39]

        "I admit it," Socrates replied, "in the case of education, for they
        know that I have made the matter a study; and with regard to health a
        man prefers to obey his doctor rather than his parents; in the public
        assembly the citizens of Athens, I presume, obey those whose arguments
        exhibit the soundest wisdom rather than their own relations. And is it
        not the case that, in your choice of generals, you set your fathers
        and brothers, and, bless me! your own selves aside, by comparison with
        those whom you believe to be the wisest authorities on military
        matters?"

        "No doubt, Socrates," replied Meletus, "because it is expedient and
        customary so to do."

        "Well then," rejoined Socrates, "does it not strike even you, Meletus,
        as wonderful when in all ordinary concerns the best people should
        obtain, I do not say only an equal share, but an exclusive preference;
        but in my case, simply because I am selected by certain people as an
        adept in respect of the greatest treasure men possess--education, I am
        on that account to be prosecuted by you, sir, on the capital charge?"

        Much more than this, it stands to reason, was urged, whether by
        himself or by the friends who advocated his cause. [40] But my object
        has not been to mention everything that arose out of the suit. It
        suffices me to have shown on the one hand that Socrates, beyond
        everything, desired not to display impiety to heaven, [41] and
        injustice to men; and on the other, that escape from death was not a
        thing, in his opinion, to be clamoured for importunately--on the
        contrary, he believed that the time was already come for him to die.
        That such was the conclusion to which he had come was made still more
        evident later when the case had been decided against him. In the first
        place, when called upon to suggest a counter-penalty, [42] he would
        neither do so himself nor suffer his friends to do so for him, but
        went so far as to say that to propose a counter-penalty was like a
        confession of guilt. And afterwards, when his companions wished to
        steal him out of prison, [43] he would not follow their lead, but would
        seem to have treated the idea as a jest, by asking "whether they
        happened to know of some place outside Attica where death was
        forbidden to set foot?"

        When the trial drew to an end, we are told, the master said: [44]
        "Sirs, those who instructed the witnesses that they ought to perjure
        themselves and bear false witness against me, alike with those who
        listened to their instruction, must be conscious to themselves of a
        deep impiety and injustice. [45] But for myself, what reason have I at
        the present time to hold my head less high than I did before sentence
        was passed against me, if I have not been convicted of having done any
        of those things whereof my accusers accused me? It has not been proved
        against me that I have sacrificed to novel divinities in place of Zeus
        and Hera and the gods who form their company. I have not taken oath by
        any other gods, nor named their name.

        "And then the young--how could I corrupt them by habituating them to
        manliness and frugality? since not even my accusers themselves allege
        against me that I have committed any of those deeds [46] of which death
        is the penalty, such as robbery of temples, [47] breaking into houses,
        selling freemen into slavery, or betrayal of the state; so that I must
        still ask myself in wonderment how it has been proved to you that I
        have done a deed worthy of death. Nor yet again because I die
        innocently is that a reason why I should lower my crest, for that is a
        blot not upon me but upon those who condemned me.

        "For me, I find a certain consolation in the case of Palamedes, [48]
        whose end was not unlike my own; who still even to-day furnishes a far
        nobler theme of song than Odysseus who unjustly slew him; and I know
        that testimony will be borne to me also by time future and time past
        that I never wronged another at any time or ever made a worse man of
        him, [49] but ever tried to benefit those who practised discussion with
        me, teaching them gratuitously every good thing in my power."

        Having so said he turned and went in a manner quite in conformity [50]
        with the words which he had spoken--so bright an air was discernible
        alike in the glance of his eye, his gesture, and his step.

        And when he perceived those who followed by his side in tears, "What
        is this?" he asked. "Why do you weep now? [51] Do you not know that for
        many a long day, ever since I was born, sentence of death was passed
        upon me by nature? If so be I perish prematurely while the tide of
        life's blessings flows free and fast, certainly I and my well-wishers
        should feel pained; but if it be that I am bringing my life to a close
        on the eve of troubles, for my part I think you ought all of you to
        take heart of grace and rejoice in my good fortune."

        Now there was a certain Apollodorus, [52] who was an enthusiastic lover
        of the master, but for the rest a simple-minded man. He exclaimed very
        innocently, "But the hardest thing of all to bear, Socrates, is to see
        you put to death unjustly." [53]

        Whereupon Socrates, it is said, gently stroked the young man's head:
        "Would you have been better pleased, my dear one, to see me put to
        death for some just reason rather than unjustly?" and as he spoke he
        smiled tenderly. [54]

        It is also said that, seeing Anytus [55] pass by, Socrates remarked:
        "How proudly the great man steps; he thinks, no doubt, he has
        performed some great and noble deed in putting me to death, and all
        because, seeing him deemed worthy of the highest honours of the state,
        I told him it ill became him to bring up his so in a tan-yard. [56]
        What a scamp the fellow is! he appears not to know that of us two
        whichever has achieved what is best and noblest for all future time is
        the real victor in this suit. Well! well!" he added, "Homer [57] has
        ascribed to some at the point of death a power of forecasting things
        to be, and I too am minded to utter a prophecy. Once, for a brief
        space, I associated with the son of Anytus, and he seemed to me not
        lacking in strength of soul; and what I say is, he will not adhere
        long to the slavish employment which his father has prepared for him,
        but, in the absence of any earnest friend and guardian, he is like to
        be led into some base passion and go to great lengths in depravity."

        The prophecy proved true. The young man fell a victim to the pleasures
        of wine; night and day he never ceased drinking, and at last became a
        mere good-for-nothing, worthless alike to his city, his friends, and
        himself. As to Anytus, even though the grave has closed upon him, his
        evil reputation still survives him, due alike to his son's base
        bringing-up and his own want of human feeling.

        Socrates did, it is true, by his self-laudation draw down upon him the
        jealousy of the court and caused his judges all the more to record
        their votes against him. Yet even so I look upon the lot of destiny
        which he obtained as providential, [58] chancing as he did upon the
        easiest amidst the many shapes of death, [59] and escaping as he did
        the one grievous portion of existence. And what a glorious chance,
        moreover, he had to display the full strength of his soul, for when
        once he had decided that death was better for him than life, just as
        in the old days he had never harshly opposed himself to the good
        things of life morosely, [60] so even in face of death he showed no
        touch of weakness, but with gaiety welcomed death's embrace, and
        discharged life's debt.

        For myself indeed, as I lay to mind the wisdom of the man and his
        nobility, I can neither forget him nor, remembering him, forbear to
        praise him. But if any of those who make virtue their pursuit have
        ever met a more helpful friend than Socrates, I tender such an one my
        congratulations as a most enviable man.


