{"name": "Book 4, Chapter 6", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219180101/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/return-of-native/summary/book-4-chapter-6", "summary": "The same day, Wildeve decides to just go visit Eustacia. He figures they're related by marriage and he can visit his extended family if he wants. Sure, Wildeve, sure. So Eustacia lets him inside and they chat. Clym is conked out taking an afternoon nap. The ex-lovers discuss Clym and how terrible Eustacia's life is. Wildeve hints that she brought this all on herself since she didn't wait around for him. Eustacia tells him to shut up, and Wildeve agrees that he made a mistake with Thomasin. Wildeve hints that he'll never be happy until he has Eustacia back again, but she opts to ignore the implications of that. Suddenly they hear a knock at the door. It's Mrs. Yeobright. Eustacia peeks out the window at her and then panics. She refuses to answer the door since Damon is there. So the two decide to go out back after they notice that Clym is starting to wake up. Eustacia figures he'll just wake up and answer the door. Wildeve sneaks off and Eustacia hangs out for a bit before going back inside. She's horrified to see that Clym is still asleep and that Mrs. Yeobright is no longer outside. Meanwhile, Mrs. Yeobright is stumbling away, devastated. She saw Eustacia at the window and thinks that Eustacia and Clym deliberately refused to answer the door. Mrs. Yeobright is really depressed and continues walking along aimlessly. She comes across little Johnny and thinks aloud about her son. Johnny is confused and is worried since she seems ill. Johnny finally leaves and Mrs. Yeobright doesn't seem to care. She tells him to tell his mom that \"you have seen a broken-hearted woman cast off by her son\" . Mrs. Yeobright continues to wander around and stops again to watch an ant colony. She lies down on the grass and watches a bird fly in the air. Her thoughts travel back to Clym's house.", "analysis": ""}