{"name": "Book 3, Chapter 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219180101/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/return-of-native/summary/book-3-chapter-3", "summary": "Mrs. Yeobright is upset that Clym is showing an interest in Eustacia. Clym says, whatever, and leaves anyway. The local men try to get some rope around the bucket and drag it back out, but they keep having trouble since the bucket is water-logged and heavy now. Clym offers to take Timothy Fairway's place and to be lowered down some into the well to get the bucket. Eustacia pipes up from the house and says to tie a rope around Clym since he might fall in the well. But it's getting late and the men say they'll have to come back tomorrow. Eustacia is bummed that she doesn't have water. Clym offers to send her some water, but Eustacia says it's cool since she technically has pond water, even though it's gross. The two walk over to the pond and Clym notices the ashes from the November bonfire. Clym gallantly volunteers to try again for the bucket and Eustacia helps him. But Eustacia just ends up with rope burn. Clym looks her over and also checks out her stab wound, courtesy of crazy Susan - what a day for Eustacia. The two talk about Clym's school plans and Eustacia shows some interest. Clym learns that Eustacia isn't happy in Egdon and longs for city life. The two part and are smitten with each other. The next day Clym studies hard and then goes for a walk, where he meets Eustacia. Upon returning home, his mom grills him. Things get steadily more awkward between mother and son. A few days later, Christian swings by with some gossip. He tells Mrs. Yeobright that some people dug up some ancient urns on the heath. Clym was going to bring one home but gave it to Eustacia instead. Mrs. Yeobright is peeved. Spring arrives and, with it, nature descriptions. Clym keeps wandering around and keeping weird hours. The Yeobrights finally have a throw-down argument, which has been building for weeks. They fight over Eustacia. Mrs. Yeobright calls her a hussy, while Clym defends his girlfriend. Finally Clym storms out and stays out very late.", "analysis": ""}