{"name": "Chapter XV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-xv-xviii", "summary": "Since Solomon is skilled at cutting cane, Epps often hires him out during the season. Solomon describes the process of cultivating cane. He begins by explaining that the land is only planted every three years. The joint of cane has an eye and sends out sprouts. The field is hoed three times and general cutting begins in October. A slave takes a knife, shears the flags from the stalk, severs the stalk at the root, and places the stalks on the cart. The stalks are taken to the sugar house and ground up. In January, the slaves prepare the field for another crop. The dry debris is set afire and the field left clean for the hoes. This works until the third year, at which point the seed has exhausted its strength and the field must be plowed and planted again. Solomon often works in the sugar house. The mill is a massive building with a great deal of machinery. Slave children place the cane on an iron roller that moves the cane to be crushed, dropped upon another carrier, and deposited on top of a chimney with a fire below. The juice falls into a conductor below as it burns and is collected in a reservoir. It then goes to filters, and then to coolers. Molasses and sugar are separated at this point, and the molasses is converted to brown sugar. The only respite slaves get from work is Christmas. They get a few days; Epps gives them three, while some other planters give up to six, and old and young alike delight in it. It is a time to feast and frolic. Slaves wear their best attire and go to one planter's meal that is provided for all the slaves in the region. The table is spread with glorious provisions and everyone seats themselves on benches. Many love matches are made, and laughter is frequent. After the food comes the Christmas dance, and, as Solomon was quite famous by then, he always played his fiddle. He believes that this instrument was essential to his surviving slavery. Solomon describes one Christmas where two men try to woo the pretty Lively, and the uproarious dancing and \"patting\" of hands to the beat. In the remaining days after Christmas, slaves get passes to go where they please within a limited distance. Slaves are ebullient to have this \"freedom. Solomon reminds his readers that this lasts for only three days per year: the other three-hundred and sixty-two are full of unrelenting labor and sorrow", "analysis": "Throughout his narrative, Northup takes pains to correct assumptions people have about slaves. He writes, \"they are deceived who flatter themselves that the ignorant and debased slave has no conception of the magnitude of his wrongs. They are deceived who imagine that he arises from his knees, with back lacerated and bleeding, cherishing only a spirit of meekness and forgiveness\"  and \"It is a mistaken opinion that prevails in some quarters, that the slave does not understand the term--does not comprehend the idea of freedom. Even on Bayou Boeuf, where I conceive slavery exists in its most abject and cruel form--where it exhibits features altogether unknown in more northern States--the most ignorant of them generally know full well its meaning. They understand the privileges and exemptions that belong to it--that it would bestow upon them the fruits of their own labors, and that it would secure to them the enjoyment of domestic happiness. They do not fail to observe the difference between their own condition and the meanest white man's...\" . One of the other things that Northup does frequently is depict a culture among the slaves, even those who labor for such controlling and soul-sucking monsters as Epps. He seeks to show how slaves create meaning in their lives, how they maintain their dignity, and how they strive to improve their conditions even infinitesimally. Critic William Nichols identifies Northup's evocation of slave culture as early as the slave pens, where Northup finds \"communities of shared emotion\" and \"the frequent exchange of autobiographies and reflections on injustice.\" It is notable that despite the slaves' isolation from family and friends, these separations \" not seem to have destroyed their willingness to risk ne human relationships.\" Northup befriends Clem, Arthur, and Robert, and he also works with the latter and other slaves to foment mutiny . Once on the plantations, Northup recounts slaves telling stories, giving advice, delighting in a white person getting their comeuppance, helping each other, and rehashing interesting events. Nichols sees these as \"reminiscent of folk tales in their tough humor and masked resentment.\" Northup reveals how slaves also supplemented their meager rations in a variety of ways. He builds himself a fish trap while some try to catch possums and coons. Slaves are allowed to keep money that they make on Sundays and buy small luxuries. Ira Berlin explains that \"plantation hands have been depicted as cogs In a great machine, marching mindlessly up and down the rows of cotton or through fields of cane, driven by an overseer's lash. Northup reveals that even on the great plantations, slaves were often jacks-of-all-trades, laboring on a multitude of tasks...In the interstices of these many tasks, slaves created their own economy and their own life.\" Northup is keen to note the small bits of rebelliousness that slaves evince, and \"emphasizes how slaves found satisfaction and pride in their daily accomplishments, even knowing they gained few benefits from the labor that made their masters rich.\" He explains that many masters think beating their slaves and instilling fear in them makes them more productive, but that the truth is it makes them less productive. The plantation system is inefficient and wasteful; free labor is far more productive and profitable. During the holidays, Northup writes, slaves forge romantic relationships, dance, dress up, celebrate, and travel from plantation to plantation. Northup is aware of the problematic nature of the holidays: slaveowners consider themselves benevolent in \"giving\" these days to slaves, while the rest of the year, their slaves toil and suffer; yet he does acknowledge how much slaves delight in these days. Ultimately, as Berlin states, Northup \"understands the essential truth that while slavery may define black people, it is not who they are.\""}