

The conversation with the justiciary and the pure air somewhat calmed
Nekhludoff. The feeling he experienced he now ascribed to the fact
that he had passed the day amid surroundings to which he was
unaccustomed.

"It is certainly a remarkable coincidence! I must do what is necessary
to alleviate her lot, and do it quickly. Yes, I must find out here
where Fanarin or Mikishin lives." Nekhludoff called to mind these two
well-known lawyers.

Nekhludoff returned to the court-house, took off his overcoat and
walked up the stairs. In the very first corridor he met Fanarin. He
stopped him and told him that he had some business with him. Fanarin
knew him by sight, and also his name. He told Nekhludoff that he would
be glad to do anything to please him.

"I am rather tired, but, if it won't take long, I will listen to your
case. Let us walk into that room."

And Fanarin led Nekhludoff into a room, probably the cabinet of some
judge. They seated themselves at a table.

"Well, state your case."

"First of all, I will ask you," said Nekhludoff, "not to disclose that
I am interesting myself in this case."

"That is understood. Well?"

"I was on a jury to-day, and we sent an innocent woman to Siberia. It
torments me."

To his own surprise, Nekhludoff blushed and hesitated. Fanarin glanced
at him, then lowered his eyes and listened.

"Well?"

"We condemned an innocent woman, and I would like to have the case
appealed to a higher court."

"To the Senate?" Fanarin corrected him.

"And I wish you to take the case."

Nekhludoff wanted to get through the most difficult part, and
therefore immediately added:

"I take all expenses on myself, whatever they may be," he said,
blushing.

"Well, we will arrange all that," said the lawyer, condescendingly
smiling at Nekhludoff's inexperience.

"What are the facts of the case?"

Nekhludoff related them.

"Very well; I will examine the record to-morrow. Call at my office the
day after--no, better on Thursday, at six o'clock in the evening, and
I will give you an answer. And now let us go; I must make some
inquiries here."

Nekhludoff bade him good-by, and departed.

His conversation with the lawyer, and the fact that he had already
taken steps to defend Maslova, still more calmed his spirit. The
weather was fine, and when Nekhludoff found himself on the street, he
gladly inhaled the spring air. Cab drivers offered their services, but
he preferred to walk, and a swarm of thoughts and recollections of
Katiousha and his conduct toward her immediately filled his head. He
became sad, and everything appeared to him gloomy. "No, I will
consider it later," he said to himself, "and now I must have some
diversion from these painful impressions."

The dinner at the Korchagin's came to his mind, and he looked at his
watch. It was not too late to reach there for dinner. A tram-car
passed by. He ran after it, and boarded it at a bound. On the square
he jumped off, took one of the best cabs, and ten minutes later he
alighted in front of Korchagin's large dwelling.



