

As soon as the first recess was taken, Nekhludoff rose and went out of
the court, intending to return no more. They might do with him what
they pleased, but he could no longer take part in that farce.

Having inquired where the prosecutor's room was, he directed his steps
toward that dignitary. The messenger would not admit him, declaring
that the prosecutor was busy, but Nekhludoff brushed past him and
asked an officer who met him to announce him to the prosecutor, saying
that he was on important business. His title and dress helped
Nekhludoff. The officer announced him, and he was admitted. The
prosecutor received him standing, evidently dissatisfied with
Nekhludoff's persistence in seeking an audience with him.

"What do you wish?" the prosecutor asked, sternly.

"I am a juryman, my name is Nekhludoff, and I want to see the
prisoner Maslova," he said, resolutely and quickly. He blushed, and
felt that his act would have a decisive influence on his life.

The prosecutor was a tall, swarthy man with short hair just turning
gray, bright eyes and a trimmed, bushy beard on the protruding lower
jaw.

"Maslova? Yes, I know her. She was charged with poisoning," he said
calmly. "Why do you want to see her?" And then, as if desiring to
soften his harsh demeanor, he added: "I cannot give you the permission
before I know what you want to see her for."

"It is very important for me to see her," Nekhludoff burst out.

"I see," said the prosecutor, and, raising his eyes, looked intently
at Nekhludoff. "Has her case been tried?"

"She was tried yesterday and sentenced to four years' penal servitude.
The conviction was irregular; she is innocent."

"I see. If she has only been sentenced yesterday," said the prosecutor
without paying attention to Nekhludoff's declaration about her
innocence, "then she will be detained until final judgment in the
place where she is now. The jail is open to visitors on certain days
only. I advise you to apply there."

"But I must see her as soon as possible," with trembling lower jaw
Nekhludoff said, feeling that a critical moment was approaching.

"Why are you so anxious about seeing her?" the prosecutor asked,
raising his eyebrows with some alarm.

"Because she is innocent of the crime for which she was sentenced to
penal servitude. The guilt is mine, not hers," Nekhludoff said in a
trembling voice, feeling that he was saying what he should not.

"How so?" asked the prosecutor.

"I deceived her, and brought her to the condition in which she is now.
If I had not driven her to the position in which she was, she would
not have been charged here with such a crime."

"Still I fail to see what all this has to do with visiting her."

"It has, because I want to follow her and--marry her," said
Nekhludoff. And, as it usually happened when he spoke of this, his
eyes filled with tears.

[Illustration: THE PRISONERS.]

"Ah, is that so?" said the prosecutor. "This is really an exceptional
case. Are you not a member of the Krasnopersk town council?" asked the
prosecutor, as if recalling that he had heard of this Nekhludoff who
was now making such a strange statement.

"Excuse me, but I fail to see what this has to do with my request,"
fuming, Nekhludoff answered with rancor.

"Nothing, of course," the prosecutor said, with a faint smile on his
face, and not in the least disturbed. "But your request is so unusual
and beside all customary forms----"

"Well, can I get the permission?"

"Permission? Why, yes. I will give you a pass immediately. Please be
seated."

He went to the table, sat down and began to write.

"Please be seated."

Nekhludoff stood still.

When he had made out the pass the prosecutor handed it to Nekhludoff
and eyed him with curiosity.

"I must also tell you," said Nekhludoff, "that I cannot continue to
serve as juror."

"As you know, satisfactory reasons must be given to the court in such
cases."

"The reasons are that I consider all courts useless and immoral."

"I see," said the prosecutor, with the same faint smile which seemed
to indicate that such statements were familiar to him, and belonged to
an amusing class of people well known to him. "I see, but you
understand that, as public prosecutor, I cannot agree with you. I
therefore advise you to state so to the court, which will either find
your reasons satisfactory or unsatisfactory, and in the latter case
will impose a fine on you. Apply to the court."

"I have already stated my reasons, and I will not go there,"
Nekhludoff said angrily.

"I have the honor to salute you," said the prosecutor, bowing,
evidently desiring to rid himself of the strange visitor.

"Who was the man that just left your room?" asked one of the judges
who entered the prosecutor's cabinet after Nekhludoff had left.

"Nekhludoff. You know, the one who made such strange suggestions in
the Krasnopersk town council. Just imagine, he is on the jury, and
among the prisoners there was a woman, or girl, who was sentenced to
penal servitude, and who, he says, was deceived by him. And now he
wishes to marry her."

"It is impossible!"

"That is what he told me. And how strangely excited he was!"

"There is something wrong with our young men."

"He is not so very young."

"What a bore your famous Ivasheukoff is, my dear! He wins his cases by
tiring us out--there is no end to his talking."

"They must be curbed, or they become real obstructionists."



