

It was evening when Nekhludoff arrived in the city, and as he drove
through the gas-lit streets to his house, it looked to him like a new
city. The odor of camphor still hung in the air through all the rooms,
and Agrippina, Petrovna and Kornei seemed tired out and dissatisfied,
and even quarreled about the packing of the things, the use of which
seemed to consist chiefly in being hung out, dried and packed away
again. His room was not occupied, but was not arranged for his coming,
and the trunks blocked all the passages, so that his coming interfered
with those affairs which, by some strange inertia, were taking place
in this house. This evident foolishness, to which he had once been a
party, seemed so unpleasant to Nekhludoff, after the impressions he
had gained of the want in the villages, that he decided to move to a
hotel the very next day, leaving the packing to Agrippina until the
arrival of his sister.

He left the house in the morning, hired two modest and not over-clean
furnished rooms near the prison, and went to his lawyer.

After the storms and rains came those cold, piercing winds that
usually occur in the fall. Protected only by a light overcoat,
Nekhludoff was chilled to the bone. He walked quickly in order to warm
himself.

The village scenes came to his mind--the women, children and old men,
whose poverty and exhaustion he had noticed as if for the first time,
especially that oldish child which twisted its little calfless
legs--and he involuntarily compared them with the city folks. Passing
by the butcher, fish and clothing shops, he was struck, as if it was
the first time he looked upon them--by the physical evidences of the
well-being of such a large number of clean, well-fed shopkeepers which
was not to be seen anywhere in the villages. Equally well fed were the
drivers in quilted coats and buttons on their backs, porters, servant
girls, etc. In all these people he now involuntarily saw those same
village folks whom privation had driven to the city. Some of them were
able to take advantage of the conditions in the city and became happy
proprietors themselves; others were reduced to even greater straits
and became even more wretched. Such wretchedness Nekhludoff saw in a
number of shoemakers that he saw working near the window of a
basement; in the lean, pale, disheveled washerwomen ironing with bare
hands before open windows from which soap-laden steam poured out; in
two painters, aproned and bare-footed, who were covered with paint
from temple to heel. In their sunburnt, sinewy, weak hands, bared
above the elbows, they carried a bucket of paint and incessantly
cursed each other. Their faces were wearied and angry. The same
expression of weariness and anger he saw in the dusty faces of the
truck drivers; on the swollen and tattered men, women and children who
stood begging on the street corners. Similar faces were seen in the
windows of the tea-houses which Nekhludoff passed. Around the dirty
tables, loaded with bottles and tea services, perspiring men with red,
stupefied faces sat shouting and singing, and white-aproned servants
flitted to and fro.

"Why have they all gathered here?" thought Nekhludoff, involuntarily
inhaling, together with the dust, the odor of rancid oil spread by the
fresh paint.

On one of the streets he suddenly heard his name called above the
rattling of the trucks. It was Shenbok, with curled and stiffened
mustache and radiant face. Nekhludoff had lost sight of him long ago,
but heard that on leaving his regiment and joining the cavalry,
notwithstanding his debts he managed to hold his own in rich society.

"I am glad I met you. There is not a soul in the city. How old you
have grown, my boy! I only recognized you by your walk. Well, shall
we have dinner together? Where can we get a good meal here?"

"I hardly think I will have the time," answered Nekhludoff, who wished
to get rid of his friend without offending him. "What brings you
here?" he asked.

"Business, my boy. Guardianship affairs. I am a guardian, you know. I
have charge of Samanoff's business--the rich Samanoff, you know. He is
a spendthrift, and there are fifty-four thousand acres of land!" he
said with particular pride, as if he had himself made all these acres.
"The affairs were fearfully neglected. The land was rented to the
peasants, who did not pay anything and were eighty thousand rubles in
arrears. In one year I changed everything, and realized seventy per
cent. more for the estate. Eh?" he asked, with pride.

Nekhludoff recalled a rumor that for the very reason that Shenbok
squandered his own wealth and was inextricably in debt, he was
appointed guardian over a rich old spendthrift, and was now evidently
obtaining an income from the guardianship.

Nekhludoff refused to take dinner with Shenbok, or accompany him to
the horse races, to which the latter invited him, and after an
exchange of commonplaces the two parted.

"Is it possible that I was like him?" thought Nekhludoff. "Not
exactly, but I sought to be like him, and thought that I would thus
pass my life."

       *       *       *       *       *

The lawyer received him immediately on his arrival, although it was
not his turn. The lawyer expressed himself strongly on the detention
of the Menshovs, declaring that there was not a particle of evidence
against them on record.

"If the case is tried here, and not in the district, I will stake
anything on their discharge. And the petition in behalf of Theodosia
Brinkova is ready. You had better take it with you to St. Petersburg
and present it there. Otherwise there will begin an inquiry which will
have no end. Try to reach some people who have influence with the
commission on petitions. Well, that's all, isn't it?"

"No. Here they write me----"

"You seem to be the funnel into which all the prison complaints are
poured. I fear you will not hold them all."

"But this case is simply shocking," said Nekhludoff, and related the
substance of it.

"What is it that surprises you?"

"Everything. I can understand the orderly who acted under orders, but
the assistant prosecutor who drew the indictment is an educated man----"

"That is the mistake. We are used to think that the prosecuting
officers--the court officers generally--are a kind of new, liberal
men. And so they were at one time, but not now. The only thing that
concerns these officers is to draw their salaries on the 20th of every
month. Their principles begin and end with their desire to get more.
They will arrest, try and convict anybody----. I am always telling these
court officers that I never look upon them without gratitude,"
continued the lawyer, "because it is due to their kindness that I, you
and all of us are not in jail. To deprive any one of us of all civil
rights and send him to Siberia is the easiest thing imaginable."

"But if everything depends on the pleasure of the prosecutor, who can
enforce the law or not, then what is the use of the courts?"

The lawyer laughed merrily.

"That is the question you are raising. Well, my dear sir, that is
philosophy. However, we can discuss that. Come to my house next
Saturday. You will find there scholars, litterateurs, artists. We will
have a talk on social questions," said the lawyer, pronouncing the
words "social questions" with ironical pathos. "Are you acquainted
with my wife? Call on Saturday."

"I will try," answered Nekhludoff, feeling that he was saying an
untruth; that if there was anything he would try hard to do it was not
to be present at the lawyer's amid the scholars, litterateurs and
artists.

The laughter with which the lawyer met Nekhludoff's remark concerning
the uselessness of courts if the prosecutors can do what they please,
and the intonation with which he pronounced the words "philosophy" and
"social questions," showed how utterly unlike himself were the lawyer
and the people of his circle, both in character and in views of life.



