

With a faint heart and with horror at the thought that he might find
Maslova in an inebriate condition and persistently antagonistic, and
at the mystery which she was to him, Nekhludoff rang the bell and
inquired of the inspector about Maslova. She was in the hospital.

A young physician, impregnated with carbolic acid, came out into the
corridor and sternly asked Nekhludoff what he wanted. The physician
indulged the prisoners' shortcomings and often relaxed the rules in
their favor, for which he often ran afoul of the prison officials and
even the head physician. Fearing that Nekhludoff might ask something
not permitted by the rules, and, moreover, desiring to show that he
made no exceptions in favor of anybody, he feigned anger.

"There are no women here; this is the children's ward," he said.

"I know it, but there is a nurse here who had been transferred from
the prison."

"Yes, there are two. What do you wish, then?"

"I am closely related to one of them, Maslova," said Nekhludoff, "and
would like to see her. I am going to St. Petersburg to enter an appeal
in her case. I would like to hand her this; it is only a photograph,"
and he produced an envelope from his pocket.

"Yes, you may do that," said the softened physician, and turning to an
old nurse in a white apron, told her to call Maslova. "Won't you take
a seat, or come into the reception-room?"

"Thank you," said Nekhludoff, and taking advantage of the favorable
change in the physician's demeanor, asked him what they thought of
Maslova in the hospital.

"Her work is fair, considering the conditions amid which she had
lived," answered the physician. "But there she comes."

The old nurse appeared at one of the doors, and behind her came
Maslova. She wore a white apron over a striped skirt; a white cap on
her head hid her hair. Seeing Nekhludoff she flushed, stopped
waveringly, then frowned, and with downcast eyes approached him with
quick step. Coming near him she stood for a moment without offering
her hand, then she did offer her hand and became even more flushed.
Nekhludoff had not seen her since the conversation in which she
excused herself for her impetuosity, and he expected to find her in a
similar mood. But she was entirely different to-day; there was
something new in the expression of her face; something timid and
reserved, and, as it seemed to him, malevolent toward him. He repeated
the words he had said to the physician and handed her the envelope
with the photograph which he had brought from Panov.

"It is an old picture which I came across in Panov. It may please you
to have it. Take it."

Raising her black eyebrows she looked at him with her squinting eyes,
as though asking, "What is that for?" Then she silently took the
envelope and tucked it under her apron.

"I saw your aunt there," said Nekhludoff.

"Did you?" she said, with indifference.

"How do you fare here?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Fairly well," she said.

"It is not very hard?"

"Not very. I am not used to it yet."

"I am very glad. At any rate, it is better than there."

"Than where?" she said, and her face became purple.

"There, in the prison," Nekhludoff hastened to say.

"Why better?" she asked.

"I think the people here are better. There are no such people here as
there."

"There are many good people there."

"I did what I could for the Menshovs and hope they will be freed,"
said Nekhludoff.

"May God grant it. Such a wonderful little woman," she said, repeating
her description of the old woman, and slightly smiled.

"I am going to-day to St. Petersburg. Your case will be heard soon,
and, I hope, will be reversed."

"It is all the same now, whether they reverse it or not," she said.

"Why now?"

"So," she answered, and stealthily glanced at him inquiringly.

Nekhludoff understood this answer and this glance as a desire on her
part to know if he were still holding to his decision, or had changed
it since her refusal.

"I don't know why it is all the same to you," he said, "but to me it
really is all the same whether you are acquitted or not. In either
case, I am ready to do what I said," he said, with determination.

She raised her head, and her black, squinting eyes fixed themselves on
his face and past it, and her whole face became radiant with joy. But
her words were in an entirely different strain.

"Oh, you needn't talk that way," she said.

"I say it that you may know."

"Everything has been already said, and there is no use talking any
more," she said, with difficulty repressing a smile.

There was some noise in the ward. A child was heard crying.

"I think I am called," she said, looking around with anxiety.

"Well, then, good-by," he said.

She pretended not to see his extended hand, turned round, and
endeavoring to hide her elation, she walked away with quick step.

"What is taking place in her? What is she thinking? What are her
feelings? Is she putting me to a test, or is she really unable to
forgive me? Can she not say what she thinks and feels, or simply will
not? Is she pacified or angered?" Nekhludoff asked himself, but could
give no answer. One thing he knew, however, and that was that she had
changed; that a spiritual transformation was taking place in her, and
this transformation united him not only to her, but to Him in whose
name it was taking place. And this union caused him joyful agitation.

Returning to the ward where eight children lay in their beds, Maslova
began to remake one of the beds, by order of the Sister, and, leaning
over too far with the sheet, slipped and nearly fell. The convalescing
boy, wound in bandages to his neck, began to laugh. Maslova could
restrain herself no longer, and seating herself on the bedstead she
burst into loud laughter, infecting several children, who also began
to laugh. The Sister angrily shouted:

"What are you roaring about? Think you this is like the place you came
from? Go fetch the rations."

Maslova stopped laughing, and taking a dish went on her errand, but
exchanging looks with the bandaged boy, who giggled again.

Several times during the day, when Maslova remained alone, she drew
out a corner of the picture and looked at it with admiration, but in
the evening, when she and another nurse retired for the night, she
removed the picture from the envelope and immovably looked with
admiration at the faces; her own, his and the aunt's, their dresses,
the stairs of the balcony, the bushes in the background, her eyes
feasting especially on herself, her young, beautiful face with the
hair hanging over her forehead. She was so absorbed that she failed to
notice that the other nurse had entered.

"What is that? Did he give it you?" asked the stout, good-natured
nurse, leaning over the photograph.

"Is it possible that that is you?"

"Who else?" Maslova said, smiling and looking into her companion's
face.

"And who is that? He himself? And that is his mother?"

"His aunt. Couldn't you recognize me?" asked Maslova.

"Why, no. I could never recognize you. The face is entirely different.
That must have been taken about ten years ago."

"Not years, but a lifetime," said Maslova, and suddenly her face
became sullen and a wrinkle formed between her eyebrows.

"Yours was an easy life, wasn't it?"

"Yes, easy," Maslova repeated, closing her eyes and shaking her head.
"Worse than penal servitude."

"Why so?"

"Because. From eight in the evening to four in the morning--every day
the same."

"Then why don't they get out?"

"They like to, but cannot. But what is the use of talking!" cried
Maslova, and she sprang to her feet, threw the photograph into the
drawer of the table, and suppressing her angry tears, ran into the
corridor, slamming the door. Looking on the photograph she imagined
herself as she had been at the time the photograph was made, and
dreamed how happy she had been and might still be with him. The words
of her companion reminded her what she was now--reminded her of all
the horror of that life which she then felt but confusedly, and would
not allow herself to admit. Only now she vividly recalled all those
terrible nights, particularly one Shrovetide night. She recalled how
she, in a low-cut, wine-bespattered, red silk dress, with a red bow in
her dishevelled hair, weak, jaded and tipsy, after dancing attendance
upon the guest, had seated herself, at two in the morning, near the
thin, bony, pimpled girl-pianist and complained of her hard life. The
girl said that her life was also disagreeable to her, and that she
wished to change her occupation. Afterward their friend Clara joined
them, and all three suddenly decided to change their life. They were
about to leave the place when the drunken guests became noisy, the
fiddler struck up a lively song of the first figure of a Russian
quadrille, the pianist began to thump in unison, a little drunken man
in a white necktie and dress coat caught her up. Another man, stout
and bearded, and also in a dress coat, seized Clara, and for a long
time they whirled, danced, shouted and drank. Thus a year passed, a
second and a third. How could she help changing! And the cause of it
all was he. And suddenly her former wrath against him rose in her; and
she felt like chiding and reproving him. She was sorry that she had
missed the opportunity of telling him again that she knew him, and
would not yield to him; that she would not allow him to take advantage
of her spiritually as he had done corporeally; that she would not
allow him to make her the subject of his magnanimity. And in order to
deaden the painful feeling of pity for herself and the useless
reprobation of him, she yearned for wine. And she would have broken
her word and drunk some wine had she been in the prison. But here wine
could only be obtained from the assistant surgeon, and she was afraid
of him, because he pursued her with his attentions, and all relations
with men were disgusting to her. For some time she sat on a bench in
the corridor, and returning to her closet, without heeding her
companion's questions, she wept for a long time over her ruined life.



