

Maslova's case was to be heard the following day, and Nekhludoff went
to the Senate. He met Fanirin at the entrance to the magnificent
Senate building, where several carriages were already waiting. Walking
up the grand, solemn staircase to the second floor, the lawyer, who
was familiar with all the passages, turned into a room to the left, on
the door of which was carved the year of the institution of the Code.
The lawyer removed his overcoat, remaining in his dress-coat and black
tie on a white bosom, and with cheerful self-confidence walked into
the next room. There were about fifteen spectators present, among whom
were a young woman in a pince-nez, and a gray-haired lady. A
gray-haired old man of patriarchal mien, wearing a box-coat and gray
trousers, and attended by two men, attracted particular attention. He
crossed the room and entered a wardrobe.

An usher, a handsome man with red cheeks and in a pompous uniform,
approached Fanirin with a piece of paper in his hand and asked him in
what case he appeared. Being told that in Maslova's case, the usher
made a note of something and went away. At that time the door of the
wardrobe opened and the patriarchal looking old man came forth, no
longer in the coat, but in a brilliant uniform which made him resemble
a bird. His uniform evidently embarrassed the old man, and he walked
into the room opposite the entrance with quicker than his ordinary
step.

Fanirin pointed him out to Nekhludoff as Be, "a most honorable
gentleman." The spectators, including Fanirin, went into the next room
and seated themselves behind the grating on benches reserved for
spectators. Only the St. Petersburg lawyer took a seat behind a desk
on the other side of the grating.

The session room of the Senate was smaller than the room of the
Circuit Court, was furnished in simpler style, only the table behind
which the Senators sat was of crimson plush instead of green cloth,
bordered with gold lace.

There were four Senators. The President, Nikitin, with a closely
shaved, narrow face and steel-gray eyes; Wolf, with thin lips and
small white hands, with which he was turning over the papers before
him; then Skovorodnikoff, stout, massive and pock-marked, and a very
learned jurist, and finally, Be, the same partriarchal old man, who
was the last to arrive. Immediately behind the Senators came the Chief
Secretary and Associate Attorney General. He was a young man of medium
height, shaved, lean, with a very dark face and black, sad eyes.
Nekhludoff recognized him, notwithstanding his strange uniform and the
fact that he had not seen him for about six years, as one of his best
friends during his student life.

"Is the associate's name Selenin?" he asked the lawyer.

"Yes, why?"

"I know him very well; he is an excellent man----"

"And a good associate of the Attorney General--very sensible. It would
have been well to see him," said Fanirin.

"At all events, he will follow the dictates of his conscience," said
Nekhludoff, remembering his close relations with and friendship for
Selenin, and the latter's charming qualities of purity, honesty and
good breeding, in the best sense of the word.

The first case before the Senate was an appeal from the decision of
the Circuit Court of Appeals affirming a judgment in favor of the
publisher of a newspaper in a libel suit brought against him.

Nekhludoff listened and tried to understand the arguments in the
case, but as in the Circuit Court, the chief difficulty in
understanding what was going on was found in the fact that the
discussion centered not on what appeared naturally to be the main
point, but on side issues.

The libel consisted in an article accusing the president of a stock
company of swindling. It seemed, then, that the main point to consider
was, whether or not the president was guilty of swindling the
stockholders, and what was to be done to stop his swindling. But this
was never mentioned. The questions discussed were: Had the publisher
the legal right to print the article of its reporter? What crime has
he committed by printing it--defamation or libel? And does defamation
include libel, or libel defamation? And a number of other things
unintelligible to ordinary people, including various laws and
decisions of some "General Department."

The only thing Nekhludoff did understand was that, though Wolf had
sternly suggested but yesterday that the Senate could not consider the
substance of a case, in the case at bar he argued with evident
partiality in favor of reversing the judgment, and that Selenin, in
spite of his characteristic reserve, argued in favor of affirming the
judgment with unexpected fervor. The cause of Selenin's ardor lay in
the fact that he knew the president of the stock company to be
dishonest in money affairs, while he accidentally learned that Wolf,
almost on the eve of the hearing of the case, had attended a sumptuous
dinner at the president's house. And now, when Wolf, though with great
caution, showed undoubted partiality, Selenin became excited and
expressed his opinion with more nervousness than an ordinary case
would justify. Wolf was evidently offended by the speech; he twitched
nervously, changed color, made silent gestures of wonder, and with an
haughty air of being offended he departed with the other Senators into
the deliberation-room.

"What case are you interested in?" the usher again asked Fanirin, as
soon as the Senators had left the room.

"I have already told you that I am here in behalf of Maslova."

"That is so. The case will be heard to-day. But----"

"What is that?" asked the lawyer.

"You see, the case was to be argued without counsel, so that the
Senators would hardly consider it in open session. But--I will
announce----" and he made a note on the piece of paper.

The Senators really intended, after announcing their decision in the
libel case, to consider the other cases, including Maslova's, while
drinking their tea and smoking cigarettes in the consultation-room.



