

The party of convicts, which included Maslova, was to leave on the
three o'clock train, and in order to see them coming out of the prison
and follow them to the railroad station Nekhludoff decided to get to
the prison before twelve.

While packing his clothes and papers, Nekhludoff came across his
diary and began to read the entry he had made before leaving for St.
Petersburg. "Katiusha does not desire my sacrifice, but is willing to
sacrifice herself," it ran. "She has conquered, and I have conquered.
I am rejoicing at that inner change which she seems to me to be
undergoing. I fear to believe it, but it appears to me that she is
awakening." Immediately after this was the following entry: "I have
lived through a very painful and very joyous experience. I was told
that she had misbehaved in the hospital. It was very painful to hear
it. Did not think it would so affect me. Have spoken to her with
contempt and hatred, but suddenly remembered how often I myself have
been guilty--am even now, although only in thought, of that for which
I hated her, and suddenly I was seized with disgust for myself and
pity for her, and I became very joyful. If we would only see in time
the beam in our own eye, how much kinder we would be." Then he made
the following entry for the day: "Have seen Katiusha, and, because of
my self-content, was unkind and angry, and departed with a feeling of
oppression. But what can I do? A new life begins to-morrow. Farewell
to the old life! My mind is filled with numberless impressions, but I
cannot yet reduce them to order."

On awakening the following morning, Nekhludoff's first feeling was one
of sorrow for the unpleasant incident with his brother-in-law.

"I must go to see them," he thought, "and smooth it over."

But, looking at the clock, he saw that there was no time left, and
that he must hasten to the prison to see the departure of the
convicts. Hastily packing up his things and sending them to the depot,
Nekhludoff hired a trap and drove to the prison.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hot July days had set in. The stones of the street, the houses,
and the tins of the roofs, failing to cool off during the suffocating
night, exhaled their warmth into the hot, still air. There was no
breeze, and such as rose every now and then was laden with dust and
the stench of oil paint. The few people that were on the streets
sought shelter in the shade of the houses. Only sun-burnt
street-pavers in bast shoes were sitting in the middle of the street,
setting boulders into the hot sand; gloomy policemen in unstarched
blouses and carrying revolvers attached to yellow cords, were lazily
shuffling about, and tram-cars with drawn blinds on the sides exposed
to the sun, and drawn by white-hooded horses, were running up and down
the street.

When Nekhludoff arrived at the prison, the formal delivery and
acceptance of the departing convicts, which began at four in the
morning, were still going on. The party consisted of six hundred and
twenty-three men and sixty-four women; all had to be counted, the weak
and sick had to be separated, and they were to be delivered to the
convoy. The new inspector, two assistants, a physician, his assistant,
the officer of the convoy and a clerk were sitting in the shade around
a table with papers and documents, calling and examining each convict
and making entries in their books.

One-half of the table was already exposed to the sun. It was getting
warm and close from want of air, and from the breathing of the
convicts standing near by.

"Will there ever be an end?" said a tall, stout, red-faced captain of
the convoy, incessantly smoking a cigarette and blowing the smoke
through the moustache which covered his mouth. "I am exhausted. Where
have you taken so many? How many more are there?"

The clerk consulted the books.

"Twenty-four men and the women."

"Why are you standing there? Come forward!" shouted the captain to the
crowding convicts.

The convicts had already been standing three hours in a broiling sun,
waiting their turn.

All this was taking place in the court-yard of the prison, while
without the prison stood the usual armed soldier, about two dozen
trucks for the baggage, and the infirm convicts, and on the corner a
crowd of relatives and friends of the convicts, waiting for a chance
to see the exiles as they emerged from the prison, and, if possible,
to have a last few words with them, or deliver some things they had
brought for them. Nekhludoff joined this crowd.

He stood there about an hour. At the end of the hour, from behind the
gates came the clatter of chains, the tramping of feet, voices of
command, coughing and the low conversation of a large crowd. This
lasted about five minutes, during which time prison officers flitted
in and out through the wicket. Finally there was heard a sharp
command.

The gates were noisily flung open, the clatter of the chains became
more distinct, and a detachment of guardsmen in white blouses and
shouldering guns marched forth and arranged themselves, evidently as a
customary manoeuvre, in a large semi-circle before the gates. Again
a command was heard, and the hard-labor convicts, in pairs, began to
pour out. With pancake-shaped caps on their shaved heads, and sacks on
their shoulders, they dragged their fettered legs, holding up the
sacks with one hand and waving the other. First came the men convicts,
all in gray trousers and long coats with diamond aces on their backs.
All of them--young, old, slim, stout, pale, and red-faced,
dark-haired, moustached, bearded and beardless, Russians, Tartars,
Jews--came, clanging their chains and briskly waving their hands as
though going on a long journey; but after making about ten steps they
stopped and humbly arranged themselves in rows of four. Immediately
behind these came another contingent, also with shaved heads and
similarly dressed, without leg-fetters, but handcuffed to each other.
These were exiles. They walked as briskly as the others, stopped, and
formed in rows of four. Then came the women in the same order, in gray
coats and 'kerchiefs, those sentenced to hard labor coming first; then
the exiles, and finally those voluntarily following their husbands, in
their native costumes. Some of the women carried infants under the
skirts of their coats.

Children--boys and girls--followed them on foot, hanging on to the
skirts of their mothers. The men stood silently, coughing now and
then, or exchanging remarks, while the women carried on incessant
conversation. Nekhludoff thought that he saw Maslova as she was coming
out, but she was soon lost in the large crowd, and he only saw a lot
of gray creatures almost deprived of all womanly features, with their
children and sacks, grouping themselves behind the men.

Although the convicts had been counted within the walls of the prison,
the guard began to count them over again. This counting took a long
time, because the convicts, moving from one place to another, confused
the count of the officers. The officers cursed and pushed the humbly
but angrily compliant convicts and counted them again. When the
counting was finally over, the officer of the guard gave some command,
and suddenly all became confusion in the crowd. Infirm men, women and
children hastened to the trucks, on which they first placed their
sacks, then climbed in themselves, the infants crying in their
mothers' arms, the children quarreling about the places, the men
looking gloomy and despondent.

Some of the convicts, removing their caps, approached the officer and
made some request. As Nekhludoff afterward learned, they were asking
to be taken on the wagons. The guard officer, without looking at the
applicants, silently inhaled the smoke of his cigarette, then suddenly
swung his short hand at one of the convicts that approached him, who
dodged and sprang back.

"I will elevate you to the nobility with a rope! You can walk!"
shouted the officer.

Only a tall, staggering old man in irons was permitted to ride on a
wagon. The old man removed his cap, and making the sign of the cross,
dragged himself to the wagon; but his fettered legs prevented his
climbing up until an old woman, sitting on the wagon, took his hand
and helped him in.

When all the wagons were loaded with sacks and those that were
permitted to ride, the guard officer uncovered his bald head, wiped
with a handkerchief his pate, forehead and red, stout neck, made the
sign of the cross, and gave command to proceed.

There was a clatter of weapons; the convicts, removing their caps,
began to make the sign of the cross, some with their left hands; the
escorting crowd shouted something, the convicts shouted in answer; a
great wailing arose among the women, and the party, surrounded by
soldiers in white blouses moved forward, raising a cloud of dust with
their fettered feet. They marched in the order in which they formed at
the prison gates, in rows of four, preceded by a detachment of
soldiers. The rear was brought up by the wagons loaded with the sacks
and the infirm. On top of one of the wagons, above all the others, sat
a woman, wrapped up in her coat and sobbing incessantly.



