

The party of convicts to which Maslova belonged had gone about
thirty-five hundred miles. It was not until Perm was reached that
Nekhludoff succeeded in obtaining Maslova's transfer to the contingent
of politicals, as he was advised to do by Bogodukhovskaia, who was
among them.

The journey to Perm was very burdensome to Maslova, both physically
and morally--physically because of the crowded condition of their
quarters, the uncleanliness and disgusting insects, which gave her no
rest; morally because of the equally loathsome men who, though they
changed at every stopping place, were like the insects, always
insolent, intrusive and gave her little rest. The cynicism prevailing
among the convicts and their overseers was such that every woman,
especially the young women, had to be on the alert. Maslova was
particularly subject to these attacks because of her attractive looks
and her well-known past. This condition of constant dread and struggle
was very burdensome to her. The firm repulse with which she met the
impertinent advances of the men was taken by them as an insult and
exasperated them. Her condition in this respect was somewhat relieved
by the presence of Theodosia and Tarass, who, learning that his wife
was subjected to these insults, had himself included among the
prisoners, and riding as such from Nijhni, was able to protect her to
some extent.

Maslova's transfer to the division of the politicals bettered her
situation in every respect. Besides the improvement in the quarters,
food and treatment, her condition was also made easier by the fact
that the persecution of the men ceased and she was no longer reminded
of her past, which she was so anxious to forget now. The principal
advantage of the transfer, however, lay in the acquaintance she made
of some people who exerted a decisive influence over her.

At stopping places she was permitted to mingle with the politicals,
but, being a strong woman, she was compelled to walk with the other
prisoners. She thus walked from Tomsk. There were two politicals who
traveled on foot with her--Maria Pablovna Stchetinina, the same pretty
girl with the sheepish eyes who had attracted Nekhludoff's attention
when visiting Bogodukhovskaia, and one Simonson, banished to
Yakoutsk--that same shaggy man with deep-set eyes whom Nekhludoff had
noticed on the same occasion. Maria Pablovna walked, because she
yielded her place on the wagon to a pregnant woman; Simonson, because
he would not profit by class advantages. These three started on foot
with the other convicts in the early morning, the politicals following
them later in wagons. It was at the last stopping place, near a large
city, where the party was handed over to another convoy officer.

It was a chill September morning. Snow and rain fell alternately
between cold blasts of wind. All the prisoners--400 men and 50
women--were already in the court-yard, some crowding around the chief
officer of the convoy, who was paying out money to the overseers for
the day's rations; others were buying food of the hucksters who had
been admitted into the court-yard. There were a din of prisoners'
voices counting money and the shrill conversation of the hucksters.

Katiousha and Maria Pablovna, both in boots and short fur coats and
girdled with 'kerchiefs, came into the court-yard from the house and
walked toward the hucksters, who were sitting under the northern wall
and calling out their wares--fresh meat-pies, fish, boiled shred
paste, buckwheat mush, meat, eggs, milk; one woman even offered
roasted pig.

Simonson, in rubber jacket and similar galoshes, bound with whip-cord
over woolen socks (he was a vegetarian and did not use the skin of
animals), was also awaiting the departure of the party. He stood near
the entrance of the house, writing down in a note-book a thought that
occurred to him. "If," he wrote, "a bacterium were to observe and
analyze the nail of a man, it would declare him an inorganic being.
Similarly, from an observation of the earth's surface, we declare it
to be inorganic. That is wrong."

Having bought eggs, buns, fish and fresh wheat bread, Maslova packed
them away in a bag while Maria Pablovna settled for the food, when
among the prisoners there arose a commotion. Every one became silent,
and the prisoners began to form into ranks. An officer came forth and
gave final orders.

Everything proceeded as usual--the prisoners were counted over, the
chains were examined and men were handcuffed in pairs.



