

"What do you think of him?" said Maria Pablovna. "In love, and
earnestly in love! I never thought that Vladimir Simonson could fall
in love in such a very stupid, childish fashion. It is remarkable, and
to tell the truth, sad," she concluded, sighing.

"But Katia? How do you think she will take it?" asked Nekhludoff.

"She?" Maria Pablovna stopped, evidently desiring to give a precise
answer. "She? You see, notwithstanding her past, she is naturally of a
most moral character. And her feelings are so refined. She loves
you--very much so--and is happy to be able to do you the negative good
of not binding you to herself. Marriage with you would be a dreadful
fall to her, worse than all her past. For this reason she would never
consent to it. At the same time, your presence perplexes her."

"Ought I then to disappear?" asked Nekhludoff.

Maria Pablovna smiled in her pleasant, childish way.

"Yes, partly."

"How can I partly disappear?"

"I take it back. But I will tell you that she probably sees the
absurdity of that exalted love of his (he has not spoken to her about
it), is flattered by it, and fears it. You know that I am not
competent in these matters, but I think that his love is that of the
ordinary man, although it is masked. He says that it rouses his energy
and that it is a platonic love; but it has nothing but nastiness for
its basis."

"But what am I to do?" asked Nekhludoff.

"I think it is best that you have a talk with her. It is always better
to make everything clear. Shall I call her?" said Maria Pablovna.

"If you please," answered Nekhludoff, and Maria Pablovna went out.

Nekhludoff was seized with a strange feeling when, alone in the small
cell, he listened to the quiet breathing of Vera Efremovna,
interrupted by an occasional moan, and the constant din coming from
the cells of the convicts.

That which Simonson had told him freed him from his self-imposed
obligation, which, in a moment of weakness, seemed to him burdensome
and dreadful; and yet it was not only unpleasant, but painful. The
offer of Simonson destroyed the exclusiveness of his act, minimized in
his own and other people's eyes the value of the sacrifice he was
making. If such a good man as Simonson, who was under no obligation to
her, wished to join his fate to hers, then his own sacrifice was no
longer so important. Maybe there was also the ordinary feeling of
jealousy; he was so used to her love that he could not think that she
was capable of loving any one else. Besides, his plans were now
shattered, especially the plan of living near her while she served her
sentence. If she married Simonson, his presence was no longer
necessary, and that required a rearrangement of his projects. He could
scarcely collect his thoughts, when Katiousha entered the cell.

With quick step she approached him.

"Maria Pablovna sent me," she said, stopping near him.

"Yes, I would like to talk with you. Take a seat. Vladimir Ivanovitch
spoke to me."

She seated herself, crossed her hands on her knees, and seemed calm.
But as soon as Nekhludoff pronounced Simonson's name, her face turned
a purple color.

"What did he tell you?" she asked.

"He told me that he wishes to marry you."

Her face suddenly became wrinkled, evidencing suffering, but she
remained silent, only looking at the floor.

"He asked my consent or advice. I told him that it all rests with you;
that you must decide."

"Oh, what is it all for?" she said, and looked at Nekhludoff with that
squinting glance that always peculiarly affected him. For a few
seconds they looked silently at each other. That glance was
significant to both.

"You must decide," repeated Nekhludoff.

"Decide what?" she said. "It has all been decided long ago. It is you
who must decide whether you will accept the offer of Vladimir
Ivanovitch," she continued, frowning.

"But if a pardon should come?" said Nekhludoff.

"Oh, leave me alone. It is useless to talk any more," she answered,
and, rising, left the cell.

Gaining the street, Nekhludoff stopped, and, expanding his chest, drew
in the frosty air.

The following morning a soldier brought him a note from Maria
Pablovna, in which she said that Kryltzoff's condition was worse than
they thought it to be.

"At one time we intended to remain here with him, but they would not
allow it. So we are taking him with us, but we fear the worst. Try to
so arrange in town that if he is left behind some one of us shall
remain with him. If it is necessary for that purpose that I should
marry him, then, of course, I am ready to do it."

Nekhludoff obtained horses and hastened to catch up with the party of
prisoners. He stopped his team near the wagon carrying Kryltzoff on a
bed of hay and pillows. Beside Kryltzoff sat Maria Pablovna.
Kryltzoff, in a fur coat and lambskin cap, seemed thinner and more
pale than before. His beautiful eyes seemed particularly larger and
sparkling. Weakly rolling from side to side from the jostling of the
wagon, he steadily looked at Nekhludoff, and in answer to questions
about his health, he only closed his eyes and angrily shook his head.
It required all his energy to withstand the jostling of the wagon.
Maria Pablovna exchanged glances with Nekhludoff, expressing
apprehension concerning Kryltzoff's condition.

"The officer seems to have some shame in him," she shouted, so as to
be heard above the rattling of the wheels. "He removed the handcuffs
from Bouzovkin, who is now carrying his child. With him are Katia,
Simonson and, in my place, Verotchka."

Kryltzoff, pointing at Maria Pablovna, said something which could not,
however, be heard. Nekhludoff leaned over him in order to hear him.
Then Kryltzoff removed the handkerchief, which was tied around his
mouth, and whispered:

"Now I am better. If I could only keep from catching cold."

Nekhludoff nodded affirmatively and glanced at Maria Pablovna.

"Have you received my note, and will you do it?" asked Maria Pablovna.

"Without fail," said Nekhludoff, and seeing the dissatisfied face of
Kryltzoff, went over to his own team, climbed into the wagon, and
holding fast to the sides of it, drove along the line of gray-coated
and fettered prisoners which stretched for almost a mile.

Nekhludoff crossed the river to a town, and his driver took him to a
hotel, where, notwithstanding the poor appointments, he found a
measure of comfort entirely wanting in the inns of his stopping
places. He took a bath, dressed himself in city clothes and drove to
the governor of the district. He alighted at a large, handsome
building, in front of which stood a sentry and a policeman.

The general was ill, and did not receive. Nekhludoff, nevertheless,
asked the porter to take his card to the general, and the porter
returned with a favorable answer:

"You are asked to step in."

The vestibule, the porter, the messenger, the shining floor of the
hall--everything reminded him of St. Petersburg, only it was somewhat
dirtier and more majestic. Nekhludoff was admitted to the cabinet.

The general, bloated, with a potato nose and prominent bumps on his
forehead, hairless pate and bags under his eyes, a man of sanguine
temperament, was reclining in a silk morning gown, and with a
cigarette in his hand, was drinking tea from a silver saucer.

"How do you do, sir? Excuse my receiving you in a morning gown; it is
better than not receiving at all," he said, covering his stout,
wrinkled neck with the collar of his gown. "I am not quite well, and
do not go out. What brought you into these wilds?"

"I was following a party of convicts, among whom is a person near to
me," said Nekhludoff. "And now I come to see Your Excellency about
that person, and also another affair."

The general inhaled the smoke of his cigarette, took a sip of tea,
placed his cigarette in a malachite ash-holder, and steadily gazing
with his watery, shining eyes at Nekhludoff, listened gravely. He only
interrupted Nekhludoff to ask him if he wished to smoke.

Nekhludoff told the general that the person in whom he was interested
was a woman, that she was unjustly convicted, and that His Majesty's
clemency had been appealed to.

"Yes. Well?" said the general.

"I was promised in St. Petersburg that the news of this woman's fate
would be sent to this place not later than this month."

Looking steadily at Nekhludoff, the general asked:

"Anything else?"

"My second request would be concerning the political prisoner who is
going to Siberia with this detachment."

"Is that so?" said the general.

"He is very sick--he is a dying man. And he will probably be left here
in the hospital; for this reason one of the female prisoners would
like to remain with him."

"Is she a relative of his?"

"No. But she wishes to marry him, if it will allow her to stay with
him."

The general looked sharply at Nekhludoff from his shining eyes, and,
smoking continually, he kept silence, as if wishing to confound his
companion.

When Nekhludoff had finished he took a book from the table, and
frequently wetting the fingers with which he turned the leaves, he
lighted on the chapter treating of marriage and perused it.

"What's her sentence?" he asked, lifting his eyes from the book.

"Hers? Hard labor."

"If this is the case, the sentence cannot be changed by marriage."

"But----"

"I beg your pardon! If a free man would marry her she would have to
serve her sentence all the same. Whose sentence is harder, his or
hers?"

"Both are sentenced to hard labor."

"So they are quits," the general said, laughing. "An equal share for
both of them. He may be left here on account of his sickness," he
continued, "and, of course, everything will be done to ameliorate his
condition, but she, even if she should marry him, cannot remain here.
Anyhow, I will think it over. What are their names? Write them down
here."

Nekhludoff did as he was asked.

"And this I cannot do either," said the general, concerning his
request to see the patient. "Of course I don't suspect you, but you
are interested in them and in others. You have money, and the people
here are corrupt. How, then, is it possible for me to watch a person
who is five thousand miles distant from me? There he is king, as I am
here," and he began to laugh. "You have surely seen the political
prisoners. You have surely given them money," he added, smiling.
"Isn't it so?"

"Yes, it is true."

"I understand that you must act in this way. You want to see the
political prisoner, and you all sorrow for him, and the soldier on
guard will surely take money, because he has a family, and his salary
amounts to something less than nothing; he cannot afford to refuse. I
would do the same were I in yours or his place. But, being situated as
I am now, I cannot permit myself to disobey one iota of the law, for
the very reason that I, too, am no more than a man, and am liable to
yield to pity. They confide in me under certain conditions, and I, by
my actions, must prove that I am trustworthy. So this question is
settled. Well, now tell me what is going on at the metropolis?"

Then the general put various questions, as if he would like to learn
some news.

"Well, tell me now whom you are stopping with--at Duke's? It is
unpleasant there. Come to us to dinner," he said, finally, dismissing
Nekhludoff, "at five. Do you speak English?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, that is good. You see, there is an English traveler here. He is
studying the exile system, and the prisons in Siberia. So he will dine
with us, and you come, too. We dine at five, and madam wants us to be
punctual. I will let you know what will be done with that woman, and
also with the patient. Maybe it will be possible to leave somebody
with him."

Having taken leave of the general, Nekhludoff drove to the
postoffice. Receiving his mail, he walked up to a wooden bench, on
which a soldier was sitting, probably waiting for something; he sat
down beside him, and started to look through the letters. Among them
he found a registered letter in a beautiful, large envelope, with a
large seal of red wax on it. He tore open the envelope, and, seeing a
letter from Selenin with some official document, he felt the blood
mounting to his cheeks, and his heart grow weak. This document was the
decision concerning Katiousha's trial. What was it? Was it possible
that it contained a refusal? Nekhludoff hastily ran over the letter,
written in small, hardly legible, broken handwriting, and breathed
freely. The decision was a favorable one.

"Dear friend," wrote Selenin, "our last conversation made a strong
impression upon me. You were right concerning Maslova. I have looked
through the accusation. This could be corrected only through the
Commission for Petitions, to which you sent your petition. They let me
have a copy of the pardon, and here I send it to you, to the address
which the Countess Catherine Ivanovna gave me. I press your hand in
friendship."

The news was pleasant and important. All that Nekhludoff could wish
for Katiousha and himself was realized. True, those changes in his
life changed his relations to her. But now, he thought, all that was
most important was to see her as quick as possible and bring her the
good news of her freedom. He thought that the copy he had in his hand
was sufficient for that. So he bade the cabman drive at once to the
prison.

The superintendent of the prison told him that he could not admit him
without a permit from the general. The copy of the petition from their
majesty's bureau also did not prevail with the superintendent. He
positively refused admittance. He also refused to admit him to see
Kryltzoff.



