

After the disappointment at the prison, Nekhludoff drove down to the
Governor's Bureau to find out whether they had received there any news
concerning the pardon of Maslova. There was no news there, so he drove
back to his hotel, and wrote at once to the lawyer and to Selenin
concerning it. Having finished the letters, he glanced at his watch;
it was already time to go to the general.

On the way he thought again of how he might hand over the pardon to
Katiousha; of the place she would be sent to, and how he would live
with her.

At dinner in the general's house all were not only very friendly to
Nekhludoff, but, as it seemed, very favorably inclined to him, as he
was a new, interesting personality. The general, who came in to dinner
with a white cross on his breast, greeted Nekhludoff like an old
friend. On the general's inquiry as to what he had done since he saw
him in the morning, Nekhludoff answered that he had been at the
postoffice, that he had found out the facts concerning the pardoning
of the person they were talking of in the morning, and he asked
permission to visit her.

The general seemed displeased, began to frown and said nothing.

"Will you have some whisky?" he said in French to the Englishman who
had walked up to him. The Englishman took some, and related that he
had been to see the cathedral of the city, and the factory, and
expressed the desire to see the great jail in which criminals were
confined on their way to Siberia.

"This idea is excellent!" exclaimed the general, turning to
Nekhludoff. "You may go together. Give them a pass!" he added, turning
to his lieutenant.

"What time do you wish to go?" Nekhludoff asked the Englishman.

"I prefer to visit prisons in the evening," the Englishman replied.
"All are then at home, and there are no preparations."

After dinner, Nekhludoff followed her into the ante-chamber, where
the Englishman was already waiting for him to visit the prison, as
they had agreed. Having taken leave of the whole family, he walked
out, followed by the Englishman.

The sombre looking prison, the soldier on guard, the lantern behind
the gate, notwithstanding the pure white layer of snow which had
covered everything--the sidewalk, the roof and the walls--made a
gloomy impression. The proud looking superintendent, walking out to
the gate and glancing at Nekhludoff's pass in the light of the
lantern, shrugged his broad shoulders, but obeyed the order and
invited the visitors to follow him. He first led them to the yard, and
then to a door on the right hand and up the stairs leading to the
office. Offering them seats, he asked them in what way he could serve
them, and learning from Nekhludoff that he wished to see Maslova, he
sent the jailer for her and prepared himself to answer the questions
which the Englishman wished to ask him, before going to the cell.

Nekhludoff translated the Englishman's questions. While they were
conversing they heard approaching footsteps, the door opened and the
jailer entered, followed by Katiousha in her prison garb, with a scarf
tied around her head.

Nekhludoff rose and made a few steps toward her. She said nothing, but
her excited expression surprised him. Her face was lit up with a
wonderful decision. He had never seen her look like that. Now the
blood rushed to her face, and now she turned pale; now her fingers
twisted convulsively the edges of her jacket, now she looked at him,
and now she dropped her eyes.

"You know what I called you for?" asked Nekhludoff.

"Yes, he told me. But now I am decided. I will ask permission to go
with Vladimir Ivanovitch." She said this quickly, as if she had made
up her mind before what to say.

"How with Vladimir Ivanovitch?" asked Nekhludoff. But she interrupted
him.

"But if he wants me to live with him?" Here she stopped in fear, and
added, "I mean to stay with him. I could expect nothing better, and
perhaps I may be useful to him and others. What difference does it
make to me?"

One of the two things had happened--either she had fallen in love
with Simonson and did not wish his sacrifice, which weighed so heavily
on him, or she was still in love with Nekhludoff and renounced him for
his own good, burning all bridges behind her, and throwing her
fortunes in the same scale with those of Simonson. Nekhludoff
understood it, and felt ashamed.

"If you are in love with him," he said.

"I never knew such people, you know. It is impossible not to love
them. And Vladimir is entirely unlike any person I have ever known."

"Yes, certainly," said Nekhludoff. "He is an excellent man, and I
think----"

Here she interrupted him, as if she were afraid that he would speak
too much, or she would not say everything.

"You will forgive me for doing that which you did not wish. You, too,
must love."

She said the very thing that he had just said to himself.

But now he was no longer thinking so, but felt altogether different.
He felt not only shame, but pity.

"Is it possible that all is at an end between us?" he said.

"Yes, it looks like it," she answered, with a strange smile.

"But nevertheless I would like to be useful to you."

"To us," she said, glancing at Nekhludoff. "We don't need anything. I
am very much obliged to you. If it were not for you"--she wished to
say something, but her voice began to tremble.

"I don't know which of us is under greater obligation to the other.
God will settle our accounts," said Nekhludoff.

"Yes, God will settle them," she whispered.

"Are you ready?" asked the Englishman.

"Directly," answered Nekhludoff, and then he inquired of her what she
knew of Kryltzoff.

She quieted down and calmly told him:

"Kryltzoff became very weak on the road and was taken to the hospital.
Maria Pablovna wanted to become a nurse, but there is no answer yet."

"Well, may I go?" she asked, noticing the Englishman who was waiting
for him.

"I am not yet taking leave of you," said Nekhludoff, holding out his
hand to her.

"Pardon me," she said in a low tone.

Their eyes met, and in that strange, stern look, and in that pitiful
smile, with which she said not "good-by," but "pardon me," Nekhludoff
understood, that of the two suppositions concerning her decision the
latter was the right one. She still loved him and thought she would
mar his life by a union with him, and would free him by living with
Simonson.

She pressed his hand, turned quickly, and left the room.



