

Nekhludoff, after parting with the Englishman, went straight to his
hotel, and walked about his room for a long time. The affair with
Katiousha was at an end. There was something ugly in the very memory
of it. But it was not that which grieved him. Some other affair of his
was yet unsettled--an affair which tortured him and required his
attention. In his imagination rose the gloomy scenes of the hundreds
and thousands of human beings pent up in the pestiferous air. The
laughter of the prisoners resounded in his ears. He saw again among
the dead bodies the beautiful, angry, waxen face of the dead
Kryltzoff; and the question whether he was mad, or all those who
commit those evils and think themselves wise were mad, bore in upon
his mind with renewed power, and he found no answer to it. The
principal difficulty consisted in finding an answer to the principal
question, which was: What should be done with those who became
brutalized in the struggle for life?

When he became tired walking about the room he sat down on the
lounge, close by the lamp, and mechanically opened the Bible which the
Englishman had presented him, and which he had thrown on the table
while emptying his pockets. They say, he thought, that this Bible
contains the solution to all questions. So, opening it, he began to
read at the place at which it opened itself--Matt. x., 8. After a
while he inclined close to the lamp and became like one petrified. An
exultation, the like of which he had not experienced for a long time,
took possession of his soul, as though, after long suffering and
weariness, he found at last liberty and rest. He did not sleep the
whole night. As is the case with many who read the Bible for the first
time, he now, on reading it again, grasped the full meaning of words
which he had known long ago, but which he had not understood before.
Like a sponge that absorbs everything, so he absorbed everything that
was important, necessary and joyful.

"That is the principal thing," thought Nekhludoff. "We all live in the
silly belief that we ourselves are the lords of our world, that this
world has been given us for our enjoyment. But this is evidently
untrue. Somebody must have sent us here for some reason. And for this
reason it is plain that we will suffer like those laborers suffer who
do not fulfill the wishes of their Master. The will of the Lord is
expressed in the teachings of Christ. Let man obey Him, and the
Kingdom of the Lord will come on earth, and man will derive the
greatest possible good.

"_Seek the truth and the Kingdom of God, and the rest will come of
itself._ We seek that which is to come, and do not find it, and not
only do we not build the Kingdom of God, but we destroy it.

"So this will henceforth be the task of my life!"

And indeed, from that night a new life began for Nekhludoff; not so
much because he had risen into a new stage of existence, but because
all that had happened to him till then assumed for him an altogether
new meaning.


THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *



TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:
(Not part of the original book.)

Below are listed the spelling inconsistencies in the names of certain
characters. The names were transcribed to match the original text
except where typos are assumed to have caused the variations. Changes
from the original are noted below, except for minor punctuation
corrections.

Absence changed to absent from original sentence (Part 1, Ch. VI,
  Pg. 25):

     He was postponing the case against the Skoptzy, although
     the absence witness was an entirely unnecessary one.

Birukova (Theodosia) (1 time)
Brinkova (Theodosia) (1 time)

Borki (village) (1 time)
Borkoff (village) (1 time)
Barkoff (village) (1 time)

Chapter (3 times)
Chepter (1 time), changed to Chapter from original sentence (Part 1,
  Ch. XLIII, Pg. 153):

    "To the Department of Cassation, etc., etc., Katherine, etc.
    Petition. By the decision, etc., of the etc., rendered, etc.,
    a certain Maslova was found guilty of taking the life, by
    poisoning, of a certain merchant Smelkoff, and in pursuance
    of Chepter 1,454 of the Code, was sentenced to etc., with
    hard labor, etc."

Daus changed to dans, from original sentence (Part 2, Ch. IX, Pg. 229):

    Il donne daus le spiritisme.

Dmitri (22 times)
Dimitri (3 times)

Dvorianskaia (1 time)
Dvorinskaia (1 time)

Fanarin (11 times)
Fanirin (19 times)

Fomer changed to former, from original sentence (Part 1, Ch. XLIII,
  Pg. 151):

     Not only was the old arrangement of things continued, but,
     as in fomer times, the house received a general cleaning.

Gerasimovich (7 times)
Gerasimovitch (8 times)

Ivanova (Bochkova) (1 time)
Ivanovna (Bochkova) (1 time)

Ivanovich (Dmitri) (14 times)
Ivanovitch (Dmitri) (3 time)

Kamensky (2 times)
Kanesky (1 time)

Katherine (Michaelovna Maslova) (15 times)
Catherine (Michaelovna Maslova) (3 times)

Katiousha (122 times)
Katiusha (3 times)

Korableva (39 times)
Korabeva (1 time), changed to Korableva from original sentence (Part 1,
  Ch. XLVI, Pg. 164):

     "Well, girl, good times are coming," said Korabeva to
     Maslova when the latter returned to the cell.

Kornei (8 times)
Kornci (1 time), changed to Kornei from original sentence (Part 2,
  Ch. VI, Pg. 215):

     The odor of camphor still hung in the air through all the
     rooms, and Agrippina, Petrovna and Kornci seemed tired out
     and dissatisfied, and even quarreled about the packing of
     the things, the use of which seemed to consist chiefly in
     being hung out, dried and packed away again.

Kryltzoff (22 times)
Kyrltzoff (1 time), changed to Kryltzoff from original sentence
  (Part 3, Ch. V, Pg. 301):

     "I cannot talk to them," Kyrltzoff said in a whisper, and
     became silent.

Kusminskoie (8 times)
Kusminskoi (1 time), changed to Kusminskoie from original sentence
  (Part 2, Ch. V, Pg. 215):

     Recalling now the feeling of pity over the loss of his
     property which he had experienced in Kusminskoi, Nekhludoff
     wondered how he could have done so.

Kusminskoe (1 time), changed to Kusminskoie from original sentence
  (Part 2, Ch. XXIV, Pg. 286):

     "I have not yet given the Kusminskoe land to the peasants."

Maslova (294 times)
Moslova (3 times)

Two occurrences of Moslova kept as in original, as they could be
interpreted as her name misspelled on the prison list, and Nekhludoff
asking for her by that name. The third was considered a typo and
changed from the original sentence (Part 1, Ch. XI, Pg. 41):

     "What took place?" suddenly said Moslova.

Menshov (9 times)
Menshova (5 times)
Menshoff (1 time)

Michaelovna (5 times)
Michaelova (1 time), changed to Michaelovna from original sentence
  (Part 1, Ch. XXIII, Pg. 82):

     3. Is the burgess Katherine Michaelova Maslova, twenty-seven
     years of age, guilty of the crime mentioned in the first
     question?

Natalie (15 times)
Natalia (10 times)
Natasha (3 times)

Nekhludoff (970 times)
Nekludoff (1 time), changed to Nekhludoff from original sentence
  (Part 1, Ch. XXV, Pg. 90):

     Nekludoff called to mind these two well-known lawyers.

Nekhuldoff (1 time), changed to Nekhludoff from original sentence
  (Part 1, Ch. XLII, Pg. 149):

     Nekhuldoff expected that at the first meeting Katiousha,
     learning of his intention to serve her, and of his
     repentance, would be moved to rejoicing, would become again
     Katiousha, but to his surprise and horror, he saw that
     Katiousha was no more; that only Maslova remained.

Nikiforovitch (26 times)
Nikiforvitch (1 time), changed to Nikiforovitch from original sentence
  (Part 2, Ch. XX, Pg. 269):

     "In the first place, the Ministry will not refer to the
     Senate," and Ignatius Nikiforvitch smiled condescendingly,
     "but will call for all the documents in the case, and, if it
     finds an error, will so decide."

Panov (5 times)
Panovo (1 time)
Panoff (1 time)

Petrovna (25 times)
Petrovana (1 time), changed to Petrovna from original sentence (Part 1,
  Ch. III, Pg. 15):

     "Then I will bid her wait," and Agrippina Petrovana glided
     out of the dining-room, first replacing the crumb-brush,
     which lay on the table, in its holder.

Replusive was changed to repulsive from the original sentence (Part 1,
  Ch. XLI, Pg. 148):

     "Because I wish to efface, to expiate my sin. Katiousha----"
     he began, and was about to tell her that he would marry her,
     but he met her eyes in which he read something so terrible,
     rude and replusive that he could not finish.

Selenin (21 times)
Selinin (1 time), changed to Selenin from original sentence (Part 3,
  Ch. VIII, Pg. 311):

     There was no news there, so he drove back to his hotel, and
     wrote at once to the lawyer and to Selinin concerning it.

Silenin (3 times), changed to Selenin from original sentences (Part 2,
  Ch. XII, Pg. 239 and Part 3, Ch. VII, Pg. 310):

     "Is the associate's name Silenin?" he asked the lawyer.

     He tore open the envelope, and, seeing a letter from Silenin
     with some official document, he felt the blood mounting to
     his cheeks, and his heart grow weak.

     "Dear friend," wrote Silenin, "our last conversation made a
     strong impression upon me."

Shouleds was changed to shoulders from the original sentence (Part 2,
  Ch. XVI, Pg. 252):

     In the box he found Mariette and a strange lady with a red
     mantle over her shouleds and high head-dress, and two men--a
     general, Mariette's husband, a handsome, tall man with a
     high, artificial, military breast, and a flaxen haired,
     bald-headed man with shaved chin and solemn side-whiskers.

Simonson (31 times)
Simsonson (1 time), changed to Simonson from the original sentence
  (Part 3, Ch. VII, Pg. 304):

     I never thought that Vladimir Simsonson could fall in love in
     such a very stupid, childish fashion.

Smelkoff (34 times)
Smeldoff (1 time), changed to Smelkoff from the original sentence
  (Part 1, Ch. XI, Pg. 39):

     "You are charged, together with Euphemia Bochkova and
     Katherine Maslova, with stealing from the trunk of the
     merchant Smeldoff money belonging to him, and subsequently
     brought arsenic and induced Maslova to administer it to
     Smelkoff, by reason of which he came to his death."

Smothly changed to smoothly from the original sentence
  (Part 1, Ch. LIII, Pg. 183):

     At first everything went on smothly, but afterward one of
     the party was caught, the papers were seized, and then all
     were taken in a police drag-net.

Tarass (7 times)
Taras (1 time), changed to Tarass from original sentence (Part 3,
  Ch. 1, Pg. 290):

     Her condition in this respect was somewhat relieved by the
     presence of Theodosia and Taras, who, learning that his wife
     was subjected to these insults, had himself included among
     the prisoners, and riding as such from Nijhni, was able to
     protect her to some extent.

Therapout (1 time)
Therapont (1 time)

TOLSTOY (Count Leo, author) (correct spelling) (0 times)
TOLSTOI (Count Leo, author) (2 times) left variation as in original.

Tourgenieff (1 time) (correct spelling.)
Tourgeniff (1 time) Could be misquoted by character, left as original.

Vasilevna (Maria) (1 time)
Vasilieona (Maria) (1 time)

Vodk changed to vodka from original sentence (Part 1, Ch. XLIV,
  Pg. 157):

     Korableva, Miss Dandy, Theodosia and Maslova, flushed and
     animated, for they had already partaken of vodk which Maslova
     now had in abundance, were sitting in their corner, talking
     of the same thing.

Maslenikoff, Nekhludoff character error:

Nekhludoff was kept in the following sentence to match the original,
and because it wasn't a simple printer's typo. It should have been
Maslenikoff speaking in place of Nekhludoff as can be seen by the
surrounding paragraphs (Part 1, Ch. LVI, Pg. 190):

     "How did you come to know it?" asked Nekhludoff, and his
     face showed disquietude and displeasure.

     "I was visiting a prisoner, and these people surrounded me
     and asked----"

     "What prisoner were you visiting?"

     "The peasant who is innocently accused, and for whom I have
     obtained counsel. But that is not to the point. Is it
     possible that these innocent people are kept in prison only
     because they failed to renew their passports?"


