{"name": "Chapter Thirty-Five: A Gascon A Match for Cupid", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210127112556/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/three-musketeers/summary/chapter-thirty-five-a-gascon-a-match-for-cupid", "summary": "It is the morning after the key evening for both Porthos and D'Artagnan. Athos, who is now with D'Artagnan, listens eagerly as the Gascon recounts the previous evening's events. D'Artagnan shows up at Milady's, where he is warmly received. As Kitty serves them sorbet, D'Artagnan can't help but reflect that the maid has a better personality than the noblewoman. Kitty remains worried that D'Artagnan loves Milady. Milady kicks D'Artagnan out at about ten o'clock, and he consoles Kitty. Milady orders that all the lights in the house be extinguished. D'Artagnan visits Kitty early and where he finds the maid weeping. He explains that what he is about to do is motivated solely by revenge. At the appointed hour, D'Artagnan, disguised as the Comte de Wardes, enters Milady's room. Believing her lover to be the Comte de Wardes, Milady tells him that she's still upset that D'Artagnan wounded him. She's plotting her revenge. D'Artagnan plays along. He marvels at his simultaneous extreme love and hate for her. She gives him a beautiful sapphire ring as a token of her love. They plan to get together again in another week. D'Artagnan shows Athos the sapphire ring, which reminds Athos of a family jewel. Athos expresses his surprise at recognizing the ring. He remembers that his family ring had one of the faces scratched; D'Artagnan's ring also has a face scratched. Athos advises D'Artagnan to stop seeing this woman because there's something dangerous about her. D'Artagnan agrees. The two friends say good-bye. D'Artagnan arrives home to find Kitty waiting for him with a note for the fake Comte de Wardes. He gathers up his courage and writes Milady the following note: There are just so many women for me to see; I'll let you know when it's your turn again. Kitty reads the letter and practically dances for joy. She runs home to hand it to Milady. Milady is flaming mad. Kitty, thinking that her mistress has fainted or is ill, goes to help her. Milady then delivers one of the ultimate power lines: \"I faint? I? I? Do you take me for half a woman? When I am insulted I do not faint; I avenge myself!\" It looks like our hero is headed for trouble!", "analysis": ""}