SCENE IV.
Rome. PHILARIO'S house

Enter PHILARIO, IACHIMO, a FRENCHMAN, a DUTCHMAN, and a SPANIARD

  IACHIMO. Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain. He was
then
    of a crescent note, expected to prove so worthy as since he
hath
    been allowed the name of. But I could then have look'd on him
    without the help of admiration, though the catalogue of his
    endowments had been tabled by his side, and I to peruse him
by
    items.
  PHILARIO. You speak of him when he was less furnish'd than now
he
    is with that which makes him both without and within.
  FRENCHMAN. I have seen him in France; we had very many there
could
    behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.
  IACHIMO. This matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein
he
    must be weighed rather by her value than his own, words him,
I
    doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
  FRENCHMAN. And then his banishment.
  IACHIMO. Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this
lamentable
    divorce under her colours are wonderfully to extend him, be
it
    but to fortify her judgment, which else an easy battery might
lay
    flat, for taking a beggar, without less quality. But how
comes it
    he is to sojourn with you? How creeps acquaintance?
  PHILARIO. His father and I were soldiers together, to whom I
have
    been often bound for no less than my life.

                       Enter POSTHUMUS

    Here comes the Briton. Let him be so entertained amongst you
as
    suits with gentlemen of your knowing to a stranger of his
    quality. I beseech you all be better known to this gentleman,
    whom I commend to you as a noble friend of mine. How worthy
he is
    I will leave to appear hereafter, rather than story him in
his
    own hearing.
  FRENCHMAN. Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
  POSTHUMUS. Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies,
    which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.
  FRENCHMAN. Sir, you o'errate my poor kindness. I was glad I did
    atone my countryman and you; it had been pity you should have
    been put together with so mortal a purpose as then each bore,
    upon importance of so slight and trivial a nature.
  POSTHUMUS. By your pardon, sir. I was then a young traveller;
    rather shunn'd to go even with what I heard than in my every
    action to be guided by others' experiences; but upon my
mended
    judgment- if I offend not to say it is mended- my quarrel was
not
    altogether slight.
  FRENCHMAN. Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords,
and
    by such two that would by all likelihood have confounded one
the
    other or have fall'n both.
  IACHIMO. Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
  FRENCHMAN. Safely, I think. 'Twas a contention in public, which
    may, without contradiction, suffer the report. It was much
like
    an argument that fell out last night, where each of us fell
in
    praise of our country mistresses; this gentleman at that time
    vouching- and upon warrant of bloody affirmation- his to be
more
    fair, virtuous, wise, chaste, constant, qualified, and less
    attemptable, than any the rarest of our ladies in France.
  IACHIMO. That lady is not now living, or this gentleman's
opinion,
    by this, worn out.
  POSTHUMUS. She holds her virtue still, and I my mind.
  IACHIMO. You must not so far prefer her fore ours of Italy.
  POSTHUMUS. Being so far provok'd as I was in France, I would
abate
    her nothing, though I profess myself her adorer, not her
friend.
  IACHIMO. As fair and as good- a kind of hand-in-hand
comparison-
    had been something too fair and too good for any lady in
Britain.
    If she went before others I have seen as that diamond of
yours
    outlustres many I have beheld, I could not but believe she
    excelled many; but I have not seen the most precious diamond
that
    is, nor you the lady.
  POSTHUMUS. I prais'd her as I rated her. So do I my stone.
  IACHIMO. What do you esteem it at?
  POSTHUMUS. More than the world enjoys.
  IACHIMO. Either your unparagon'd mistress is dead, or she's
    outpriz'd by a trifle.
  POSTHUMUS. You are mistaken: the one may be sold or given, if
there
    were wealth enough for the purchase or merit for the gift;
the
    other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the gods.
  IACHIMO. Which the gods have given you?
  POSTHUMUS. Which by their graces I will keep.
  IACHIMO. You may wear her in title yours; but you know strange
fowl
    light upon neighbouring ponds. Your ring may be stol'n too.
So
    your brace of unprizable estimations, the one is but frail
and
    the other casual; a cunning thief, or a that-way-accomplish'd
    courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
  POSTHUMUS. Your Italy contains none so accomplish'd a courtier
to
    convince the honour of my mistress, if in the holding or loss
of
    that you term her frail. I do nothing doubt you have store of
    thieves; notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.
  PHILARIO. Let us leave here, gentlemen.
  POSTHUMUS. Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, I thank
    him, makes no stranger of me; we are familiar at first.
  IACHIMO. With five times so much conversation I should get
ground
    of your fair mistress; make her go back even to the yielding,
had
    I admittance and opportunity to friend.
  POSTHUMUS. No, no.
  IACHIMO. I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to your
    ring, which, in my opinion, o'ervalues it something. But I
make
    my wager rather against your confidence than her reputation;
and,
    to bar your offence herein too, I durst attempt it against
any
    lady in the world.
  POSTHUMUS. You are a great deal abus'd in too bold a
persuasion,
    and I doubt not you sustain what y'are worthy of by your
attempt.
  IACHIMO. What's that?
  POSTHUMUS. A repulse; though your attempt, as you call it,
deserve
    more- a punishment too.
  PHILARIO. Gentlemen, enough of this. It came in too suddenly;
let
    it die as it was born, and I pray you be better acquainted.
  IACHIMO. Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on th'
    approbation of what I have spoke!
  POSTHUMUS. What lady would you choose to assail?
  IACHIMO. Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe. I
will
    lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring that, commend me to
the
    court where your lady is, with no more advantage than the
    opportunity of a second conference, and I will bring from
thence
    that honour of hers which you imagine so reserv'd.
  POSTHUMUS. I will wage against your gold, gold to it. My ring I
    hold dear as my finger; 'tis part of it.
  IACHIMO. You are a friend, and therein the wiser. If you buy
    ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot preserve it
from
    tainting. But I see you have some religion in you, that you
fear.
  POSTHUMUS. This is but a custom in your tongue; you bear a
graver
    purpose, I hope.
  IACHIMO. I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo
what's
    spoken, I swear.
  POSTHUMUS. Will you? I Shall but lend my diamond till your
return.
    Let there be covenants drawn between's. My mistress exceeds
in
    goodness the hugeness of your unworthy thinking. I dare you
to
    this match: here's my ring.
  PHILARIO. I will have it no lay.
  IACHIMO. By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no sufficient
    testimony that I have enjoy'd the dearest bodily part of your
    mistress, my ten thousand ducats are yours; so is your
diamond
    too. If I come off, and leave her in such honour as you have
    trust in, she your jewel, this your jewel, and my gold are
yours-
    provided I have your commendation for my more free
entertainment.
  POSTHUMUS. I embrace these conditions; let us have articles
betwixt
    us. Only, thus far you shall answer: if you make your voyage
upon
    her, and give me directly to understand you have prevail'd, I
am
    no further your enemy- she is not worth our debate; if she
remain
    unseduc'd, you not making it appear otherwise, for your ill
    opinion and th' assault you have made to her chastity you
shall
    answer me with your sword.
  IACHIMO. Your hand- a covenant! We will have these things set
down
    by lawful counsel, and straight away for Britain, lest the
    bargain should catch cold and starve. I will fetch my gold
and
    have our two wagers recorded.
  POSTHUMUS. Agreed.                Exeunt POSTHUMUS and IACHIMO
  FRENCHMAN. Will this hold, think you?
  PHILARIO. Signior Iachimo will not from it. Pray let us follow
'em.
                                                          Exeunt





