{"name": "chapter xix", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025235/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Looking_Backward_Bellamy/Looking_Backward_Study_Guide15.html", "summary": "The next morning, Julian West goes for a walk and realizes that the state prison in Charleston is missing. When he gets back, Doctor Leete explains that there are no prisons and that cases of atavism are treated in the hospitals. Atavism, Julian West learns, refers to behavior that comes from the past and does not belong in the present age. Julian West feels embarrassed at this idea, since the behavior of his age is considered backward and criminal. Edith Leete tells him to consider the twentieth century his age now, and Doctor Leete explains the thinking behind this term. In the nineteenth century, most crime resulted from inequalities in peoples possessions. He compares the need for money to the tap root of a vast poisonous growth. It required all the law, police, and government resources to keep this growth from overpowering the whole of society. Making everyone fully equal was like cutting the tap root. The small number of crimes that were not caused by poverty were largely eradicated by improvements in the education of the populace. Now, all crime is treated as an illness, and perpetrators are treated with firm kindness. Doctor Leete next explains how criminals are tried. There are no lawyers in this utopia. The criminals usually plead honestly as to their guilt or innocence, and a judge decides the case. In serious cases, three judges hear the case. No jury is used. The president of the nation appoints the judges. There are no law schools because the laws are so simple. They see the great legal minds of the nineteenth century as very smart men who were experts in an abstract subject of study that no longer has a practical application. Julian West wonders about state governments. Doctor Leete says they have been abolished, central government being more efficient and logical, but that municipal governments are still intact. Julian West wonders how they get legislation passed when their congress meets only once every five years. He finds out that this society has almost no legislation, since the fundamental principles on which the society is founded settle for all time the strifes and misunderstandings which called for legislation in the nineteenth century. Since the laws of Julian Wests time were set up mainly to protect private property and the relations between buyers and sellers, the disappearance of these entities makes such laws obsolete. Doctor Leete compares the structure of nineteenth-century society to an upside down pyramid. It was always threatening to fall over, and the only way to maintain it was with all kinds of props, like laws. Now society rests on its base and does not need artificial supports.", "analysis": ""}