LESSON V

THE DANGERS OF SENTIMENTALITY


The Shogun says: "There are sentimentalities of many kinds, some present
less dangers than others, but from every point of view they are
prejudicial to the acquisition and exercise of common sense. To cultivate
sentiment over which the Will has no control is always to be regretted.

"Sentimentality is multiform.

"It presents itself, at times, under the aspect of an obscure appeal to
sensuality and brings with it a passing desire of the heart and of the
senses, which produces an artificial appreciation of the emotion felt.

"In this first case sentimentality is an unconscious manifestation of
egotism, because, outside of that which provokes this outward
manifestation, everything is alienated and becomes indistinct.

"The incidents of existence lose their true proportion, since everything
becomes relative to the object because of our preoccupation.

"The impulse reigns supreme there when sentimentality establishes itself,
    and the desire of judgment, if it makes itself apparent, is quickly
    shunned, to the profit of illusory reasons, in which pure reason does not
    intervene.

    "This sentimentality amalgamating the springs of egotism bereaves the
    soul's longing of all its greatness.

    "The anxiety to attribute all our impressions to emotion is only a way of
    intensifying it for our personal satisfaction, at the expense of a
    sentiment far deeper and more serious, which never blossoms under the
    shadow of egotism and of frivolous sentimentality.

    "Never will common sense have the chance to manifest itself in those who
    permit such ephemeral and enfeebling impressions to implant themselves in
    their souls.

    "However they must be pitied because their artificial emotion often
    results in a sorrow which is not lessened by repetition, but whose
    manifestation is none the less prejudicial to the peace of their being.

    "All those who do not harmonize common sense and the emotions of the
    heart become passive to the investiture of a sentimentality which does
    not wait to know if the object be worthy of them before it exists in
    consciousness.

    "From this state of mind arise disillusions and their recurrence entails
    a defect in the conception.

    "Men who are often deceived in allowing themselves to feel a sorrow which
    is only based on the longings of sentimentality become pessimists quickly
    and deny the existence of deep and enduring affection judged from its
    superior expression.

    "This superior expression of sentiment is freed from all personality and
    such judgment which differentiates it from other sentiments.

    "If we wished to appeal to common sense we should acknowledge, too often,
    that in the search for expansion we have only recognized the opportunity
    to satisfy the inclination which urges us to seek for pleasure.

    "Sentiment reasons, and is capable of devotion. Sentimentality excludes
    reflective thought and ignores generosity.

    "We are capable of sacrificing ourselves for sentiment.

    "Sentimentality exacts the sacrifice of others.

    "Therefore, profiting by the principles already developed, he who
    cultivates common sense will never fail to reason in the following
    manner:

    "Opening the symbolic fan, he will encounter, after perfection, the
    memory which will suggest to him the recollections of personal and
    strange experiences and he will record this fact: abegation is rarely
    encountered.

    "The inclination of our thoughts will suggest to us the difficulties
    there are in searching for it.

    "Deduction will acquaint us with the temerity of this exaction, and
    precaution will attract our thoughts to the possibility of suffering
    which could proceed from disillusion.

    "Following this, reasoning and judgment will intervene in order to hasten
    the conclusion formulated by common sense.

    "It follows then that, abnegation being so rare, common sense indicates
    to me that it would be imprudent for me to allow my happiness to rest
    upon the existence of a thing so exceptional.

    "For this reason this sentimental defect will find common sense armed
    against this eventuality.

    "There is another form or sentimentality not less common.

    "It is that which extends itself to all the circumstances of life and
    transforms true pity into a false sensibility, the exaggeration of which
    deteriorates the true value of things.

    "Those who give publicity to this form of sentiment are agitated (or
    imagine themselves to be agitated) as profoundly on the most futile of
    pretexts as for the most important cause.

    "They do not think to ask themselves if their ardor is merited; also
    every such experience, taking out of them something of their inner
    selves, leaves them enfeebled and stranded.

    "Every excursion into the domain of sentimentality is particularly
    dangerous, for tourists always fail to carry with them the necessary
    coinage which one calls common sense."

    After having put ourselves on guard against the surprizes of mental
    exaggeration, Yoritomo warns us of a kind of high respectable
    sentimentality which we possess, that is none the less censurable
    because under an exterior of the purest tenderness it conceals a
    profound egotism.

    It concerns paternal love from which reasoning and common sense
    are excluded.

    "Nothing" said he, "seems more noble than the love of parents for their
    children, and no sentiment is more august when it is comprehended in all
    its grandeur.

    "But how many people are apt to distinguish it from an egotistical
    sentimentality.

    "I have seen some mothers oppose the departure of their sons, preferring
    to oblige them to lead an obscure existence near to them, rather than
    impose upon themselves the sorrow of a separation.

    "These women do not fail to condemn the action of others, who, filled
    with a sublime abnegation, allow their children to depart, hiding from
    them the tears which they shed, because they have the conviction of
    seeing them depart for the fortune and the happiness which they feel
    themselves unable to offer them.

    "Which of these are worthy of admiration? Those who condemn their
    children to a life of mediocrity in order to obey an egotistical
    sentimentality, or those who, with despair in their hearts, renounce the
    joy of their presence, and think only of their own grief in order to
    build upon it the happiness of their dear ones.

    "The common sense of this latter class inspiring in them this magnificent
    sentiment, and forcing them to set aside a sentimentality which is, in
    reality, only the caricature of sentiment, has permitted them to escape
    that special kind of egotism, which could be defined thus: The
    translation of a desire for personal contentment.

    "Ought we then to blame others so strongly?

    "It is necessary, above all, to teach them to reason about the ardor of
    their emotions, and only to follow them when they find that they are
    cleansed from all aspiration which is not a pledge of devotion."

    Now the Shogun speaks to us with that subtlety of analysis which is
    characteristic and refers to a kind of sentimentality the most frequent
    and the least excusable.

    "There are," he tells us, "a number of people who, without knowing that
    they offend common sense in a most indefensible manner, invoke
    sentimentality in order to dispense with exercising the most vulgar pity,
    to the profit of their neighbor.

    "A prince," he continues, "possest a large? tract of land which he had
    put under grain.

    "For the harvest, a large number of peasants and laborers were employed
    and each one lived on the products of his labor.

    "But a prolonged drought threatened the crop; so the prince's overseer
    dismissed most of the laborers, who failed to find employment in the
    parched country.

    "Soon hunger threatened the inmates of the miserable dwellings, and
    sickness, its inseparable companion, did not fail to follow.

    "Facing the conditions the prince left, and had it not been for two
    or three wealthy and charitable people the laborers would have
    starved to death.

    "This pitiful condition was soon changed, abundance replaced famine, and
    the master returned to live in his domain.

    "But amazement followed when he addrest his people as follows: Here I am,
    back among you, and I hope to remain here a long time; if I left you, it
    was because I have so great an affection for all my servants and because
    even the bare thought of seeing them suffer caused me unbearable sorrow.

    "I am not among those who are sufficiently hard-hearted to be able to
    take care of sick and suffering people and to be a witness of their
    martyrdom. My pity is too keen to permit of my beholding this spectacle;
    this is why I had to leave to others, less sensitive, the burden of care
    which my too tender heart was unable to lavish on you."

    And that which is more terrible is that this man believed what he said.

    He did not understand the monstrous rent which he made in the robe of
    common sense, by declaring that he had committed the vilest act of
    cruelty due to excessive sensitiveness since it represented a murderous
    act of omission.

    Examples of this form of sentimentality are more numerous than we think.

    There exist people who cover their dogs with caresses, gorging them with
    dainties, and will take good care not to succor the needy.

    Others faint away at sight of an accident and never think of giving aid
    to the wounded.

    One may observe that for people exercising sentimentality at the expense
    of common sense, the greatest catastrophe in intensity, if it be far away
    from us, diminishes, while the merest incident, a little out of the
    ordinary, affects them in a most immoderate manner if it be produced in
    the circle of their acquaintances.

    It is needless to add that, if it touches them directly, it becomes an
    unparalleled calamity; it seems that the rest of the world must be
    troubled by it.

    This propensity toward pitying oneself unreasonably about little things
    which relate to one directly and this exaggerated development of a
    sterile sentimentality are almost always artificial, and the instinct of
    self-preservation very often aids in their extermination.

    "Among my old disciples," pursues the Shogun, "I had a friend whose son
    was afflicted by this kind of sentimentality, the sight of blood made him
    faint and he was incapable of aiding any one whomsoever; that which he
    called his good heart, and which was only a form of egotistical
    sentimentality, prevented him from looking at the suffering of others.

    "One day, a terrible earthquake destroyed his palace; he escaped, making
    his way through the ruins and roughly pushing aside the wounded who told
    about it afterward.

    "I saw him some days after; instead of reproaching him severely for his
    conduct, I endeavored to make him see how false was his conception of
    pity, since, not only had he not fainted at the sight of those who,
    half-dead, were groaning, but he had found in the egotistical sentiment
    of self-preservation the strength to struggle against those who clung to
    him, beseeching him for help.

    "I demonstrated to him the evident contradiction of his instinctive
    cruelty to the sentimentality that it pleased him to make public.

    "I made an appeal to common sense, in order to prove to him the attitude
    which he had, until then, assumed, and I had the joy of seeing myself
    understood.

    "My arguments appealed to his mentality, and always afterward, when he
    had the opportunity to bring puerile sentimentality and common sense face
    to face, he forced himself to appeal to that quality, which in revealing
    to him the artifice of the sentiment which animated him, cured him of
    false sensibility, which he had displayed up to that time."

    Sentimentality is in reality only a conception of egotism, under the
    different forms which it adopts.

    Yoritomo proves it to us again, in speaking of the weakness of certain
    teachers, who, under the pretext of avoiding trouble, allow their
    children to follow their defective inclinations.

    "It is by an instinctive hatred of effort that parents forbid themselves
    to make their children cry when reprimanding them," said he.

    "If the parents wish to be sincere to themselves, they will perceive that
    the sorrow in seeing their children's tears flow, plays a very small part
    in their preconceived idea of indulgence.

    "It is in order to economize their own nervous energy or to avoid
    cleverly the trouble of continued teaching, that they hesitate to provoke
    these imaginary miseries, the manifestation of which is caused by the
    great weakness of the teachers.

    "Common sense, nevertheless, ought to make them understand that it is
    preferable to allow the little ones to shed a few tears, which are
    quickly dried, rather than to tolerate a deplorable propensity for these
    habits which, later in life, will cause them real anxiety."

    And the philosopher concludes:

    "A very little reasoning could suffice to convince one of the dangers of
    sentimentality, if the persons who devote themselves entirely to it
    consented to reflect, by frankly agreeing to the true cause which
    produces it.

    "They would discover in this false pity the desire not to disturb their
    own tranquility.

    "They would also perceive that, in order to spare themselves a few
    unpleasant moments in the present they are preparing for themselves great
    sorrow for the future.

    "In parental affection, as in friendship or in the emotions of
    love, sentimentality is none other than an exaggerated amplification
    of the ego.

    "If it be true that all our acts, even those most worthy of approbation,
    can react in our personality, at least it is necessary that we should be
    logical and that, in order to create for ourselves a partial happiness or
    to avoid a temporary annoyance, we should not prepare for ourselves an
    existence, outlined by deception and fruitless regrets.

    "Sentimentality and its derivatives, puerile pity and false
    sensitiveness, can create illusion for those who do not practise the art
    of reasoning, but the friends of common sense do not hesitate to condemn
    them for it.

    "In spite of the glitter in which it parades itself, sentimentality will
    never be anything but the dross of true sentiment."




