LESSON XI

COMMON SENSE AND SELF-CONTROL


"Where life manifests itself," says Yoritomo, "antagonism always
springs up."

"In the eternal struggle between the individual and social soul, each of
which, in its turn, is victorious or vanquished, a truce is declared only
if self-control is allied to common sense, in order to maintain the
equilibrium between individual sentiment, natural to each one of us, and
the ideas of mankind as a whole.

"All classes of society are subject to this law, and, from the proudest
prince to the humblest peasant, every one is obliged to harmonize their
social duties with their personal obligations.

"Those who understand how to imbibe thoroughly the lessons of common
sense, never ignore the fact that morality is always closely related to
self-interest.

"If each one of us would observe this rule individual happiness would not
be long in creating a harmony from which all men would benefit.

"One thing we should avoid, for the attainment of universal
tranquility, and that is the perpetual conflict between individual and
social interest.

"The day when each one of us can comprehend that he is a part of this
'all,' which is called society, he will admit that sinning against
society may be considered the same as sinning against oneself.

"Passing one day before an immense cabin, built of bamboo, which stood
near a rice-plantation, I perceived a man who hid himself from my view,
     without however being able to escape my notice altogether. I went
     resolutely to him, to ask him the explanation of his suspicious movement.

     "After an unsuccessful attempt to escape, he resigned himself to allow me
     to approach him, and I understood the reason of his apprehension:

     "He was carrying several pieces of bamboo which he had detached from the
     house. He wanted, he said, to make a little blaze because the dampness
     was chilling him.

     "Without replying to him, I led him by the hand to the place where the
     branches taken away had left a large space, a kind of opening in the side
     of the house, through which a keen wind was rushing.

     "'Look,' I said to him, 'the blaze that you are going to make will warm
     you for a few minutes, but, during the whole night the cold wind will
     freeze you--you and your companions.

     "'In order to procure for yourself an agreeable but passing sensation you
     are going to inflict upon them continued sufferings, of which you can not
     escape your share.'

     "The man hung his head and said: 'I had not thought of this; I was cold
     and I allowed myself to be tempted by the anticipated pleasure of warming
     myself, even if only for a few minutes.'

     "And, convinced by common sense, he repaired the harm which he had done,
     first by reason of selfishness, then by thoughtlessness, but, above all,
     by lack of self-control.

     "To dominate oneself to the point of not allowing oneself to become the
     slave of miserable contingencies which appear as temptations to
     self-indulgence, and conceal from their pettiness the beauty of the
     consistent action--this is only given to the chosen few and can only be
     understood by those who cultivate common sense."

     Is this to say that reasoning should be a school for abnegation.

     Such a thought is far from our minds.

     Neither habitual abnegation nor modesty is among the militant virtues,
     and for this reason the critics ought often to relegate them to their
     proper place, which is the last, very close to defects to which they
     closely approach and among whose ranks one must sometimes go in order to
     discover them.

     But, apart from the question of a sterile abnegation, we must foresee
     that it may be important not to overestimate one's individual interests,
     to the visible detriment of the general interest.

     This is a fault common to all those who have not been initiated into the
     practise of self-control by means of reasoning based on solid premises.

     They are ready to sacrifice very great interests, which do not seem to
     concern them directly, for some immediate paltry gratification.

     "They act," said the philosopher, "like a peasant who should risk
     his harvest in order to avoid paying the prince the rent which
     belongs to him.

     "Common sense teaches us that we should call to our assistance
     self-control, in order to repress the tendencies which tempt men to
     sacrifice the general interest to some personal and vehement desire.

     "Rarely do these people find their advantage in separating themselves
     from the mass, and the prosperity of the greatest number is always the
     cradle of individual fortunes."

     Leaving questions of primary importance to come to the subtleties of
     detail in which, he delights, Yoritomo speaks to us of self-control
     allied to common sense, extolling to us its good effects in practical
     questions of our every-day life.

     "We too often confound," said he, "self-control and liberty.

     "We are tempted to believe that a slave can not possess it, inasmuch as
     it is the special possession of all those to whom riches give a superior
     position in the world.

     "How profound is this error!

     "The lowest slave can enjoy this liberty, which is worth all others:
     self-control, which confers intellectual independence more precious than
     the most precious of possessions, whereas the most powerful prince may be
     altogether ignorant of this blessing.

     "There are dependent souls who, for want of the necessary strength to
     escape from vassalage to the external impressions will always drag on,
     feeble and opprest by the exactions of a mental servitude from which they
     can not free themselves.

     "Others rise proudly, ready to command circumstances, which they dominate
     with all the power of their volition governed by reason.

     "It is common sense which will guide them in this ascent by keeping them
     within the limits assigned to those things pertaining to reason and
     rectitude of mind.

     "Before everything, it is well not to forget that this faculty invites
     those who cultivate it to seek always for exact facts.

     "Knowledge, in all its aspects is, then, a perfect educator for those who
     do not wish to build on the flimsy foundation of approximate truth.

     "In pronouncing the word knowledge, we do not wish to speak of abstract
     studies which are only accessible to a small number; we wish to express
     the thought of instruction embracing all things, even the most humble
     and ordinary.

     "A man from the city was walking in the country one day, not far from a
     vast swamp.

     "All around it were a few miserable huts, the shelter of some peasants
     whose business it was to gather the reeds from the borders, weaving them
     into large baskets to be sold afterward in the neighboring country.

     "Little by little twilight descended, slowly enveloping all things in a
     mist of ashy gray, and vapors arose from afar over the stagnant water.

     "The man from the city trembled, believing that he recognized fantoms in
     this moving vapor; he sought to flee, but, unfamiliar with the locality,
     he ran along the side of the swamp without finding the end of it.

     "Exhausted from fatigue and trembling with fear, he resolved to knock at
     one of the cabins.

     "He was welcomed by a basket-maker, to whom he related his fright, adding
     that he was unable to understand how this man found the courage to live
     in a place haunted in such a terrible way.

     "The peasant smiled and explained to the man, whose intellectual culture
     was, however, infinitely superior to his own, by what phenomenon of
     evaporation these mirages were produced.

     "He demonstrated to him that these fantoms were only harmless vapors, and
     the city man admired the knowledge which common sense had taught the
     ignorant one."

     And Yoritomo concluded:

     "This peasant gave there a proof of what self-control allied to common
     sense can do.

     "Instead of allowing himself to be influenced by appearances, he confined
     himself to reflection, and observation aided by attention led him to a
     deduction resting on truth.

     "The essential factor of control is cool-headedness, which permits of
     seeing things in their true light, and forbids us to gild them or to
     darken them, according to our state of mind at the time."

     The Shogun adds:

     "Fear, hideous fear, is a sentiment unknown to those whose soul communes
     with self-control and common sense.

     "The first of these qualities will produce a fixt resolution tending to
     calmness, at the same time that it makes a powerful appeal to
     cool-headedness, which permits of reflection.

     "Fear is always the confession of a weakness which disavows struggle and
     wishes to ignore the name of adversary.

     "Cool-headedness is the evanescent examination of forces, either physical
     or intellectual, with reference to supposed danger.

     "Without self-control cool-headedness can not exist; but it only develops
     completely under the influence of common sense which dictates to it the
     reasons for its existence.

     "Cool-headedness, by leaving us our liberty of thought, enlightens us
     undoubtedly on the nature of danger, at the same time that it suggests to
     us the way to avoid it, if it really exists.

     "There can not be a question of fear for those who possess the faculties
     of which we have just spoken, for it is well known that, from the moment
     when the cause of fear is defined it ceases to exist; it becomes stupid
     illusion or a real enemy.

     "In the one case, as in the other, it ought not to excite anxiety any
     longer, but contempt or the desire to fight it.

     "For those whose mind is not yet strong enough to resolve on one or other
     of these decisions it will be well to take up again the argument
     indicated in the preceding pages, and to say:

     "Either the object of my fear really exists, and, in this case, I must
     determine its nature exactly, in order to use the proper means first to
     combat it and then to conquer it.

     "Or it is only an illusion, and I am going to seek actively for that
     which produces it, in order never again to fall into the error of which
     my senses have just been the dupes."

     Looking over these manuscripts, so rich in valuable advice, we find once
     more the following lines:

     "Self-control and cool-headedness are above all necessary to aid in
     dissimulating impressions.

     "It is very bad to allow one of the speakers in a dialog to read the mind
     of him who speaks to him like an open book.

     "He whose thoughts are imprest vividly on the surface is always placed at
     a glaring disadvantage.

     "The thought of glorifying hypocrisy is far from our minds, for it has
     nothing to do with the attitude which we recommend.

     "The hypocrite strives to assume emotions which he does not feel.

     "The man gifted with cool-headedness is intent on never allowing them
     to be seen.

     "It keeps his adversary in ignorance of the effect produced by his
     reasoning and allows him to take his chance, until the moment when, in
     spite of this feigned indifference, he reveals himself and permits his
     mind to be seen.

     "Now, to know the designs of a rival, when he is ignorant of those that
     we have conceived, is one of the essential factors of success.

     "In every way, he who is informed about the projects of his adversary
     walks preceded by a torch of light, while the adversary, if he can not
     divine his opponent's plans, continues to fight in darkness."

     The most elementary common sense counsels then cool-headedness
     when exchanging ideas, even when the discussion is of quite an
     amicable nature.

     From this habit there will result a very praiseworthy propensity to
     exercise self-control, which is only a sort of superior cool-headedness.

     It is also the cause of a noble pride, because it is more difficult to
     win a victory over one's passions than to conquer ordinary enemies, and
     he who, with the support of common sense, succeeds in ruling himself, can
     calculate, without arrogance, the hour when he will reign over the minds
     of others.




