LESSON XII

COMMON SENSE DOES NOT EXCLUDE GREAT ASPIRATIONS


"A very common error," says Yoritomo, "is that which consists in
classifying common sense among the amorphous virtues, only applicable to
things and to people whose fundamental principle is materiality.

"This is a calumny which is spread broadcast by fools who scatter their
lives to the four winds of caprice and extravagance.

"Not only does common sense not exclude beauty, but it really aids in its
inception and protects its growth by maintaining the reasons which
produced its appearance.

"Without it, the reign of the most admired things would be of short
duration, granting that the want of logic had not prevented their
production.

"What is there more commendable than the love of work, devotion to
science, ambition to succeed?

"Could all this exist if common sense did not intervene to permit the
development of the deductions on which are based the resolutions that
inspired in us these aspirations.

"But this is not all; without logic, which permits us to give them
solidity, the most serious resolutions would soon become nothing but
vague projects, shattered as soon as formed.

"In common sense lies the cause and the object of things.

"It is common sense which makes us realize that difference that
few persons are willing to analyze, and which lies between
judgment and opinion.

"We almost always succeed in readily confounding them, and from this
mistake results a too-frequent cause of failures.

"Opinion is a conviction which is capable of modification.

"In addition to this, as it is based on mere indications and probability,
    it is rarely free from the personal element.

    "Opinion depends upon the favorite inclination, upon the mood of the
    moment, upon sundry considerations, which direct it almost always toward
    the desired solution.

    "Also it depends often on thoughtfulness or on the inexactness of the
    initial representation, which we are pleased to disguise slightly at
    first, then little by little to color in accordance with our desires.

    "Falsehood does not necessarily enter into this process of tricking
    things out; it is, three-quarters of the time, the result of an illusion
    which we are prone to perpetuate within us.

    "We are too often in the position of the three wise men who, while
    rummaging in an old sarcophagus, discovered a vase whose primitive
    function they were unable to determine with any certainty.

    "One of them was a poet and an idealist.

    "The second only prized positive things.

    "The third belonged to the category of melancholy people.

    "After a few days devoted to special research work, they met together
    again in order to communicate to each other their different opinions
    about the exhumed vase.

    "'I have found the secret,' said the first.

    "'I also,' affirmed the second.

    "'I equally have found it,' replied the third.

    "And each one based his opinion on preconceived notions which reflected
    their bent of mind:

    "'This vase,' said the first, 'was intended to hold incense, which
    they burned a that epoch, in the belief that the smoke dispelled the
    evil spirits.'

    "'Nonsense!' cried out the second; 'this vase is a pot which at that time
    served as a receptacle for keeping spices.'

    "'Not so!' insisted the third, 'it is an urn of antiquated design used
    for receiving tears; that is all.'

    "These three serious men were certainly sincere in giving explanations
    which each one of them declared decisive. They exprest opinions which
    they believed implicitly and which their respective natures directed
    irresistibly toward their peculiar bents of mind.

    "Judgment, in order to be free from all which is not common sense, ought
    then to put aside all personal predilections, all desire to form a
    conclusion to humor our inclinations.

    "Absolute impartiality of judgment is one of the rarest gifts and at the
    same time is the noblest quality which we can possess."

    We should then conclude, with the Shogun, that common sense aids in the
    production of noble aspirations, and is not concerned only with that
    which relates to materiality, as so many people would have us understand.

    The Nippon philosopher teaches us also the part which he assigns to the
    habitual practise of goodness.

    "We are too easily persuaded," he says, "that goodness, like beauty, is a
    gift of birth.

    "It is time to destroy an error rooted in our minds for too many
    centuries.

    "Goodness is acquired by reasoning and logic, as are so many other
    qualities, and it is common sense which governs its formation.

    "Have we ever reflected over the sum total of annoyances that people, who
    are essentially wicked, add every day to those imposed upon them by
    circumstances?

    "Are we capable of appreciating the joys of life when impatience makes
    the nerves vibrate or when anger brandishes its torch in the bends and
    turns of the brain?

    "People who lack goodness are the first to be punished for their defect.
    Serenity is unknown to them and they live in perpetual agitation, caused
    by the irritation which they experience on the slightest provocation."

    Common sense indicates then in an irrefutable way that there is every
    advantage in being good.

    And Yoritomo proves it to us, by using his favorite syllogism:

    "Happiness," he says, "is above all a combination of harmony and absence
    of sorrow.

    "Wickedness, by inspiring us with discontent and anger, disturbs
    this harmony.

    "We must, therefore, banish wickedness, that we may cultivate goodness,
    which is the creator of harmony."

    Continuing still further the same argument, he adds:

    "Common sense would have the tendency even to make us promise to be good,
    so as to satisfy our own egotism.

    "Goodness creates smiles; to sow happiness around one, is a way of having
    neither eyes nor heart offended by the sight of people in tears; it is
    the eliciting of an agreeable joy, whose rays will shed a golden light
    over our life; is it not more pleasing to hear the ring of laughter than
    to listen to painful sobs?"

    So, we should never lose an opportunity of being good and that without
    mental reservation.

    Gratitude is not the possession of every soul and he who does good may
    expect to receive ingratitude.

    He will not suffer from it, if he has done good, not in the way a
    creditor does who intends to come on the very day appointed to claim his
    debt, but as a giver who fulfils his mission from which he is expecting
    a personal satisfaction, without thinking of any acknowledgment for what
    he has done.

    If the debtor is filled with gratitude, the joy of being good is that
    much increased.

    There is a species of common sense of a particularly noble quality that
    is called moral sense and which the Shogun defines thus:

    "The moral sense is the common sense of the soul; it is the superior
    power of reasoning which stands before us that we may be prevented from
    passively following our instincts; it is by its assistance that we
    succeed without too much difficulty in climbing the steep paths of duty.

    "This sense discerns an important quality, which puts us on our guard
    against the danger of certain theories, whose brilliancy might seduce us.

    "It is the moral sense which indicates to us the point of delimitation
    separating legitimate concessions from forbidden license.

    "It allows us to go as far as the dangerous place where the understanding
    with conscience might become compromised and, by reasoning, proves to us
    that there would be serious danger in proceeding further.

    "It is the moral sense which distinguishes civilized man from the brute;
    it is the regulator of the movements of the soul and the faithful
    indicator of the actions which depend on it."

    We must really pity those who are deprived of moral sense for they are
    the prey of all the impulses created in them by the brute-nature, which
    sleeps in the depths of each human creature.

    The man whose moral sense is developed will live at peace with himself,
    for he will only know the evil of doubt when he realizes the satisfaction
    of having conquered it.

    Moral sense, like common sense, is formed by reasoning and is fostered by
    the practise of constant application.

    It is the property of those who avoid evil, as others avoid the spatter
    of mud, through horror of the stains which result from it.

    Those who do not have this apprehension flounder about, cover themselves
    with mud, sink in it and finally are swallowed up.

    Yoritomo again takes up the defense of common sense, with reference
    to the arts.

    "Can one imagine," he says, "a painter conceiving a picture and grouping
    his figures in such a way as to violate the rules of common sense?

    "We should be doomed, if this were true, to see men as tall as oak-trees
    and houses resembling children's toy constructions, placed without
    reference to equilibrium among green or pink animals, whose legs had
    queer shapes.

    "Madmen represent nature thus, which seems to them outlined in
    strange forms.

    "But people of common sense reproduce things just as sound judgment
    conceives of them; if they throw around them at times the halo of beauty
    which seems exaggerated, let us not decry them.

    "Beauty exists everywhere; it dwells in the most humble objects, makes
    all around us resplendent and, if we refuse to see it, we are blinded by
    an unjust prejudice, or our minds are not open to the faculty of
    contemplation.

    "It is revealed above all to those who cultivate common sense and reject
    the sophistries of untruth that they may surround themselves with truth.

    "Such people scorn trivial casualties; they adopt an immutable
    rule, reasoning, which permits them to deduce, to judge, and
    afterward to produce.

    "All beautiful creations are derived from this source.

    "The most admirable inventions would never have been known if common
    sense had not helped them to be produced, strengthening those who
    conceived them by the support of logic, which demonstrated to them the
    truth of their presumptions.

    "Authority follows, based on the experience which, by maintaining the
    effect of judgment, has armed them with the strength of the mind, the
    true glory of peaceful conquerors."

    Would one not say that the Shogun, in writing these lines, foresaw the
    magnificent efforts which we are witnessing each day and that from the
    depths of time he caught a glimpse of these brave conquerors of the
    air and of space, whose great deeds, seeming at times the result of a
    crazy temerity, are in reality only homage rendered to common sense,
    which has permitted them to calculate the value of their initiative
    without mistake?

    And one can not be denied the pleasure of entering once more into close
    communion of thought with the old philosopher when he says:

    "Enthusiasm is of crystal but common sense is of brass."
