{"name": "book ii, Chapter VI", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter VI<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>It is winter again, and it seems like the cold, bleak light of the winter is the light of truth. Winter is like punishment for the summer. The streets become more and more deserted, as people run from building to building and stay in their warm homes. Jim would often stop in at the Harlings, and if Mr. Harling wasn't at home, all the children would play charades and Antonia would make snacks for them. Antonia tells a story about a day at work when she was throwing hay into a bin. A tramp came over and offered to help out. After working for awhile, he waved at Antonia and then jumped headfirst into the bin, which chopped him up. Frances remembers the story also and how the only thing found on the tramp was a poem. PARAGRAPH>Antonia and Mrs. Harling are very similar in nature: they are honest, independent, and strong people who like children and who take pride in keeping a good household. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>During winter, people have to try hard just to survive, and they are able to focus only on the bare necessities, like keeping warm and eating enough food. For this reason, Jim calls the light of winter the light of truth. In winter there are no illusions; all is stripped away in the name of basic survival. PARAGRAPH>Jim wanders the streets alone and doesn't speak to anyone since everyone is preoccupied with keeping warm. Although there are more people in the city than in the country, it is just as easy, and perhaps even easier, to feel alone in the city. In the country, there was only Jim, his grandparents, Otto, and Jake, so they all appreciated each other's company, but in the city, because there is less need to become attached to particular people, people end up feeling perhaps more isolated. PARAGRAPH>However, Jim finds his refuge of coziness and warmth with the Harlings, who function as a surrogate family for Jim. There he can play with a lot of children his own change and feel the maternal presence of both Mrs. Harling and Antonia. As noted earlier, Mrs. Harling represents the strength of maternal femininity, and she also functions as a role model for Antonia", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-ii-chapters-1-9"}