{"name": "book i, Chapter V", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter V<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Even though the Shimerdas are having trouble getting used to their new home, the two young girls never complain and are always happy. One day Antonia tells Jim that her father had met two Russian men, Peter and Pavel, who speak a dialect similar to the Shimerdas. Pavel is tall, skinny, and wasted-looking; he makes excited gestures, so people think he's an anarchist. Peter is short, fat, pleasant, and very friendly. The two men live together and work together as farmhands. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Shimerda visits the Russians almost every day, sometimes with Antonia, and one day he takes Jim along with them. Peter is out washing laundry, and he shows them his cow, which he is very fond of. Pavel is not home, and their house is very neat and organized. Peter gives them fresh melons, and they eat many of them messily on the table. Looking at Antonia, he sighs because he wishes he hadn't had to leave Russia, where he could have a daughter just like her. Before Jim and the Shimerdas leave, Peter plays the harmonica for them and gives them cucumbers and milk. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>In this chapter the Shimerdas finally meet other immigrants that they can talk to. During the beginning of the twentieth century, the type of people immigrating to the United States began to change. Whereas before most immigrants had been of Northern and Western European origin, around the turn of the century, immigration from Eastern Europe increased dramatically. These new immigrants were initially greeted with a great deal of prejudice and were assumed to be inferior, both morally and intellectually, than their Northern and Western European counterparts. My Antonia reflects the changing face of immigration during this time period, as most of the immigrant families are of Eastern European  origin. PARAGRAPH>As bachelors trying to survive together, Peter and Pavel form a household that though unconventional, works well for them. The two men have a clean house that is decorated and organized, even though there are no women around to take care of them. Jim is favorably impressed with how well put together their home is. In living together, Peter and Pavel are redefining the typical American household and demonstrating how two single men can effectively band together to survive the frontier", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-i-chapters-1-10"}