{"name": "book ii, Chapter VII", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter VII<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Jim is bored of winter by March. During that month the only exciting thing that happens is when Blind d'Arnault, a negro pianist, comes to play at the Boys' Home on a Saturday night. The atmosphere is free and relaxed, particularly because the proprietor, the snobbish and proper Mrs. Gardener, is not present. Blind d'Arnault comes in to play for the men, and Jim describes him in racialized terms. Jim thinks he is the happiest-looking person he has seen since leaving Virginia. PARAGRAPH>After swaying back and forth on the piano bench, the mulatto plays negro tunes. Jim recounts Blind d'Arnault's story: When he was three, he lost his vision. His mother named him Samson and hid him away because he was ugly and dim-witted. Samson used to go listen to his mistress Miss d'Arnault practice the piano, and one day he stole into the house and began to play the piano. When he was discovered, he had a violent fit, but afterwards his mistress let him play the piano. Samson became a negro prodigy who played barbarously but in a way that was somehow more real. PARAGRAPH>Blind d'Arnault senses that there are girls dancing in the other room, and the men open the doors and invite Antonia, Lena, and Tiny, who are listening on the other side of the wall, to come in. The girls are pretty, and Blind d'Arnault plays until they have to close the hotel. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Despite Cather's progressive attitudes towards women, marriage, and religion, she does not have the most enlightened attitude towards African-Americans. In this chapter her depiction of Blind d'Arnault makes him into an exotic, primitive spectacle. Everyone looks at him with wonder and awe, but they find him fascinating in a somewhat condescending and patronizing way. Blind d'Arnault is not an equal, but rather a performer who takes elements of his culture and transforms it into palatable entertainment for his spectators. This scene recreates a form of entertainment popular at the time: the Negro burlesque. For the white spectators, Blind d'Arnault is a member of a race that they find somewhat threatening, yet exciting. His race becomes neutralized as entertainment, however, when he performs, and he becomes a harmless, childlike object that his audience can gape at without fear of danger. PARAGRAPH>Though Jim enjoys Blind d'Arnault's piano-playing, he doesn't consider it real art or music. Instead, it becomes a perversion and a distortion of the traditional musical genres. Although his music is praised for being more \"real,\" this \"realness\" is associated in the minds of the audience members with primitiveness, childishness, and lack of sophistication. While Cather may indirectly be praising African-American culture for being free of artificiality and formality, she is nevertheless presenting it as being at the earlier stages of cultural development. PARAGRAPH>Finally, Blind d'Arnault's piano-playing is described in highly sexualized terms. It is analogous to the act of copulation, with Blind d'Arnault characterized as being aggressive, with animal instincts and desires. Such a description conforms to negative stereotypes of the African-American male as hypersexual and driven by lustful passions, never by intellect or emotion", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-ii-chapters-1-9"}