{"name": "book iii, Chapter I", "summary": "Chapter I<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>At the University in Lincoln, Jim meets Gaston Cleric, who is his mentor in the Latin Department and who arrived at the same time he did. Jim stays in Lincoln during the summer studying Greek, and he spends a lot of time socializing with Gaston, who helps effect his mental awakening. During that time, the University is still very new, and it is full of earnest young men from the farms and enthusiastic, young instructors. Jim lives in a small cramped apartment where Gaston used to come visit him to talk about poetry and Italy. PARAGRAPH>Gaston talks very vividly and poetically, and Jim imagines that he might have been a poet if he didn't waste so much creativity talking to other people. Jim particularly remembers one conversation they had about Dante's admiration for his teacher Virgil. Although he admires Gaston, Jim knows that he cannot be a scholar because he loves the people and places of his past so much. He has very vivid memories of them sometimes. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>With Gaston Cleric, Jim has the second close relationship of his life. While this section of the novel is entitled \"Lena Lingard\" and he does become romantically involved with her, he is close to her primarily because she reminds him of Antonia and his childhood. His relationship with Gaston is entirely separate from Antonia and his life in the country, and it is centered around intellectual pursuits. PARAGRAPH>Although Gaston is his instructor in the Latin Department, their relationship goes far beyond a simple teacher-student one. Gaston is his mentor and introduces him to new worlds of knowledge, and they have an intimate, intense relationship of equals. Just as Virgil inspires Dante, so does Gaston awaken Jim to scholarly pursuits and the world beyond Black Hawk. However, Jim feels tied to the land and his childhood friends much more strongly than he does to his scholarly pursuits. Jim's intense love of Latin and Gaston Cleric pales in comparison to the pull that Antonia and the land has on him. In a sense, even this epoch of Jim's life, seemingly unrelated to Antonia, is a way for him to discover the other possibilities that life has to offer and to see how they compare to his idyllic childhood experiences", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-iii"}