{"name": "book ii, Chapter II", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter II<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Jim begins this chapter by describing their Norwegian neighbors, the Harlings. Mr. Harling is very successful and frequently away on business, and his wife generally runs the household. She is short, sturdy, and jolly. There are three Harling children around Jim's age: Charley, Julia, and Sally the tomboy. The oldest daughter Frances helps her father with his business and is trusted around the countryside because of her understanding of financial matters. PARAGRAPH>When the Harlings' cook leaves, Grandmother persuades Mrs. Harling to hire Antonia. Mrs. Harling goes to visit the Shimerdas to get an impression of Antonia and her family. Afterwards, Jim and the grandmother go hear what Mrs. Harling has to say. Mrs. Harling likes Antonia and tells about how grumpy and demanding Ambrosch was. Ambrosch wanted all of Antonia's wages to go directly to him, but Mrs. Harling mandates that a certain amount will be set aside for Antonia's own use. Mrs. Harling comments on how pretty Antonia is, and Jim and Grandmother are pleased at the praise. Grandmother then tells a brief history of the Shimerda family. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Jim's world at this time is an essentially female-dominated space, as he spends a lot of time with strong, independent women: his grandmother, Mrs. Harling and her daughter Frances, and, of course, Antonia. Jim sympathizes with these women, who he clearly admires and respects. Mrs. Harling is responsible for running her household in her husband's absence and creates a lot of joy in the lives of Jim and her children. Though she does not have any real occupation, her role as a mother  is worthy of respect and much appreciated by Jim. Mrs. Harling's daughter Frances takes care of the finances of many people around the country, and though she is a woman, is very much trusted. These two Harling women exemplify female strength and initiative, and for this reason, Cather's work can be considered progressive and pro-feminist. Women like Frances can have the responsibilities usually granted only to men, but such a lifestyle should be a matter of personal choice. If women like Mrs. Harling choose to raise a family, they should be celebrated for doing that too, as it is clearly a pursuit to be admired. PARAGRAPH>In contrast, Ambrosch, the Shimerdas' male head of household, is selfish and not worthy of respect. His behavior towards Antonia emphasizes how generous and wise the Harling women, as well as Antonia, really are", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-ii-chapters-1-9"}