{"name": "book i, Chapter VI", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter VI<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>One afternoon Jim and \"Tony\" are sitting outside in the sun for their English lesson. Tony begins talking about badgers and how they are hunted by special dogs in her native country. It is almost winter, so all the insects, except one, are dead. Tony picks the bug up and begins to speak to it in Bohemian, and it starts to chirp back at her. She begins to cry a little bit because the bug reminds her of an old beggar woman she once knew who used to sing songs for children. When they decide to go back, Antonia puts the bug in her hair. PARAGRAPH>As they walk back, Jim marvels at the prairie surrounding them, covered in red grass and cornfields. Every day they walked back through the fields, and the moment seems triumphant, \"like a hero's deathheroes who died young and gloriously. They see Mr. Shimerda up ahead and run to overtake him. Antonia confides that her father is sick, and he shows them three rabbits that he killed for food and fur. As Antonia shows her father the bug from her hair, Jim looks at Mr. Shimerda's gun. With Antonia translating, the father tells Jim that he can have the gun when he grows up. The gun is a gift from a very wealthy man whose wedding Mr. Shimerda played at. Jim wonders that the Shimerdas are always wanting to give away their possessions, and he is touched by the old man's look of sadness and pity. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>This chapter describes the near-perfect communion with nature that Jim and Antonia have at this point during the year before winter comes. They feel triumphant and comfortable in nature, and they appreciate all forms of life, even the little grasshopper. Nature and humans are in harmony during the fall, and Jim feels like nature is celebrating him for his life and vitality when he walks home in the sunset. In passages such as these, Cather is once again idealizing the peaceful, wholesome life in the country. However, she does not maintain this fairy tale-like tone through the entirety of the novel, as Mr. Shimerda's failing health implies. PARAGRAPH>Unlike his daughter Antonia, Mr. Shimerda is not thriving in the countryside and is becoming depressed. He does not have the luxury of being as carefree as his daughter, and he has to try to master and take advantage of nature in order for his family to survive. Thus, he has to go hunting for rabbits to feed and clothe his family; he must kill wild animals, unlike his daughter who wants to save even a little caterpillar. He has responsibilities that Jim and Antonia do not have, and as the weather changes and the elements become fierce, he will feel the effects much more strongly. PARAGRAPH>As noted earlier, the Shimerdas have very different cultural values than the Burdens and other \"American\" families. Jim does not understand why Mr. Shimerda wants to give him his expensive gun, and he thinks it is foolish that the family is so generous. Raised in an American capitalist society, he values individual competition and private ownership, and he does not see how Mr. Shimerda is not just offering him a possession, but also lifelong loyalty and assistance", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-i-chapters-1-10"}