{"name": "book ii, Chapter III", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter III<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Antonia soon comes to work for the Harlings, and Jim and Grandmother are very happy to see her. Antonia likes working in town and learning English, and she plays with the children a lot. Jim is jealous because Antonia has a crush on Charley Harling and is always trying to do nice things for him. PARAGRAPH>The Harling household is always very pleasant, except when Mr. Harling is at home. He likes to have everything quiet, and he makes Mrs. Harling devote all her attention to him. Later Jim realizes how important Mrs. Harling's presence in their lives was. Jim thinks that Mr. Harling is an arrogant man and walks around feeling powerful all the time. Whenever Mr. Harling is not around, the house is loud with a lot of music. Mrs. Harling is very serious about playing the piano. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>In this chapter Cather offers a dramatic example of how marriage can be stifling to women. Although the previous chapter sets Mrs. Harling up as someone to be admired, in this chapter all her good qualities become invisible when she is forced to minister to her husband. Even though she is a cheerful person who enjoys life and loves music, she becomes simply her husband's caretaker when he is around. Though Cather is not condemning the institution of marriage, through passages such as these, she is implying that marriage is a bad, confining thing for women when it is not based on a relationship of equality. In addition, since it is easy for women's needs to become secondary to those of her husband, marriage should be a personal choice, not an inevitable destiny. This theme of questioning marriage is further developed in the chapters concerning Lena Lingard. PARAGRAPH>Antonia loves playing with the Harling children, and her attitude towards them will acquire greater significance in the last section of the book. At the end of the novel, when Jim goes to visit Antonia and her huge brood, he will note that her interactions with her children mirror those with the Harlings. In addition, Antonia will tell him that working for the Harlings and taking care of the children was excellent preparation for her life as a mother. Though Jim does not realize it at the time, Antonia's life with the Harlings is essentially a dress performance for her future life as the mother of many", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-ii-chapters-1-9"}