{"name": "book i, Chapter XVIII", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XVIII<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Jim starts school and tries to get back at Antonia by becoming friends with his classmates, even though he thinks they're boring. He is resentful that Antonia seems to worship Ambrosch, while she treats him with mild disdain. He recounts how the Burdens and Shimerdas were further estranged that spring. PARAGRAPH>Jim and Jake went to the Shimerdas to retrieve a horse-collar that Ambrosch had borrowed but not returned. Ambrosch is surly and gives Jake a collar in very poor condition. The two men get into a scuffle, with Ambrosch fighting unfairly and Jake knocking him down. Antonia screams hatred at them, and Mrs. Shimerda threatens with the law. While leaving, Jim and Jake express their distrust of foreigners and say they're just not the same as other people. Grandfather simply laughs at the story and tells Jake to go to town and pay his fine. Jake happens to sell a pig at the same time, and the Shimerdas mock him because they think he needed to sell it in order to have enough money to pay the fine. PARAGRAPH>Despite the feud, the Shimerdas are always respectful to Grandfather, who gives them a lot of helpful advice and helps them when they have a problem with their horse. Ambrosch and Marek have started working for wages, and Grandfather decides to pay Ambrosch and Antonia to help out on the farm. When he goes to the Shimerdas to ask, he graciously gives Mrs. Shimerda the cow that she has purchased on credit, and she falls to her knees and kisses his hand. Afterwards, the feud between the two families is forgotten, although Mrs. Shimerda wants to have the last word. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>As the beginning paragraph of this chapter suggests, Jim at times structures his life around Antonia, even if she is not directly involved or even present. For instance, he makes friends at school seemingly out of spite at Antonia; in other words, he engages in normal human activity, but always with Antonia in mind. PARAGRAPH>This chapter paints Ambrosch as a brutish, somewhat selfish creature that the reader simply cannot sympathize with. While this characterization may or may not be true, it does lead the reader to feel sorry for Antonia, who is under Ambrosch's thumb and has to obey him. Jim's reaction to the Shimerdas in this chapter is somewhat uncharacteristic. While Antonia's anger can be attributed to her intense feelings of family loyalty and devotion, Jim's prejudiced insults seem strikingly out of place, especially as they are directed primarily at Antonia. However, as might be expected, they are probably just his pent-up feelings of frustration and resentment at no longer being the main object of Antonia's affection", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411115145/https://www.gradesaver.com/my-antonia/study-guide/summary-book-i-chapters-11-19"}