{"name": "Chapter I", "summary": "Summary   Dracula begins with the diary kept by Jonathan Harker\u2014an English solicitor, or lawyer\u2014as he makes his way from England to Eastern Europe. Embarking on his first professional assignment as a solicitor, Harker is traveling to the castle of Count Dracula, a Transylvanian nobleman. Harker hopes to conclude a real estate deal to sell Count Dracula a residence in London. Harker plans to take copious notes throughout his journey so that he can share the details of his adventures with his fianc\u00e9e, Mina Murray. In his first diary entry, on May 3, Harker describes the picturesque countryside of Eastern Europe and the exotic food he has tasted at the roadside inns. He notes several recipes that he plans to obtain for Mina. Harker arrives in the northern Romanian town of Bistritz and checks into a hotel Count Dracula has recommended to him. The innkeeper gives Harker a letter from the count. The letter welcomes Harker to the beautiful Carpathian Mountains and informs him that\u00a0he should take the next day\u2019s coach to the Borgo Pass, where a carriage will meet him to bring him the rest of the way to the castle. As Harker prepares to leave the next morning, the innkeeper\u2019s wife delivers an ominous warning. She reminds Harker that it is the eve of St. George\u2019s Day, when \u201call the evil things in the world will have full sway.\u201d She then puts a crucifix around his neck. Though he is a practicing Anglican who regards Catholic paraphernalia as somewhat idolatrous, Harker politely accepts the crucifix. He is somewhat disturbed by this exchange, however, and his uneasiness increases when a crowd of peasants gathers around the inn as he boards the coach. They mutter many \u201cqueer words\u201d at Harker, which, with the help of his dictionary, he translates to mean \u201cwere-wolf\u201d or \u201cvampire.\u201d As the coach departs, everyone in the crowd makes the sign of the cross in his direction, a gesture that a fellow passenger explains is meant to protect him from the \u201cevil eye.\u201d The journey to the Borgo Pass takes Harker through incomparably beautiful country. At dusk, he passes by quaintly attired peasants kneeling in prayer at roadside shrines. As darkness falls, the other passengers become restless, urging the coachmen to quicken their speed. The driver whips the horses into a frenzy and the coach rockets along the mountain road. One by one, the passengers begin to offer Harker small gifts and tokens that he assumes are also meant to ward off the evil eye. The coach soon arrives at the Borgo Pass, but there is no carriage waiting to ferry Harker to his final destination. Just as the driver offers to bring Harker back to the pass the next day, however, a small, horse-drawn carriage arrives. Harker boards the carriage and continues toward the castle. He has the impression that the carriage is covering the same ground over and over again, and he grows increasingly fearful as the ride progresses. Harker is spooked several times by the wild howling of wolves. At one point, Harker looks outside the carriage and sees a flickering blue flame burning somewhere in the distance. The driver pulls over without explanation, inspects the flame, then returns to the carriage and continues on. Harker recounts several more stops to inspect similar flames and notes that at one point, when the driver gathers a few stones around one of the flames, he seems to be able to see the flame through the driver\u2019s body. Eventually, Harker arrives, paralyzed by fear, at the dark and ruined castle.<PARAGRAPH>Analysis Though Stoker wrote Dracula well after the heyday of the Gothic novel\u2014the period from approximately 1760 to 1820\u2014the novel draws on many conventions of the genre, especially in these opening chapters. Conceived primarily as bloodcurdling tales of horror, Gothic novels tend to feature strong supernatural elements juxtaposed with familiar backdrops: dark and stormy nights, ruined castles riddled with secret passages, and forces of unlikely good pitted against those of unimaginable evil. Stoker echoes these conventions in this chapter, as the frantic superstitions of the Carpathian peasants, the cold and desolate mountain pass, and Harker\u2019s disorienting and threatening ride to Dracula\u2019s castle combine to create a mood of doom and dread. As contemporary readers, we may find the setting vaguely reminiscent of Halloween, but Stoker\u2019s descriptions in fact reveal a great deal about nineteenth-century British stereotypes of Eastern Europe. As Harker approaches Dracula\u2019s castle, he notes that his trip has been \u201cso strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon [him].\u201d Harker\u2019s sense of dread illustrates his inability to comprehend the superstitions of the Carpathian peasants. Indeed, as an Englishman who \u201cvisits the British Museum\u201d in an attempt to understand the lands and customs of Transylvania, Harker emerges as a model of Victorian reason, a clear product of turn-of-the-century England. Harker\u2019s education, as well as his Western sense of progress and propriety, disables him from making sense of such rustic traditions as \u201cthe evil eye.\u201d To a man of Harker\u2019s position and education, the strange sights he witnesses en route to the castle strike him as rare curiosities or dreams. He already begins doubting the reality of his experience: \u201cI think I must have fallen asleep and kept dreaming. . . .\u201d Harker\u2019s inability to accept what is unknown, irrational, and unprovable is echoed by his English and American compatriots later in the novel. Harker\u2019s experience suggests that the foundations of Western civilization\u2014reason, scientific advancement, and economic domination\u2014are threatened by the alternative knowledge that they presume to have surpassed. Western empirical knowledge is vulnerable because it has summarily dismissed foreign ways of thinking and, in doing so, has failed to recognize the power of such alternative modes of thought. Harker\u2019s description of his ascent to the castle as \u201cuncanny\u201d foreshadows the psychological horror of the novel. In 1919, Sigmund Freud published an essay called \u201cThe Uncanny,\u201d in which he analyzed the implications of feelings and sensations that arouse \u201cdread and horror.\u201d Freud concludes that uncanny experiences can arise at two times. First, they can arise when primitive, supposedly disproved beliefs suddenly seem to be confirmed or validated once again. Second, the uncanny can arise when repressed infantile complexes are revived. Most academic criticism of Dracula relies heavily on such psychoanalytic theory and argues that the novel can be seen as a case study of repressed instincts coming to the surface. Indeed, such a reading seems inevitable if one considers Freud\u2019s model of psychosexual development, which links the first stage of this development\u2014the oral stage\u2014with the death instinct, the urge to destroy what is living. The vampire, bringing about death with his mouth, serves as a fitting embodiment of these abstract psychological concepts, and allows Stoker to investigate Victorian sexuality and repression.", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210120133206/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/dracula/section1/"}