{"name": "Scene 10", "summary": "Act V, Scene 10 Summary Aeneas, Paris, Antenor and Deiphobus enter. Aeneas says that they must never go home and here starve we out the night on the battlefield. Troilus enters and announces that Hector has been killed. Everybody is aghast. Troilus reiterates that Hector is dead and adds that his body had been dragged through the battlefield. He calls Achilles a murderer and expresses his disgust at his brutality. He calls on heaven to do what is to be done and tells the gods, upon your thrones not to protract their inevitable destruction. Aeneas says that his words are discouraging the whole party. Troilus says that Aeneas doesnt understand him.. He says the he does not speak of fleeing, of fear or of death, but dares all the impending dangers that gods and men prepare for. Hector is gone. Who will tell that to Priam or Hecuba, he wonders. He says that let anyone, who doesnt mind being dubbed a screech owl, go into Troy and say Hector is dead. That will turn Priam to stone, turn the maids and wives into weeping figures of stone like Niobe and scare Troy. But march away, says Troilus who announces again that Hector is dead, and that there is nothing more to say. Addressing the Greek tents, he tells them to stay pitched a while longer on the Phrygian plains - let the sun rise as early as he dared, and he, Troilus would go through and through them. And then in a remark directed at Achilles, the great-sizd coward, he vows that No space of earth shall sunder our two hates /Ill haunt thee like a wicked conscience still, /That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzys thoughts. Vowing to avenge Hectors death, he calls for a brisk march back to the city. Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe, he says as the Trojan party exits leaving him behind. Pandarus enters, who attempts to catch Troilus attention. Troilus tells him to get away from him, and contemptuously calls him broker-lackey and hopes ignominy and shame pursues him and becomes synonymous with his name. He exits. Pandarus whose body has by now been overrun with a host of venereal diseases comments that this is a good medicine for his aching bones. He comments: Thus is the poor agent despised. He wonders why the endeavors of the likes of him are so loved and the performance so loathed. He argues that the employer of the Pandar comes to detest the agent who procured for him, and that the rejected Pander once so desirable, becomes impotent. He then breaks into a proverbial or traditional saying or rhyme to support his argument. The rhyme says the happiness of the Pandar is lost when he is no longer effective. He tells Good traders in the flesh to set this lesson in their painted wall hangings. Then addressing the guild of Pandarus, he says that their eyes affected by venereal disease should weep at his fall, and if they cannot weep to groan - not for him but for their own aching bones. Continuing his address to bawds and pandars, he says his will be made in a few months time. Pandarus adds that he would have made his will sooner but he fears that some infected prostitute from the Southwark stews who is offended by him would hiss. So until then, he will sit in a sweating tub and wish his diseases upon them.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTroilus80.asp"}