11 Plain Speaking



The longer I lived at Birtwick the more proud and happy I felt at having
such a place. Our master and mistress were respected and beloved by all
who knew them; they were good and kind to everybody and everything; not
only men and women, but horses and donkeys, dogs and cats, cattle and
birds; there was no oppressed or ill-used creature that had not a friend
in them, and their servants took the same tone. If any of the village
children were known to treat any creature cruelly they soon heard about
it from the Hall.

The squire and Farmer Grey had worked together, as they said, for more
than twenty years to get check-reins on the cart-horses done away with,
and in our parts you seldom saw them; and sometimes, if mistress met
a heavily laden horse with his head strained up she would stop the
carriage and get out, and reason with the driver in her sweet serious
voice, and try to show him how foolish and cruel it was.

I don't think any man could withstand our mistress. I wish all ladies
were like her. Our master, too, used to come down very heavy sometimes.
I remember he was riding me toward home one morning when we saw a
powerful man driving toward us in a light pony chaise, with a beautiful
little bay pony, with slender legs and a high-bred sensitive head and
face. Just as he came to the park gates the little thing turned toward
them; the man, without word or warning, wrenched the creature's head
round with such a force and suddenness that he nearly threw it on its
haunches. Recovering itself it was going on, when he began to lash it
furiously. The pony plunged forward, but the strong, heavy hand held the
pretty creature back with force almost enough to break its jaw, while
the whip still cut into him. It was a dreadful sight to me, for I knew
what fearful pain it gave that delicate little mouth; but master gave me
the word, and we were up with him in a second.

"Sawyer," he cried in a stern voice, "is that pony made of flesh and
blood?"

"Flesh and blood and temper," he said; "he's too fond of his own will,
and that won't suit me." He spoke as if he was in a strong passion. He
was a builder who had often been to the park on business.

"And do you think," said master sternly, "that treatment like this will
make him fond of your will?"

"He had no business to make that turn; his road was straight on!" said
the man roughly.

"You have often driven that pony up to my place," said master; "it only
shows the creature's memory and intelligence; how did he know that you
were not going there again? But that has little to do with it. I must
say, Mr. Sawyer, that a more unmanly, brutal treatment of a little
pony it was never my painful lot to witness, and by giving way to such
passion you injure your own character as much, nay more, than you injure
your horse; and remember, we shall all have to be judged according to
our works, whether they be toward man or toward beast."

Master rode me home slowly, and I could tell by his voice how the thing
had grieved him. He was just as free to speak to gentlemen of his own
rank as to those below him; for another day, when we were out, we met
a Captain Langley, a friend of our master's; he was driving a splendid
pair of grays in a kind of break. After a little conversation the
captain said:

"What do you think of my new team, Mr. Douglas? You know, you are the
judge of horses in these parts, and I should like your opinion."

The master backed me a little, so as to get a good view of them. "They
are an uncommonly handsome pair," he said, "and if they are as good as
they look I am sure you need not wish for anything better; but I see
you still hold that pet scheme of yours for worrying your horses and
lessening their power."

"What do you mean," said the other, "the check-reins? Oh, ah! I know
that's a hobby of yours; well, the fact is, I like to see my horses hold
their heads up."

"So do I," said master, "as well as any man, but I don't like to
see them held up; that takes all the shine out of it. Now, you are a
military man, Langley, and no doubt like to see your regiment look well
on parade, 'heads up', and all that; but you would not take much credit
for your drill if all your men had their heads tied to a backboard! It
might not be much harm on parade, except to worry and fatigue them; but
how would it be in a bayonet charge against the enemy, when they want
the free use of every muscle, and all their strength thrown forward? I
would not give much for their chance of victory. And it is just the same
with horses: you fret and worry their tempers, and decrease their power;
you will not let them throw their weight against their work, and so
they have to do too much with their joints and muscles, and of course
it wears them up faster. You may depend upon it, horses were intended
to have their heads free, as free as men's are; and if we could act a
little more according to common sense, and a good deal less according
to fashion, we should find many things work easier; besides, you know as
well as I that if a horse makes a false step, he has much less chance
of recovering himself if his head and neck are fastened back. And now,"
said the master, laughing, "I have given my hobby a good trot out, can't
you make up your mind to mount him, too, captain? Your example would go
a long way."

"I believe you are right in theory," said the other, "and that's rather
a hard hit about the soldiers; but--well--I'll think about it," and so
they parted.





12 A Stormy Day



One day late in the autumn my master had a long journey to go on
business. I was put into the dog-cart, and John went with his master. I
always liked to go in the dog-cart, it was so light and the high wheels
ran along so pleasantly. There had been a great deal of rain, and now
the wind was very high and blew the dry leaves across the road in a
shower. We went along merrily till we came to the toll-bar and the low
wooden bridge. The river banks were rather high, and the bridge, instead
of rising, went across just level, so that in the middle, if the river
was full, the water would be nearly up to the woodwork and planks; but
as there were good substantial rails on each side, people did not mind
it.

The man at the gate said the river was rising fast, and he feared it
would be a bad night. Many of the meadows were under water, and in one
low part of the road the water was halfway up to my knees; the bottom
was good, and master drove gently, so it was no matter.

When we got to the town of course I had a good bait, but as the master's
business engaged him a long time we did not start for home till rather
late in the afternoon. The wind was then much higher, and I heard the
master say to John that he had never been out in such a storm; and so I
thought, as we went along the skirts of a wood, where the great branches
were swaying about like twigs, and the rushing sound was terrible.

"I wish we were well out of this wood," said my master.

"Yes, sir," said John, "it would be rather awkward if one of these
branches came down upon us."

The words were scarcely out of his mouth when there was a groan, and a
crack, and a splitting sound, and tearing, crashing down among the other
trees came an oak, torn up by the roots, and it fell right across the
road just before us. I will never say I was not frightened, for I was. I
stopped still, and I believe I trembled; of course I did not turn round
or run away; I was not brought up to that. John jumped out and was in a
moment at my head.

"That was a very near touch," said my master. "What's to be done now?"

"Well, sir, we can't drive over that tree, nor yet get round it; there
will be nothing for it, but to go back to the four crossways, and that
will be a good six miles before we get round to the wooden bridge again;
it will make us late, but the horse is fresh."

So back we went and round by the crossroads, but by the time we got to
the bridge it was very nearly dark; we could just see that the water was
over the middle of it; but as that happened sometimes when the floods
were out, master did not stop. We were going along at a good pace, but
the moment my feet touched the first part of the bridge I felt sure
there was something wrong. I dare not go forward, and I made a dead
stop. "Go on, Beauty," said my master, and he gave me a touch with the
whip, but I dare not stir; he gave me a sharp cut; I jumped, but I dare
not go forward.

"There's something wrong, sir," said John, and he sprang out of the
dog-cart and came to my head and looked all about. He tried to lead me
forward. "Come on, Beauty, what's the matter?" Of course I could not
tell him, but I knew very well that the bridge was not safe.

Just then the man at the toll-gate on the other side ran out of the
house, tossing a torch about like one mad.

"Hoy, hoy, hoy! halloo! stop!" he cried.

"What's the matter?" shouted my master.

"The bridge is broken in the middle, and part of it is carried away; if
you come on you'll be into the river."

"Thank God!" said my master. "You Beauty!" said John, and took the
bridle and gently turned me round to the right-hand road by the river
side. The sun had set some time; the wind seemed to have lulled off
after that furious blast which tore up the tree. It grew darker and
darker, stiller and stiller. I trotted quietly along, the wheels hardly
making a sound on the soft road. For a good while neither master nor
John spoke, and then master began in a serious voice. I could not
understand much of what they said, but I found they thought, if I had
gone on as the master wanted me, most likely the bridge would have given
way under us, and horse, chaise, master, and man would have fallen into
the river; and as the current was flowing very strongly, and there was
no light and no help at hand, it was more than likely we should all have
been drowned. Master said, God had given men reason, by which they could
find out things for themselves; but he had given animals knowledge which
did not depend on reason, and which was much more prompt and perfect in
its way, and by which they had often saved the lives of men. John had
many stories to tell of dogs and horses, and the wonderful things they
had done; he thought people did not value their animals half enough nor
make friends of them as they ought to do. I am sure he makes friends of
them if ever a man did.

At last we came to the park gates and found the gardener looking out for
us. He said that mistress had been in a dreadful way ever since dark,
fearing some accident had happened, and that she had sent James off on
Justice, the roan cob, toward the wooden bridge to make inquiry after
us.

We saw a light at the hall-door and at the upper windows, and as we came
up mistress ran out, saying, "Are you really safe, my dear? Oh! I
have been so anxious, fancying all sorts of things. Have you had no
accident?"

"No, my dear; but if your Black Beauty had not been wiser than we were
we should all have been carried down the river at the wooden bridge."
I heard no more, as they went into the house, and John took me to the
stable. Oh, what a good supper he gave me that night, a good bran mash
and some crushed beans with my oats, and such a thick bed of straw! and
I was glad of it, for I was tired.





13 The Devil's Trade Mark



One day when John and I had been out on some business of our master's,
and were returning gently on a long, straight road, at some distance we
saw a boy trying to leap a pony over a gate; the pony would not take the
leap, and the boy cut him with the whip, but he only turned off on one
side. He whipped him again, but the pony turned off on the other side.
Then the boy got off and gave him a hard thrashing, and knocked him
about the head; then he got up again and tried to make him leap the
gate, kicking him all the time shamefully, but still the pony refused.
When we were nearly at the spot the pony put down his head and threw up
his heels, and sent the boy neatly over into a broad quickset hedge, and
with the rein dangling from his head he set off home at a full gallop.
John laughed out quite loud. "Served him right," he said.

"Oh, oh, oh!" cried the boy as he struggled about among the thorns; "I
say, come and help me out."

"Thank ye," said John, "I think you are quite in the right place, and
maybe a little scratching will teach you not to leap a pony over a gate
that is too high for him," and so with that John rode off. "It may be,"
said he to himself, "that young fellow is a liar as well as a cruel one;
we'll just go home by Farmer Bushby's, Beauty, and then if anybody wants
to know you and I can tell 'em, ye see." So we turned off to the right,
and soon came up to the stack-yard, and within sight of the house. The
farmer was hurrying out into the road, and his wife was standing at the
gate, looking very frightened.

"Have you seen my boy?" said Mr. Bushby as we came up; "he went out an
hour ago on my black pony, and the creature is just come back without a
rider."

"I should think, sir," said John, "he had better be without a rider,
unless he can be ridden properly."

"What do you mean?" said the farmer.

"Well, sir, I saw your son whipping, and kicking, and knocking that good
little pony about shamefully because he would not leap a gate that was
too high for him. The pony behaved well, sir, and showed no vice; but at
last he just threw up his heels and tipped the young gentleman into the
thorn hedge. He wanted me to help him out, but I hope you will excuse
me, sir, I did not feel inclined to do so. There's no bones broken, sir;
he'll only get a few scratches. I love horses, and it riles me to see
them badly used; it is a bad plan to aggravate an animal till he uses
his heels; the first time is not always the last."

During this time the mother began to cry, "Oh, my poor Bill, I must go
and meet him; he must be hurt."

"You had better go into the house, wife," said the farmer; "Bill wants a
lesson about this, and I must see that he gets it; this is not the first
time, nor the second, that he has ill-used that pony, and I shall stop
it. I am much obliged to you, Manly. Good-evening."

So we went on, John chuckling all the way home; then he told James about
it, who laughed and said, "Serve him right. I knew that boy at school;
he took great airs on himself because he was a farmer's son; he used to
swagger about and bully the little boys. Of course, we elder ones would
not have any of that nonsense, and let him know that in the school and
the playground farmers' sons and laborers' sons were all alike. I well
remember one day, just before afternoon school, I found him at the large
window catching flies and pulling off their wings. He did not see me and
I gave him a box on the ears that laid him sprawling on the floor. Well,
angry as I was, I was almost frightened, he roared and bellowed in such
a style. The boys rushed in from the playground, and the master ran in
from the road to see who was being murdered. Of course I said fair and
square at once what I had done, and why; then I showed the master the
flies, some crushed and some crawling about helpless, and I showed him
the wings on the window sill. I never saw him so angry before; but as
Bill was still howling and whining, like the coward that he was, he did
not give him any more punishment of that kind, but set him up on a stool
for the rest of the afternoon, and said that he should not go out to
play for that week. Then he talked to all the boys very seriously about
cruelty, and said how hard-hearted and cowardly it was to hurt the
weak and the helpless; but what stuck in my mind was this, he said that
cruelty was the devil's own trade-mark, and if we saw any one who took
pleasure in cruelty we might know who he belonged to, for the devil was
a murderer from the beginning, and a tormentor to the end. On the other
hand, where we saw people who loved their neighbors, and were kind to
man and beast, we might know that was God's mark."

"Your master never taught you a truer thing," said John; "there is no
religion without love, and people may talk as much as they like about
their religion, but if it does not teach them to be good and kind to man
and beast it is all a sham--all a sham, James, and it won't stand when
things come to be turned inside out."





14 James Howard



Early one morning in December John had just led me into my box after my
daily exercise, and was strapping my cloth on and James was coming in
from the corn chamber with some oats, when the master came into the
stable. He looked rather serious, and held an open letter in his hand.
John fastened the door of my box, touched his cap, and waited for
orders.

"Good-morning, John," said the master. "I want to know if you have any
complaint to make of James."

"Complaint, sir? No, sir."

"Is he industrious at his work and respectful to you?"

"Yes, sir, always."

"You never find he slights his work when your back is turned?"

"Never, sir."

"That's well; but I must put another question. Have you no reason to
suspect, when he goes out with the horses to exercise them or to take a
message, that he stops about talking to his acquaintances, or goes into
houses where he has no business, leaving the horses outside?"

"No, sir, certainly not; and if anybody has been saying that about
James, I don't believe it, and I don't mean to believe it unless I have
it fairly proved before witnesses; it's not for me to say who has been
trying to take away James' character, but I will say this, sir, that a
steadier, pleasanter, honester, smarter young fellow I never had in this
stable. I can trust his word and I can trust his work; he is gentle and
clever with the horses, and I would rather have them in charge with him
than with half the young fellows I know of in laced hats and liveries;
and whoever wants a character of James Howard," said John, with a
decided jerk of his head, "let them come to John Manly."

The master stood all this time grave and attentive, but as John finished
his speech a broad smile spread over his face, and looking kindly
across at James, who all this time had stood still at the door, he said,
"James, my lad, set down the oats and come here; I am very glad to find
that John's opinion of your character agrees so exactly with my own.
John is a cautious man," he said, with a droll smile, "and it is not
always easy to get his opinion about people, so I thought if I beat the
bush on this side the birds would fly out, and I should learn what I
wanted to know quickly; so now we will come to business. I have a letter
from my brother-in-law, Sir Clifford Williams, of Clifford Hall.
He wants me to find him a trustworthy young groom, about twenty or
twenty-one, who knows his business. His old coachman, who has lived with
him thirty years, is getting feeble, and he wants a man to work with him
and get into his ways, who would be able, when the old man was pensioned
off, to step into his place. He would have eighteen shillings a week at
first, a stable suit, a driving suit, a bedroom over the coachhouse, and
a boy under him. Sir Clifford is a good master, and if you could get the
place it would be a good start for you. I don't want to part with you,
and if you left us I know John would lose his right hand."

"That I should, sir," said John, "but I would not stand in his light for
the world."

"How old are you, James?" said master.

"Nineteen next May, sir."

"That's young; what do you think, John?"

"Well, sir, it is young; but he is as steady as a man, and is strong,
and well grown, and though he has not had much experience in driving, he
has a light firm hand and a quick eye, and he is very careful, and I am
quite sure no horse of his will be ruined for want of having his feet
and shoes looked after."

"Your word will go the furthest, John," said the master, "for Sir
Clifford adds in a postscript, 'If I could find a man trained by your
John I should like him better than any other;' so, James, lad, think it
over, talk to your mother at dinner-time, and then let me know what you
wish."

In a few days after this conversation it was fully settled that James
should go to Clifford Hall, in a month or six weeks, as it suited his
master, and in the meantime he was to get all the practice in driving
that could be given to him. I never knew the carriage to go out so often
before; when the mistress did not go out the master drove himself in the
two-wheeled chaise; but now, whether it was master or the young ladies,
or only an errand, Ginger and I were put in the carriage and James drove
us. At the first John rode with him on the box, telling him this and
that, and after that James drove alone.

Then it was wonderful what a number of places the master would go to in
the city on Saturday, and what queer streets we were driven through. He
was sure to go to the railway station just as the train was coming in,
and cabs and carriages, carts and omnibuses were all trying to get over
the bridge together; that bridge wanted good horses and good drivers
when the railway bell was ringing, for it was narrow, and there was a
very sharp turn up to the station, where it would not have been at all
difficult for people to run into each other, if they did not look sharp
and keep their wits about them.





15 The Old Hostler



After this it was decided by my master and mistress to pay a visit to
some friends who lived about forty-six miles from our home, and James
was to drive them. The first day we traveled thirty-two miles.
There were some long, heavy hills, but James drove so carefully and
thoughtfully that we were not at all harassed. He never forgot to put on
the brake as we went downhill, nor to take it off at the right place. He
kept our feet on the smoothest part of the road, and if the uphill was
very long, he set the carriage wheels a little across the road, so as
not to run back, and gave us a breathing. All these little things help a
horse very much, particularly if he gets kind words into the bargain.

We stopped once or twice on the road, and just as the sun was going down
we reached the town where we were to spend the night. We stopped at the
principal hotel, which was in the market-place; it was a very large one;
we drove under an archway into a long yard, at the further end of which
were the stables and coachhouses. Two hostlers came to take us out. The
head hostler was a pleasant, active little man, with a crooked leg,
and a yellow striped waistcoat. I never saw a man unbuckle harness so
quickly as he did, and with a pat and a good word he led me to a long
stable, with six or eight stalls in it, and two or three horses. The
other man brought Ginger; James stood by while we were rubbed down and
cleaned.

I never was cleaned so lightly and quickly as by that little old man.
When he had done James stepped up and felt me over, as if he thought I
could not be thoroughly done, but he found my coat as clean and smooth
as silk.

"Well," he said, "I thought I was pretty quick, and our John quicker
still, but you do beat all I ever saw for being quick and thorough at
the same time."

"Practice makes perfect," said the crooked little hostler, "and 'twould
be a pity if it didn't; forty years' practice, and not perfect! ha, ha!
that would be a pity; and as to being quick, why, bless you! that is
only a matter of habit; if you get into the habit of being quick it is
just as easy as being slow; easier, I should say; in fact it don't agree
with my health to be hulking about over a job twice as long as it need
take. Bless you! I couldn't whistle if I crawled over my work as some
folks do! You see, I have been about horses ever since I was twelve
years old, in hunting stables, and racing stables; and being small, ye
see, I was jockey for several years; but at the Goodwood, ye see, the
turf was very slippery and my poor Larkspur got a fall, and I broke my
knee, and so of course I was of no more use there. But I could not live
without horses, of course I couldn't, so I took to the hotels. And I
can tell ye it is a downright pleasure to handle an animal like this,
well-bred, well-mannered, well-cared-for; bless ye! I can tell how a
horse is treated. Give me the handling of a horse for twenty minutes,
and I'll tell you what sort of a groom he has had. Look at this one,
pleasant, quiet, turns about just as you want him, holds up his feet to
be cleaned out, or anything else you please to wish; then you'll find
another fidgety, fretty, won't move the right way, or starts across the
stall, tosses up his head as soon as you come near him, lays his ears,
and seems afraid of you; or else squares about at you with his heels.
Poor things! I know what sort of treatment they have had. If they are
timid it makes them start or shy; if they are high-mettled it makes them
vicious or dangerous; their tempers are mostly made when they are young.
Bless you! they are like children, train 'em up in the way they should
go, as the good book says, and when they are old they will not depart
from it, if they have a chance."

"I like to hear you talk," said James, "that's the way we lay it down at
home, at our master's."

"Who is your master, young man? if it be a proper question. I should
judge he is a good one, from what I see."

"He is Squire Gordon, of Birtwick Park, the other side the Beacon
Hills," said James.

"Ah! so, so, I have heard tell of him; fine judge of horses, ain't he?
the best rider in the county."

"I believe he is," said James, "but he rides very little now, since the
poor young master was killed."

"Ah! poor gentleman; I read all about it in the paper at the time. A
fine horse killed, too, wasn't there?"

"Yes," said James; "he was a splendid creature, brother to this one, and
just like him."

"Pity! pity!" said the old man; "'twas a bad place to leap, if I
remember; a thin fence at top, a steep bank down to the stream, wasn't
it? No chance for a horse to see where he is going. Now, I am for bold
riding as much as any man, but still there are some leaps that only
a very knowing old huntsman has any right to take. A man's life and a
horse's life are worth more than a fox's tail; at least, I should say
they ought to be."

During this time the other man had finished Ginger and had brought our
corn, and James and the old man left the stable together.





16 The Fire



Later on in the evening a traveler's horse was brought in by the second
hostler, and while he was cleaning him a young man with a pipe in his
mouth lounged into the stable to gossip.

"I say, Towler," said the hostler, "just run up the ladder into the loft
and put some hay down into this horse's rack, will you? only lay down
your pipe."

"All right," said the other, and went up through the trapdoor; and I
heard him step across the floor overhead and put down the hay. James
came in to look at us the last thing, and then the door was locked.

I cannot say how long I had slept, nor what time in the night it was,
but I woke up very uncomfortable, though I hardly knew why. I got up;
the air seemed all thick and choking. I heard Ginger coughing and one
of the other horses seemed very restless; it was quite dark, and I could
see nothing, but the stable seemed full of smoke, and I hardly knew how
to breathe.

The trapdoor had been left open, and I thought that was the place it
came through. I listened, and heard a soft rushing sort of noise and a
low crackling and snapping. I did not know what it was, but there was
something in the sound so strange that it made me tremble all over. The
other horses were all awake; some were pulling at their halters, others
stamping.

At last I heard steps outside, and the hostler who had put up the
traveler's horse burst into the stable with a lantern, and began to
untie the horses, and try to lead them out; but he seemed in such a
hurry and so frightened himself that he frightened me still more. The
first horse would not go with him; he tried the second and third, and
they too would not stir. He came to me next and tried to drag me out of
the stall by force; of course that was no use. He tried us all by turns
and then left the stable.

No doubt we were very foolish, but danger seemed to be all round, and
there was nobody we knew to trust in, and all was strange and uncertain.
The fresh air that had come in through the open door made it easier to
breathe, but the rushing sound overhead grew louder, and as I looked
upward through the bars of my empty rack I saw a red light flickering
on the wall. Then I heard a cry of "Fire!" outside, and the old hostler
quietly and quickly came in; he got one horse out, and went to another,
but the flames were playing round the trapdoor, and the roaring overhead
was dreadful.

The next thing I heard was James' voice, quiet and cheery, as it always
was.

"Come, my beauties, it is time for us to be off, so wake up and come
along." I stood nearest the door, so he came to me first, patting me as
he came in.

"Come, Beauty, on with your bridle, my boy, we'll soon be out of this
smother." It was on in no time; then he took the scarf off his neck, and
tied it lightly over my eyes, and patting and coaxing he led me out
of the stable. Safe in the yard, he slipped the scarf off my eyes, and
shouted, "Here somebody! take this horse while I go back for the other."

A tall, broad man stepped forward and took me, and James darted back
into the stable. I set up a shrill whinny as I saw him go. Ginger told
me afterward that whinny was the best thing I could have done for her,
for had she not heard me outside she would never have had courage to
come out.

There was much confusion in the yard; the horses being got out of other
stables, and the carriages and gigs being pulled out of houses and
sheds, lest the flames should spread further. On the other side the yard
windows were thrown up, and people were shouting all sorts of things;
but I kept my eye fixed on the stable door, where the smoke poured out
thicker than ever, and I could see flashes of red light; presently I
heard above all the stir and din a loud, clear voice, which I knew was
master's:

"James Howard! James Howard! Are you there?" There was no answer, but I
heard a crash of something falling in the stable, and the next moment
I gave a loud, joyful neigh, for I saw James coming through the smoke
leading Ginger with him; she was coughing violently, and he was not able
to speak.

"My brave lad!" said master, laying his hand on his shoulder, "are you
hurt?"

James shook his head, for he could not yet speak.

"Ay," said the big man who held me; "he is a brave lad, and no mistake."

"And now," said master, "when you have got your breath, James, we'll get
out of this place as quickly as we can," and we were moving toward the
entry, when from the market-place there came a sound of galloping feet
and loud rumbling wheels.

"'Tis the fire-engine! the fire-engine!" shouted two or three voices,
"stand back, make way!" and clattering and thundering over the stones
two horses dashed into the yard with a heavy engine behind them. The
firemen leaped to the ground; there was no need to ask where the fire
was--it was rolling up in a great blaze from the roof.

We got out as fast as we could into the broad quiet market-place; the
stars were shining, and except the noise behind us, all was still.
Master led the way to a large hotel on the other side, and as soon as
the hostler came, he said, "James, I must now hasten to your mistress;
I trust the horses entirely to you, order whatever you think is needed,"
and with that he was gone. The master did not run, but I never saw
mortal man walk so fast as he did that night.

There was a dreadful sound before we got into our stalls--the shrieks of
those poor horses that were left burning to death in the stable--it was
very terrible! and made both Ginger and me feel very bad. We, however,
were taken in and well done by.

The next morning the master came to see how we were and to speak to
James. I did not hear much, for the hostler was rubbing me down, but
I could see that James looked very happy, and I thought the master was
proud of him. Our mistress had been so much alarmed in the night that
the journey was put off till the afternoon, so James had the morning
on hand, and went first to the inn to see about our harness and the
carriage, and then to hear more about the fire. When he came back we
heard him tell the hostler about it. At first no one could guess how the
fire had been caused, but at last a man said he saw Dick Towler go into
the stable with a pipe in his mouth, and when he came out he had not
one, and went to the tap for another. Then the under hostler said he had
asked Dick to go up the ladder to put down some hay, but told him to lay
down his pipe first. Dick denied taking the pipe with him, but no one
believed him. I remember our John Manly's rule, never to allow a pipe in
the stable, and thought it ought to be the rule everywhere.

James said the roof and floor had all fallen in, and that only the black
walls were standing; the two poor horses that could not be got out were
buried under the burnt rafters and tiles.





17 John Manly's Talk



The rest of our journey was very easy, and a little after sunset we
reached the house of my master's friend. We were taken into a clean,
snug stable; there was a kind coachman, who made us very comfortable,
and who seemed to think a good deal of James when he heard about the
fire.

"There is one thing quite clear, young man," he said, "your horses know
who they can trust; it is one of the hardest things in the world to get
horses out of a stable when there is either fire or flood. I don't know
why they won't come out, but they won't--not one in twenty."

We stopped two or three days at this place and then returned home. All
went well on the journey; we were glad to be in our own stable again,
and John was equally glad to see us.

Before he and James left us for the night James said, "I wonder who is
coming in my place."

"Little Joe Green at the lodge," said John.

"Little Joe Green! why, he's a child!"

"He is fourteen and a half," said John.

"But he is such a little chap!"

"Yes, he is small, but he is quick and willing, and kind-hearted, too,
and then he wishes very much to come, and his father would like it;
and I know the master would like to give him the chance. He said if I
thought he would not do he would look out for a bigger boy; but I said I
was quite agreeable to try him for six weeks."

"Six weeks!" said James; "why, it will be six months before he can be of
much use! It will make you a deal of work, John."

"Well," said John with a laugh, "work and I are very good friends; I
never was afraid of work yet."

"You are a very good man," said James. "I wish I may ever be like you."

"I don't often speak of myself," said John, "but as you are going away
from us out into the world to shift for yourself I'll just tell you how
I look on these things. I was just as old as Joseph when my father and
mother died of the fever within ten days of each other, and left me and
my cripple sister Nelly alone in the world, without a relation that we
could look to for help. I was a farmer's boy, not earning enough to keep
myself, much less both of us, and she must have gone to the workhouse
but for our mistress (Nelly calls her her angel, and she has good right
to do so). She went and hired a room for her with old Widow Mallet, and
she gave her knitting and needlework when she was able to do it; and
when she was ill she sent her dinners and many nice, comfortable things,
and was like a mother to her. Then the master he took me into the stable
under old Norman, the coachman that was then. I had my food at the house
and my bed in the loft, and a suit of clothes, and three shillings a
week, so that I could help Nelly. Then there was Norman; he might have
turned round and said at his age he could not be troubled with a raw boy
from the plow-tail, but he was like a father to me, and took no end of
pains with me. When the old man died some years after I stepped into his
place, and now of course I have top wages, and can lay by for a rainy
day or a sunny day, as it may happen, and Nelly is as happy as a bird.
So you see, James, I am not the man that should turn up his nose at a
little boy and vex a good, kind master. No, no! I shall miss you very
much, James, but we shall pull through, and there's nothing like doing a
kindness when 'tis put in your way, and I am glad I can do it."

"Then," said James, "you don't hold with that saying, 'Everybody look
after himself, and take care of number one'?"

"No, indeed," said John, "where should I and Nelly have been if master
and mistress and old Norman had only taken care of number one? Why,
she in the workhouse and I hoeing turnips! Where would Black Beauty and
Ginger have been if you had only thought of number one? why, roasted to
death! No, Jim, no! that is a selfish, heathenish saying, whoever uses
it; and any man who thinks he has nothing to do but take care of number
one, why, it's a pity but what he had been drowned like a puppy or a
kitten, before he got his eyes open; that's what I think," said John,
with a very decided jerk of his head.

James laughed at this; but there was a thickness in his voice when he
said, "You have been my best friend except my mother; I hope you won't
forget me."

"No, lad, no!" said John, "and if ever I can do you a good turn I hope
you won't forget me."

The next day Joe came to the stables to learn all he could before James
left. He learned to sweep the stable, to bring in the straw and hay; he
began to clean the harness, and helped to wash the carriage. As he was
quite too short to do anything in the way of grooming Ginger and me,
James taught him upon Merrylegs, for he was to have full charge of
him, under John. He was a nice little bright fellow, and always came
whistling to his work.

Merrylegs was a good deal put out at being "mauled about," as he said,
"by a boy who knew nothing;" but toward the end of the second week he
told me confidentially that he thought the boy would turn out well.

At last the day came when James had to leave us; cheerful as he always
was, he looked quite down-hearted that morning.

"You see," he said to John, "I am leaving a great deal behind; my mother
and Betsy, and you, and a good master and mistress, and then the horses,
and my old Merrylegs. At the new place there will not be a soul that I
shall know. If it were not that I shall get a higher place, and be able
to help my mother better, I don't think I should have made up my mind to
it; it is a real pinch, John."

"Ay, James, lad, so it is; but I should not think much of you if you
could leave your home for the first time and not feel it. Cheer up,
you'll make friends there; and if you get on well, as I am sure you
will, it will be a fine thing for your mother, and she will be proud
enough that you have got into such a good place as that."

So John cheered him up, but every one was sorry to lose James; as for
Merrylegs, he pined after him for several days, and went quite off his
appetite. So John took him out several mornings with a leading rein,
when he exercised me, and, trotting and galloping by my side, got up the
little fellow's spirits again, and he was soon all right.

Joe's father would often come in and give a little help, as he
understood the work; and Joe took a great deal of pains to learn, and
John was quite encouraged about him.





18 Going for the Doctor



One night, a few days after James had left, I had eaten my hay and was
lying down in my straw fast asleep, when I was suddenly roused by the
stable bell ringing very loud. I heard the door of John's house open,
and his feet running up to the hall. He was back again in no time; he
unlocked the stable door, and came in, calling out, "Wake up, Beauty!
You must go well now, if ever you did;" and almost before I could think
he had got the saddle on my back and the bridle on my head. He just
ran round for his coat, and then took me at a quick trot up to the hall
door. The squire stood there, with a lamp in his hand.

"Now, John," he said, "ride for your life--that is, for your mistress'
life; there is not a moment to lose. Give this note to Dr. White; give
your horse a rest at the inn, and be back as soon as you can."

John said, "Yes, sir," and was on my back in a minute. The gardener who
lived at the lodge had heard the bell ring, and was ready with the gate
open, and away we went through the park, and through the village, and
down the hill till we came to the toll-gate. John called very loud and
thumped upon the door; the man was soon out and flung open the gate.

"Now," said John, "do you keep the gate open for the doctor; here's the
money," and off he went again.

There was before us a long piece of level road by the river side; John
said to me, "Now, Beauty, do your best," and so I did; I wanted no whip
nor spur, and for two miles I galloped as fast as I could lay my feet to
the ground; I don't believe that my old grandfather, who won the race
at Newmarket, could have gone faster. When we came to the bridge John
pulled me up a little and patted my neck. "Well done, Beauty! good old
fellow," he said. He would have let me go slower, but my spirit was up,
and I was off again as fast as before. The air was frosty, the moon was
bright; it was very pleasant. We came through a village, then through
a dark wood, then uphill, then downhill, till after eight miles' run we
came to the town, through the streets and into the market-place. It was
all quite still except the clatter of my feet on the stones--everybody
was asleep. The church clock struck three as we drew up at Dr. White's
door. John rang the bell twice, and then knocked at the door like
thunder. A window was thrown up, and Dr. White, in his nightcap, put his
head out and said, "What do you want?"

"Mrs. Gordon is very ill, sir; master wants you to go at once; he thinks
she will die if you cannot get there. Here is a note."

"Wait," he said, "I will come."

He shut the window, and was soon at the door.

"The worst of it is," he said, "that my horse has been out all day and
is quite done up; my son has just been sent for, and he has taken the
other. What is to be done? Can I have your horse?"

"He has come at a gallop nearly all the way, sir, and I was to give him
a rest here; but I think my master would not be against it, if you think
fit, sir."

"All right," he said; "I will soon be ready."

John stood by me and stroked my neck; I was very hot. The doctor came
out with his riding-whip.

"You need not take that, sir," said John; "Black Beauty will go till he
drops. Take care of him, sir, if you can; I should not like any harm to
come to him."

"No, no, John," said the doctor, "I hope not," and in a minute we had
left John far behind.

I will not tell about our way back. The doctor was a heavier man than
John, and not so good a rider; however, I did my very best. The man at
the toll-gate had it open. When we came to the hill the doctor drew me
up. "Now, my good fellow," he said, "take some breath." I was glad he
did, for I was nearly spent, but that breathing helped me on, and soon
we were in the park. Joe was at the lodge gate; my master was at the
hall door, for he had heard us coming. He spoke not a word; the doctor
went into the house with him, and Joe led me to the stable. I was glad
to get home; my legs shook under me, and I could only stand and pant. I
had not a dry hair on my body, the water ran down my legs, and I steamed
all over, Joe used to say, like a pot on the fire. Poor Joe! he was
young and small, and as yet he knew very little, and his father, who
would have helped him, had been sent to the next village; but I am sure
he did the very best he knew. He rubbed my legs and my chest, but he did
not put my warm cloth on me; he thought I was so hot I should not like
it. Then he gave me a pailful of water to drink; it was cold and very
good, and I drank it all; then he gave me some hay and some corn, and
thinking he had done right, he went away. Soon I began to shake and
tremble, and turned deadly cold; my legs ached, my loins ached, and my
chest ached, and I felt sore all over. Oh! how I wished for my warm,
thick cloth, as I stood and trembled. I wished for John, but he had
eight miles to walk, so I lay down in my straw and tried to go to sleep.
After a long while I heard John at the door; I gave a low moan, for I
was in great pain. He was at my side in a moment, stooping down by me. I
could not tell him how I felt, but he seemed to know it all; he covered
me up with two or three warm cloths, and then ran to the house for some
hot water; he made me some warm gruel, which I drank, and then I think I
went to sleep.

John seemed to be very much put out. I heard him say to himself over and
over again, "Stupid boy! stupid boy! no cloth put on, and I dare say the
water was cold, too; boys are no good;" but Joe was a good boy, after
all.

I was now very ill; a strong inflammation had attacked my lungs, and I
could not draw my breath without pain. John nursed me night and day; he
would get up two or three times in the night to come to me. My master,
too, often came to see me. "My poor Beauty," he said one day, "my good
horse, you saved your mistress' life, Beauty; yes, you saved her life."
I was very glad to hear that, for it seems the doctor had said if we had
been a little longer it would have been too late. John told my master he
never saw a horse go so fast in his life. It seemed as if the horse knew
what was the matter. Of course I did, though John thought not; at least
I knew as much as this--that John and I must go at the top of our speed,
and that it was for the sake of the mistress.





19 Only Ignorance



I do not know how long I was ill. Mr. Bond, the horse-doctor, came every
day. One day he bled me; John held a pail for the blood. I felt very
faint after it and thought I should die, and I believe they all thought
so too.

Ginger and Merrylegs had been moved into the other stable, so that I
might be quiet, for the fever made me very quick of hearing; any little
noise seemed quite loud, and I could tell every one's footstep going to
and from the house. I knew all that was going on. One night John had to
give me a draught; Thomas Green came in to help him. After I had taken
it and John had made me as comfortable as he could, he said he should
stay half an hour to see how the medicine settled. Thomas said he
would stay with him, so they went and sat down on a bench that had been
brought into Merrylegs' stall, and put down the lantern at their feet,
that I might not be disturbed with the light.

For awhile both men sat silent, and then Tom Green said in a low voice:

"I wish, John, you'd say a bit of a kind word to Joe. The boy is quite
broken-hearted; he can't eat his meals, and he can't smile. He says he
knows it was all his fault, though he is sure he did the best he knew,
and he says if Beauty dies no one will ever speak to him again. It goes
to my heart to hear him. I think you might give him just a word; he is
not a bad boy."

After a short pause John said slowly, "You must not be too hard upon me,
Tom. I know he meant no harm, I never said he did; I know he is not a
bad boy. But you see, I am sore myself; that horse is the pride of my
heart, to say nothing of his being such a favorite with the master and
mistress; and to think that his life may be flung away in this manner is
more than I can bear. But if you think I am hard on the boy I will try
to give him a good word to-morrow--that is, I mean if Beauty is better."

"Well, John, thank you. I knew you did not wish to be too hard, and I am
glad you see it was only ignorance."

John's voice almost startled me as he answered:

"Only ignorance! only ignorance! how can you talk about only ignorance?
Don't you know that it is the worst thing in the world, next to
wickedness?--and which does the most mischief heaven only knows. If
people can say, 'Oh! I did not know, I did not mean any harm,' they
think it is all right. I suppose Martha Mulwash did not mean to kill
that baby when she dosed it with Dalby and soothing syrups; but she did
kill it, and was tried for manslaughter."

"And serve her right, too," said Tom. "A woman should not undertake to
nurse a tender little child without knowing what is good and what is bad
for it."

"Bill Starkey," continued John, "did not mean to frighten his brother
into fits when he dressed up like a ghost and ran after him in the
moonlight; but he did; and that bright, handsome little fellow, that
might have been the pride of any mother's heart is just no better than
an idiot, and never will be, if he lives to be eighty years old. You
were a good deal cut up yourself, Tom, two weeks ago, when those young
ladies left your hothouse door open, with a frosty east wind blowing
right in; you said it killed a good many of your plants."

"A good many!" said Tom; "there was not one of the tender cuttings that
was not nipped off. I shall have to strike all over again, and the worst
of it is that I don't know where to go to get fresh ones. I was nearly
mad when I came in and saw what was done."

"And yet," said John, "I am sure the young ladies did not mean it; it
was only ignorance."

I heard no more of this conversation, for the medicine did well and sent
me to sleep, and in the morning I felt much better; but I often thought
of John's words when I came to know more of the world.





20 Joe Green



Joe Green went on very well; he learned quickly, and was so attentive
and careful that John began to trust him in many things; but as I have
said, he was small of his age, and it was seldom that he was allowed to
exercise either Ginger or me; but it so happened one morning that John
was out with Justice in the luggage cart, and the master wanted a
note to be taken immediately to a gentleman's house, about three miles
distant, and sent his orders for Joe to saddle me and take it, adding
the caution that he was to ride steadily.

The note was delivered, and we were quietly returning when we came
to the brick-field. Here we saw a cart heavily laden with bricks; the
wheels had stuck fast in the stiff mud of some deep ruts, and the carter
was shouting and flogging the two horses unmercifully. Joe pulled up. It
was a sad sight. There were the two horses straining and struggling with
all their might to drag the cart out, but they could not move it; the
sweat streamed from their legs and flanks, their sides heaved, and every
muscle was strained, while the man, fiercely pulling at the head of the
fore horse, swore and lashed most brutally.

"Hold hard," said Joe; "don't go on flogging the horses like that; the
wheels are so stuck that they cannot move the cart."

The man took no heed, but went on lashing.

"Stop! pray stop!" said Joe. "I'll help you to lighten the cart; they
can't move it now."

"Mind your own business, you impudent young rascal, and I'll mind mine!"
The man was in a towering passion and the worse for drink, and laid on
the whip again. Joe turned my head, and the next moment we were going at
a round gallop toward the house of the master brick-maker. I cannot say
if John would have approved of our pace, but Joe and I were both of one
mind, and so angry that we could not have gone slower.

The house stood close by the roadside. Joe knocked at the door, and
shouted, "Halloo! Is Mr. Clay at home?" The door was opened, and Mr.
Clay himself came out.

"Halloo, young man! You seem in a hurry; any orders from the squire this
morning?"

"No, Mr. Clay, but there's a fellow in your brick-yard flogging two
horses to death. I told him to stop, and he wouldn't; I said I'd help
him to lighten the cart, and he wouldn't; so I have come to tell you.
Pray, sir, go." Joe's voice shook with excitement.

"Thank ye, my lad," said the man, running in for his hat; then pausing
for a moment, "Will you give evidence of what you saw if I should bring
the fellow up before a magistrate?"

"That I will," said Joe, "and glad too." The man was gone, and we were
on our way home at a smart trot.

"Why, what's the matter with you, Joe? You look angry all over," said
John, as the boy flung himself from the saddle.

"I am angry all over, I can tell you," said the boy, and then in
hurried, excited words he told all that had happened. Joe was usually
such a quiet, gentle little fellow that it was wonderful to see him so
roused.

"Right, Joe! you did right, my boy, whether the fellow gets a summons or
not. Many folks would have ridden by and said it was not their
business to interfere. Now I say that with cruelty and oppression it is
everybody's business to interfere when they see it; you did right, my
boy."

Joe was quite calm by this time, and proud that John approved of him,
and cleaned out my feet and rubbed me down with a firmer hand than
usual.

They were just going home to dinner when the footman came down to the
stable to say that Joe was wanted directly in master's private room;
there was a man brought up for ill-using horses, and Joe's evidence was
wanted. The boy flushed up to his forehead, and his eyes sparkled. "They
shall have it," said he.

"Put yourself a bit straight," said John. Joe gave a pull at his necktie
and a twitch at his jacket, and was off in a moment. Our master being
one of the county magistrates, cases were often brought to him to
settle, or say what should be done. In the stable we heard no more for
some time, as it was the men's dinner hour, but when Joe came next into
the stable I saw he was in high spirits; he gave me a good-natured slap,
and said, "We won't see such things done, will we, old fellow?" We heard
afterward that he had given his evidence so clearly, and the horses were
in such an exhausted state, bearing marks of such brutal usage, that the
carter was committed to take his trial, and might possibly be sentenced
to two or three months in prison.

It was wonderful what a change had come over Joe. John laughed, and said
he had grown an inch taller in that week, and I believe he had. He
was just as kind and gentle as before, but there was more purpose and
determination in all that he did--as if he had jumped at once from a boy
into a man.





21 The Parting



Now I had lived in this happy place three years, but sad changes were
about to come over us. We heard from time to time that our mistress was
ill. The doctor was often at the house, and the master looked grave and
anxious. Then we heard that she must leave her home at once, and go to
a warm country for two or three years. The news fell upon the household
like the tolling of a deathbell. Everybody was sorry; but the master
began directly to make arrangements for breaking up his establishment
and leaving England. We used to hear it talked about in our stable;
indeed, nothing else was talked about.

John went about his work silent and sad, and Joe scarcely whistled.
There was a great deal of coming and going; Ginger and I had full work.

The first of the party who went were Miss Jessie and Flora, with their
governess. They came to bid us good-by. They hugged poor Merrylegs
like an old friend, and so indeed he was. Then we heard what had been
arranged for us. Master had sold Ginger and me to his old friend,
the Earl of W----, for he thought we should have a good place there.
Merrylegs he had given to the vicar, who was wanting a pony for Mrs.
Blomefield, but it was on the condition that he should never be sold,
and that when he was past work he should be shot and buried.

Joe was engaged to take care of him and to help in the house, so I
thought that Merrylegs was well off. John had the offer of several good
places, but he said he should wait a little and look round.

The evening before they left the master came into the stable to give
some directions, and to give his horses the last pat. He seemed very
low-spirited; I knew that by his voice. I believe we horses can tell
more by the voice than many men can.

"Have you decided what to do, John?" he said. "I find you have not
accepted either of those offers."

"No, sir; I have made up my mind that if I could get a situation with
some first-rate colt-breaker and horse-trainer, it would be the right
thing for me. Many young animals are frightened and spoiled by wrong
treatment, which need not be if the right man took them in hand. I
always get on well with horses, and if I could help some of them to a
fair start I should feel as if I was doing some good. What do you think
of it, sir?"

"I don't know a man anywhere," said master, "that I should think so
suitable for it as yourself. You understand horses, and somehow they
understand you, and in time you might set up for yourself; I think you
could not do better. If in any way I can help you, write to me. I shall
speak to my agent in London, and leave your character with him."

Master gave John the name and address, and then he thanked him for his
long and faithful service; but that was too much for John. "Pray, don't,
sir, I can't bear it; you and my dear mistress have done so much for
me that I could never repay it. But we shall never forget you, sir, and
please God, we may some day see mistress back again like herself; we
must keep up hope, sir." Master gave John his hand, but he did not
speak, and they both left the stable.

The last sad day had come; the footman and the heavy luggage had gone
off the day before, and there were only master and mistress and her
maid. Ginger and I brought the carriage up to the hall door for the last
time. The servants brought out cushions and rugs and many other things;
and when all were arranged master came down the steps carrying the
mistress in his arms (I was on the side next to the house, and could see
all that went on); he placed her carefully in the carriage, while the
house servants stood round crying.

"Good-by, again," he said; "we shall not forget any of you," and he got
in. "Drive on, John."

Joe jumped up, and we trotted slowly through the park and through the
village, where the people were standing at their doors to have a last
look and to say, "God bless them."

When we reached the railway station I think mistress walked from the
carriage to the waiting-room. I heard her say in her own sweet voice,
"Good-by, John. God bless you." I felt the rein twitch, but John made no
answer; perhaps he could not speak. As soon as Joe had taken the things
out of the carriage John called him to stand by the horses, while he
went on the platform. Poor Joe! he stood close up to our heads to hide
his tears. Very soon the train came puffing up into the station; then
two or three minutes, and the doors were slammed to, the guard whistled,
and the train glided away, leaving behind it only clouds of white smoke
and some very heavy hearts.

When it was quite out of sight John came back.

"We shall never see her again," he said--"never." He took the reins,
mounted the box, and with Joe drove slowly home; but it was not our home
now.










