39 Seedy Sam



I should say that for a cab-horse I was very well off indeed; my driver
was my owner, and it was his interest to treat me well and not overwork
me, even had he not been so good a man as he was; but there were a great
many horses which belonged to the large cab-owners, who let them out to
their drivers for so much money a day. As the horses did not belong to
these men the only thing they thought of was how to get their money out
of them, first, to pay the master, and then to provide for their own
living; and a dreadful time some of these horses had of it. Of course,
I understood but little, but it was often talked over on the stand,
and the governor, who was a kind-hearted man and fond of horses, would
sometimes speak up if one came in very much jaded or ill-used.

One day a shabby, miserable-looking driver, who went by the name of
"Seedy Sam", brought in his horse looking dreadfully beat, and the
governor said:

"You and your horse look more fit for the police station than for this
rank."

The man flung his tattered rug over the horse, turned full round upon
the Governor and said in a voice that sounded almost desperate:

"If the police have any business with the matter it ought to be with the
masters who charge us so much, or with the fares that are fixed so low.
If a man has to pay eighteen shillings a day for the use of a cab and
two horses, as many of us have to do in the season, and must make that
up before we earn a penny for ourselves I say 'tis more than hard work;
nine shillings a day to get out of each horse before you begin to get
your own living. You know that's true, and if the horses don't work we
must starve, and I and my children have known what that is before now.
I've six of 'em, and only one earns anything; I am on the stand fourteen
or sixteen hours a day, and I haven't had a Sunday these ten or twelve
weeks; you know Skinner never gives a day if he can help it, and if I
don't work hard, tell me who does! I want a warm coat and a mackintosh,
but with so many to feed how can a man get it? I had to pledge my clock
a week ago to pay Skinner, and I shall never see it again."

Some of the other drivers stood round nodding their heads and saying he
was right. The man went on:

"You that have your own horses and cabs, or drive for good masters, have
a chance of getting on and a chance of doing right; I haven't. We can't
charge more than sixpence a mile after the first, within the four-mile
radius. This very morning I had to go a clear six miles and only took
three shillings. I could not get a return fare, and had to come all the
way back; there's twelve miles for the horse and three shillings for me.
After that I had a three-mile fare, and there were bags and boxes enough
to have brought in a good many twopences if they had been put outside;
but you know how people do; all that could be piled up inside on the
front seat were put in and three heavy boxes went on the top. That
was sixpence, and the fare one and sixpence; then I got a return for a
shilling. Now that makes eighteen miles for the horse and six shillings
for me; there's three shillings still for that horse to earn and nine
shillings for the afternoon horse before I touch a penny. Of course, it
is not always so bad as that, but you know it often is, and I say 'tis
a mockery to tell a man that he must not overwork his horse, for when a
beast is downright tired there's nothing but the whip that will keep
his legs a-going; you can't help yourself--you must put your wife and
children before the horse; the masters must look to that, we can't. I
don't ill-use my horse for the sake of it; none of you can say I do.
There's wrong lays somewhere--never a day's rest, never a quiet hour
with the wife and children. I often feel like an old man, though I'm
only forty-five. You know how quick some of the gentry are to suspect us
of cheating and overcharging; why, they stand with their purses in
their hands counting it over to a penny and looking at us as if we were
pickpockets. I wish some of 'em had got to sit on my box sixteen hours
a day and get a living out of it and eighteen shillings beside, and that
in all weathers; they would not be so uncommon particular never to give
us a sixpence over or to cram all the luggage inside. Of course, some of
'em tip us pretty handsome now and then, or else we could not live; but
you can't depend upon that."

The men who stood round much approved this speech, and one of them said,
"It is desperate hard, and if a man sometimes does what is wrong it is
no wonder, and if he gets a dram too much who's to blow him up?"

Jerry had taken no part in this conversation, but I never saw his face
look so sad before. The governor had stood with both his hands in his
pockets; now he took his handkerchief out of his hat and wiped his
forehead.

"You've beaten me, Sam," he said, "for it's all true, and I won't cast
it up to you any more about the police; it was the look in that horse's
eye that came over me. It is hard lines for man and it is hard lines for
beast, and who's to mend it I don't know: but anyway you might tell
the poor beast that you were sorry to take it out of him in that way.
Sometimes a kind word is all we can give 'em, poor brutes, and 'tis
wonderful what they do understand."

A few mornings after this talk a new man came on the stand with Sam's
cab.

"Halloo!" said one, "what's up with Seedy Sam?"

"He's ill in bed," said the man; "he was taken last night in the yard,
and could scarcely crawl home. His wife sent a boy this morning to
say his father was in a high fever and could not get out, so I'm here
instead."

The next morning the same man came again.

"How is Sam?" inquired the governor.

"He's gone," said the man.

"What, gone? You don't mean to say he's dead?"

"Just snuffed out," said the other; "he died at four o'clock this
morning; all yesterday he was raving--raving about Skinner, and having
no Sundays. 'I never had a Sunday's rest,' these were his last words."

No one spoke for a while, and then the governor said, "I'll tell you
what, mates, this is a warning for us."





40 Poor Ginger



One day, while our cab and many others were waiting outside one of the
parks where music was playing, a shabby old cab drove up beside ours.
The horse was an old worn-out chestnut, with an ill-kept coat, and
bones that showed plainly through it, the knees knuckled over, and the
fore-legs were very unsteady. I had been eating some hay, and the wind
rolled a little lock of it that way, and the poor creature put out her
long thin neck and picked it up, and then turned and looked about for
more. There was a hopeless look in the dull eye that I could not help
noticing, and then, as I was thinking where I had seen that horse
before, she looked full at me and said, "Black Beauty, is that you?"

It was Ginger! but how changed! The beautifully arched and glossy neck
was now straight, and lank, and fallen in; the clean straight legs and
delicate fetlocks were swelled; the joints were grown out of shape with
hard work; the face, that was once so full of spirit and life, was now
full of suffering, and I could tell by the heaving of her sides, and her
frequent cough, how bad her breath was.

Our drivers were standing together a little way off, so I sidled up to
her a step or two, that we might have a little quiet talk. It was a sad
tale that she had to tell.

After a twelvemonth's run off at Earlshall, she was considered to be fit
for work again, and was sold to a gentleman. For a little while she
got on very well, but after a longer gallop than usual the old strain
returned, and after being rested and doctored she was again sold. In
this way she changed hands several times, but always getting lower down.

"And so at last," said she, "I was bought by a man who keeps a number of
cabs and horses, and lets them out. You look well off, and I am glad of
it, but I could not tell you what my life has been. When they found out
my weakness they said I was not worth what they gave for me, and that I
must go into one of the low cabs, and just be used up; that is what
they are doing, whipping and working with never one thought of what I
suffer--they paid for me, and must get it out of me, they say. The man
who hires me now pays a deal of money to the owner every day, and so he
has to get it out of me too; and so it's all the week round and round,
with never a Sunday rest."

I said, "You used to stand up for yourself if you were ill-used."

"Ah!" she said, "I did once, but it's no use; men are strongest, and if
they are cruel and have no feeling, there is nothing that we can do, but
just bear it--bear it on and on to the end. I wish the end was come,
I wish I was dead. I have seen dead horses, and I am sure they do not
suffer pain; I wish I may drop down dead at my work, and not be sent off
to the knackers."

I was very much troubled, and I put my nose up to hers, but I could say
nothing to comfort her. I think she was pleased to see me, for she said,
"You are the only friend I ever had."

Just then her driver came up, and with a tug at her mouth backed her out
of the line and drove off, leaving me very sad indeed.

A short time after this a cart with a dead horse in it passed our
cab-stand. The head hung out of the cart-tail, the lifeless tongue was
slowly dropping with blood; and the sunken eyes! but I can't speak of
them, the sight was too dreadful. It was a chestnut horse with a long,
thin neck. I saw a white streak down the forehead. I believe it was
Ginger; I hoped it was, for then her troubles would be over. Oh! if men
were more merciful they would shoot us before we came to such misery.





41 The Butcher



I saw a great deal of trouble among the horses in London, and much of
it might have been prevented by a little common sense. We horses do not
mind hard work if we are treated reasonably, and I am sure there are
many driven by quite poor men who have a happier life than I had when I
used to go in the Countess of W----'s carriage, with my silver-mounted
harness and high feeding.

It often went to my heart to see how the little ponies were used,
straining along with heavy loads or staggering under heavy blows from
some low, cruel boy. Once I saw a little gray pony with a thick mane
and a pretty head, and so much like Merrylegs that if I had not been in
harness I should have neighed to him. He was doing his best to pull a
heavy cart, while a strong rough boy was cutting him under the belly
with his whip and chucking cruelly at his little mouth. Could it be
Merrylegs? It was just like him; but then Mr. Blomefield was never to
sell him, and I think he would not do it; but this might have been quite
as good a little fellow, and had as happy a place when he was young.

I often noticed the great speed at which butchers' horses were made to
go, though I did not know why it was so till one day when we had to wait
some time in St. John's Wood. There was a butcher's shop next door, and
as we were standing a butcher's cart came dashing up at a great pace.
The horse was hot and much exhausted; he hung his head down, while his
heaving sides and trembling legs showed how hard he had been driven. The
lad jumped out of the cart and was getting the basket when the master
came out of the shop much displeased. After looking at the horse he
turned angrily to the lad.

"How many times shall I tell you not to drive in this way? You ruined
the last horse and broke his wind, and you are going to ruin this in the
same way. If you were not my own son I would dismiss you on the spot;
it is a disgrace to have a horse brought to the shop in a condition like
that; you are liable to be taken up by the police for such driving, and
if you are you need not look to me for bail, for I have spoken to you
till I'm tired; you must look out for yourself."

During this speech the boy had stood by, sullen and dogged, but when his
father ceased he broke out angrily. It wasn't his fault, and he wouldn't
take the blame; he was only going by orders all the time.

"You always say, 'Now be quick; now look sharp!' and when I go to the
houses one wants a leg of mutton for an early dinner and I must be back
with it in a quarter of an hour; another cook has forgotten to order
the beef; I must go and fetch it and be back in no time, or the
mistress will scold; and the housekeeper says they have company coming
unexpectedly and must have some chops sent up directly; and the lady at
No. 4, in the Crescent, never orders her dinner till the meat comes
in for lunch, and it's nothing but hurry, hurry, all the time. If the
gentry would think of what they want, and order their meat the day
before, there need not be this blow up!"

"I wish to goodness they would," said the butcher; "'twould save me a
wonderful deal of harass, and I could suit my customers much better if
I knew beforehand--But there! what's the use of talking--who ever thinks
of a butcher's convenience or a butcher's horse! Now, then, take him
in and look to him well; mind, he does not go out again to-day, and if
anything else is wanted you must carry it yourself in the basket." With
that he went in, and the horse was led away.

But all boys are not cruel. I have seen some as fond of their pony or
donkey as if it had been a favorite dog, and the little creatures have
worked away as cheerfully and willingly for their young drivers as I
work for Jerry. It may be hard work sometimes, but a friend's hand and
voice make it easy.

There was a young coster-boy who came up our street with greens and
potatoes; he had an old pony, not very handsome, but the cheerfullest
and pluckiest little thing I ever saw, and to see how fond those two
were of each other was a treat. The pony followed his master like a dog,
and when he got into his cart would trot off without a whip or a word,
and rattle down the street as merrily as if he had come out of the
queen's stables. Jerry liked the boy, and called him "Prince Charlie",
for he said he would make a king of drivers some day.

There was an old man, too, who used to come up our street with a little
coal cart; he wore a coal-heaver's hat, and looked rough and black. He
and his old horse used to plod together along the street, like two good
partners who understood each other; the horse would stop of his own
accord at the doors where they took coal of him; he used to keep one ear
bent toward his master. The old man's cry could be heard up the street
long before he came near. I never knew what he said, but the children
called him "Old Ba-a-ar Hoo", for it sounded like that. Polly took her
coal of him, and was very friendly, and Jerry said it was a comfort to
think how happy an old horse might be in a poor place.





42 The Election



As we came into the yard one afternoon Polly came out. "Jerry! I've had
Mr. B---- here asking about your vote, and he wants to hire your cab for
the election; he will call for an answer."

"Well, Polly, you may say that my cab will be otherwise engaged. I
should not like to have it pasted over with their great bills, and as
to making Jack and Captain race about to the public-houses to bring up
half-drunken voters, why, I think 'twould be an insult to the horses.
No, I shan't do it."

"I suppose you'll vote for the gentleman? He said he was of your
politics."

"So he is in some things, but I shall not vote for him, Polly; you know
what his trade is?"

"Yes."

"Well, a man who gets rich by that trade may be all very well in some
ways, but he is blind as to what workingmen want; I could not in my
conscience send him up to make the laws. I dare say they'll be angry,
but every man must do what he thinks to be the best for his country."

On the morning before the election, Jerry was putting me into the
shafts, when Dolly came into the yard sobbing and crying, with her
little blue frock and white pinafore spattered all over with mud.

"Why, Dolly, what is the matter?"

"Those naughty boys," she sobbed, "have thrown the dirt all over me, and
called me a little raga--raga--"

"They called her a little 'blue' ragamuffin, father," said Harry, who
ran in looking very angry; "but I have given it to them; they won't
insult my sister again. I have given them a thrashing they will
remember; a set of cowardly, rascally 'orange' blackguards."

Jerry kissed the child and said, "Run in to mother, my pet, and tell her
I think you had better stay at home to-day and help her."

Then turning gravely to Harry:

"My boy, I hope you will always defend your sister, and give anybody who
insults her a good thrashing--that is as it should be; but mind, I won't
have any election blackguarding on my premises. There are as many
'blue' blackguards as there are 'orange', and as many white as there are
purple, or any other color, and I won't have any of my family mixed up
with it. Even women and children are ready to quarrel for the sake of a
color, and not one in ten of them knows what it is about."

"Why, father, I thought blue was for Liberty."

"My boy, Liberty does not come from colors, they only show party, and
all the liberty you can get out of them is, liberty to get drunk at
other people's expense, liberty to ride to the poll in a dirty old cab,
liberty to abuse any one that does not wear your color, and to shout
yourself hoarse at what you only half-understand--that's your liberty!"

"Oh, father, you are laughing."

"No, Harry, I am serious, and I am ashamed to see how men go on who
ought to know better. An election is a very serious thing; at least it
ought to be, and every man ought to vote according to his conscience,
and let his neighbor do the same."





43 A Friend in Need



The election day came at last; there was no lack of work for Jerry and
me. First came a stout puffy gentleman with a carpet bag; he wanted to
go to the Bishopsgate station; then we were called by a party who wished
to be taken to the Regent's Park; and next we were wanted in a side
street where a timid, anxious old lady was waiting to be taken to the
bank; there we had to stop to take her back again, and just as we had
set her down a red-faced gentleman, with a handful of papers, came
running up out of breath, and before Jerry could get down he had opened
the door, popped himself in, and called out, "Bow Street Police Station,
quick!" so off we went with him, and when after another turn or two
we came back, there was no other cab on the stand. Jerry put on my
nose-bag, for as he said, "We must eat when we can on such days as
these; so munch away, Jack, and make the best of your time, old boy."

I found I had a good feed of crushed oats wetted up with a little bran;
this would be a treat any day, but very refreshing then. Jerry was so
thoughtful and kind--what horse would not do his best for such a master?
Then he took out one of Polly's meat pies, and standing near me, he
began to eat it. The streets were very full, and the cabs, with the
candidates' colors on them, were dashing about through the crowd as if
life and limb were of no consequence; we saw two people knocked down
that day, and one was a woman. The horses were having a bad time of it,
poor things! but the voters inside thought nothing of that; many of them
were half-drunk, hurrahing out of the cab windows if their own party
came by. It was the first election I had seen, and I don't want to be in
another, though I have heard things are better now.

Jerry and I had not eaten many mouthfuls before a poor young woman,
carrying a heavy child, came along the street. She was looking this way
and that way, and seemed quite bewildered. Presently she made her way up
to Jerry and asked if he could tell her the way to St. Thomas' Hospital,
and how far it was to get there. She had come from the country that
morning, she said, in a market cart; she did not know about the
election, and was quite a stranger in London. She had got an order for
the hospital for her little boy. The child was crying with a feeble,
pining cry.

"Poor little fellow!" she said, "he suffers a deal of pain; he is four
years old and can't walk any more than a baby; but the doctor said if I
could get him into the hospital he might get well; pray, sir, how far is
it; and which way is it?"

"Why, missis," said Jerry, "you can't get there walking through crowds
like this! why, it is three miles away, and that child is heavy."

"Yes, bless him, he is; but I am strong, thank God, and if I knew the
way I think I should get on somehow; please tell me the way."

"You can't do it," said Jerry, "you might be knocked down and the child
be run over. Now look here, just get into this cab, and I'll drive you
safe to the hospital. Don't you see the rain is coming on?"

"No, sir, no; I can't do that, thank you, I have only just money enough
to get back with. Please tell me the way."

"Look you here, missis," said Jerry, "I've got a wife and dear children
at home, and I know a father's feelings; now get you into that cab, and
I'll take you there for nothing. I'd be ashamed of myself to let a woman
and a sick child run a risk like that."

"Heaven bless you!" said the woman, and burst into tears.

"There, there, cheer up, my dear, I'll soon take you there; come, let me
put you inside."

As Jerry went to open the door two men, with colors in their hats and
buttonholes, ran up calling out, "Cab!"

"Engaged," cried Jerry; but one of the men, pushing past the woman,
sprang into the cab, followed by the other. Jerry looked as stern as a
policeman. "This cab is already engaged, gentlemen, by that lady."

"Lady!" said one of them; "oh! she can wait; our business is very
important, besides we were in first, it is our right, and we shall stay
in."

A droll smile came over Jerry's face as he shut the door upon them. "All
right, gentlemen, pray stay in as long as it suits you; I can wait while
you rest yourselves." And turning his back upon them he walked up to the
young woman, who was standing near me. "They'll soon be gone," he said,
laughing; "don't trouble yourself, my dear."

And they soon were gone, for when they understood Jerry's dodge they got
out, calling him all sorts of bad names and blustering about his number
and getting a summons. After this little stoppage we were soon on our
way to the hospital, going as much as possible through by-streets. Jerry
rung the great bell and helped the young woman out.

"Thank you a thousand times," she said; "I could never have got here
alone."

"You're kindly welcome, and I hope the dear child will soon be better."

He watched her go in at the door, and gently he said to himself,
"Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these." Then he
patted my neck, which was always his way when anything pleased him.

The rain was now coming down fast, and just as we were leaving the
hospital the door opened again, and the porter called out, "Cab!" We
stopped, and a lady came down the steps. Jerry seemed to know her at
once; she put back her veil and said, "Barker! Jeremiah Barker, is it
you? I am very glad to find you here; you are just the friend I want,
for it is very difficult to get a cab in this part of London to-day."

"I shall be proud to serve you, ma'am; I am right glad I happened to be
here. Where may I take you to, ma'am?"

"To the Paddington Station, and then if we are in good time, as I think
we shall be, you shall tell me all about Mary and the children."

We got to the station in good time, and being under shelter the lady
stood a good while talking to Jerry. I found she had been Polly's
mistress, and after many inquiries about her she said:

"How do you find the cab work suit you in winter? I know Mary was rather
anxious about you last year."

"Yes, ma'am, she was; I had a bad cough that followed me up quite into
the warm weather, and when I am kept out late she does worry herself a
good deal. You see, ma'am, it is all hours and all weathers, and that
does try a man's constitution; but I am getting on pretty well, and I
should feel quite lost if I had not horses to look after. I was brought
up to it, and I am afraid I should not do so well at anything else."

"Well, Barker," she said, "it would be a great pity that you should
seriously risk your health in this work, not only for your own but for
Mary's and the children's sake; there are many places where good drivers
or good grooms are wanted, and if ever you think you ought to give up
this cab work let me know."

Then sending some kind messages to Mary she put something into his hand,
saying, "There is five shillings each for the two children; Mary will
know how to spend it."

Jerry thanked her and seemed much pleased, and turning out of the
station we at last reached home, and I, at least, was tired.





44 Old Captain and His Successor



Captain and I were great friends. He was a noble old fellow, and he was
very good company. I never thought that he would have to leave his home
and go down the hill; but his turn came, and this was how it happened. I
was not there, but I heard all about it.

He and Jerry had taken a party to the great railway station over London
Bridge, and were coming back, somewhere between the bridge and the
monument, when Jerry saw a brewer's empty dray coming along, drawn by
two powerful horses. The drayman was lashing his horses with his heavy
whip; the dray was light, and they started off at a furious rate; the
man had no control over them, and the street was full of traffic.

One young girl was knocked down and run over, and the next moment they
dashed up against our cab; both the wheels were torn off and the cab was
thrown over. Captain was dragged down, the shafts splintered, and one
of them ran into his side. Jerry, too, was thrown, but was only bruised;
nobody could tell how he escaped; he always said 'twas a miracle. When
poor Captain was got up he was found to be very much cut and knocked
about. Jerry led him home gently, and a sad sight it was to see the
blood soaking into his white coat and dropping from his side and
shoulder. The drayman was proved to be very drunk, and was fined, and
the brewer had to pay damages to our master; but there was no one to pay
damages to poor Captain.

The farrier and Jerry did the best they could to ease his pain and make
him comfortable. The fly had to be mended, and for several days I did
not go out, and Jerry earned nothing. The first time we went to the
stand after the accident the governor came up to hear how Captain was.

"He'll never get over it," said Jerry, "at least not for my work, so the
farrier said this morning. He says he may do for carting, and that sort
of work. It has put me out very much. Carting, indeed! I've seen what
horses come to at that work round London. I only wish all the drunkards
could be put in a lunatic asylum instead of being allowed to run foul of
sober people. If they would break their own bones, and smash their own
carts, and lame their own horses, that would be their own affair, and
we might let them alone, but it seems to me that the innocent
always suffer; and then they talk about compensation! You can't make
compensation; there's all the trouble, and vexation, and loss of time,
besides losing a good horse that's like an old friend--it's nonsense
talking of compensation! If there's one devil that I should like to see
in the bottomless pit more than another, it's the drink devil."

"I say, Jerry," said the governor, "you are treading pretty hard on my
toes, you know; I'm not so good as you are, more shame to me; I wish I
was."

"Well," said Jerry, "why don't you cut with it, governor? You are too
good a man to be the slave of such a thing."

"I'm a great fool, Jerry, but I tried once for two days, and I thought I
should have died; how did you do?"

"I had hard work at it for several weeks; you see I never did get drunk,
but I found that I was not my own master, and that when the craving came
on it was hard work to say 'no'. I saw that one of us must knock under,
the drink devil or Jerry Barker, and I said that it should not be Jerry
Barker, God helping me; but it was a struggle, and I wanted all the
help I could get, for till I tried to break the habit I did not know how
strong it was; but then Polly took such pains that I should have good
food, and when the craving came on I used to get a cup of coffee, or
some peppermint, or read a bit in my book, and that was a help to me;
sometimes I had to say over and over to myself, 'Give up the drink or
lose your soul! Give up the drink or break Polly's heart!' But thanks be
to God, and my dear wife, my chains were broken, and now for ten years I
have not tasted a drop, and never wish for it."

"I've a great mind to try at it," said Grant, "for 'tis a poor thing not
to be one's own master."

"Do, governor, do, you'll never repent it, and what a help it would be
to some of the poor fellows in our rank if they saw you do without it. I
know there's two or three would like to keep out of that tavern if they
could."

At first Captain seemed to do well, but he was a very old horse, and it
was only his wonderful constitution, and Jerry's care, that had kept
him up at the cab work so long; now he broke down very much. The farrier
said he might mend up enough to sell for a few pounds, but Jerry said,
no! a few pounds got by selling a good old servant into hard work
and misery would canker all the rest of his money, and he thought the
kindest thing he could do for the fine old fellow would be to put a sure
bullet through his head, and then he would never suffer more; for he did
not know where to find a kind master for the rest of his days.

The day after this was decided Harry took me to the forge for some new
shoes; when I returned Captain was gone. I and the family all felt it
very much.

Jerry had now to look out for another horse, and he soon heard of one
through an acquaintance who was under-groom in a nobleman's stables. He
was a valuable young horse, but he had run away, smashed into another
carriage, flung his lordship out, and so cut and blemished himself that
he was no longer fit for a gentleman's stables, and the coachman had
orders to look round, and sell him as well as he could.

"I can do with high spirits," said Jerry, "if a horse is not vicious or
hard-mouthed."

"There is not a bit of vice in him," said the man; "his mouth is very
tender, and I think myself that was the cause of the accident; you see
he had just been clipped, and the weather was bad, and he had not had
exercise enough, and when he did go out he was as full of spring as a
balloon. Our governor (the coachman, I mean) had him harnessed in as
tight and strong as he could, with the martingale, and the check-rein, a
very sharp curb, and the reins put in at the bottom bar. It is my belief
that it made the horse mad, being tender in the mouth and so full of
spirit."

"Likely enough; I'll come and see him," said Jerry.

The next day Hotspur, that was his name, came home; he was a fine brown
horse, without a white hair in him, as tall as Captain, with a very
handsome head, and only five years old. I gave him a friendly greeting
by way of good fellowship, but did not ask him any questions. The first
night he was very restless. Instead of lying down, he kept jerking his
halter rope up and down through the ring, and knocking the block about
against the manger till I could not sleep. However, the next day, after
five or six hours in the cab, he came in quiet and sensible. Jerry
patted and talked to him a good deal, and very soon they understood each
other, and Jerry said that with an easy bit and plenty of work he would
be as gentle as a lamb; and that it was an ill wind that blew nobody
good, for if his lordship had lost a hundred-guinea favorite, the cabman
had gained a good horse with all his strength in him.

Hotspur thought it a great come-down to be a cab-horse, and was
disgusted at standing in the rank, but he confessed to me at the end of
the week that an easy mouth and a free head made up for a great deal,
and after all, the work was not so degrading as having one's head and
tail fastened to each other at the saddle. In fact, he settled in well,
and Jerry liked him very much.





45 Jerry's New Year



For some people Christmas and the New Year are very merry times; but for
cabmen and cabmen's horses it is no holiday, though it may be a harvest.
There are so many parties, balls, and places of amusement open that the
work is hard and often late. Sometimes driver and horse have to wait
for hours in the rain or frost, shivering with the cold, while the merry
people within are dancing away to the music. I wonder if the beautiful
ladies ever think of the weary cabman waiting on his box, and his
patient beast standing, till his legs get stiff with cold.

I had now most of the evening work, as I was well accustomed to
standing, and Jerry was also more afraid of Hotspur taking cold. We had
a great deal of late work in the Christmas week, and Jerry's cough was
bad; but however late we were, Polly sat up for him, and came out with a
lantern to meet him, looking anxious and troubled.

On the evening of the New Year we had to take two gentlemen to a house
in one of the West End Squares. We set them down at nine o'clock, and
were told to come again at eleven, "but," said one, "as it is a card
party, you may have to wait a few minutes, but don't be late."

As the clock struck eleven we were at the door, for Jerry was always
punctual. The clock chimed the quarters, one, two, three, and then
struck twelve, but the door did not open.

The wind had been very changeable, with squalls of rain during the day,
but now it came on sharp, driving sleet, which seemed to come all the
way round; it was very cold, and there was no shelter. Jerry got off
his box and came and pulled one of my cloths a little more over my neck;
then he took a turn or two up and down, stamping his feet; then he began
to beat his arms, but that set him off coughing; so he opened the cab
door and sat at the bottom with his feet on the pavement, and was a
little sheltered. Still the clock chimed the quarters, and no one came.
At half-past twelve he rang the bell and asked the servant if he would
be wanted that night.

"Oh, yes, you'll be wanted safe enough," said the man; "you must not go,
it will soon be over," and again Jerry sat down, but his voice was so
hoarse I could hardly hear him.

At a quarter past one the door opened, and the two gentlemen came out;
they got into the cab without a word, and told Jerry where to drive,
that was nearly two miles. My legs were numb with cold, and I thought
I should have stumbled. When the men got out they never said they were
sorry to have kept us waiting so long, but were angry at the charge;
however, as Jerry never charged more than was his due, so he never took
less, and they had to pay for the two hours and a quarter waiting; but
it was hard-earned money to Jerry.

At last we got home; he could hardly speak, and his cough was dreadful.
Polly asked no questions, but opened the door and held the lantern for
him.

"Can't I do something?" she said.

"Yes; get Jack something warm, and then boil me some gruel."

This was said in a hoarse whisper; he could hardly get his breath, but
he gave me a rub-down as usual, and even went up into the hayloft for an
extra bundle of straw for my bed. Polly brought me a warm mash that made
me comfortable, and then they locked the door.

It was late the next morning before any one came, and then it was only
Harry. He cleaned us and fed us, and swept out the stalls, then he put
the straw back again as if it was Sunday. He was very still, and neither
whistled nor sang. At noon he came again and gave us our food and water;
this time Dolly came with him; she was crying, and I could gather from
what they said that Jerry was dangerously ill, and the doctor said it
was a bad case. So two days passed, and there was great trouble indoors.
We only saw Harry, and sometimes Dolly. I think she came for company,
for Polly was always with Jerry, and he had to be kept very quiet.

On the third day, while Harry was in the stable, a tap came at the door,
and Governor Grant came in.

"I wouldn't go to the house, my boy," he said, "but I want to know how
your father is."

"He is very bad," said Harry, "he can't be much worse; they call
it 'bronchitis'; the doctor thinks it will turn one way or another
to-night."

"That's bad, very bad," said Grant, shaking his head; "I know two men
who died of that last week; it takes 'em off in no time; but while
there's life there's hope, so you must keep up your spirits."

"Yes," said Harry quickly, "and the doctor said that father had a better
chance than most men, because he didn't drink. He said yesterday the
fever was so high that if father had been a drinking man it would have
burned him up like a piece of paper; but I believe he thinks he will get
over it; don't you think he will, Mr. Grant?"

The governor looked puzzled.

"If there's any rule that good men should get over these things, I'm
sure he will, my boy; he's the best man I know. I'll look in early
to-morrow."

Early next morning he was there.

"Well?" said he.

"Father is better," said Harry. "Mother hopes he will get over it."

"Thank God!" said the governor, "and now you must keep him warm, and
keep his mind easy, and that brings me to the horses; you see Jack will
be all the better for the rest of a week or two in a warm stable, and
you can easily take him a turn up and down the street to stretch his
legs; but this young one, if he does not get work, he will soon be all
up on end, as you may say, and will be rather too much for you; and when
he does go out there'll be an accident."

"It is like that now," said Harry. "I have kept him short of corn, but
he's so full of spirit I don't know what to do with him."

"Just so," said Grant. "Now look here, will you tell your mother that
if she is agreeable I will come for him every day till something is
arranged, and take him for a good spell of work, and whatever he earns,
I'll bring your mother half of it, and that will help with the horses'
feed. Your father is in a good club, I know, but that won't keep the
horses, and they'll be eating their heads off all this time; I'll come
at noon and hear what she says," and without waiting for Harry's thanks
he was gone.

At noon I think he went and saw Polly, for he and Harry came to the
stable together, harnessed Hotspur, and took him out.

For a week or more he came for Hotspur, and when Harry thanked him or
said anything about his kindness, he laughed it off, saying it was all
good luck for him, for his horses were wanting a little rest which they
would not otherwise have had.

Jerry grew better steadily, but the doctor said that he must never go
back to the cab work again if he wished to be an old man. The children
had many consultations together about what father and mother would do,
and how they could help to earn money.

One afternoon Hotspur was brought in very wet and dirty.

"The streets are nothing but slush," said the governor; "it will give
you a good warming, my boy, to get him clean and dry."

"All right, governor," said Harry, "I shall not leave him till he is;
you know I have been trained by my father."

"I wish all the boys had been trained like you," said the governor.

While Harry was sponging off the mud from Hotspur's body and legs Dolly
came in, looking very full of something.

"Who lives at Fairstowe, Harry? Mother has got a letter from Fairstowe;
she seemed so glad, and ran upstairs to father with it."

"Don't you know? Why, it is the name of Mrs. Fowler's place--mother's
old mistress, you know--the lady that father met last summer, who sent
you and me five shillings each."

"Oh! Mrs. Fowler. Of course, I know all about her. I wonder what she is
writing to mother about."

"Mother wrote to her last week," said Harry; "you know she told father
if ever he gave up the cab work she would like to know. I wonder what
she says; run in and see, Dolly."

Harry scrubbed away at Hotspur with a huish! huish! like any old
hostler. In a few minutes Dolly came dancing into the stable.

"Oh! Harry, there never was anything so beautiful; Mrs. Fowler says we
are all to go and live near her. There is a cottage now empty that
will just suit us, with a garden and a henhouse, and apple-trees, and
everything! and her coachman is going away in the spring, and then she
will want father in his place; and there are good families round, where
you can get a place in the garden or the stable, or as a page-boy;
and there's a good school for me; and mother is laughing and crying by
turns, and father does look so happy!"

"That's uncommon jolly," said Harry, "and just the right thing, I should
say; it will suit father and mother both; but I don't intend to be a
page-boy with tight clothes and rows of buttons. I'll be a groom or a
gardener."

It was quickly settled that as soon as Jerry was well enough they should
remove to the country, and that the cab and horses should be sold as
soon as possible.

This was heavy news for me, for I was not young now, and could not look
for any improvement in my condition. Since I left Birtwick I had never
been so happy as with my dear master Jerry; but three years of cab work,
even under the best conditions, will tell on one's strength, and I felt
that I was not the horse that I had been.

Grant said at once that he would take Hotspur, and there were men on the
stand who would have bought me; but Jerry said I should not go to cab
work again with just anybody, and the governor promised to find a place
for me where I should be comfortable.

The day came for going away. Jerry had not been allowed to go out yet,
and I never saw him after that New Year's eve. Polly and the children
came to bid me good-by. "Poor old Jack! dear old Jack! I wish we could
take you with us," she said, and then laying her hand on my mane she put
her face close to my neck and kissed me. Dolly was crying and kissed
me too. Harry stroked me a great deal, but said nothing, only he seemed
very sad, and so I was led away to my new place.










Part IV. 46 Jakes and the Lady



I was sold to a corn dealer and baker, whom Jerry knew, and with him he
thought I should have good food and fair work. In the first he was quite
right, and if my master had always been on the premises I do not think
I should have been overloaded, but there was a foreman who was always
hurrying and driving every one, and frequently when I had quite a full
load he would order something else to be taken on. My carter, whose name
was Jakes, often said it was more than I ought to take, but the other
always overruled him. "'Twas no use going twice when once would do, and
he chose to get business forward."

Jakes, like the other carters, always had the check-rein up, which
prevented me from drawing easily, and by the time I had been there three
or four months I found the work telling very much on my strength.

One day I was loaded more than usual, and part of the road was a steep
uphill. I used all my strength, but I could not get on, and was obliged
continually to stop. This did not please my driver, and he laid his whip
on badly. "Get on, you lazy fellow," he said, "or I'll make you."

Again I started the heavy load, and struggled on a few yards; again the
whip came down, and again I struggled forward. The pain of that great
cart whip was sharp, but my mind was hurt quite as much as my poor
sides. To be punished and abused when I was doing my very best was
so hard it took the heart out of me. A third time he was flogging me
cruelly, when a lady stepped quickly up to him, and said in a sweet,
earnest voice:

"Oh! pray do not whip your good horse any more; I am sure he is doing
all he can, and the road is very steep; I am sure he is doing his best."

"If doing his best won't get this load up he must do something more than
his best; that's all I know, ma'am," said Jakes.

"But is it not a heavy load?" she said.

"Yes, yes, too heavy," he said; "but that's not my fault; the foreman
came just as we were starting, and would have three hundredweight more
put on to save him trouble, and I must get on with it as well as I can."

He was raising the whip again, when the lady said:

"Pray, stop; I think I can help you if you will let me."

The man laughed.

"You see," she said, "you do not give him a fair chance; he cannot use
all his power with his head held back as it is with that check-rein; if
you would take it off I am sure he would do better--do try it," she said
persuasively, "I should be very glad if you would."

"Well, well," said Jakes, with a short laugh, "anything to please a
lady, of course. How far would you wish it down, ma'am?"

"Quite down, give him his head altogether."

The rein was taken off, and in a moment I put my head down to my very
knees. What a comfort it was! Then I tossed it up and down several times
to get the aching stiffness out of my neck.

"Poor fellow! that is what you wanted," said she, patting and stroking
me with her gentle hand; "and now if you will speak kindly to him and
lead him on I believe he will be able to do better."

Jakes took the rein. "Come on, Blackie." I put down my head, and threw
my whole weight against the collar; I spared no strength; the load
moved on, and I pulled it steadily up the hill, and then stopped to take
breath.

The lady had walked along the footpath, and now came across into the
road. She stroked and patted my neck, as I had not been patted for many
a long day.

"You see he was quite willing when you gave him the chance; I am sure he
is a fine-tempered creature, and I dare say has known better days. You
won't put that rein on again, will you?" for he was just going to hitch
it up on the old plan.

"Well, ma'am, I can't deny that having his head has helped him up the
hill, and I'll remember it another time, and thank you, ma'am; but if
he went without a check-rein I should be the laughing-stock of all the
carters; it is the fashion, you see."

"Is it not better," she said, "to lead a good fashion than to follow a
bad one? A great many gentlemen do not use check-reins now; our carriage
horses have not worn them for fifteen years, and work with much less
fatigue than those who have them; besides," she added in a very serious
voice, "we have no right to distress any of God's creatures without a
very good reason; we call them dumb animals, and so they are, for they
cannot tell us how they feel, but they do not suffer less because they
have no words. But I must not detain you now; I thank you for trying
my plan with your good horse, and I am sure you will find it far better
than the whip. Good-day," and with another soft pat on my neck she
stepped lightly across the path, and I saw her no more.

"That was a real lady, I'll be bound for it," said Jakes to himself;
"she spoke just as polite as if I was a gentleman, and I'll try her
plan, uphill, at any rate;" and I must do him the justice to say that
he let my rein out several holes, and going uphill after that, he always
gave me my head; but the heavy loads went on. Good feed and fair rest
will keep up one's strength under full work, but no horse can stand
against overloading; and I was getting so thoroughly pulled down from
this cause that a younger horse was bought in my place. I may as well
mention here what I suffered at this time from another cause. I had
heard horses speak of it, but had never myself had experience of the
evil; this was a badly-lighted stable; there was only one very small
window at the end, and the consequence was that the stalls were almost
dark.

Besides the depressing effect this had on my spirits, it very much
weakened my sight, and when I was suddenly brought out of the darkness
into the glare of daylight it was very painful to my eyes. Several times
I stumbled over the threshold, and could scarcely see where I was going.

I believe, had I stayed there very long, I should have become purblind,
and that would have been a great misfortune, for I have heard men say
that a stone-blind horse was safer to drive than one which had imperfect
sight, as it generally makes them very timid. However, I escaped without
any permanent injury to my sight, and was sold to a large cab owner.





47 Hard Times



My new master I shall never forget; he had black eyes and a hooked nose,
his mouth was as full of teeth as a bull-dog's, and his voice was as
harsh as the grinding of cart wheels over graveled stones. His name was
Nicholas Skinner, and I believe he was the man that poor Seedy Sam drove
for.

I have heard men say that seeing is believing; but I should say that
feeling is believing; for much as I had seen before, I never knew till
now the utter misery of a cab-horse's life.

Skinner had a low set of cabs and a low set of drivers; he was hard on
the men, and the men were hard on the horses. In this place we had no
Sunday rest, and it was in the heat of summer.

Sometimes on a Sunday morning a party of fast men would hire the cab for
the day; four of them inside and another with the driver, and I had to
take them ten or fifteen miles out into the country, and back again;
never would any of them get down to walk up a hill, let it be ever
so steep, or the day ever so hot--unless, indeed, when the driver was
afraid I should not manage it, and sometimes I was so fevered and worn
that I could hardly touch my food. How I used to long for the nice bran
mash with niter in it that Jerry used to give us on Saturday nights in
hot weather, that used to cool us down and make us so comfortable.
Then we had two nights and a whole day for unbroken rest, and on Monday
morning we were as fresh as young horses again; but here there was no
rest, and my driver was just as hard as his master. He had a cruel whip
with something so sharp at the end that it sometimes drew blood, and he
would even whip me under the belly, and flip the lash out at my head.
Indignities like these took the heart out of me terribly, but still I
did my best and never hung back; for, as poor Ginger said, it was no
use; men are the strongest.

My life was now so utterly wretched that I wished I might, like Ginger,
drop down dead at my work and be out of my misery, and one day my wish
very nearly came to pass.

I went on the stand at eight in the morning, and had done a good share
of work, when we had to take a fare to the railway. A long train was
just expected in, so my driver pulled up at the back of some of the
outside cabs to take the chance of a return fare. It was a very heavy
train, and as all the cabs were soon engaged ours was called for. There
was a party of four; a noisy, blustering man with a lady, a little boy
and a young girl, and a great deal of luggage. The lady and the boy got
into the cab, and while the man ordered about the luggage the young girl
came and looked at me.

"Papa," she said, "I am sure this poor horse cannot take us and all our
luggage so far, he is so very weak and worn up. Do look at him."

"Oh! he's all right, miss," said my driver, "he's strong enough."

The porter, who was pulling about some heavy boxes, suggested to the
gentleman, as there was so much luggage, whether he would not take a
second cab.

"Can your horse do it, or can't he?" said the blustering man.

"Oh! he can do it all right, sir; send up the boxes, porter; he could
take more than that;" and he helped to haul up a box so heavy that I
could feel the springs go down.

"Papa, papa, do take a second cab," said the young girl in a beseeching
tone. "I am sure we are wrong, I am sure it is very cruel."

"Nonsense, Grace, get in at once, and don't make all this fuss; a pretty
thing it would be if a man of business had to examine every cab-horse
before he hired it--the man knows his own business of course; there, get
in and hold your tongue!"

My gentle friend had to obey, and box after box was dragged up and
lodged on the top of the cab or settled by the side of the driver. At
last all was ready, and with his usual jerk at the rein and slash of the
whip he drove out of the station.

The load was very heavy and I had had neither food nor rest since
morning; but I did my best, as I always had done, in spite of cruelty
and injustice.

I got along fairly till we came to Ludgate Hill; but there the heavy
load and my own exhaustion were too much. I was struggling to keep on,
goaded by constant chucks of the rein and use of the whip, when in a
single moment--I cannot tell how--my feet slipped from under me, and I
fell heavily to the ground on my side; the suddenness and the force
with which I fell seemed to beat all the breath out of my body. I lay
perfectly still; indeed, I had no power to move, and I thought now I was
going to die. I heard a sort of confusion round me, loud, angry voices,
and the getting down of the luggage, but it was all like a dream. I
thought I heard that sweet, pitiful voice saying, "Oh! that poor horse!
it is all our fault." Some one came and loosened the throat strap of
my bridle, and undid the traces which kept the collar so tight upon me.
Some one said, "He's dead, he'll never get up again." Then I could hear
a policeman giving orders, but I did not even open my eyes; I could only
draw a gasping breath now and then. Some cold water was thrown over
my head, and some cordial was poured into my mouth, and something was
covered over me. I cannot tell how long I lay there, but I found my life
coming back, and a kind-voiced man was patting me and encouraging me to
rise. After some more cordial had been given me, and after one or two
attempts, I staggered to my feet, and was gently led to some stables
which were close by. Here I was put into a well-littered stall, and some
warm gruel was brought to me, which I drank thankfully.

In the evening I was sufficiently recovered to be led back to Skinner's
stables, where I think they did the best for me they could. In the
morning Skinner came with a farrier to look at me. He examined me very
closely and said:

"This is a case of overwork more than disease, and if you could give him
a run off for six months he would be able to work again; but now there
is not an ounce of strength left in him."

"Then he must just go to the dogs," said Skinner. "I have no meadows to
nurse sick horses in--he might get well or he might not; that sort of
thing don't suit my business; my plan is to work 'em as long as they'll
go, and then sell 'em for what they'll fetch, at the knacker's or
elsewhere."

"If he was broken-winded," said the farrier, "you had better have him
killed out of hand, but he is not; there is a sale of horses coming off
in about ten days; if you rest him and feed him up he may pick up, and
you may get more than his skin is worth, at any rate."

Upon this advice Skinner, rather unwillingly, I think, gave orders that
I should be well fed and cared for, and the stable man, happily for me,
carried out the orders with a much better will than his master had in
giving them. Ten days of perfect rest, plenty of good oats, hay,
bran mashes, with boiled linseed mixed in them, did more to get up my
condition than anything else could have done; those linseed mashes were
delicious, and I began to think, after all, it might be better to live
than go to the dogs. When the twelfth day after the accident came, I
was taken to the sale, a few miles out of London. I felt that any change
from my present place must be an improvement, so I held up my head, and
hoped for the best.





48 Farmer Thoroughgood and His Grandson Willie



At this sale, of course I found myself in company with the old
broken-down horses--some lame, some broken-winded, some old, and some
that I am sure it would have been merciful to shoot.

The buyers and sellers, too, many of them, looked not much better off
than the poor beasts they were bargaining about. There were poor old
men, trying to get a horse or a pony for a few pounds, that might drag
about some little wood or coal cart. There were poor men trying to sell
a worn-out beast for two or three pounds, rather than have the greater
loss of killing him. Some of them looked as if poverty and hard times
had hardened them all over; but there were others that I would have
willingly used the last of my strength in serving; poor and shabby, but
kind and human, with voices that I could trust. There was one tottering
old man who took a great fancy to me, and I to him, but I was not strong
enough--it was an anxious time! Coming from the better part of the fair,
I noticed a man who looked like a gentleman farmer, with a young boy by
his side; he had a broad back and round shoulders, a kind, ruddy face,
and he wore a broad-brimmed hat. When he came up to me and my companions
he stood still and gave a pitiful look round upon us. I saw his eye
rest on me; I had still a good mane and tail, which did something for my
appearance. I pricked my ears and looked at him.

"There's a horse, Willie, that has known better days."

"Poor old fellow!" said the boy, "do you think, grandpapa, he was ever a
carriage horse?"

"Oh, yes! my boy," said the farmer, coming closer, "he might have been
anything when he was young; look at his nostrils and his ears, the shape
of his neck and shoulder; there's a deal of breeding about that horse."
He put out his hand and gave me a kind pat on the neck. I put out my
nose in answer to his kindness; the boy stroked my face.

"Poor old fellow! see, grandpapa, how well he understands kindness.
Could not you buy him and make him young again as you did with
Ladybird?"

"My dear boy, I can't make all old horses young; besides, Ladybird was
not so very old, as she was run down and badly used."

"Well, grandpapa, I don't believe that this one is old; look at his mane
and tail. I wish you would look into his mouth, and then you could tell;
though he is so very thin, his eyes are not sunk like some old horses'."

The old gentleman laughed. "Bless the boy! he is as horsey as his old
grandfather."

"But do look at his mouth, grandpapa, and ask the price; I am sure he
would grow young in our meadows."

The man who had brought me for sale now put in his word.

"The young gentleman's a real knowing one, sir. Now the fact is, this
'ere hoss is just pulled down with overwork in the cabs; he's not an old
one, and I heerd as how the vetenary should say, that a six months' run
off would set him right up, being as how his wind was not broken.
I've had the tending of him these ten days past, and a gratefuller,
pleasanter animal I never met with, and 'twould be worth a gentleman's
while to give a five-pound note for him, and let him have a chance. I'll
be bound he'd be worth twenty pounds next spring."

The old gentleman laughed, and the little boy looked up eagerly.

"Oh, grandpapa, did you not say the colt sold for five pounds more than
you expected? You would not be poorer if you did buy this one."

The farmer slowly felt my legs, which were much swelled and strained;
then he looked at my mouth. "Thirteen or fourteen, I should say; just
trot him out, will you?"

I arched my poor thin neck, raised my tail a little, and threw out my
legs as well as I could, for they were very stiff.

"What is the lowest you will take for him?" said the farmer as I came
back.

"Five pounds, sir; that was the lowest price my master set."

"'Tis a speculation," said the old gentleman, shaking his head, but at
the same time slowly drawing out his purse, "quite a speculation! Have
you any more business here?" he said, counting the sovereigns into his
hand.

"No, sir, I can take him for you to the inn, if you please."

"Do so, I am now going there."

They walked forward, and I was led behind. The boy could hardly control
his delight, and the old gentleman seemed to enjoy his pleasure. I had a
good feed at the inn, and was then gently ridden home by a servant of my
new master's, and turned into a large meadow with a shed in one corner
of it.

Mr. Thoroughgood, for that was the name of my benefactor, gave orders
that I should have hay and oats every night and morning, and the run of
the meadow during the day, and, "you, Willie," said he, "must take the
oversight of him; I give him in charge to you."

The boy was proud of his charge, and undertook it in all seriousness.
There was not a day when he did not pay me a visit; sometimes picking
me out from among the other horses, and giving me a bit of carrot, or
something good, or sometimes standing by me while I ate my oats. He
always came with kind words and caresses, and of course I grew very fond
of him. He called me Old Crony, as I used to come to him in the field
and follow him about. Sometimes he brought his grandfather, who always
looked closely at my legs.

"This is our point, Willie," he would say; "but he is improving so
steadily that I think we shall see a change for the better in the
spring."

The perfect rest, the good food, the soft turf, and gentle exercise,
soon began to tell on my condition and my spirits. I had a good
constitution from my mother, and I was never strained when I was young,
so that I had a better chance than many horses who have been worked
before they came to their full strength. During the winter my legs
improved so much that I began to feel quite young again. The spring came
round, and one day in March Mr. Thoroughgood determined that he would
try me in the phaeton. I was well pleased, and he and Willie drove me a
few miles. My legs were not stiff now, and I did the work with perfect
ease.

"He's growing young, Willie; we must give him a little gentle work now,
and by mid-summer he will be as good as Ladybird. He has a beautiful
mouth and good paces; they can't be better."

"Oh, grandpapa, how glad I am you bought him!"

"So am I, my boy; but he has to thank you more than me; we must now
be looking out for a quiet, genteel place for him, where he will be
valued."





49 My Last Home



One day during this summer the groom cleaned and dressed me with such
extraordinary care that I thought some new change must be at hand; he
trimmed my fetlocks and legs, passed the tarbrush over my hoofs, and
even parted my forelock. I think the harness had an extra polish. Willie
seemed half-anxious, half-merry, as he got into the chaise with his
grandfather.

"If the ladies take to him," said the old gentleman, "they'll be suited
and he'll be suited. We can but try."

At the distance of a mile or two from the village we came to a pretty,
low house, with a lawn and shrubbery at the front and a drive up to the
door. Willie rang the bell, and asked if Miss Blomefield or Miss Ellen
was at home. Yes, they were. So, while Willie stayed with me, Mr.
Thoroughgood went into the house. In about ten minutes he returned,
followed by three ladies; one tall, pale lady, wrapped in a white shawl,
leaned on a younger lady, with dark eyes and a merry face; the other,
a very stately-looking person, was Miss Blomefield. They all came
and looked at me and asked questions. The younger lady--that was Miss
Ellen--took to me very much; she said she was sure she should like me, I
had such a good face. The tall, pale lady said that she should always
be nervous in riding behind a horse that had once been down, as I might
come down again, and if I did she should never get over the fright.

"You see, ladies," said Mr. Thoroughgood, "many first-rate horses have
had their knees broken through the carelessness of their drivers without
any fault of their own, and from what I see of this horse I should say
that is his case; but of course I do not wish to influence you. If you
incline you can have him on trial, and then your coachman will see what
he thinks of him."

"You have always been such a good adviser to us about our horses," said
the stately lady, "that your recommendation would go a long way with me,
and if my sister Lavinia sees no objection we will accept your offer of
a trial, with thanks."

It was then arranged that I should be sent for the next day.

In the morning a smart-looking young man came for me. At first he looked
pleased; but when he saw my knees he said in a disappointed voice:

"I didn't think, sir, you would have recommended my ladies a blemished
horse like that."

"'Handsome is that handsome does'," said my master; "you are only taking
him on trial, and I am sure you will do fairly by him, young man. If he
is not as safe as any horse you ever drove send him back."

I was led to my new home, placed in a comfortable stable, fed, and left
to myself. The next day, when the groom was cleaning my face, he said:

"That is just like the star that 'Black Beauty' had; he is much the same
height, too. I wonder where he is now."

A little further on he came to the place in my neck where I was bled and
where a little knot was left in the skin. He almost started, and began
to look me over carefully, talking to himself.

"White star in the forehead, one white foot on the off side, this little
knot just in that place;" then looking at the middle of my back--"and,
as I am alive, there is that little patch of white hair that John used
to call 'Beauty's three-penny bit'. It must be 'Black Beauty'! Why,
Beauty! Beauty! do you know me?--little Joe Green, that almost killed
you?" And he began patting and patting me as if he was quite overjoyed.

I could not say that I remembered him, for now he was a fine grown young
fellow, with black whiskers and a man's voice, but I was sure he knew
me, and that he was Joe Green, and I was very glad. I put my nose up
to him, and tried to say that we were friends. I never saw a man so
pleased.

"Give you a fair trial! I should think so indeed! I wonder who the
rascal was that broke your knees, my old Beauty! you must have been
badly served out somewhere; well, well, it won't be my fault if you
haven't good times of it now. I wish John Manly was here to see you."

In the afternoon I was put into a low park chair and brought to the
door. Miss Ellen was going to try me, and Green went with her. I soon
found that she was a good driver, and she seemed pleased with my paces.
I heard Joe telling her about me, and that he was sure I was Squire
Gordon's old "Black Beauty".

When we returned the other sisters came out to hear how I had behaved
myself. She told them what she had just heard, and said:

"I shall certainly write to Mrs. Gordon, and tell her that her favorite
horse has come to us. How pleased she will be!"

After this I was driven every day for a week or so, and as I appeared
to be quite safe, Miss Lavinia at last ventured out in the small close
carriage. After this it was quite decided to keep me and call me by my
old name of "Black Beauty".

I have now lived in this happy place a whole year. Joe is the best and
kindest of grooms. My work is easy and pleasant, and I feel my strength
and spirits all coming back again. Mr. Thoroughgood said to Joe the
other day:

"In your place he will last till he is twenty years old--perhaps more."

Willie always speaks to me when he can, and treats me as his special
friend. My ladies have promised that I shall never be sold, and so I
have nothing to fear; and here my story ends. My troubles are all over,
and I am at home; and often before I am quite awake, I fancy I am still
in the orchard at Birtwick, standing with my old friends under the
apple-trees.


