Part III. 32 A Horse Fair



No doubt a horse fair is a very amusing place to those who have nothing
to lose; at any rate, there is plenty to see.

Long strings of young horses out of the country, fresh from the marshes;
and droves of shaggy little Welsh ponies, no higher than Merrylegs; and
hundreds of cart horses of all sorts, some of them with their long tails
braided up and tied with scarlet cord; and a good many like myself,
handsome and high-bred, but fallen into the middle class, through some
accident or blemish, unsoundness of wind, or some other complaint. There
were some splendid animals quite in their prime, and fit for anything;
they were throwing out their legs and showing off their paces in high
style, as they were trotted out with a leading rein, the groom running
by the side. But round in the background there were a number of poor
things, sadly broken down with hard work, with their knees knuckling
over and their hind legs swinging out at every step, and there were some
very dejected-looking old horses, with the under lip hanging down and
the ears lying back heavily, as if there were no more pleasure in life,
and no more hope; there were some so thin you might see all their ribs,
and some with old sores on their backs and hips. These were sad sights
for a horse to look upon, who knows not but he may come to the same
state.

There was a great deal of bargaining, of running up and beating down;
and if a horse may speak his mind so far as he understands, I should say
there were more lies told and more trickery at that horse fair than a
clever man could give an account of. I was put with two or three other
strong, useful-looking horses, and a good many people came to look at
us. The gentlemen always turned from me when they saw my broken knees;
though the man who had me swore it was only a slip in the stall.

The first thing was to pull my mouth open, then to look at my eyes, then
feel all the way down my legs, and give me a hard feel of the skin and
flesh, and then try my paces. It was wonderful what a difference there
was in the way these things were done. Some did it in a rough, offhand
way, as if one was only a piece of wood; while others would take their
hands gently over one's body, with a pat now and then, as much as to
say, "By your leave." Of course I judged a good deal of the buyers by
their manners to myself.

There was one man, I thought, if he would buy me, I should be happy.
He was not a gentleman, nor yet one of the loud, flashy sort that call
themselves so. He was rather a small man, but well made, and quick in
all his motions. I knew in a moment by the way he handled me, that he
was used to horses; he spoke gently, and his gray eye had a kindly,
cheery look in it. It may seem strange to say--but it is true all the
same--that the clean, fresh smell there was about him made me take to
him; no smell of old beer and tobacco, which I hated, but a fresh smell
as if he had come out of a hayloft. He offered twenty-three pounds for
me, but that was refused, and he walked away. I looked after him, but
he was gone, and a very hard-looking, loud-voiced man came. I was
dreadfully afraid he would have me; but he walked off. One or two more
came who did not mean business. Then the hard-faced man came back again
and offered twenty-three pounds. A very close bargain was being driven,
for my salesman began to think he should not get all he asked, and must
come down; but just then the gray-eyed man came back again. I could not
help reaching out my head toward him. He stroked my face kindly.

"Well, old chap," he said, "I think we should suit each other. I'll give
twenty-four for him."

"Say twenty-five and you shall have him."

"Twenty-four ten," said my friend, in a very decided tone, "and not
another sixpence--yes or no?"

"Done," said the salesman; "and you may depend upon it there's a
monstrous deal of quality in that horse, and if you want him for cab
work he's a bargain."

The money was paid on the spot, and my new master took my halter, and
led me out of the fair to an inn, where he had a saddle and bridle
ready. He gave me a good feed of oats and stood by while I ate it,
talking to himself and talking to me. Half an hour after we were on our
way to London, through pleasant lanes and country roads, until we came
into the great London thoroughfare, on which we traveled steadily, till
in the twilight we reached the great city. The gas lamps were already
lighted; there were streets to the right, and streets to the left, and
streets crossing each other, for mile upon mile. I thought we should
never come to the end of them. At last, in passing through one, we
came to a long cab stand, when my rider called out in a cheery voice,
"Good-night, governor!"

"Halloo!" cried a voice. "Have you got a good one?"

"I think so," replied my owner.

"I wish you luck with him."

"Thank you, governor," and he rode on. We soon turned up one of the side
streets, and about halfway up that we turned into a very narrow street,
with rather poor-looking houses on one side, and what seemed to be
coach-houses and stables on the other.

My owner pulled up at one of the houses and whistled. The door flew
open, and a young woman, followed by a little girl and boy, ran out.
There was a very lively greeting as my rider dismounted.

"Now, then, Harry, my boy, open the gates, and mother will bring us the
lantern."

The next minute they were all standing round me in a small stable-yard.

"Is he gentle, father?"

"Yes, Dolly, as gentle as your own kitten; come and pat him."

At once the little hand was patting about all over my shoulder without
fear. How good it felt!

"Let me get him a bran mash while you rub him down," said the mother.

"Do, Polly, it's just what he wants; and I know you've got a beautiful
mash ready for me."

"Sausage dumpling and apple turnover!" shouted the boy, which set them
all laughing. I was led into a comfortable, clean-smelling stall, with
plenty of dry straw, and after a capital supper I lay down, thinking I
was going to be happy.





33 A London Cab Horse



Jeremiah Barker was my new master's name, but as every one called him
Jerry, I shall do the same. Polly, his wife, was just as good a match as
a man could have. She was a plump, trim, tidy little woman, with smooth,
dark hair, dark eyes, and a merry little mouth. The boy was twelve years
old, a tall, frank, good-tempered lad; and little Dorothy (Dolly they
called her) was her mother over again, at eight years old. They were all
wonderfully fond of each other; I never knew such a happy, merry family
before or since. Jerry had a cab of his own, and two horses, which he
drove and attended to himself. His other horse was a tall, white, rather
large-boned animal called "Captain". He was old now, but when he was
young he must have been splendid; he had still a proud way of
holding his head and arching his neck; in fact, he was a high-bred,
fine-mannered, noble old horse, every inch of him. He told me that in
his early youth he went to the Crimean War; he belonged to an officer
in the cavalry, and used to lead the regiment. I will tell more of that
hereafter.

The next morning, when I was well-groomed, Polly and Dolly came into the
yard to see me and make friends. Harry had been helping his father since
the early morning, and had stated his opinion that I should turn out a
"regular brick". Polly brought me a slice of apple, and Dolly a piece
of bread, and made as much of me as if I had been the "Black Beauty" of
olden time. It was a great treat to be petted again and talked to in a
gentle voice, and I let them see as well as I could that I wished to be
friendly. Polly thought I was very handsome, and a great deal too good
for a cab, if it was not for the broken knees.

"Of course there's no one to tell us whose fault that was," said Jerry,
"and as long as I don't know I shall give him the benefit of the doubt;
for a firmer, neater stepper I never rode. We'll call him 'Jack', after
the old one--shall we, Polly?"

"Do," she said, "for I like to keep a good name going."

Captain went out in the cab all the morning. Harry came in after school
to feed me and give me water. In the afternoon I was put into the
cab. Jerry took as much pains to see if the collar and bridle fitted
comfortably as if he had been John Manly over again. When the crupper
was let out a hole or two it all fitted well. There was no check-rein,
no curb, nothing but a plain ring snaffle. What a blessing that was!

After driving through the side street we came to the large cab stand
where Jerry had said "Good-night". On one side of this wide street were
high houses with wonderful shop fronts, and on the other was an old
church and churchyard, surrounded by iron palisades. Alongside these
iron rails a number of cabs were drawn up, waiting for passengers; bits
of hay were lying about on the ground; some of the men were standing
together talking; some were sitting on their boxes reading the
newspaper; and one or two were feeding their horses with bits of hay,
and giving them a drink of water. We pulled up in the rank at the back
of the last cab. Two or three men came round and began to look at me and
pass their remarks.

"Very good for a funeral," said one.

"Too smart-looking," said another, shaking his head in a very wise way;
"you'll find out something wrong one of these fine mornings, or my name
isn't Jones."

"Well," said Jerry pleasantly, "I suppose I need not find it out till it
finds me out, eh? And if so, I'll keep up my spirits a little longer."

Then there came up a broad-faced man, dressed in a great gray coat
with great gray cape and great white buttons, a gray hat, and a blue
comforter loosely tied round his neck; his hair was gray, too; but
he was a jolly-looking fellow, and the other men made way for him.
He looked me all over, as if he had been going to buy me; and then
straightening himself up with a grunt, he said, "He's the right sort for
you, Jerry; I don't care what you gave for him, he'll be worth it." Thus
my character was established on the stand.

This man's name was Grant, but he was called "Gray Grant", or "Governor
Grant". He had been the longest on that stand of any of the men, and
he took it upon himself to settle matters and stop disputes. He was
generally a good-humored, sensible man; but if his temper was a little
out, as it was sometimes when he had drunk too much, nobody liked to
come too near his fist, for he could deal a very heavy blow.

The first week of my life as a cab horse was very trying. I had never
been used to London, and the noise, the hurry, the crowds of horses,
carts, and carriages that I had to make my way through made me feel
anxious and harassed; but I soon found that I could perfectly trust my
driver, and then I made myself easy and got used to it.

Jerry was as good a driver as I had ever known, and what was better, he
took as much thought for his horses as he did for himself. He soon found
out that I was willing to work and do my best, and he never laid the
whip on me unless it was gently drawing the end of it over my back when
I was to go on; but generally I knew this quite well by the way in which
he took up the reins, and I believe his whip was more frequently stuck
up by his side than in his hand.

In a short time I and my master understood each other as well as horse
and man can do. In the stable, too, he did all that he could for our
comfort. The stalls were the old-fashioned style, too much on the slope;
but he had two movable bars fixed across the back of our stalls, so that
at night, and when we were resting, he just took off our halters and
put up the bars, and thus we could turn about and stand whichever way we
pleased, which is a great comfort.

Jerry kept us very clean, and gave us as much change of food as he
could, and always plenty of it; and not only that, but he always gave us
plenty of clean fresh water, which he allowed to stand by us both night
and day, except of course when we came in warm. Some people say that a
horse ought not to drink all he likes; but I know if we are allowed to
drink when we want it we drink only a little at a time, and it does us
a great deal more good than swallowing down half a bucketful at a time,
because we have been left without till we are thirsty and miserable.
Some grooms will go home to their beer and leave us for hours with our
dry hay and oats and nothing to moisten them; then of course we gulp
down too much at once, which helps to spoil our breathing and sometimes
chills our stomachs. But the best thing we had here was our Sundays for
rest; we worked so hard in the week that I do not think we could have
kept up to it but for that day; besides, we had then time to enjoy each
other's company. It was on these days that I learned my companion's
history.





34 An Old War Horse



Captain had been broken in and trained for an army horse; his first
owner was an officer of cavalry going out to the Crimean war. He said he
quite enjoyed the training with all the other horses, trotting together,
turning together, to the right hand or the left, halting at the word of
command, or dashing forward at full speed at the sound of the trumpet
or signal of the officer. He was, when young, a dark, dappled iron-gray,
and considered very handsome. His master, a young, high-spirited
gentleman, was very fond of him, and treated him from the first with the
greatest care and kindness. He told me he thought the life of an army
horse was very pleasant; but when it came to being sent abroad over the
sea in a great ship, he almost changed his mind.

"That part of it," said he, "was dreadful! Of course we could not walk
off the land into the ship; so they were obliged to put strong straps
under our bodies, and then we were lifted off our legs in spite of our
struggles, and were swung through the air over the water, to the deck of
the great vessel. There we were placed in small close stalls, and never
for a long time saw the sky, or were able to stretch our legs. The ship
sometimes rolled about in high winds, and we were knocked about, and
felt bad enough.

"However, at last it came to an end, and we were hauled up, and swung
over again to the land; we were very glad, and snorted and neighed for
joy, when we once more felt firm ground under our feet.

"We soon found that the country we had come to was very different from
our own and that we had many hardships to endure besides the fighting;
but many of the men were so fond of their horses that they did
everything they could to make them comfortable in spite of snow, wet,
and all things out of order."

"But what about the fighting?" said I, "was not that worse than anything
else?"

"Well," said he, "I hardly know; we always liked to hear the trumpet
sound, and to be called out, and were impatient to start off, though
sometimes we had to stand for hours, waiting for the word of command;
and when the word was given we used to spring forward as gayly and
eagerly as if there were no cannon balls, bayonets, or bullets. I
believe so long as we felt our rider firm in the saddle, and his hand
steady on the bridle, not one of us gave way to fear, not even when the
terrible bomb-shells whirled through the air and burst into a thousand
pieces.

"I, with my noble master, went into many actions together without a
wound; and though I saw horses shot down with bullets, pierced through
with lances, and gashed with fearful saber-cuts; though we left them
dead on the field, or dying in the agony of their wounds, I don't think
I feared for myself. My master's cheery voice, as he encouraged his
men, made me feel as if he and I could not be killed. I had such perfect
trust in him that while he was guiding me I was ready to charge up
to the very cannon's mouth. I saw many brave men cut down, many fall
mortally wounded from their saddles. I had heard the cries and groans
of the dying, I had cantered over ground slippery with blood, and
frequently had to turn aside to avoid trampling on wounded man or horse,
but, until one dreadful day, I had never felt terror; that day I shall
never forget."

Here old Captain paused for awhile and drew a long breath; I waited, and
he went on.

"It was one autumn morning, and as usual, an hour before daybreak our
cavalry had turned out, ready caparisoned for the day's work, whether
it might be fighting or waiting. The men stood by their horses waiting,
ready for orders. As the light increased there seemed to be some
excitement among the officers; and before the day was well begun we
heard the firing of the enemy's guns.

"Then one of the officers rode up and gave the word for the men to
mount, and in a second every man was in his saddle, and every horse
stood expecting the touch of the rein, or the pressure of his rider's
heels, all animated, all eager; but still we had been trained so well
that, except by the champing of our bits, and the restive tossing of our
heads from time to time, it could not be said that we stirred.

"My dear master and I were at the head of the line, and as all sat
motionless and watchful, he took a little stray lock of my mane which
had turned over on the wrong side, laid it over on the right, and
smoothed it down with his hand; then patting my neck, he said, 'We shall
have a day of it to-day, Bayard, my beauty; but we'll do our duty as we
have done.' He stroked my neck that morning more, I think, than he had
ever done before; quietly on and on, as if he were thinking of something
else. I loved to feel his hand on my neck, and arched my crest proudly
and happily; but I stood very still, for I knew all his moods, and when
he liked me to be quiet, and when gay.

"I cannot tell all that happened on that day, but I will tell of the
last charge that we made together; it was across a valley right in front
of the enemy's cannon. By this time we were well used to the roar of
heavy guns, the rattle of musket fire, and the flying of shot near us;
but never had I been under such a fire as we rode through on that day.
From the right, from the left, and from the front, shot and shell poured
in upon us. Many a brave man went down, many a horse fell, flinging his
rider to the earth; many a horse without a rider ran wildly out of the
ranks; then terrified at being alone, with no hand to guide him, came
pressing in among his old companions, to gallop with them to the charge.

"Fearful as it was, no one stopped, no one turned back. Every moment the
ranks were thinned, but as our comrades fell, we closed in to keep
them together; and instead of being shaken or staggered in our pace our
gallop became faster and faster as we neared the cannon.

"My master, my dear master was cheering on his comrades with his right
arm raised on high, when one of the balls whizzing close to my head
struck him. I felt him stagger with the shock, though he uttered no cry;
I tried to check my speed, but the sword dropped from his right hand,
the rein fell loose from the left, and sinking backward from the saddle
he fell to the earth; the other riders swept past us, and by the force
of their charge I was driven from the spot.

"I wanted to keep my place by his side and not leave him under that
rush of horses' feet, but it was in vain; and now without a master or a
friend I was alone on that great slaughter ground; then fear took hold
on me, and I trembled as I had never trembled before; and I too, as I
had seen other horses do, tried to join in the ranks and gallop with
them; but I was beaten off by the swords of the soldiers. Just then a
soldier whose horse had been killed under him caught at my bridle and
mounted me, and with this new master I was again going forward; but our
gallant company was cruelly overpowered, and those who remained alive
after the fierce fight for the guns came galloping back over the same
ground. Some of the horses had been so badly wounded that they could
scarcely move from the loss of blood; other noble creatures were trying
on three legs to drag themselves along, and others were struggling to
rise on their fore feet, when their hind legs had been shattered by
shot. After the battle the wounded men were brought in and the dead were
buried."

"And what about the wounded horses?" I said; "were they left to die?"

"No, the army farriers went over the field with their pistols and shot
all that were ruined; some that had only slight wounds were brought back
and attended to, but the greater part of the noble, willing creatures
that went out that morning never came back! In our stables there was
only about one in four that returned.

"I never saw my dear master again. I believe he fell dead from the
saddle. I never loved any other master so well. I went into many other
engagements, but was only once wounded, and then not seriously; and when
the war was over I came back again to England, as sound and strong as
when I went out."

I said, "I have heard people talk about war as if it was a very fine
thing."

"Ah!" said he, "I should think they never saw it. No doubt it is very
fine when there is no enemy, when it is just exercise and parade and
sham fight. Yes, it is very fine then; but when thousands of good brave
men and horses are killed or crippled for life, it has a very different
look."

"Do you know what they fought about?" said I.

"No," he said, "that is more than a horse can understand, but the enemy
must have been awfully wicked people, if it was right to go all that way
over the sea on purpose to kill them."





35 Jerry Barker



I never knew a better man than my new master. He was kind and good, and
as strong for the right as John Manly; and so good-tempered and merry
that very few people could pick a quarrel with him. He was very fond of
making little songs, and singing them to himself. One he was very fond
of was this:

     "Come, father and mother,
     And sister and brother,
     Come, all of you, turn to
     And help one another."

And so they did; Harry was as clever at stable-work as a much older boy,
and always wanted to do what he could. Then Polly and Dolly used to come
in the morning to help with the cab--to brush and beat the cushions,
and rub the glass, while Jerry was giving us a cleaning in the yard, and
Harry was rubbing the harness. There used to be a great deal of laughing
and fun between them, and it put Captain and me in much better spirits
than if we had heard scolding and hard words. They were always early in
the morning, for Jerry would say:

     "If you in the morning
     Throw minutes away,
     You can't pick them up
     In the course of a day.
     You may hurry and scurry,
     And flurry and worry,
     You've lost them forever,
     Forever and aye."

He could not bear any careless loitering and waste of time; and nothing
was so near making him angry as to find people, who were always late,
wanting a cab horse to be driven hard, to make up for their idleness.

One day two wild-looking young men came out of a tavern close by the
stand, and called Jerry.

"Here, cabby! look sharp, we are rather late; put on the steam, will
you, and take us to the Victoria in time for the one o'clock train? You
shall have a shilling extra."

"I will take you at the regular pace, gentlemen; shillings don't pay for
putting on the steam like that."

Larry's cab was standing next to ours; he flung open the door, and said,
"I'm your man, gentlemen! take my cab, my horse will get you there all
right;" and as he shut them in, with a wink toward Jerry, said, "It's
against his conscience to go beyond a jog-trot." Then slashing his jaded
horse, he set off as hard as he could. Jerry patted me on the neck: "No,
Jack, a shilling would not pay for that sort of thing, would it, old
boy?"

Although Jerry was determinedly set against hard driving, to please
careless people, he always went a good fair pace, and was not against
putting on the steam, as he said, if only he knew why.

I well remember one morning, as we were on the stand waiting for a
fare, that a young man, carrying a heavy portmanteau, trod on a piece of
orange peel which lay on the pavement, and fell down with great force.

Jerry was the first to run and lift him up. He seemed much stunned, and
as they led him into a shop he walked as if he were in great pain. Jerry
of course came back to the stand, but in about ten minutes one of the
shopmen called him, so we drew up to the pavement.

"Can you take me to the South-Eastern Railway?" said the young man;
"this unlucky fall has made me late, I fear; but it is of great
importance that I should not lose the twelve o'clock train. I should be
most thankful if you could get me there in time, and will gladly pay you
an extra fare."

"I'll do my very best," said Jerry heartily, "if you think you are well
enough, sir," for he looked dreadfully white and ill.

"I must go," he said earnestly, "please to open the door, and let us
lose no time."

The next minute Jerry was on the box; with a cheery chirrup to me, and a
twitch of the rein that I well understood.

"Now then, Jack, my boy," said he, "spin along, we'll show them how we
can get over the ground, if we only know why."

It is always difficult to drive fast in the city in the middle of the
day, when the streets are full of traffic, but we did what could be
done; and when a good driver and a good horse, who understand each
other, are of one mind, it is wonderful what they can do. I had a very
good mouth--that is I could be guided by the slightest touch of the
rein; and that is a great thing in London, among carriages, omnibuses,
carts, vans, trucks, cabs, and great wagons creeping along at a walking
pace; some going one way, some another, some going slowly, others
wanting to pass them; omnibuses stopping short every few minutes to take
up a passenger, obliging the horse that is coming behind to pull up too,
or to pass, and get before them; perhaps you try to pass, but just then
something else comes dashing in through the narrow opening, and you
have to keep in behind the omnibus again; presently you think you see a
chance, and manage to get to the front, going so near the wheels on each
side that half an inch nearer and they would scrape. Well, you get along
for a bit, but soon find yourself in a long train of carts and carriages
all obliged to go at a walk; perhaps you come to a regular block-up, and
have to stand still for minutes together, till something clears out into
a side street, or the policeman interferes; you have to be ready for
any chance--to dash forward if there be an opening, and be quick as a
rat-dog to see if there be room and if there be time, lest you get your
own wheels locked or smashed, or the shaft of some other vehicle run
into your chest or shoulder. All this is what you have to be ready for.
If you want to get through London fast in the middle of the day it wants
a deal of practice.

Jerry and I were used to it, and no one could beat us at getting through
when we were set upon it. I was quick and bold and could always trust
my driver; Jerry was quick and patient at the same time, and could trust
his horse, which was a great thing too. He very seldom used the whip; I
knew by his voice, and his click, click, when he wanted to get on fast,
and by the rein where I was to go; so there was no need for whipping;
but I must go back to my story.

The streets were very full that day, but we got on pretty well as far
as the bottom of Cheapside, where there was a block for three or four
minutes. The young man put his head out and said anxiously, "I think I
had better get out and walk; I shall never get there if this goes on."

"I'll do all that can be done, sir," said Jerry; "I think we shall be
in time. This block-up cannot last much longer, and your luggage is very
heavy for you to carry, sir."

Just then the cart in front of us began to move on, and then we had a
good turn. In and out, in and out we went, as fast as horseflesh could
do it, and for a wonder had a good clear time on London Bridge, for
there was a whole train of cabs and carriages all going our way at a
quick trot, perhaps wanting to catch that very train. At any rate, we
whirled into the station with many more, just as the great clock pointed
to eight minutes to twelve o'clock.

"Thank God! we are in time," said the young man, "and thank you, too, my
friend, and your good horse. You have saved me more than money can ever
pay for. Take this extra half-crown."

"No, sir, no, thank you all the same; so glad we hit the time, sir;
but don't stay now, sir, the bell is ringing. Here, porter! take this
gentleman's luggage--Dover line twelve o'clock train--that's it," and
without waiting for another word Jerry wheeled me round to make room for
other cabs that were dashing up at the last minute, and drew up on one
side till the crush was past.

"'So glad!' he said, 'so glad!' Poor young fellow! I wonder what it was
that made him so anxious!"

Jerry often talked to himself quite loud enough for me to hear when we
were not moving.

On Jerry's return to the rank there was a good deal of laughing and
chaffing at him for driving hard to the train for an extra fare, as they
said, all against his principles, and they wanted to know how much he
had pocketed.

"A good deal more than I generally get," said he, nodding slyly; "what
he gave me will keep me in little comforts for several days."

"Gammon!" said one.

"He's a humbug," said another; "preaching to us and then doing the same
himself."

"Look here, mates," said Jerry; "the gentleman offered me half a crown
extra, but I didn't take it; 'twas quite pay enough for me to see how
glad he was to catch that train; and if Jack and I choose to have a
quick run now and then to please ourselves, that's our business and not
yours."

"Well," said Larry, "you'll never be a rich man."

"Most likely not," said Jerry; "but I don't know that I shall be the
less happy for that. I have heard the commandments read a great many
times and I never noticed that any of them said, 'Thou shalt be rich';
and there are a good many curious things said in the New Testament about
rich men that I think would make me feel rather queer if I was one of
them."

"If you ever do get rich," said Governor Gray, looking over his shoulder
across the top of his cab, "you'll deserve it, Jerry, and you won't find
a curse come with your wealth. As for you, Larry, you'll die poor; you
spend too much in whipcord."

"Well," said Larry, "what is a fellow to do if his horse won't go
without it?"

"You never take the trouble to see if he will go without it; your whip
is always going as if you had the St. Vitus' dance in your arm, and
if it does not wear you out it wears your horse out; you know you are
always changing your horses; and why? Because you never give them any
peace or encouragement."

"Well, I have not had good luck," said Larry, "that's where it is."

"And you never will," said the governor. "Good Luck is rather particular
who she rides with, and mostly prefers those who have got common sense
and a good heart; at least that is my experience."

Governor Gray turned round again to his newspaper, and the other men
went to their cabs.





36 The Sunday Cab



One morning, as Jerry had just put me into the shafts and was fastening
the traces, a gentleman walked into the yard. "Your servant, sir," said
Jerry.

"Good-morning, Mr. Barker," said the gentleman. "I should be glad to
make some arrangements with you for taking Mrs. Briggs regularly to
church on Sunday mornings. We go to the New Church now, and that is
rather further than she can walk."

"Thank you, sir," said Jerry, "but I have only taken out a six-days'
license,* and therefore I could not take a fare on a Sunday; it would
not be legal."


* A few years since the annual charge for a cab license was very much
reduced, and the difference between the six and seven days' cabs was
abolished.


"Oh!" said the other, "I did not know yours was a six-days' cab; but of
course it would be very easy to alter your license. I would see that you
did not lose by it; the fact is, Mrs. Briggs very much prefers you to
drive her."

"I should be glad to oblige the lady, sir, but I had a seven-days'
license once, and the work was too hard for me, and too hard for my
horses. Year in and year out, not a day's rest, and never a Sunday with
my wife and children; and never able to go to a place of worship, which
I had always been used to do before I took to the driving box. So for
the last five years I have only taken a six-days' license, and I find it
better all the way round."

"Well, of course," replied Mr. Briggs, "it is very proper that every
person should have rest, and be able to go to church on Sundays, but I
should have thought you would not have minded such a short distance for
the horse, and only once a day; you would have all the afternoon and
evening for yourself, and we are very good customers, you know."

"Yes, sir, that is true, and I am grateful for all favors, I am sure;
and anything that I could do to oblige you, or the lady, I should be
proud and happy to do; but I can't give up my Sundays, sir, indeed I
can't. I read that God made man, and he made horses and all the other
beasts, and as soon as He had made them He made a day of rest, and bade
that all should rest one day in seven; and I think, sir, He must have
known what was good for them, and I am sure it is good for me; I am
stronger and healthier altogether, now that I have a day of rest; the
horses are fresh too, and do not wear up nearly so fast. The six-day
drivers all tell me the same, and I have laid by more money in the
savings bank than ever I did before; and as for the wife and children,
sir, why, heart alive! they would not go back to the seven days for all
they could see."

"Oh, very well," said the gentleman. "Don't trouble yourself, Mr.
Barker, any further. I will inquire somewhere else," and he walked away.

"Well," says Jerry to me, "we can't help it, Jack, old boy; we must have
our Sundays."

"Polly!" he shouted, "Polly! come here."

She was there in a minute.

"What is it all about, Jerry?"

"Why, my dear, Mr. Briggs wants me to take Mrs. Briggs to church every
Sunday morning. I say I have only a six-days' license. He says, 'Get a
seven-days' license, and I'll make it worth your while;' and you know,
Polly, they are very good customers to us. Mrs. Briggs often goes out
shopping for hours, or making calls, and then she pays down fair and
honorable like a lady; there's no beating down or making three hours
into two hours and a half, as some folks do; and it is easy work for
the horses; not like tearing along to catch trains for people that are
always a quarter of an hour too late; and if I don't oblige her in this
matter it is very likely we shall lose them altogether. What do you say,
little woman?"

"I say, Jerry," says she, speaking very slowly, "I say, if Mrs. Briggs
would give you a sovereign every Sunday morning, I would not have you a
seven-days' cabman again. We have known what it was to have no Sundays,
and now we know what it is to call them our own. Thank God, you earn
enough to keep us, though it is sometimes close work to pay for all the
oats and hay, the license, and the rent besides; but Harry will soon be
earning something, and I would rather struggle on harder than we do than
go back to those horrid times when you hardly had a minute to look at
your own children, and we never could go to a place of worship together,
or have a happy, quiet day. God forbid that we should ever turn back to
those times; that's what I say, Jerry."

"And that is just what I told Mr. Briggs, my dear," said Jerry, "and
what I mean to stick to. So don't go and fret yourself, Polly" (for she
had begun to cry); "I would not go back to the old times if I earned
twice as much, so that is settled, little woman. Now, cheer up, and I'll
be off to the stand."

Three weeks had passed away after this conversation, and no order had
come from Mrs. Briggs; so there was nothing but taking jobs from the
stand. Jerry took it to heart a good deal, for of course the work was
harder for horse and man. But Polly would always cheer him up, and say,
"Never mind, father, never, mind.

     "'Do your best,
     And leave the rest,
     'Twill all come right
     Some day or night.'"

It soon became known that Jerry had lost his best customer, and for what
reason. Most of the men said he was a fool, but two or three took his
part.

"If workingmen don't stick to their Sunday," said Truman, "they'll soon
have none left; it is every man's right and every beast's right. By
God's law we have a day of rest, and by the law of England we have a day
of rest; and I say we ought to hold to the rights these laws give us and
keep them for our children."

"All very well for you religious chaps to talk so," said Larry; "but
I'll turn a shilling when I can. I don't believe in religion, for I
don't see that your religious people are any better than the rest."

"If they are not better," put in Jerry, "it is because they are not
religious. You might as well say that our country's laws are not good
because some people break them. If a man gives way to his temper, and
speaks evil of his neighbor, and does not pay his debts, he is not
religious, I don't care how much he goes to church. If some men are
shams and humbugs, that does not make religion untrue. Real religion is
the best and truest thing in the world, and the only thing that can make
a man really happy or make the world we live in any better."

"If religion was good for anything," said Jones, "it would prevent your
religious people from making us work on Sundays, as you know many of
them do, and that's why I say religion is nothing but a sham; why, if it
was not for the church and chapel-goers it would be hardly worth while
our coming out on a Sunday. But they have their privileges, as they call
them, and I go without. I shall expect them to answer for my soul, if I
can't get a chance of saving it."

Several of the men applauded this, till Jerry said:

"That may sound well enough, but it won't do; every man must look
after his own soul; you can't lay it down at another man's door like a
foundling and expect him to take care of it; and don't you see, if you
are always sitting on your box waiting for a fare, they will say, 'If we
don't take him some one else will, and he does not look for any Sunday.'
Of course, they don't go to the bottom of it, or they would see if they
never came for a cab it would be no use your standing there; but
people don't always like to go to the bottom of things; it may not be
convenient to do it; but if you Sunday drivers would all strike for a
day of rest the thing would be done."

"And what would all the good people do if they could not get to their
favorite preachers?" said Larry.

"'Tis not for me to lay down plans for other people," said Jerry, "but
if they can't walk so far they can go to what is nearer; and if it
should rain they can put on their mackintoshes as they do on a week-day.
If a thing is right it can be done, and if it is wrong it can be done
without; and a good man will find a way. And that is as true for us
cabmen as it is for the church-goers."





37 The Golden Rule



Two or three weeks after this, as we came into the yard rather late in
the evening, Polly came running across the road with the lantern (she
always brought it to him if it was not very wet).

"It has all come right, Jerry; Mrs. Briggs sent her servant this
afternoon to ask you to take her out to-morrow at eleven o'clock. I
said, 'Yes, I thought so, but we supposed she employed some one else
now.'"

"'Well,' said he, 'the real fact is, master was put out because Mr.
Barker refused to come on Sundays, and he has been trying other cabs,
but there's something wrong with them all; some drive too fast, and some
too slow, and the mistress says there is not one of them so nice and
clean as yours, and nothing will suit her but Mr. Barker's cab again.'"

Polly was almost out of breath, and Jerry broke out into a merry laugh.

"''Twill all come right some day or night': you were right, my dear; you
generally are. Run in and get the supper, and I'll have Jack's harness
off and make him snug and happy in no time."

After this Mrs. Briggs wanted Jerry's cab quite as often as before,
never, however, on a Sunday; but there came a day when we had Sunday
work, and this was how it happened. We had all come home on the Saturday
night very tired, and very glad to think that the next day would be all
rest, but so it was not to be.

On Sunday morning Jerry was cleaning me in the yard, when Polly stepped
up to him, looking very full of something.

"What is it?" said Jerry.

"Well, my dear," she said, "poor Dinah Brown has just had a letter
brought to say that her mother is dangerously ill, and that she must
go directly if she wishes to see her alive. The place is more than ten
miles away from here, out in the country, and she says if she takes the
train she should still have four miles to walk; and so weak as she is,
and the baby only four weeks old, of course that would be impossible;
and she wants to know if you would take her in your cab, and she
promises to pay you faithfully, as she can get the money."

"Tut, tut! we'll see about that. It was not the money I was thinking
about, but of losing our Sunday; the horses are tired, and I am tired,
too--that's where it pinches."

"It pinches all round, for that matter," said Polly, "for it's only
half Sunday without you, but you know we should do to other people as
we should like they should do to us; and I know very well what I should
like if my mother was dying; and Jerry, dear, I am sure it won't break
the Sabbath; for if pulling a poor beast or donkey out of a pit would
not spoil it, I am quite sure taking poor Dinah would not do it."

"Why, Polly, you are as good as the minister, and so, as I've had my
Sunday-morning sermon early to-day, you may go and tell Dinah that I'll
be ready for her as the clock strikes ten; but stop--just step round to
butcher Braydon's with my compliments, and ask him if he would lend me
his light trap; I know he never uses it on the Sunday, and it would make
a wonderful difference to the horse."

Away she went, and soon returned, saying that he could have the trap and
welcome.

"All right," said he; "now put me up a bit of bread and cheese, and I'll
be back in the afternoon as soon as I can."

"And I'll have the meat pie ready for an early tea instead of for
dinner," said Polly; and away she went, while he made his preparations
to the tune of "Polly's the woman and no mistake", of which tune he was
very fond.

I was selected for the journey, and at ten o'clock we started, in a
light, high-wheeled gig, which ran so easily that after the four-wheeled
cab it seemed like nothing.

It was a fine May day, and as soon as we were out of the town, the sweet
air, the smell of the fresh grass, and the soft country roads were as
pleasant as they used to be in the old times, and I soon began to feel
quite fresh.

Dinah's family lived in a small farmhouse, up a green lane, close by a
meadow with some fine shady trees; there were two cows feeding in it.
A young man asked Jerry to bring his trap into the meadow, and he would
tie me up in the cowshed; he wished he had a better stable to offer.

"If your cows would not be offended," said Jerry, "there is nothing my
horse would like so well as to have an hour or two in your beautiful
meadow; he's quiet, and it would be a rare treat for him."

"Do, and welcome," said the young man; "the best we have is at your
service for your kindness to my sister; we shall be having some dinner
in an hour, and I hope you'll come in, though with mother so ill we are
all out of sorts in the house."

Jerry thanked him kindly, but said as he had some dinner with him there
was nothing he should like so well as walking about in the meadow.

When my harness was taken off I did not know what I should do
first--whether to eat the grass, or roll over on my back, or lie down
and rest, or have a gallop across the meadow out of sheer spirits at
being free; and I did all by turns. Jerry seemed to be quite as happy
as I was; he sat down by a bank under a shady tree, and listened to the
birds, then he sang himself, and read out of the little brown book he is
so fond of, then wandered round the meadow, and down by a little brook,
where he picked the flowers and the hawthorn, and tied them up with
long sprays of ivy; then he gave me a good feed of the oats which he had
brought with him; but the time seemed all too short--I had not been in a
field since I left poor Ginger at Earlshall.

We came home gently, and Jerry's first words were, as we came into the
yard, "Well, Polly, I have not lost my Sunday after all, for the birds
were singing hymns in every bush, and I joined in the service; and as
for Jack, he was like a young colt."

When he handed Dolly the flowers she jumped about for joy.





38 Dolly and a Real Gentleman



Winter came in early, with a great deal of cold and wet. There was snow,
or sleet, or rain almost every day for weeks, changing only for keen
driving winds or sharp frosts. The horses all felt it very much. When
it is a dry cold a couple of good thick rugs will keep the warmth in us;
but when it is soaking rain they soon get wet through and are no good.
Some of the drivers had a waterproof cover to throw over, which was a
fine thing; but some of the men were so poor that they could not protect
either themselves or their horses, and many of them suffered very much
that winter. When we horses had worked half the day we went to our dry
stables, and could rest, while they had to sit on their boxes, sometimes
staying out as late as one or two o'clock in the morning if they had a
party to wait for.

When the streets were slippery with frost or snow that was the worst of
all for us horses. One mile of such traveling, with a weight to draw
and no firm footing, would take more out of us than four on a good
road; every nerve and muscle of our bodies is on the strain to keep our
balance; and, added to this, the fear of falling is more exhausting than
anything else. If the roads are very bad indeed our shoes are roughed,
but that makes us feel nervous at first.

When the weather was very bad many of the men would go and sit in the
tavern close by, and get some one to watch for them; but they often
lost a fare in that way, and could not, as Jerry said, be there without
spending money. He never went to the Rising Sun; there was a coffee-shop
near, where he now and then went, or he bought of an old man, who came
to our rank with tins of hot coffee and pies. It was his opinion that
spirits and beer made a man colder afterward, and that dry clothes, good
food, cheerfulness, and a comfortable wife at home, were the best things
to keep a cabman warm. Polly always supplied him with something to eat
when he could not get home, and sometimes he would see little Dolly
peeping from the corner of the street, to make sure if "father" was on
the stand. If she saw him she would run off at full speed and soon come
back with something in a tin or basket, some hot soup or pudding Polly
had ready. It was wonderful how such a little thing could get safely
across the street, often thronged with horses and carriages; but she was
a brave little maid, and felt it quite an honor to bring "father's first
course", as he used to call it. She was a general favorite on the stand,
and there was not a man who would not have seen her safely across the
street, if Jerry had not been able to do it.

One cold windy day Dolly had brought Jerry a basin of something hot,
and was standing by him while he ate it. He had scarcely begun when
a gentleman, walking toward us very fast, held up his umbrella. Jerry
touched his hat in return, gave the basin to Dolly, and was taking off
my cloth, when the gentleman, hastening up, cried out, "No, no, finish
your soup, my friend; I have not much time to spare, but I can wait
till you have done, and set your little girl safe on the pavement." So
saying, he seated himself in the cab. Jerry thanked him kindly, and came
back to Dolly.

"There, Dolly, that's a gentleman; that's a real gentleman, Dolly; he
has got time and thought for the comfort of a poor cabman and a little
girl."

Jerry finished his soup, set the child across, and then took his orders
to drive to Clapham Rise. Several times after that the same gentleman
took our cab. I think he was very fond of dogs and horses, for whenever
we took him to his own door two or three dogs would come bounding out
to meet him. Sometimes he came round and patted me, saying in his quiet,
pleasant way, "This horse has got a good master, and he deserves it."
It was a very rare thing for any one to notice the horse that had been
working for him. I have known ladies to do it now and then, and this
gentleman, and one or two others have given me a pat and a kind word;
but ninety-nine persons out of a hundred would as soon think of patting
the steam engine that drew the train.

The gentleman was not young, and there was a forward stoop in his
shoulders as if he was always going at something. His lips were thin and
close shut, though they had a very pleasant smile; his eye was keen, and
there was something in his jaw and the motion of his head that made one
think he was very determined in anything he set about. His voice was
pleasant and kind; any horse would trust that voice, though it was just
as decided as everything else about him.

One day he and another gentleman took our cab; they stopped at a shop
in R---- Street, and while his friend went in he stood at the door. A
little ahead of us on the other side of the street a cart with two very
fine horses was standing before some wine vaults; the carter was not
with them, and I cannot tell how long they had been standing, but they
seemed to think they had waited long enough, and began to move off.
Before they had gone many paces the carter came running out and caught
them. He seemed furious at their having moved, and with whip and rein
punished them brutally, even beating them about the head. Our gentleman
saw it all, and stepping quickly across the street, said in a decided
voice:

"If you don't stop that directly, I'll have you arrested for leaving
your horses, and for brutal conduct."

The man, who had clearly been drinking, poured forth some abusive
language, but he left off knocking the horses about, and taking the
reins, got into his cart; meantime our friend had quietly taken a
note-book from his pocket, and looking at the name and address painted
on the cart, he wrote something down.

"What do you want with that?" growled the carter, as he cracked his whip
and was moving on. A nod and a grim smile was the only answer he got.

On returning to the cab our friend was joined by his companion, who said
laughingly, "I should have thought, Wright, you had enough business of
your own to look after, without troubling yourself about other people's
horses and servants."

Our friend stood still for a moment, and throwing his head a little
back, "Do you know why this world is as bad as it is?"

"No," said the other.

"Then I'll tell you. It is because people think only about their own
business, and won't trouble themselves to stand up for the oppressed,
nor bring the wrongdoer to light. I never see a wicked thing like this
without doing what I can, and many a master has thanked me for letting
him know how his horses have been used."

"I wish there were more gentlemen like you, sir," said Jerry, "for they
are wanted badly enough in this city."

After this we continued our journey, and as they got out of the cab our
friend was saying, "My doctrine is this, that if we see cruelty or
wrong that we have the power to stop, and do nothing, we make ourselves
sharers in the guilt."





