Part II. 22 Earlshall



The next morning after breakfast Joe put Merrylegs into the mistress'
low chaise to take him to the vicarage; he came first and said good-by
to us, and Merrylegs neighed to us from the yard. Then John put the
saddle on Ginger and the leading rein on me, and rode us across the
country about fifteen miles to Earlshall Park, where the Earl of W----
lived. There was a very fine house and a great deal of stabling. We went
into the yard through a stone gateway, and John asked for Mr. York. It
was some time before he came. He was a fine-looking, middle-aged man,
and his voice said at once that he expected to be obeyed. He was very
friendly and polite to John, and after giving us a slight look he
called a groom to take us to our boxes, and invited John to take some
refreshment.

We were taken to a light, airy stable, and placed in boxes adjoining
each other, where we were rubbed down and fed. In about half an hour
John and Mr. York, who was to be our new coachman, came in to see us.

"Now, Mr. Manly," he said, after carefully looking at us both, "I can
see no fault in these horses; but we all know that horses have their
peculiarities as well as men, and that sometimes they need different
treatment. I should like to know if there is anything particular in
either of these that you would like to mention."

"Well," said John, "I don't believe there is a better pair of horses in
the country, and right grieved I am to part with them, but they are not
alike. The black one is the most perfect temper I ever knew; I suppose
he has never known a hard word or a blow since he was foaled, and all
his pleasure seems to be to do what you wish; but the chestnut, I fancy,
must have had bad treatment; we heard as much from the dealer. She came
to us snappish and suspicious, but when she found what sort of place
ours was, it all went off by degrees; for three years I have never seen
the smallest sign of temper, and if she is well treated there is not
a better, more willing animal than she is. But she is naturally a more
irritable constitution than the black horse; flies tease her more;
anything wrong in the harness frets her more; and if she were ill-used
or unfairly treated she would not be unlikely to give tit for tat. You
know that many high-mettled horses will do so."

"Of course," said York, "I quite understand; but you know it is not easy
in stables like these to have all the grooms just what they should be. I
do my best, and there I must leave it. I'll remember what you have said
about the mare."

They were going out of the stable, when John stopped and said, "I had
better mention that we have never used the check-rein with either of
them; the black horse never had one on, and the dealer said it was the
gag-bit that spoiled the other's temper."

"Well," said York, "if they come here they must wear the check-rein. I
prefer a loose rein myself, and his lordship is always very reasonable
about horses; but my lady--that's another thing; she will have style,
and if her carriage horses are not reined up tight she wouldn't look at
them. I always stand out against the gag-bit, and shall do so, but it
must be tight up when my lady rides!"

"I am sorry for it, very sorry," said John; "but I must go now, or I
shall lose the train."

He came round to each of us to pat and speak to us for the last time;
his voice sounded very sad.

I held my face close to him; that was all I could do to say good-by; and
then he was gone, and I have never seen him since.

The next day Lord W---- came to look at us; he seemed pleased with our
appearance.

"I have great confidence in these horses," he said, "from the character
my friend Mr. Gordon has given me of them. Of course they are not a
match in color, but my idea is that they will do very well for the
carriage while we are in the country. Before we go to London I must try
to match Baron; the black horse, I believe, is perfect for riding."

York then told him what John had said about us.

"Well," said he, "you must keep an eye to the mare, and put the
check-rein easy; I dare say they will do very well with a little
humoring at first. I'll mention it to your lady."

In the afternoon we were harnessed and put in the carriage, and as the
stable clock struck three we were led round to the front of the house.
It was all very grand, and three or four times as large as the old house
at Birtwick, but not half so pleasant, if a horse may have an opinion.
Two footmen were standing ready, dressed in drab livery, with scarlet
breeches and white stockings. Presently we heard the rustling sound of
silk as my lady came down the flight of stone steps. She stepped round
to look at us; she was a tall, proud-looking woman, and did not
seem pleased about something, but she said nothing, and got into the
carriage. This was the first time of wearing a check-rein, and I must
say, though it certainly was a nuisance not to be able to get my head
down now and then, it did not pull my head higher than I was accustomed
to carry it. I felt anxious about Ginger, but she seemed to be quiet and
content.

The next day at three o'clock we were again at the door, and the footmen
as before; we heard the silk dress rustle and the lady came down the
steps, and in an imperious voice she said, "York, you must put those
horses' heads higher; they are not fit to be seen."

York got down, and said very respectfully, "I beg your pardon, my lady,
but these horses have not been reined up for three years, and my lord
said it would be safer to bring them to it by degrees; but if your
ladyship pleases I can take them up a little more."

"Do so," she said.

York came round to our heads and shortened the rein himself--one hole,
I think; every little makes a difference, be it for better or worse, and
that day we had a steep hill to go up. Then I began to understand what
I had heard of. Of course, I wanted to put my head forward and take the
carriage up with a will, as we had been used to do; but no, I had to
pull with my head up now, and that took all the spirit out of me, and
the strain came on my back and legs. When we came in Ginger said, "Now
you see what it is like; but this is not bad, and if it does not get
much worse than this I shall say nothing about it, for we are very well
treated here; but if they strain me up tight, why, let 'em look out! I
can't bear it, and I won't."

Day by day, hole by hole, our bearing reins were shortened, and instead
of looking forward with pleasure to having my harness put on, as I used
to do, I began to dread it. Ginger, too, seemed restless, though she
said very little. At last I thought the worst was over; for several days
there was no more shortening, and I determined to make the best of
it and do my duty, though it was now a constant harass instead of a
pleasure; but the worst was not come.





23 A Strike for Liberty



One day my lady came down later than usual, and the silk rustled more
than ever.

"Drive to the Duchess of B----'s," she said, and then after a pause,
"Are you never going to get those horses' heads up, York? Raise them at
once and let us have no more of this humoring and nonsense."

York came to me first, while the groom stood at Ginger's head. He drew
my head back and fixed the rein so tight that it was almost intolerable;
then he went to Ginger, who was impatiently jerking her head up and down
against the bit, as was her way now. She had a good idea of what was
coming, and the moment York took the rein off the terret in order to
shorten it she took her opportunity and reared up so suddenly that York
had his nose roughly hit and his hat knocked off; the groom was nearly
thrown off his legs. At once they both flew to her head; but she was
a match for them, and went on plunging, rearing, and kicking in a most
desperate manner. At last she kicked right over the carriage pole and
fell down, after giving me a severe blow on my near quarter. There is no
knowing what further mischief she might have done had not York promptly
sat himself down flat on her head to prevent her struggling, at the
same time calling out, "Unbuckle the black horse! Run for the winch and
unscrew the carriage pole! Cut the trace here, somebody, if you can't
unhitch it!" One of the footmen ran for the winch, and another brought
a knife from the house. The groom soon set me free from Ginger and the
carriage, and led me to my box. He just turned me in as I was and ran
back to York. I was much excited by what had happened, and if I had ever
been used to kick or rear I am sure I should have done it then; but
I never had, and there I stood, angry, sore in my leg, my head still
strained up to the terret on the saddle, and no power to get it down. I
was very miserable and felt much inclined to kick the first person who
came near me.

Before long, however, Ginger was led in by two grooms, a good deal
knocked about and bruised. York came with her and gave his orders, and
then came to look at me. In a moment he let down my head.

"Confound these check-reins!" he said to himself; "I thought we should
have some mischief soon. Master will be sorely vexed. But there, if a
woman's husband can't rule her of course a servant can't; so I wash my
hands of it, and if she can't get to the duchess' garden party I can't
help it."

York did not say this before the men; he always spoke respectfully when
they were by. Now he felt me all over, and soon found the place above my
hock where I had been kicked. It was swelled and painful; he ordered it
to be sponged with hot water, and then some lotion was put on.

Lord W---- was much put out when he learned what had happened; he blamed
York for giving way to his mistress, to which he replied that in future
he would much prefer to receive his orders only from his lordship; but
I think nothing came of it, for things went on the same as before. I
thought York might have stood up better for his horses, but perhaps I am
no judge.

Ginger was never put into the carriage again, but when she was well of
her bruises one of the Lord W----'s younger sons said he should like
to have her; he was sure she would make a good hunter. As for me, I was
obliged still to go in the carriage, and had a fresh partner called Max;
he had always been used to the tight rein. I asked him how it was he
bore it.

"Well," he said, "I bear it because I must; but it is shortening my
life, and it will shorten yours too if you have to stick to it."

"Do you think," I said, "that our masters know how bad it is for us?"

"I can't say," he replied, "but the dealers and the horse-doctors know
it very well. I was at a dealer's once, who was training me and another
horse to go as a pair; he was getting our heads up, as he said, a little
higher and a little higher every day. A gentleman who was there asked
him why he did so. 'Because,' said he, 'people won't buy them unless we
do. The London people always want their horses to carry their heads high
and to step high. Of course it is very bad for the horses, but then it
is good for trade. The horses soon wear up, or get diseased, and they
come for another pair.' That," said Max, "is what he said in my hearing,
and you can judge for yourself."

What I suffered with that rein for four long months in my lady's
carriage it would be hard to describe; but I am quite sure that, had it
lasted much longer, either my health or my temper would have given way.
Before that, I never knew what it was to foam at the mouth, but now
the action of the sharp bit on my tongue and jaw, and the constrained
position of my head and throat, always caused me to froth at the mouth
more or less. Some people think it very fine to see this, and say, "What
fine spirited creatures!" But it is just as unnatural for horses as
for men to foam at the mouth; it is a sure sign of some discomfort,
and should be attended to. Besides this, there was a pressure on my
windpipe, which often made my breathing very uncomfortable; when I
returned from my work my neck and chest were strained and painful, my
mouth and tongue tender, and I felt worn and depressed.

In my old home I always knew that John and my master were my friends;
but here, although in many ways I was well treated, I had no friend.
York might have known, and very likely did know, how that rein harassed
me; but I suppose he took it as a matter of course that it could not be
helped; at any rate, nothing was done to relieve me.





24 The Lady Anne, or a Runaway Horse



Early in the spring, Lord W---- and part of his family went up to
London, and took York with them. I and Ginger and some other horses were
left at home for use, and the head groom was left in charge.

The Lady Harriet, who remained at the hall, was a great invalid, and
never went out in the carriage, and the Lady Anne preferred riding on
horseback with her brother or cousins. She was a perfect horsewoman, and
as gay and gentle as she was beautiful. She chose me for her horse, and
named me "Black Auster". I enjoyed these rides very much in the clear
cold air, sometimes with Ginger, sometimes with Lizzie. This Lizzie was
a bright bay mare, almost thoroughbred, and a great favorite with the
gentlemen, on account of her fine action and lively spirit; but Ginger,
who knew more of her than I did, told me she was rather nervous.

There was a gentleman of the name of Blantyre staying at the hall;
he always rode Lizzie, and praised her so much that one day Lady Anne
ordered the side-saddle to be put on her, and the other saddle on me.
When we came to the door the gentleman seemed very uneasy.

"How is this?" he said. "Are you tired of your good Black Auster?"

"Oh, no, not at all," she replied, "but I am amiable enough to let you
ride him for once, and I will try your charming Lizzie. You must confess
that in size and appearance she is far more like a lady's horse than my
own favorite."

"Do let me advise you not to mount her," he said; "she is a charming
creature, but she is too nervous for a lady. I assure you, she is not
perfectly safe; let me beg you to have the saddles changed."

"My dear cousin," said Lady Anne, laughing, "pray do not trouble your
good careful head about me. I have been a horsewoman ever since I was a
baby, and I have followed the hounds a great many times, though I know
you do not approve of ladies hunting; but still that is the fact, and
I intend to try this Lizzie that you gentlemen are all so fond of; so
please help me to mount, like a good friend as you are."

There was no more to be said; he placed her carefully on the saddle,
looked to the bit and curb, gave the reins gently into her hand, and
then mounted me. Just as we were moving off a footman came out with a
slip of paper and message from the Lady Harriet. "Would they ask this
question for her at Dr. Ashley's, and bring the answer?"

The village was about a mile off, and the doctor's house was the last
in it. We went along gayly enough till we came to his gate. There was a
short drive up to the house between tall evergreens.

Blantyre alighted at the gate, and was going to open it for Lady Anne,
but she said, "I will wait for you here, and you can hang Auster's rein
on the gate."

He looked at her doubtfully. "I will not be five minutes," he said.

"Oh, do not hurry yourself; Lizzie and I shall not run away from you."

He hung my rein on one of the iron spikes, and was soon hidden among the
trees. Lizzie was standing quietly by the side of the road a few paces
off, with her back to me. My young mistress was sitting easily with a
loose rein, humming a little song. I listened to my rider's footsteps
until they reached the house, and heard him knock at the door. There was
a meadow on the opposite side of the road, the gate of which stood open;
just then some cart horses and several young colts came trotting out in
a very disorderly manner, while a boy behind was cracking a great whip.
The colts were wild and frolicsome, and one of them bolted across the
road and blundered up against Lizzie's hind legs, and whether it was
the stupid colt, or the loud cracking of the whip, or both together, I
cannot say, but she gave a violent kick, and dashed off into a headlong
gallop. It was so sudden that Lady Anne was nearly unseated, but she
soon recovered herself. I gave a loud, shrill neigh for help; again and
again I neighed, pawing the ground impatiently, and tossing my head to
get the rein loose. I had not long to wait. Blantyre came running to
the gate; he looked anxiously about, and just caught sight of the flying
figure, now far away on the road. In an instant he sprang to the saddle.
I needed no whip, no spur, for I was as eager as my rider; he saw it,
and giving me a free rein, and leaning a little forward, we dashed after
them.

For about a mile and a half the road ran straight, and then bent to the
right, after which it divided into two roads. Long before we came to
the bend she was out of sight. Which way had she turned? A woman was
standing at her garden gate, shading her eyes with her hand, and looking
eagerly up the road. Scarcely drawing the rein, Blantyre shouted, "Which
way?" "To the right!" cried the woman, pointing with her hand, and away
we went up the right-hand road; then for a moment we caught sight of
her; another bend and she was hidden again. Several times we caught
glimpses, and then lost them. We scarcely seemed to gain ground upon
them at all. An old road-mender was standing near a heap of stones, his
shovel dropped and his hands raised. As we came near he made a sign to
speak. Blantyre drew the rein a little. "To the common, to the common,
sir; she has turned off there." I knew this common very well; it was for
the most part very uneven ground, covered with heather and dark-green
furze bushes, with here and there a scrubby old thorn-tree; there were
also open spaces of fine short grass, with ant-hills and mole-turns
everywhere; the worst place I ever knew for a headlong gallop.

We had hardly turned on the common, when we caught sight again of the
green habit flying on before us. My lady's hat was gone, and her long
brown hair was streaming behind her. Her head and body were thrown back,
as if she were pulling with all her remaining strength, and as if that
strength were nearly exhausted. It was clear that the roughness of the
ground had very much lessened Lizzie's speed, and there seemed a chance
that we might overtake her.

While we were on the highroad, Blantyre had given me my head; but now,
with a light hand and a practiced eye, he guided me over the ground in
such a masterly manner that my pace was scarcely slackened, and we were
decidedly gaining on them.

About halfway across the heath there had been a wide dike recently cut,
and the earth from the cutting was cast up roughly on the other side.
Surely this would stop them! But no; with scarcely a pause Lizzie took
the leap, stumbled among the rough clods and fell. Blantyre groaned,
"Now, Auster, do your best!" He gave me a steady rein. I gathered myself
well together and with one determined leap cleared both dike and bank.

Motionless among the heather, with her face to the earth, lay my poor
young mistress. Blantyre kneeled down and called her name: there was no
sound. Gently he turned her face upward: it was ghastly white and
the eyes were closed. "Annie, dear Annie, do speak!" But there was no
answer. He unbuttoned her habit, loosened her collar, felt her hands and
wrist, then started up and looked wildly round him for help.

At no great distance there were two men cutting turf, who, seeing Lizzie
running wild without a rider, had left their work to catch her.

Blantyre's halloo soon brought them to the spot. The foremost man seemed
much troubled at the sight, and asked what he could do.

"Can you ride?"

"Well, sir, I bean't much of a horseman, but I'd risk my neck for the
Lady Anne; she was uncommon good to my wife in the winter."

"Then mount this horse, my friend--your neck will be quite safe--and
ride to the doctor's and ask him to come instantly; then on to the hall;
tell them all that you know, and bid them send me the carriage, with
Lady Anne's maid and help. I shall stay here."

"All right, sir, I'll do my best, and I pray God the dear young lady may
open her eyes soon." Then, seeing the other man, he called out, "Here,
Joe, run for some water, and tell my missis to come as quick as she can
to the Lady Anne."

He then somehow scrambled into the saddle, and with a "Gee up" and a
clap on my sides with both his legs, he started on his journey, making
a little circuit to avoid the dike. He had no whip, which seemed to
trouble him; but my pace soon cured that difficulty, and he found the
best thing he could do was to stick to the saddle and hold me in, which
he did manfully. I shook him as little as I could help, but once or
twice on the rough ground he called out, "Steady! Woah! Steady!" On the
highroad we were all right; and at the doctor's and the hall he did his
errand like a good man and true. They asked him in to take a drop of
something. "No, no," he said; "I'll be back to 'em again by a short cut
through the fields, and be there afore the carriage."

There was a great deal of hurry and excitement after the news became
known. I was just turned into my box; the saddle and bridle were taken
off, and a cloth thrown over me.

Ginger was saddled and sent off in great haste for Lord George, and I
soon heard the carriage roll out of the yard.

It seemed a long time before Ginger came back, and before we were left
alone; and then she told me all that she had seen.

"I can't tell much," she said. "We went a gallop nearly all the way, and
got there just as the doctor rode up. There was a woman sitting on the
ground with the lady's head in her lap. The doctor poured something into
her mouth, but all that I heard was, 'She is not dead.' Then I was led
off by a man to a little distance. After awhile she was taken to
the carriage, and we came home together. I heard my master say to
a gentleman who stopped him to inquire, that he hoped no bones were
broken, but that she had not spoken yet."

When Lord George took Ginger for hunting, York shook his head; he said
it ought to be a steady hand to train a horse for the first season, and
not a random rider like Lord George.

Ginger used to like it very much, but sometimes when she came back I
could see that she had been very much strained, and now and then she
gave a short cough. She had too much spirit to complain, but I could not
help feeling anxious about her.

Two days after the accident Blantyre paid me a visit; he patted me and
praised me very much; he told Lord George that he was sure the horse
knew of Annie's danger as well as he did. "I could not have held him in
if I would," said he, "she ought never to ride any other horse." I found
by their conversation that my young mistress was now out of danger, and
would soon be able to ride again. This was good news to me and I looked
forward to a happy life.





25 Reuben Smith



Now I must say a little about Reuben Smith, who was left in charge of
the stables when York went to London. No one more thoroughly understood
his business than he did, and when he was all right there could not be
a more faithful or valuable man. He was gentle and very clever in his
management of horses, and could doctor them almost as well as a
farrier, for he had lived two years with a veterinary surgeon. He was a
first-rate driver; he could take a four-in-hand or a tandem as easily
as a pair. He was a handsome man, a good scholar, and had very pleasant
manners. I believe everybody liked him; certainly the horses did. The
only wonder was that he should be in an under situation and not in the
place of a head coachman like York; but he had one great fault and that
was the love of drink. He was not like some men, always at it; he used
to keep steady for weeks or months together, and then he would break
out and have a "bout" of it, as York called it, and be a disgrace to
himself, a terror to his wife, and a nuisance to all that had to do with
him. He was, however, so useful that two or three times York had hushed
the matter up and kept it from the earl's knowledge; but one night, when
Reuben had to drive a party home from a ball he was so drunk that he
could not hold the reins, and a gentleman of the party had to mount the
box and drive the ladies home. Of course, this could not be hidden, and
Reuben was at once dismissed; his poor wife and little children had to
turn out of the pretty cottage by the park gate and go where they could.
Old Max told me all this, for it happened a good while ago; but shortly
before Ginger and I came Smith had been taken back again. York had
interceded for him with the earl, who is very kind-hearted, and the man
had promised faithfully that he would never taste another drop as long
as he lived there. He had kept his promise so well that York thought he
might be safely trusted to fill his place while he was away, and he was
so clever and honest that no one else seemed so well fitted for it.

It was now early in April, and the family was expected home some time in
May. The light brougham was to be fresh done up, and as Colonel Blantyre
was obliged to return to his regiment it was arranged that Smith should
drive him to the town in it, and ride back; for this purpose he took the
saddle with him, and I was chosen for the journey. At the station the
colonel put some money into Smith's hand and bid him good-by, saying,
"Take care of your young mistress, Reuben, and don't let Black Auster be
hacked about by any random young prig that wants to ride him--keep him
for the lady."

We left the carriage at the maker's, and Smith rode me to the White
Lion, and ordered the hostler to feed me well, and have me ready for him
at four o'clock. A nail in one of my front shoes had started as I came
along, but the hostler did not notice it till just about four o'clock.
Smith did not come into the yard till five, and then he said he should
not leave till six, as he had met with some old friends. The man then
told him of the nail, and asked if he should have the shoe looked to.

"No," said Smith, "that will be all right till we get home."

He spoke in a very loud, offhand way, and I thought it very unlike him
not to see about the shoe, as he was generally wonderfully particular
about loose nails in our shoes. He did not come at six nor seven, nor
eight, and it was nearly nine o'clock before he called for me, and then
it was with a loud, rough voice. He seemed in a very bad temper, and
abused the hostler, though I could not tell what for.

The landlord stood at the door and said, "Have a care, Mr. Smith!" but
he answered angrily with an oath; and almost before he was out of the
town he began to gallop, frequently giving me a sharp cut with his whip,
though I was going at full speed. The moon had not yet risen, and it was
very dark. The roads were stony, having been recently mended; going over
them at this pace, my shoe became looser, and as we neared the turnpike
gate it came off.

If Smith had been in his right senses he would have been sensible of
something wrong in my pace, but he was too drunk to notice.

Beyond the turnpike was a long piece of road, upon which fresh stones
had just been laid--large sharp stones, over which no horse could be
driven quickly without risk of danger. Over this road, with one shoe
gone, I was forced to gallop at my utmost speed, my rider meanwhile
cutting into me with his whip, and with wild curses urging me to go
still faster. Of course my shoeless foot suffered dreadfully; the hoof
was broken and split down to the very quick, and the inside was terribly
cut by the sharpness of the stones.

This could not go on; no horse could keep his footing under such
circumstances; the pain was too great. I stumbled, and fell with
violence on both my knees. Smith was flung off by my fall, and, owing to
the speed I was going at, he must have fallen with great force. I soon
recovered my feet and limped to the side of the road, where it was free
from stones. The moon had just risen above the hedge, and by its light
I could see Smith lying a few yards beyond me. He did not rise; he made
one slight effort to do so, and then there was a heavy groan. I could
have groaned, too, for I was suffering intense pain both from my foot
and knees; but horses are used to bear their pain in silence. I uttered
no sound, but I stood there and listened. One more heavy groan from
Smith; but though he now lay in the full moonlight I could see no
motion. I could do nothing for him nor myself, but, oh! how I listened
for the sound of horse, or wheels, or footsteps! The road was not much
frequented, and at this time of the night we might stay for hours before
help came to us. I stood watching and listening. It was a calm, sweet
April night; there were no sounds but a few low notes of a nightingale,
and nothing moved but the white clouds near the moon and a brown owl
that flitted over the hedge. It made me think of the summer nights long
ago, when I used to lie beside my mother in the green pleasant meadow at
Farmer Grey's.





26 How it Ended



It must have been nearly midnight when I heard at a great distance the
sound of a horse's feet. Sometimes the sound died away, then it grew
clearer again and nearer. The road to Earlshall led through woods that
belonged to the earl; the sound came in that direction, and I hoped it
might be some one coming in search of us. As the sound came nearer and
nearer I was almost sure I could distinguish Ginger's step; a little
nearer still, and I could tell she was in the dog-cart. I neighed
loudly, and was overjoyed to hear an answering neigh from Ginger, and
men's voices. They came slowly over the stones, and stopped at the dark
figure that lay upon the ground.

One of the men jumped out, and stooped down over it. "It is Reuben," he
said, "and he does not stir!"

The other man followed, and bent over him. "He's dead," he said; "feel
how cold his hands are."

They raised him up, but there was no life, and his hair was soaked with
blood. They laid him down again, and came and looked at me. They soon
saw my cut knees.

"Why, the horse has been down and thrown him! Who would have thought the
black horse would have done that? Nobody thought he could fall. Reuben
must have been lying here for hours! Odd, too, that the horse has not
moved from the place."

Robert then attempted to lead me forward. I made a step, but almost fell
again.

"Halloo! he's bad in his foot as well as his knees. Look here--his hoof
is cut all to pieces; he might well come down, poor fellow! I tell you
what, Ned, I'm afraid it hasn't been all right with Reuben. Just think
of his riding a horse over these stones without a shoe! Why, if he had
been in his right senses he would just as soon have tried to ride him
over the moon. I'm afraid it has been the old thing over again. Poor
Susan! she looked awfully pale when she came to my house to ask if
he had not come home. She made believe she was not a bit anxious, and
talked of a lot of things that might have kept him. But for all that she
begged me to go and meet him. But what must we do? There's the horse to
get home as well as the body, and that will be no easy matter."

Then followed a conversation between them, till it was agreed that
Robert, as the groom, should lead me, and that Ned must take the body.
It was a hard job to get it into the dog-cart, for there was no one to
hold Ginger; but she knew as well as I did what was going on, and stood
as still as a stone. I noticed that, because, if she had a fault, it was
that she was impatient in standing.

Ned started off very slowly with his sad load, and Robert came and
looked at my foot again; then he took his handkerchief and bound it
closely round, and so he led me home. I shall never forget that night
walk; it was more than three miles. Robert led me on very slowly, and I
limped and hobbled on as well as I could with great pain. I am sure he
was sorry for me, for he often patted and encouraged me, talking to me
in a pleasant voice.

At last I reached my own box, and had some corn; and after Robert
had wrapped up my knees in wet cloths, he tied up my foot in a bran
poultice, to draw out the heat and cleanse it before the horse-doctor
saw it in the morning, and I managed to get myself down on the straw,
and slept in spite of the pain.

The next day after the farrier had examined my wounds, he said he hoped
the joint was not injured; and if so, I should not be spoiled for work,
but I should never lose the blemish. I believe they did the best to make
a good cure, but it was a long and painful one. Proud flesh, as they
called it, came up in my knees, and was burned out with caustic; and
when at last it was healed, they put a blistering fluid over the front
of both knees to bring all the hair off; they had some reason for this,
and I suppose it was all right.

As Smith's death had been so sudden, and no one was there to see it,
there was an inquest held. The landlord and hostler at the White Lion,
with several other people, gave evidence that he was intoxicated when he
started from the inn. The keeper of the toll-gate said he rode at a hard
gallop through the gate; and my shoe was picked up among the stones, so
that the case was quite plain to them, and I was cleared of all blame.

Everybody pitied Susan. She was nearly out of her mind; she kept saying
over and over again, "Oh! he was so good--so good! It was all that
cursed drink; why will they sell that cursed drink? Oh Reuben, Reuben!"
So she went on till after he was buried; and then, as she had no home or
relations, she, with her six little children, was obliged once more to
leave the pleasant home by the tall oak-trees, and go into that great
gloomy Union House.





