{"name": "chapter 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025232/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Invisible_Man_Ellison/Invisible_Man_Study_Guide06.html", "summary": "The narrator begins by telling of his search for identity. He has always gone to other people for answers about himself. His search has led him to the conclusion that only he can answer the questions about his own identity, for to others he is invisible. He does not, at the start of this narrative, know who he is. He is confused and seeking. The narrators search begins with a recollection of his grandfather, a slave. He had often been ashamed of his grandfather; he believed the old man accepted a separate but equal philosophy. When his grandfather was dying, however, he spoke of his philosophy; they were the words of a covert warrior whose goal was to destroy the enemy through seeming agreement. He told his grandson to pass those words on to the next generation. This enigmatic confession and request puzzled the Invisible Man, who was warned by other adults in the house to forget what his grandfather had said. The narrator explains that the memory of his grandfather's words became a source of apprehension for him in his dealings with white people. He learned, however, that meekness was, indeed, the way to progress. The narrator found that his compliant behavior often earned him many opportunities, the most recent of which was the opportunity to give a speech to the echelons of white society--the town leaders. Before giving his speech, the narrator was asked to participate in the evening's entertainment. He accepted reluctantly, thinking it might detract from the seriousness of his presentation. He and the other black participants were asked to dress in boxing attire. They were then led into the room with the white leaders. The narrator was shocked to see the prominent men of the town nearly all drunk. He was even more shocked to see a naked blonde woman standing among the young black men, who hung their heads in fear. Although the narrator experienced conflicting emotions, he could not help but look. He found the girl beautiful, but he felt violent towards her at the same time. When the music began to plan, she started to dance, causing more of a stir. The black participants experienced great fear as the white men taunted them about the woman. The drunken white men then began grasping at the woman. She tried to remain calm and graceful, but they started howling and chasing her. The narrator recognized terror and disgust on her face, similar to that which he felt. Finally, some of the more sober white men helped her escape from her predicament. Now hysterical with fear about what was happening to them, the black participants were ordered into a boxing ring and blindfolded. Although they did not want to fight each other, they were forced to do so by the white men, who told them they would be beaten if they did not fight. The narrator felt terrified, especially with the blindfold in place causing total darkness. The town leaders began to taunt and insult the young men with name-calling and threats. Finally, the blacks responded and began to strike one another. The more the young black men fought each other, the more the white men became excited. The narrator began to receive a beating. Although he felt he was losing his dignity, he could not escape. Then the narrator found himself left in the ring with one other man, the largest of them all. The others arranged for him to be left behind to take the final beating. He tried to negotiate with the larger man, but the man was insistent upon beating him and winning the fight. The narrator grew desperate, ironically still worried about how the outcome of the fight would affect his speech. As a result, he began to fight more ferociously, determined to win at all costs. He then heard a voice in the crowd shouting in favor of the larger man; the narrator, struck by insecurity, hesitated for a moment. He next found himself coming to consciousness. His waking thought was for his speech. The boxing ring was wheeled away and a large rug was placed on the floor in its place. Gold coins were thrown on the rug, and the young black fighters were told that this was their pay for the night's work. As they sought the money, they discovered that the rug was electrified for the amusement of the white spectators. After the white men grew tired of such merciless entertainment, the narrator was finally called upon to give his speech, a version of Booker T. Washington's Atlanta Exposition. When the narrator used the phrase \"social equality,\" he was made to correct the phrase with the more acceptable words of \"social responsibility.\" When his ordeal was finally over, the narrator was awarded a leather briefcase. Upon opening the briefcase, he found he had been given a scholarship to the State College for Negroes. Because of this award, he was not too upset to discover that the gold coins collected from the electric rug were only brass tokens. For once, the narrator feels he is not haunted by his grandfather's words. As a result, he can sleep soundly; ironically, he dreams about his grandfather. They are at a circus, but the grandfather will not laugh at the clowns. The grandfather tells him to open his briefcase and look in the envelope. The narrator obeys, only to find one envelope inside another, and another. He becomes tired of opening envelopes. When his grandfather instructs him to open a particular one, it says, \"To whom it may concern...keep this nigger-boy running.\" It is a dream he will have over and over in his life, but at the time he does not know what it means.", "analysis": ""}