{"name": "chapter 21", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025232/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Invisible_Man_Ellison/Invisible_Man_Study_Guide20.html", "summary": "The narrator returns to the office and is greeted by a few members of the organization. The memory of Clifton's black dolls haunts him more than the shooting. He feels like a failure for reacting emotionally to the doll without taking the opportunity to educate the people about it. He pulls the doll from his pocket and examines it, noticing the two faces on it and the almost invisible thread that makes it dance. He feels hatred for the doll, almost as if it is a living thing. He thinks of the Brotherhood's concept of individuals having no meaning and begins to cry; he believes that Clifton deserves some integrity in his death, some meaning. He decides to plan a proper burial for him. The narrator calls headquarters, but no one returns his calls. He decides to organize the community without the approval of the Brotherhood. He stirs the neighborhood to anger over Clifton being shot down unarmed. On the day of the funeral, it seems the entire community is in attendance. He wonders if they gather out of love or hate. At the funeral, a song is begun by an old gentleman in the crowd. It moves the narrator and others to join in the singing. Once they reach the end of the procession, it is time for the narrator to give a speech, but he begins feeling resentful towards the crowd. He wonders why they all attend now and not when they could have prevented the tragedy. He begins his speech by telling everyone to go home, because there is not much of a story to tell. There is no preacher, and they already know what has happened. After going in this direction for a while, he decides to deviate from the direction of the Brotherhood. The narrator continues to explain Clifton's death by accusing him of accepting the reality of his place in history, a place that labels him as less than human. He tells them that they are all in the coffin with Clifton, unless they start doing something to get out. Leaving, he looks out to the crowd and sees individual people, as opposed to a uniform group. He leaves, feeling he must continue to organize the people's emotion effectively.", "analysis": ""}