{"name": "Chapters 21\u201323", "summary": "Summary \u2014 Chapter 21: Laurie Makes Mischief, and Jo Makes Peace  Jo has trouble keeping secret the potential courtship between Meg and Mr. Brooke. Laurie tries to get the secret out of Jo and grows annoyed when he cannot. In the meantime, Meg receives a letter allegedly from Mr. Brooke declaring his love. She answers it before Jo gets a chance to tell her that Laurie probably wrote it. The reply from Mr. Brooke says that he has never written a love letter. Jo says that she thinks Laurie wrote this letter and the earlier one with the glove. Sure enough, Laurie comes over, confesses, and apologizes. Meg and Jo tell him never to reveal the story to anyone. Laurie leaves, and Jo decides to let him know that she is not angry with him. She goes over to the Laurence house, where Laurie is in a terrible mood. His grandfather has demanded to know what is bothering Laurie; Laurie has refused to tell him, and they have quarreled. Upset, Laurie tells Jo he wants to run away. In order to help, Jo explains Laurie\u2019s actions to his grandfather, who writes a note of apology to his grandson. Summary \u2014 Chapter 22: Pleasant Meadows  Christmas arrives and everyone is very merry. Laurie and Jo make a snowwoman for Beth, and everyone else gets lovely presents too. The Laurences and Mr. Brooke surprise the family by bringing Mr. March home for Christmas. They have a very joyful time, and Mr. March tells the girls how much each of them has grown up. Jo is upset, however, because she can feel Meg slipping away from the family in her preoccupation with Mr. Brooke. Summary \u2014 Chapter 23: Aunt March Settles the Question  Meg becomes nervous and blushes whenever Mr. Brooke is mentioned. Her parents think that she is too young to be married, and in order to follow their wishes, she prepares a speech of rejection in case he makes advances. When Mr. Brooke comes over, she softens somewhat in his presence. Nevertheless, when he professes his love for her, she tells him she is too young. Aunt March arrives in the middle of this encounter. Mr. Brooke steps out, and Aunt March lectures Meg, telling her she should marry someone wealthy. Aunt March\u2019s tirade makes Meg defend her right to love and marry Mr. Brooke. After Aunt March leaves, Mr. Brooke comes back into the room, confessing that he has heard Meg\u2019s conversation. Meg says that she did not realize how much she admired Mr. Brooke until she had to defend him. He is thrilled by her realization and asks her to marry him in a few years. Meg agrees, and her parents consent. Jo is unhappy because she feels that she is losing her sister. Laurie arrives with Mr. Laurence, and they are both thrilled for the new couple. The first part of the book ends with the family gathered in the living room. Analysis \u2014 Chapters 21\u201323 Meg does a lot of growing up in these three chapters; she falls in love and becomes engaged. Despite the outward happiness the family expresses for Meg\u2019s impending marriage, a negative current runs beneath the surface of the affair. Jo abhors losing a sister, and often likens Meg\u2019s love for Mr. Brooke to a disease. In Chapter 21, Jo says of Meg, \u201cShe feels it in the air\u2014love, I mean\u2014and she\u2019s going very fast. She\u2019s got most of the symptoms, is twittery and cross, don\u2019t eat, lies awake, and mopes in corners.\u201d In the wake of Beth\u2019s recent recovery from grave illness, Jo\u2019s metaphors about love as a sickness seem more serious than comical. Alcott may want her readers to draw a connection between Beth\u2019s and Meg\u2019s conditions; both girls are stuck in unhealthy nineteenth-century female roles. Beth is struck down by the selflessness that is encouraged in women, and Meg is struck down\u2014at least in Jo\u2019s opinion\u2014by agreeing to become a typical wife. \tOn the other hand, when Meg agrees to marry Mr. Brooke, she demonstrates that at last she has overcome her own weakness for luxury and riches. John is not a rich man, and he will not provide Meg with the glamorous lifestyle she once coveted, but she loves him nonetheless. Alcott underlines Meg\u2019s triumphant victory over materialism by having Aunt March object to Mr. Brooke\u2019s poverty, and then letting us hear Meg\u2019s passionate defense of him and her insistence that his poverty does not matter because he is a good man and they love each other. \tStill, Alcott does not entirely gloss over the issue of poverty. Little Women presents a less idealized version of domesticity than many earlier novels. Her characters have real financial problems, and she suggests that Meg is being sweetly na\u00efve to think that money will make no difference to her happiness. She suggests that the best type of marriage\u2014as in the novels of the nineteenth-century English author Jane Austen\u2014combines both love and money, since the conventions of nineteenth-century society make it difficult, if not impossible, for women to earn their own livings.<PARAGRAPH>The end of this chapter marks the close of Part One. Part One was published on its own, and, when it was well-received, Alcott went on to write and publish Part Two. She ends this first part somewhat artificially, saying that \u201cthe curtain falls upon Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy.\u201d By mentioning a curtain close, Alcott calls attention to the fact that the story she is presenting to us is artificial and constructed. She seems to acknowledge that her novel has grown more conventional and romantic and less real\u2014as though we are watching a play, with characters that are obviously fictional.", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227184920/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/littlewomen/section5/"}