{"name": "chapter 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025238/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/White_Fang/White_Fang07.html", "summary": "The novel starts with a description of the landscape in the Northland Wild, which is a cold and desolate place. Some wolfish dogs are harnessed to a sled without runners. The sled is made of birch bark and rests on the snow. On the sled lies a narrow, oblong box, along with other essential items, including blankets, an axe, a coffee pot, and a frying pan. The box is actually a coffin, and in it lies Lord Alfred, a companion of Bill and Henry, whom the reader meets in this chapter. Clothed in fur and leather, they are traveling across the snow. It is almost evening when they hear a wolfs call, which is answered by other wolves; the lonely sounds of the wolves make the two men uneasy. Once it is dark, they bring the dogs together near a cluster of spruce trees along the water, where they set up camp. The dogs are restless but show no intentions of straying from the fire. The two men begin talking. Bill tells Henry that he had to get an extra portion of fish to feed the dogs, because there were seven dogs instead of six. After counting only six dogs, Henry scoffs at Bill and tells him he is seeing things. Bill confirms his story by saying that he has seen the tracks of a new animal coming into the camp. Just then, they hear the wolves howling, and Bill thinks that the visitor may have been one of the wolves. The conversation turns to the dead companion, who was a wealthy man -- a lord or something in his own country. The talk is interrupted by the dogs, who grow very agitated. One dogs coat is nearly burned when he gets too close to the fire in his restlessness. The men look up and see a pair of gleaming eyes in the darkness. The men, with only a couple of cartridges left for their gun, wish they had more ammunition. Bill, in fact, wishes he had not come on this trip. Like the dogs, he is restless. When he tries to sleep, he is awakened by the dogs. When he counts their number, there are seven dogs again. Bill makes an unsuccessful attempt to wake Henry to prove he is not seeing things. The next morning, Henry is the first to wake. Bill rolls up the blankets and prepares the sled. He tells Henry that they now have only five dogs left, for Fatty has disappeared.", "analysis": ""}