{"name": "Chapter 29", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-28-31", "summary": "Jurgis is overcome with emotion from the man's speech. The crowd begins to sing the Marseillaise, but when the rally turns to a question and answer period and a debate on Tolstoy breaks out, Jurgis comes back into the real world and realizes that he is a bum. In desperation, Jurgis fights his way to the platform when the meeting is over and tells the speaker how much he was affected by the speech. The speaker asks him if he wants to know more about socialism and he introduces him to a Polish man named Ostrinski. Ostrinski takes Jurgis back to his own home, a two-room tenement house in the Ghetto district. Ostrinski and his wife repair pants for a living, but they can barely make a living wage. Ostrinski begins to explain the tenets of Socialism. He tells Jurgis about how wage earners, the proletariat, are kept in slavery by those that exploit their work. These workers cannot change their circumstances until they became \"class-conscious. Ostrinski tells Jurgis that the Socialist Party is the largest political organization in the world and that they are organizing to return the workingman to world power. They are a true democratic organization, meaning that they have no bosses or leaders. Chicago, he tells him, is at the mercy of the Beef Trust, and the Socialist Party wishes to help the workingman to rise up, take control, and reform the corrupt systems that the Trust controls. He tells Jurgis that this will be difficult work, but Jurgis is excited by the possibilities and has trouble falling asleep on Ostrinski's kitchen floor that night", "analysis": "As Jurgis leaves Marija's brothel, he is in danger of falling back into the same cycle of poverty and unemployment as before. By chance, he enters the Socialist Party rally and undergoes his most significant awakening. Some scholars have likened this awakening to a conversion experience for Jurgis. The conversion narrative is a fixture of much of modern Western literature. Based upon narratives that began appearing in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and which found their greatest popularity in Puritan and Evangelical literature of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, these narratives generally focus around a specific time in which a character undergoes some kind of intense personal or intellectual change. Jurgis's conversion fits this pattern. Through no effort of his own, Jurgis transforms from a character that is at the whim of the horrors of the natural world around him to a person with agency and the ability to influence his life and the lives of others. This conversion is seen in the reappearance of the voices and noises inside of Jurgis's head. In the novel's previous chapter, these voices and noises, symbolic of the spark of life, were extinguished. This represented the mental and interior death of Jurgis, even if his physical self still exists. The return of these voices represents a resurrection. This shows how Jurgis can be considered a Christ-figure in the novel's narrative. The Socialist Party movement is a typical description of revolutionary movements in America during this time. As shown by the singing of the Marseillaise, the French national anthem written during the Revolution of 1789. Sinclair had used the scene of Jurgis at the meat packing plant owner's house to propose that the reader understand the developing class conflict in Chicago in terms of previous revolutionary activity. By singing this anthem, Sinclair firmly establishes the Socialist Party in America as in the lineage of the French Revolution. These final chapters of The Jungle shows a shift in Sinclair's narrative technique. From Chapter Two until Chapter Twenty-Eight, Sinclair uses a narrative arc, mostly of the demise of Jurgis and his family. This arc ends in Chapter Twenty-Eight and Twenty-Nine with Jurgis's conversion to Socialism. The remaining chapters of the novel move from a narrative to an explanatory style of writing. Sinclair uses the final chapters to explain the tenets and the merits of socialism to his reading audience. Scholars and critics have not always approved of this technique since it abandons the Naturalist mode of writing Sinclair established in the rest of the novel. The discussion between Lucas and Schliemann allows Sinclair to elaborate on the breadth of the socialist movement. Lucas's argument that Christianity can be fully reconciled with the political aspirations of socialism demonstrates the thinking of the Social Gospel movement. This movement, unofficially led by pastors and writers who often ministered in the country's working class slums, seeks to portray the Christian church as originally a socialist movement. Their goal is to reclaim the social message of the gospel and to support socialist political goals. Schliemann's arguments for socialism follow the more traditional intellectual explanation of the movement. Schliemann relies heavily on the arguments framed by Marx and Engels in The Communist Manifesto and Capital. The novel's ending has been another point of criticism from scholars and critics. The novel resolves with a victory, if not in actual votes than in momentum,  for the Socialist Party. Jurgis's narrative is never resolved beyond experiencing his spiritual and intellectual awakening, and the reader is unsure as to whether his life truly improved or if he remained subject to the forces of the natural world that caused his previous demise. The novel's closing chapters, critics have charged, resemble propagandist material more than literary achievement, a fault that some feel keeps The Jungle from achieving the literary ambitions that Sinclair proposed for the novel."}