{"name": "Chapter 6", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-5-7", "summary": "Jurgis and Ona are in love and desire to make plans for their wedding. Ona suggests to Teta Elzbieta that they do without the veselija, but this keeps her \"lying awake all night. They decide to wait in order to save up money for a proper wedding feast. They know it will take four to five months to raise such a sum. The family meets an old Lithuanian woman who lives only a block away. The old woman brings nothing but bad news. This woman, Grandmother Majauszkiene, \"had lived in the midst of misfortune so long that it had come to be her element. The old woman tells them that the house they bought was, in fact, not new. It had been built by a company whose only goal is to sell the house, then raise the rent so high that the buyer cannot afford it. The buyer will be evicted, and the company will resell the house. The house that the family bought had previously been sold four times. Grandmother Majauszkiene gives the family a brief history of Packingtown. The first immigrant group in Packingtown were the Germans, skilled butchers brought in by the packers from abroad to start the company. Cheap labor from Ireland soon arrived, and the Germans left. For six or eight years, Packingtown had been an Irish city, but then the Irish went on strike, and Durham imported cheaper labor to replace them. There were still some Irish left, running the unions and the police, but most had been displaced by the Bohemians who had been displaced by the Poles. Lithuanians were now the cheaper labor ,and even their jobs are being threatened by the Slovaks, for they are the poorest immigrants yet and will work for very little money. Packingtown is a place for \"rats in a trap,\" though as a socialist, Grandmother Majauszkiene believed that soon the people will rise up and murder the packers. The old grandmother tells them that all the families who had lived in their house had suffered from some kind of bad luck. Someone always gets consumption, which makes the family worry about Dede Antanas and his persistent cough. All of the families have lost a child working in the yards since \"in those days there had been no law about the age of children--the packers had worked all but the babies. Grandmother Majauszkiene also tells them most of the families had not been able to keep up with the rent because of the interest payments. This shocks the family because they did not realize they are supposed to pay interest. Grandmother Majauszkiene shows them in their deed that they are responsible for seven percent--an extra seven dollars per month in rent that they had not expected to pay. The family is distraught and when Ona tells Jurgis of this development, he accepts it as fate and promises to work harder. He agrees that both Ona and young Stanislovas should work. Ona bribes one of the foreladies at the packing plant and gets a job in the wrapping-room at Brown's. Teta Elzbieta goes to a priest and gets a fraudulent document saying that Stanislovas is sixteen, older than he actually is, and he takes a position working with a machine that packs lard into cans. He earns three dollars a week for his work. Because Ona and Jurgis are young and still in love, they continue to plan for the wedding, glad that Stanislovas's job covers the extra interest payment they had not known about", "analysis": "Sinclair begins Chapter Five with a sarcastic assault on the advertising industry. Before the late nineteenth century, advertising had mostly consisted of selling space in newspapers and publications. Industries focused their advertisements on listing available items and services. With the industrial revolution in the nineteenth century, advertising transitioned into an industry of influence; advertisers helped companies distinguish themselves and their products from other products. Sinclair attacks the advertising industry because of its duplicitous nature. Advertisements portray a product in the best light, yet in doing so they often lie to consumers about the quality of products. Jurgis and his family are too naive to know about such lies and tricks, so they believe that such advertisements are meant to inform them, not persuade them. This ignorance of the ways of capitalist society and its mechanisms of persuasion and trickery exemplify the innocence of Jurgis and his family. The family, in this way, is an archetype of innocence. An archetype is a character that represents common themes in culture. The loss of innocence archetype is most commonly associated with the story of Adam and Eve from the Hebrew Bible. These characters come into the world without understanding the way in which the culture around them has devolved into a \"sinful\" world that seeks to take advantage of them. The result is that such archetypes lose their naive understandings of the world by going through extreme hardships. Often the loss of innocence involves death. Tamoszius Kuszleika's speech to Jurgis explaining the mechanism of worker exploitation in the meat packing factories is one of the novel's important passages. Tamoszius is now his own character, yet he also retains some identification with Sinclair's own personality in the first chapter. By explaining the mechanisms of capitalist exploitation in the factories, Tamoszius acts as a kind of prophet, foretelling Jurgis's future in the industry as the story of everyman's struggle to survive. This is similar to Sinclair's own understanding of his role in writing the novel. In his innocence, Jurgis denies the principles of laissez-faire economics to Tamoszius. Laissez-faire is an economic system that stipulates that all industry should be free from governmental regulation or control. In laissez-faire economics, a society will succeed through the mechanisms of pure capitalism in which individuals and individual corporations can grow at any cost and without interference. Jurgis does not understand that such a system usually only applies in a macroeconomic sense, to large economies and industries. In the microeconomic sense, laissez-faire economics seeks to take advantage of those persons or industries that are smaller and less influential. No person is smaller in the novel than Jurgis, though he does not initially understand this dynamic. Grandmother Majauszkiene also serves a prophetic role in the novel. She gives the family the history of Packingtown and tells them of the particular history of their house. Everyone in that house undergoes intense hardships and each family has lost a child while living there. This is an instance of foreshadowing for, in a future chapter, Jurgis and Ona will lose two children. The loss of Jurgis's first-born son will be a turning point in the novel. In Chapter Seven, Sinclair uses Chicago's brutal weather as a metaphor for the family's growing difficulty and as a chance to foreshadow their demise. The weather is described in both realistic and metaphorical terms. As an example of realism, the cold rain of December causes severe illness in Ona. This begins her physical hardships, which directly cause her emotional and mental hardships. As a metaphor, Sinclair describes the way in which the weather kills the blooming trees and flowers of summer. The blooming foliage represents the dream of Jurgis and the family. The weather represents the general conditions that cause the family's demise."}