{"name": "Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-8-10", "summary": "The winter turns into spring, but the family does not find their economic situation any better than before. Marija still waits to hear of the re-opening of her canning factory, and she uses all but $25 of her savings. The pipes in the house burst, and the family has to pay an enormous sum for a plumber. When the family goes to pay their rent, the agent tells them that they must procure a new insurance policy on the house. Jurgis has a confrontational meeting with the man. He makes the agent clearly spell out all the costs of the house, and the sums are much larger than the family had originally thought. The spring weather brings its own trouble. There are cold rains that turn the streets to mud, and when the spring turns into summer, there are swarms of flies because of the garbage dumps. The killing-beds become unbearably hot and the men could never wash themselves of the uncleanness of the place. In the hot sun, \"all the old smells of a generation would be drawn out by this heat--for there was never any washing of the walls and rafter and pillars, and they were caked with the filth of a lifetime. Marija's canning factory job hires again in the springtime, but in only a few weeks Marija loses her job. Because she was such a vocal member of the union, her forelady does not care for her and shorts her pay. Marija takes her complaints all the way to the supervisor, who becomes upset that he is bothered by a laborer. Marija is told to leave her job and not come back. It is an especially hard lesson for the family to learn this time because Ona is now pregnant and Jurgis insists that she get a \"man-doctor\" which costs much more than a mid-wife does. He is determined to pay for the better care, \"even if he had to stop eating in the meantime. After four and a half weeks, Marija gets another job in one of the packing plants, taking the place of a man so that the foreman only has to pay her half of the wages. She is a \"beef-trimmer\" which means she stands in a room with no light, all day, and trims meat off bones. Though she is glad to be able to pay her board once again, she and Tamoszius despair over their inability to marry. Often, while Tamoszius plays sad music on his violin, Marija weeps over \"the voices of the unborn generations which cried out in her for life. Ona has her own difficulties with her work. Her forelady, Miss Henderson, does not like Ona because she is \"a decent married girl. Miss Henderson was given her position because of an affair she carries on with one of the other foremen. She also runs a brothel at which some of the girls from the packing plant work. Though Ona is disgusted by such places, she knows that for many of the women in Packingtown there is \"no place a girl could go. where a prostitute could not get along better than a decent girl. Packingtown is a colony of poor, starving immigrants, all under the \"whim of men every bit as brutal and unscrupulous as the old-time slave-drivers. Ona gives birth to a baby boy. The baby looks just like Jurgis, and Jurgis is fascinated by the new life he has created. He has little time to see his child, however, because he must work all the time to support the family. Both Ona and Jurgis decide that the baby must grow up to be more prosperous than they had been in their lives. Ona must also go back to work only a week after giving birth. This quick return to strenuous labor causes her to have \"womb-trouble,\" which all the women of Packingtown suffer. She suffers pain in her body all day long, and only alcohol based \"medicines\" which give her the \"phantom of good heath\" give her any temporary relief", "analysis": "In Chapter Eight, Sinclair makes distinctions between the theoretical promise of capitalism and the reality of capitalism. In the theoretical world of capitalist economies, each person's private interests, as well as the interests of the industries they create, all work together to bring about a maximum good for individuals and for society. This theory is best exemplified in Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations. This theoretical good of capitalist systems is exemplified in this chapter by Marija's slow advancement in society. With a good job and an improving social life, it seems as though Marija's own self-interest as \"the capitalist of the party\" is improving her life. This improvement, however, is short lived. When demand for canned meat falls, as it does every spring and summer, Marija loses her job and is forced to live on her savings. This means that she will never be able to advance in an economic sense. This, Sinclair proposes, is the reality of capitalism. In this reality, certain individuals and their industries profit from their self-interests while others in the system do not. In fact, those individuals that do not profit suffer hardships. Capitalism, thus, is a hindrance to social good, not a benefit. It is important to note how Sinclair's narrative and the way in which he describes the hardships of the Rudkus family moves from a general notion of oppressive systems to exact descriptions of social and economic systems that cause hardship. In early chapter, the family understands their hardships as simply the \"way\" that things function in America. As the narrative progresses, however, each member of the family begins to gain a consciousness of the particular systems and events that create their suffering.  They see the ways in which the food industry fixes the wage system against workers; unsanitary food processing that sucks nutrition from meat and causes disease for workers and consumers; and the industries unwillingness to support its workers in low demand seasons. These examples are one way in which Jurgis and his family move from a state of unconscious acceptance to a state of consciousness about corrupted morals. At the end of Chapter Eight, Sinclair uses religious language to describe the work of the unions, a theme that he returns to in later chapters to describe the work of the Socialist Party in Packingtown politics. Jurgis is described here as a church-going man, yet a person for which religion \"never touched him\" in the way that it affected women. Socialist politics, however, is \"a new religion...and with all the zeal and fury of a convert he went out as a missionary.\" Some critics of the novel have noted that Sinclair's interpretation of socialism is naive and this is one example. In portraying socialism as a truer religion than anything that has come before, Sinclair is overlooking many of the negative aspects of the economic theory. Chapter Ten marks a turning point for Ona Rudkus. Although her work in the factories is difficult, her hardships are compounded by giving birth and then being forced to return to manual labor so quickly. She develops an addiction to alcoholic elixirs, the only way she can cope with her work. Ona is the first character for whom the mental and financial hardships of her life are manifested in a physical way. Almost all of the main characters of the novel progress in this way. The hardships pressed upon the family by an unjust society become true physical hardships. Sinclair shows how poverty and powerlessness is not simply a mental or social hardship. It is a physical hardship as well."}