{"name": "Chapter 27", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-24-27", "summary": "Jurgis, now a tramp and outcast once more, is \"literally crippled as any wild animal which has lost its claws, or been torn out of its shell. His new \"handicap\" is that he has acquired a taste for a higher standard of living and now must do without. He craves a drink so much that he spends his last nickel to try to get drunk. Jurgis is now very hungry; hunger becomes real to him. Jurgis finds meager ways to survive. He buys half-priced stale bread and nibbles on it throughout the day. One day, a man offers him a job in a warehouse but then fires him because he says Jurgis is not strong enough, which breaks Jurgis's heart. As he walks down the street, he sees a stand selling fresh cabbage. He steals one and is chased, but eats half of the cabbage raw when he gets away. A Chicago newspaper advertises for a free soup kitchen, but Jurgis has to stand in line for two blocks with other hungry men and only gets one bowl of soup. He sleeps in a rundown saloon owned by a \"negro, who went out and drew off the old dregs of beer that lay in barrels set outside of the saloons\" and then sells it for a few cents. There is an election coming up, and Jurgis despairs because it reminds him that he had once \"had a place beneath the shadow of the plum tree. He attends a political rally where Senator Spareshanks, a Republican Party leader, gives a speech. Jurgis goes mainly to stay in a warm place for a while. The Senator speaks of how America will succeed in \"future triumphs\" and how each citizen will hold up the hands of those who toil to maintain the country's greatness. He boasts of a system called \"Protection. whereby the working-man permitted the manufacturer to charge him higher prices, in order that he might receive higher wages. This seems like an ingenious system to the Senator. Jurgis falls asleep during the rally and is kicked out of the hall. When he exits, he begins to beg from a woman and realizes that it is Alena Jasaityte, an old friend from Lithuania. Alena tells Jurgis that she cannot help him, but she tells him where Marija lives. She tells him that she is doing well and that she will help him. Jurgis sets off to the address that Alena gives him. He arrives at a nice brownstone house on a nice street in the city. He knocks on the door and meets a servant. The servant invites him in but tells him that no one by the name of Marija lives there. Just as Jurgis is about to exit the house, a barrage of police enter. There is sudden confusion in the house and a mass of about thirty people, all in varying states of dress, begin to run around the house looking for an exit. All of the exits are blocked however, even the secret passageways that lead out of the house. Jurgis runs with the crowd upstairs. Several girls seem to be half-drunk, and suddenly Jurgis recognizes Marija. He calls for her, and she takes him into her room. It is a dirty room with clothes strewn about the place. Marija begins to tell him how she came to be a whore. She tells him that it was because she was sick and needed to find a way to support the family. The family is not upset at him for leaving, however. Marija has a very businesslike quality to her now. She tells Jurgis that the family should have done everything they could to survive early on. Even Ona should have become a prostitute, she says, and this would have saved her from her eventual fate. She tells him that rats killed Stanislovas after he was accidentally locked in a factory one night. The rats attacked him and had half eaten him by the morning. The police come and tell Marija and Jurgis that they are taking them away. Marija is not worried, however, because she says the police do this kind of raid all the time. She will be free by morning, she says. Jurgis tells her that he is a wanted man, however, and when he arrives at the police station, he gives a fake name. That night, in his jail cell, Jurgis reaches his spiritual and mental rock bottom. He thinks of everything that has happened and everyone who has been lost. Their voices would die, and never again would he hear them -- and so the last faint spark of manhood in his soul would flicker out", "analysis": "In Chapter Twenty-Four, Sinclair notes that Jurgis's journey to the home of the rich meat packer is the greatest adventure of his life. This is an ironic statement since Jurgis finds no real adventure there and, in fact, is once again subject to a string of events that is out of his control yet is deterministic for his fate. On the surface, the descriptions of the lavish settings, the carefully prepared food, and the way in which Freddie Jones unthinkingly spends money, provides as stark a contrast as possible between the lives of the rich and the lives of the poor. It shows the disconnect between those that own the packing plants and those that work there. Freddie Jones finds it humorous that Jurgis had once worked in the plants owned by his father. Jurgis finds it just as incomprehensible, however, that his labor is used to provide such a lavish estate. Notably, neither Freddie Jones, nor Jurgis, makes broad generalized judgments of the other during the scene. The servants, who have presumably moved up in social standing because of the jobs they have been able to attain, do judge Jurgis a tramp and throw him out of the house. On another level, Sinclair recreates the setting of eighteenth-century France. In several of the passages, Sinclair has Jones allude to fine French things and to practices of the French aristocracy. For Sinclair, the French Revolution of 1789 best epitomized the collective power of the people used to overthrow the extravagances of aristocracy and to claim power. By using this scene of Chicago aristocracy, Sinclair is suggesting that a similar time will come in which the people will be made aware of the lifestyle their labor and toil produces for those that own the means of production. This, Sinclair hopes, will result in revolution. The novel continues in its narratives of descent. It should be noted the order of events into which Jurgis descends. Some critics have noted that the novel can be read as a kind of modern re-telling of Dante's Inferno, in which Dante descends through the levels of hell, witnessing the horrors of each and reasons for such punishment. Significantly, Jurgis ventures into the world of criminals, then politicians, before being turned out of each, which might mean that Sinclair sees politicians as even worse criminals than those that actively participate in criminal activities. Jurgis's time with Mike Scully's political machine is an opportunity for Sinclair to describe in detail the corrupt ways that politicians and business people controlled the political and economic systems of Chicago. Sinclair notes how neither of the major political parties, Democrats or Republicans, stand up for any kind of political value. Instead, they are each engaged in a race to hold onto the power they already have. Scully, who is head of the Democratic Party, works to elect a Republican candidate so that he himself will be able to hold onto his seat in the next election. The Republican policies will be no different from the Democratic ones and that neither party will actually work towards improving the lives of those that vote for them. This cynicism will be contrasted in future chapters with the convictions of the Socialist Party and their insistence that there be no political leadership. Jurgis soon becomes a participant of the Beef Strikes. The Beef Strikes were a series of historical strikes that occurred in the first decade of the twentieth century. On July 12, 1904, almost 30,000 packing plant workers left their jobs to strike for better wages and conditions. The packers had not willingness to concede to these demands, and so they instituted a program of bringing poor labor, many of them poverty stricken African Americans from the US South, to the plants. They had higher wages than normal workers did, even though they were unskilled. These tactics proved successful and packing plant workers such as Jurgis returned to their jobs without gaining concessions from the packers. These scenes in the novel have been criticized as being racist and inaccurate in depicting immigrant and racial strife in the stockyards. Sinclair's purpose is to show the way in which workers devolve into animals and how the conditions of Packingtown come to mirror the stockyards full of animals. These poor workers, Sinclair suggests, became sacrifices so that the packers might break the strike and, one day, produce larger profits."}