{"name": "Chapter 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-2-4", "summary": "Jurgis Rudkus is a big, strong man and a hard worker. He calls others who do not work as hard as he does weaklings or \"broken-down tramps and good-for-nothings. He finds work easily because of his strength and work ethic. While others stand in line for work for many months, he is picked out of the unemployment line at Brown and Company after no more than half an hour on just his second day in Chicago. Jurgis is from the Lithuanian countryside where he had lived and worked on his ancestral estate in the Brelovicz ]. Jurgis's brother had been drafted into the military, and his sister had married. Although he never expected to get married himself, he met Ona, his future wife, at a horse fair and fell deeply in love. She is from a wealthy family, however, and her father did not approve of their marrying. Lovesick, Jurgis makes the one hundred mile trek from his home to her family's estate to convince her father to let her marry. When he arrives, he finds that Ona's father has died, leaving the family estate in disarray. Teta Elzbieta had managed to save seven hundred roubles of the family fortune, but all else had been lost. Because she loves Teta Elzbieta, Ona decides she could not marry, and Jurgis decides that they all should instead make a new life in America. Life in America, he has heard, is better than the old country; Jurgis imagines, \"He might do as he please, and count himself as good as any other man. Five other adults, six other children, Marija Berczynskas, who had escaped work on a farm where she was beaten, and Jurgis board a boat headed for America. They have a hard passage. An agent takes advantage of them while on the boat, and then, when they arrive in New York, a man disguised as a police officer holds them captive in a hotel room where he makes them pay large sums to leave. The party loses much of their money during the journey. The group arrives in America, and because Ona's brother Jonas had known a man that made a fortune in Chicago, they decide to journey west. When they arrive, they do not understand where they are and ask people on the street for directions to Chicago, not realizing they have arrived. People laugh at them, and they sleep that night in the doorway of a house until a police officer picks them up and takes them to the police station. They are transported to the stockyards, a place with \"never a hill and never a hollow, but always the same endless vista of ugly and dirty little wooden buildings. There are factories with \"immense volumes of smoke\" pouring from their chimneys and train yards with locomotives and freight cars. The party notices a change in the atmosphere as they enter the city: the dingy color of the landscape, the thickening smoke, and a \"strange, pungent odor. The group cannot quite describe the odor. It is \"an elemental odor, raw and crude. rich, almost rancid, sensual, and strong. When they exit their streetcar in the part of town known as the Stockyards, or, Packingtown, they hear the sound of ten thousand head of cattle lowing in the distance. They walk only a block when Jonas runs into a delicatessen owned by Jokubas Szedvilas, the rich man that Jonas knew from Lithuania. They are hungry and tired, and Jokubas offers to take them to old Mrs. Jukniene's flat where they can rest. Jokubas tells them that Old Mrs. Jukniene's house is not a nice place to stay, but Teta Elzbieta assures him, \"Nothing could be too cheap to suit them. They have discovered that while America is a land of high wages, it is also a land of high prices. Old Mrs. Jukniene's flat, however, is even worse than they imagined. She lives in a two-story frame tenement house, and she does not clean. Each floor of the house has a four-room flat that houses an average of half a dozen boarders per room, or fifty or sixty people in each flat. Each room contains a row of mattresses and a stove. In some cases, the landlord rents out one of the mattresses to one man during the day and to another at night when the other man is at work. Mrs. Jukniene tells the women that they can share her room and, since the weather was hot, sleep on the sidewalk. Jurgis tells the group that tomorrow he and Jonas will get jobs, and they will be able to afford their own flat. Ona and Jurgis take a walk through their new neighborhood. There are children everywhere, playing in fetid puddles and streams of water. There are so many children in Packingtown \"that nowhere on its streets could a horse and buggy move faster than a walk. Swarms of flies populate the air. The entire town is built upon the garbage dumps of the city and during the hot summer, the smell becomes overbearing. Beyond the dump is a brickyard. The brick company scoops out the dirt of the land and replaces it with garbage, a feat that seems \"characteristic of an enterprising country like America. Beyond the brickyard is a hole that collects the water that drains from the polluted soil. In the winter, when the water freezes, it is cut and sold as ice to the people of the city. It seems economical to everyone, for \"their heads were not full of troublesome thoughts about 'germs. As the sun sets, Jurgis and Ona look over Packingtown. It appears to them now as \"a vision of power. of things being done, of employment for thousands upon thousands of men, of opportunity and freedom, of life and love and joy", "analysis": "Chapter Two begins the novel's narrative by describing Jurgis Rudkus. Sinclair describes Jurgis's character through physical traits. He is big and strong ,and the meat packing plant bosses quickly hire him. His physical characteristics influence his attitude towards other workers who are not as strong and not as enthusiastic about their work. Jurgis has a judgmental attitude towards these workers. In this early chapter, Sinclair strikes a balance between portraying the difficulties of the immigrants' move to America and the difficulties of life in Lithuania. Life in Lithuania is difficult, though it will not be as difficult as life in America, as the family will find out. Sinclair works here, however, not to idealize Eastern European life and to allow room for the validity of the American Dream. The American Dream, generally defined, is the belief in the ability of the individual to gain a sense of agency and economic or social advancement for themselves in American culture. Sinclair will use the contrast between dream and reality throughout the novel. In this early chapter, the dream is idealized. This power of this dream is evident in the family's trek to America. They immediately meet difficult circumstances. Their money is stolen, and they are extorted by being held captive. In addition, they find that while wages are higher in America, prices are also higher, which partly extinguishes a hope for riches, but the dream remains alive through the story of Jonas's friend in Chicago who has made a fortune. The dream is still alive when the family reaches Packingtown. Packingtown is a neighborhood in Chicago and the main setting for the novel. Packingtown contained the country's largest meat producing industries and was a destination for millions of immigrants looking for work in the early twentieth century. Packingtown remained a leading meat-producing neighborhood until the 1970's. While Packingtown was originally home to many German and Irish immigrant, many of them skilled butchers and meat producers, these groups were eventually replaced by cheaper labor, in the form of millions of unskilled Eastern European immigrants that flooded the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Because of the influx of such large populations, Packingtown became a slum filled with trash, disease, and poor living conditions. Sinclair uses the metaphor of thousands of lowing cattle, all making the same droning noise that the family hears as they ride into the stockyards, as a symbol for the masses of people crowded into Packingtown. The lowing noise of the cows is a metaphor for the unheard agony of these immigrant populations who are forced into difficult living conditions. At the end of Chapter Two, Jurgis and Ona's American dream is symbolized in the way that they literally stand on top of the garbage of Packingtown. For the moment, Sinclair suggests, their industry and determination in coming to America has helped them rise above the poorer people and lower classes  surrounding them. Chapter Three is a realistic description of the packinghouses and the process of killing and butchering cattle and hogs for public consumption. The chapter is often graphic in its depiction of violence towards animals. Sinclair's original publisher would not publish his novel because of such scenes and Sinclair was forced to self-publish the novel before it was finally bought by a mainstream publishing house. The irony of the chapter is best summed up in Jurgis's line: \"But I'm glad I'm not a hog!\" In fact, the process of killing and breaking down animals is a similar process to the ways in which Jurgis himself will be broken down by the conditions of the city. This is not just a metaphorical breaking down, either, as a physical process of cutting and wounding is a primary cause of demise in the packing plants. Chapters Three and Four offer two visions of America's capitalist economy. Both visions show how unskilled, uneducated workers such as Jurgis's family have no hope of successfully navigating this economy towards any kind of economic or social success. The first vision of capitalism is offered through the packinghouse where Jurgis works. While Henry Ford is generally considered the creator of the modern assembly line process of manufacturing, it was the Chicago meat packing plants that first revolutionized the process of mass production and assembly line techniques. The mantra that these plants \"use every part of the hog except for the squeal\" exemplifies the way that capitalist industry seeks to eliminate waste, even if such elimination results in unsanitary and unsafe conditions. The second vision of capitalism is exemplified in the family's deal with the real estate agent. The agent attempts to sell the family a house that is not as advertised. In the quest for profit, Sinclair suggests that businessmen will use whatever means necessary to rip off or cheat others. A family such as Jurgis's will be the first victims of this capitalist greed because they have no education of the system. Sinclair suggests that capitalism is a rigged economic system that only benefits those with inside knowledge of how to manipulate others for personal gain."}