{"name": "Chapter 48", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421140324/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/sense-and-sensibility/summary/chapter-48", "summary": "Elinor finds herself mulling over the event of Edward's marriage - she realizes that she'd hoped that something would come up to prevent it, but now that it's happened, she feels incredibly hurt. She's surprised that he and Lucy were married so soon, before he could possibly have been ordained. She wonders how he must have felt, being so close to Barton. She supposes that the Ferrars must be settled at Delaford already, and envisions their life there. Elinor had thought that someone in London might have seen fit to tell her of Edward and Lucy's marriage, and she's surprised when no letter arrives with details. She even asks her mother to write to Colonel Brandon , eager for any news. However, no word has arrived. As soon as she asks this, though, Colonel Brandon himself arrives - but wait, it's not the Colonel. In fact, it's Edward! Elinor tells herself to be calm. Marianne and Mrs. Dashwood both freak out as well, unsure of what they should do. They silently await his arrival. Edward enters, looking ill with anxiety. Mrs. Dashwood breaks the ice by shaking his hand and wishing him happiness. Marianne and Margaret both retreat, leaving Elinor and Mrs. Dashwood to deal with the visitor. Mrs. Dashwood asks if Mrs. Ferrars is well, and Elinor, following up, asks if she's at Longstaple. Edward is shocked - his mother isn't anywhere near here! Elinor pointedly asks about Mrs. Edward Ferrars. All eyes turn to Edward. Edward stammers, confused - does Elinor mean Mrs. Robert Ferrars instead? Everyone is shocked: what's the meaning of this? This is the deal - it turns out that Robert, Edward's younger brother just married Lucy Steele. Whoa. Our minds are blown. Elinor isn't sure how to react, so she flees the room and bursts into tears of joy. Edward also doesn't know what to do, so he sits in silence for a moment, then simply leaves. Everyone is totally perplexed.", "analysis": ""}