SCENE V
          PHAEDRA, HIPPOLYTUS, OENONE


          PHAEDRA (to OENONE)
          There I see him!
          My blood forgets to flow, my tongue to speak
          What I am come to say.

          OENONE
          Think of your son,
          How all his hopes depend on you.

          PHAEDRA
          I hear
          You leave us, and in haste. I come to add
          My tears to your distress, and for a son
          Plead my alarm. No more has he a father,
          And at no distant day my son must witness
          My death. Already do a thousand foes
          Threaten his youth. You only can defend him
          But in my secret heart remorse awakes,
          And fear lest I have shut your ears against
          His cries. I tremble lest your righteous anger
          Visit on him ere long the hatred earn'd
          By me, his mother.

          HIPPOLYTUS
          No such base resentment,
          Madam, is mine.

          PHAEDRA
          I could not blame you, Prince,
          If you should hate me. I have injured you:
          So much you know, but could not read my heart.
          T' incur your enmity has been mine aim.
          The self-same borders could not hold us both;
          In public and in private I declared
          Myself your foe, and found no peace till seas
          Parted us from each other. I forbade
          Your very name to be pronounced before me.
          And yet if punishment should be proportion'd
          To the offence, if only hatred draws
          Your hatred, never woman merited
          More pity, less deserved your enmity.

          HIPPOLYTUS
          A mother jealous of her children's rights
          Seldom forgives the offspring of a wife
          Who reign'd before her. Harassing suspicions
          Are common sequels of a second marriage.
          Of me would any other have been jealous
          No less than you, perhaps more violent.

          PHAEDRA
          Ah, Prince, how Heav'n has from the general law
          Made me exempt, be that same Heav'n my witness!
          Far different is the trouble that devours me!

          HIPPOLYTUS
          This is no time for self-reproaches, Madam.
          It may be that your husband still beholds
          The light, and Heav'n may grant him safe return,
          In answer to our prayers. His guardian god
          Is Neptune, ne'er by him invoked in vain.

          PHAEDRA
          He who has seen the mansions of the dead
          Returns not thence. Since to those gloomy shores
          Theseus is gone, 'tis vain to hope that Heav'n
          May send him back. Prince, there is no release
          From Acheron's greedy maw. And yet, methinks,
          He lives, and breathes in you. I see him still
          Before me, and to him I seem to speak;
          My heart--
          Oh! I am mad; do what I will,
          I cannot hide my passion.

          HIPPOLYTUS
          Yes, I see
          The strange effects of love. Theseus, tho' dead,
          Seems present to your eyes, for in your soul
          There burns a constant flame.

          PHAEDRA
          Ah, yes for Theseus
          I languish and I long, not as the Shades
          Have seen him, of a thousand different forms
          The fickle lover, and of Pluto's bride
          The would-be ravisher, but faithful, proud
          E'en to a slight disdain, with youthful charms
          Attracting every heart, as gods are painted,
          Or like yourself. He had your mien, your eyes,
          Spoke and could blush like you, when to the isle
          Of Crete, my childhood's home, he cross'd the waves,
          Worthy to win the love of Minos' daughters.
          What were you doing then? Why did he gather
          The flow'r of Greece, and leave Hippolytus?
          Oh, why were you too young to have embark'd
          On board the ship that brought thy sire to Crete?
          At your hands would the monster then have perish'd,
          Despite the windings of his vast retreat.
          To guide your doubtful steps within the maze
          My sister would have arm'd you with the clue.
          But no, therein would Phaedra have forestall'd her,
          Love would have first inspired me with the thought;
          And I it would have been whose timely aid
          Had taught you all the labyrinth's crooked ways.
          What anxious care a life so dear had cost me!
          No thread had satisfied your lover's fears:
          I would myself have wish'd to lead the way,
          And share the peril you were bound to face;
          Phaedra with you would have explored the maze,
          With you emerged in safety, or have perish'd.

          HIPPOLYTUS
          Gods! What is this I hear? Have you forgotten
          That Theseus is my father and your husband?

          PHAEDRA
          Why should you fancy I have lost remembrance
          Thereof, and am regardless of mine honour?

          HIPPOLYTUS
          Forgive me, Madam. With a blush I own
          That I misconstrued words of innocence.
          For very shame I cannot bear your sight
          Longer. I go--

          PHAEDRA
          Ah! cruel Prince, too well
          You understood me. I have said enough
          To save you from mistake. I love. But think not
          That at the moment when I love you most
          I do not feel my guilt; no weak compliance
          Has fed the poison that infects my brain.
          The ill-starr'd object of celestial vengeance,
          I am not so detestable to you
          As to myself. The gods will bear me witness,
          Who have within my veins kindled this fire,
          The gods, who take a barbarous delight
          In leading a poor mortal's heart astray.
          Do you yourself recall to mind the past:
          'Twas not enough for me to fly, I chased you
          Out of the country, wishing to appear
          Inhuman, odious; to resist you better,
          I sought to make you hate me. All in vain!
          Hating me more I loved you none the less:
          New charms were lent to you by your misfortunes.
          I have been drown'd in tears, and scorch'd by fire;
          Your own eyes might convince you of the truth,
          If for one moment you could look at me.
          What is't I say? Think you this vile confession
          That I have made is what I meant to utter?
          Not daring to betray a son for whom
          I trembled, 'twas to beg you not to hate him
          I came. Weak purpose of a heart too full
          Of love for you to speak of aught besides!
          Take your revenge, punish my odious passion;
          Prove yourself worthy of your valiant sire,
          And rid the world of an offensive monster!
          Does Theseus' widow dare to love his son?
          The frightful monster! Let her not escape you!
          Here is my heart. This is the place to strike.
          Already prompt to expiate its guilt,
          I feel it leap impatiently to meet
          Your arm. Strike home. Or, if it would disgrace you
          To steep your hand in such polluted blood,
          If that were punishment too mild to slake
          Your hatred, lend me then your sword, if not
          Your arm. Quick, give't.

          OENONE
          What, Madam, will you do?
          Just gods! But someone comes. Go, fly from shame,
          You cannot 'scape if seen by any thus.




