ACT V        SCENE I
          HIPPOLYTUS, ARICIA


          ARICIA
          Can you keep silent in this mortal peril?
          Your father loves you. Will you leave him thus
          Deceived? If in your cruel heart you scorn
          My tears, content to see me nevermore,
          Go, part from poor Aricia; but at least,
          Going, secure the safety of your life.
          Defend your honor from a shameful stain,
          And force your father to recall his pray'rs.
          There yet is time. Why out of mere caprice
          Leave the field free to Phaedra's calumnies?
          Let Theseus know the truth.

          HIPPOLYTUS
          Could I say more,
          Without exposing him to dire disgrace?
          How should I venture, by revealing all,
          To make a father's brow grow red with shame?
          The odious mystery to you alone
          Is known. My heart has been outpour'd to none
          Save you and Heav'n. I could not hide from you
          (Judge if I love you), all I fain would hide
          E'en from myself. But think under what seal
          I spoke. Forget my words, if that may be;
          And never let so pure a mouth disclose
          This dreadful secret. Let us trust to Heav'n
          My vindication, for the gods are just;
          For their own honour will they clear the guiltless;
          Sooner or later punish'd for her crime,
          Phaedra will not escape the shame she merits.
          I ask no other favour than your silence;
          In all besides I give my wrath free scope.
          Make your escape from this captivity,
          Be bold to bear me company in flight;
          Linger not here on this accursed soil,
          Where virtue breathes a pestilential air.
          To cover your departure take advantage
          Of this confusion, caused by my disgrace.
          The means of flight are ready, be assured;
          You have as yet no other guards than mine.
          Pow'rful defenders will maintain our quarrel;
          Argos spreads open arms, and Sparta calls us.
          Let us appeal for justice to our friends,
          Nor suffer Phaedra, in a common ruin
          Joining us both, to hunt us from the throne,
          And aggrandise her son by robbing us.
          Embrace this happy opportunity:
          What fear restrains? You seem to hesitate.
          Your interest alone prompts me to urge
          Boldness. When I am all on fire, how comes it
          That you are ice? Fear you to follow then
          A banish'd man?

          ARICIA
          Ah, dear to me would be
          Such exile! With what joy, my fate to yours
          United, could I live, by all the world
          Forgotten! but not yet has that sweet tie
          Bound us together. How then can I steal
          Away with you? I know the strictest honour
          Forbids me not out of your father's hands
          To free myself; this is no parent's home,
          And flight is lawful when one flies from tyrants.
          But you, Sir, love me; and my virtue shrinks--

          HIPPOLYTUS
          No, no, your reputation is to me
          As dear as to yourself. A nobler purpose
          Brings me to you. Fly from your foes, and follow
          A husband. Heav'n, that sends us these misfortunes,
          Sets free from human instruments the pledge
          Between us. Torches do not always light
          The face of Hymen.
          At the gates of Troezen,
          'Mid ancient tombs where princes of my race
          Lie buried, stands a temple, ne'er approach'd
          By perjurers, where mortals dare not make
          False oaths, for instant punishment befalls
          The guilty. Falsehood knows no stronger check
          Than what is present there--the fear of death
          That cannot be avoided. Thither then
          We'll go, if you consent, and swear to love
          For ever, take the guardian god to witness
          Our solemn vows, and his paternal care
          Entreat. I will invoke the name of all
          The holiest Pow'rs; chaste Dian, and the Queen
          Of Heav'n, yea all the gods who know my heart
          Will guarantee my sacred promises.

          ARICIA
          The King draws near. Depart,--make no delay.
          To mask my flight, I linger yet one moment.
          Go you; and leave with me some trusty guide,
          To lead my timid footsteps to your side.




