"I want do d'an'ma!"

This sudden and unexpected exclamation, uttered as it was in a shrill
little voice like that of a piping bullfinch, and coming from nowhere in
particular, as far as he could make out, for he had fancied himself all
alone on the platform, made the tall railway porter almost jump out of
his skin, as he expressed it, startling him out of his seven senses.

He was a stalwart, good-natured, black-bearded giant of a man, clad in a
suit of dunduckety-mud-coloured velveteens, rather the worse for wear,
and smeary with oil and engine-grease, which gave them a sort of highly-
burnished appearance resembling that of a newly-polished black-leaded
stove.

Doing nothing, and thinking of nothing specially, for the three-forty
up-train had gone through the station, and it was a good hour yet before
the five-ten down express was due, he had been lazily leaning in a half-
dreamy and almost dozing state against the side of the booking-office.

From this coign of vantage, he was, as well as his blinking eyes would
allow, gazing out over the rails at the fast-falling flakes of feathery
snow that were quickly covering up the metals and permanent way with a
mantle of white; when, all at once, without a "by your leave," or seeing
or hearing anyone approach, his attention was summarily brought back to
the present by the strange announcement of the shrill little voice,
while, at the same time, he felt the clutch of tiny fingers twitching at
one of the legs of his shiny velveteen trousers, evidently as a further
means of attracting his notice.

The touch made the porter look downwards, when, perceiving that his
unknown interlocutor was a small mite barely reaching up to his knees,
he became more reassured; and, bending his big body so as to bring his
face somewhat on a level with the young person, he proceeded to
interrogate him in familiar fashion.

"Well, my little man," he said, desiring to learn how he might be of
service, for he was a genial willing fellow, and always anxious to
oblige people when he knew how--"what's the matter?"

"I want do d'an'ma!" repeated the small mite in the same piping tones as
before, speaking with the utmost assurance and in the most matter-of-
fact way.

It seemed as if, having now explicitly notified his wants and wishes, he
confidently looked forward, in all the innocent trust of childhood, to
their being instantly acted upon and carried out without any demur or
hesitation.

Jupp, the porter, was quite flabbergasted by the little chap's sang-
froid; so, in order the better to collect his ideas and enable him to
judge what was best to be done under the circumstances, he took off his
flat-peaked uniform cap with one hand and scratched his head
reflectively with the fingers of the other, as is frequently the wont of
those possessed of thick skulls and wits that are apt to go wool-
gathering.

The operation appeared to have the effect desired; for, after indulging
in this species of mental and physical cogitation for a moment or two,
Jupp ventured upon asking the mite another question which had
brilliantly suggested itself to him as opportune.

"Where is your grandma, sir?" he inquired with more deference than he
had used before.

"Don-don," replied the small person nonchalantly, as if the point was
quite immaterial, looking the porter calmly and straight in the eyes
unflinchingly, without turning a hair as the saying goes.

Jupp had never come across such a self-possessed young mannikin in his
life before.  Why, he might have been the station-master or traffic-
manager, he appeared so much at his ease!

But, he was a little gentleman all the same, Jupp could readily see, in
spite of the fact that his costume was not quite suited for travelling,
the mite being attired in a very prominent and dirty pinafore, while his
chubby face was tear-stained, and he had the look of having come out in
a hurry and being perhaps unprepared for the journey he contemplated;
although, mind you, he had his luggage with him all right--a small
bundle tied up in a large pocket-handkerchief of a bright-red colour,
which he held tightly clasped to his little stomach as if afraid of its
being taken from him.

Jupp hardly knew off-hand how to deal with the case, it being of a more
perplexing nature than had previously come within range of his own
personal experience; still, he had his suspicions, and thought it best
to entertain the young person in conversation for a bit, until he should
be able to find out something about his belongings and where he came
from.

"London's a large place, sir," he therefore observed tentatively, by way
of drawing the mite out and getting some clue towards his identity.

The little chap, however, was quite equal to the occasion.

"Don't tare," he said defiantly, checking the porter's artful attempt at
cross-examination.  "I want do d'an'ma!"

Certainly, he was a most independent young gentleman.

Jupp was at a nonplus again; however, he tried to temporise with the
mite, the more especially from his noticing that his little legs were
quite mottled and his tiny fingers blue with cold.

"Well, come in here, sir, at all events, and warm yourself, and then we
can talk the matter over comfortably together," he said, throwing open
the door of the waiting-room as he spoke, and politely motioning the
little chap to enter.

The mite made no reply to the invitation, but he tacitly accepted it by
following the porter into the apartment he had indicated, and the two
were presently seated before a glowing fire, on which Jupp immediately
emptied the scuttleful of coals, there being no stint of the fuel by
reason of the company standing all expense.

Thawed by the genial warmth, rendered all the more enjoyable by the
wintry scene outside, where the snow was now swirling down faster and
faster as the afternoon advanced, the little chap began to get more
communicative, egged on by Jupp in a series of apparently innocent
questions.

"Nussy bad ooman," he blurted out after a long silence, looking up at
Jupp and putting his hand on his knee confidingly.

"Indeed, sir?" said the other cautiously, leading him on.

"Ess, man," continued the mite.  "See want take way my kitty."

"You don't mean that, sir!" exclaimed Jupp with well-feigned horror at
such unprincipled behaviour on the part of the accused nurse.

"Ess, man, see did," replied the little chap, nodding his small curly
head with great importance; but the next instant his little roguish blue
eyes twinkled with suppressed intelligence, and his red rosebud of a
mouth expanded into a happy smile as he added, with much satisfaction in
his tones, "but I dot kitty all wite now!"

"Have you really, sir?" said Jupp, pretending to be much surprised at
the information, the little chap evidently expecting him to be so.

"Ess, man," cried the mite with a triumphant shout; "I'se dot po' 'ittle
kitty here!"

"Never, sir!" ejaculated Jupp with trembling eagerness, as if his life
depended on the solution of the doubt.

The little chap became completely overcome with merriment at having so
successfully concealed his treasured secret, as he thought, that the
porter had not even guessed it.

"Kitty's in dundle!" he exclaimed gleefully, hugging his handkerchief
parcel tighter to his little stomach as he spoke.  "I dot kitty here,
all wite!"

"You don't mean that, sir--not in that bundle o' yours surely, sir?"
repeated Jupp with deep fictitious interest, appearing still not quite
convinced on the point and as if wishing to have the difficulty cleared
up.

This diplomatic course of procedure on the part of the porter removed
any lingering scruples the mite had in respect of his good faith.

"Ess, man.  I dot kitty here in dundle all wite," he repeated earnestly
in his very impressive little way.  "Oo musn't tell nobody and I'll so
her to 'oo!"

"I won't breathe a word of it to a soul, sir," protested Jupp as
solemnly and gravely as if he were making his last dying deposition;
whereupon the mite, quite convinced of the porter's trustworthiness and
abandoning all further attempt at concealment, deposited his little
bundle tenderly on the floor in front of the fireplace, and began to
open it with much deliberation.

The little fellow appeared so very serious about the matter, that Jupp
could not help trying to be serious too; but it required the exercise of
all the self-command he possessed to refrain from laughing when the
motley contents of the red handkerchief were disclosed.

Before the last knot of the bundle was untied by the mite's busy fingers
there crawled out a tiny tortoise-shell kitten, with its diminutive
little tail erect like a young bottle-brush, which gave vent to a "phiz-
phit," as if indignant at its long confinement, and then proceeded to
rub itself against Jupp's leg, with a purring mew on recognising a
friend.

"So that's kitty," said Jupp, holding the little thing up on his knee
and stroking it affectionately, the animal signifying its satisfaction
by licking the back of his hand with its furry little red tongue, and
straightening its tiny tail again as stiff as a small poker.

"Ess, man.  Dat's kitty," murmured the mite, too much occupied undoing
the last knots of the bundle to waste time in further speech for the
moment, struggling as he was at the job with might and main.

In another second, however, he had accomplished his task; and, lifting
up the corners of the red handkerchief, he rolled out the whole stock of
his valued possessions on to the floor.

"Dere!" he exclaimed with much complacency, looking up into Jupp's face
in expectation of his admiring surprise.

The porter was again forced to act a part, and pretend that he could not
guess anything.

"Dear me!" he said; "you have brought a lot of things!  Going to take
'em with you to London, sir?"

"Ess.  Da'n'ma tate tare of zem."

"No doubt, sir," replied Jupp, who then went on to inspect gingerly the
different articles of the collection, which was very varied in
character.

They consisted, in addition to the tortoise-shell kitten fore-mentioned,
of a musical snuff-box, a toy model of a ship, a small Noah's ark, a
half-consumed slice of bread and butter, an apple with a good-sized bite
taken out of one side, a thick lump of toffee, and a darkish-brown
substance like gingerbread, which close association in the bundle,
combined with pressure, had welded together in one almost
indistinguishable mass.

"I suppose, sir," observed Jupp inquiringly, picking up all the eatables
and putting them together apart on the seat next the little man--"I
suppose as how them's your provisions for the journey?"

"Ess.  I ate dindin; an', dat's tea."

"Indeed, sir! and very nice things for tea too," said Jupp, beaming with
admiration and good-humoured fun.

"I touldn't det any milk, or I'd bought dat too," continued the mite,
explaining the absence of all liquid refreshment.

"Ah! that's a pity," rejoined the porter, thinking how well half a pint
of milk would have mixed up with the other contents of the bundle; "but,
perhaps, sir, the kitty would have lapped it up and there would have
been none left.  Would you like a cup of tea now, sir?  I'm just agoing
to have mine; and if you'd jine me, I'd feel that proud you wouldn't
know me again!"

"Dank 'oo, I'm so dirsty," lisped the little man in affable
acquiescence; and, the next moment, Jupp had spirited out a rough basket
from under the seat in the corner, when extracting a tin can with a cork
stopper therefrom, he put it on the fire to warm up.

From a brown-paper parcel he also turned out some thick slices of bread
that quite put in the shade the half-eaten one belonging to the mite;
and as soon as the tea began to simmer in the tin over the coals, he
poured out some in a pannikin, and handed it to his small guest.

"Now, sir, we'll have a regular picnic," he said hospitably.

"All wite, dat's jolly!" shouted the other in great glee; and the two
were enjoying themselves in the highest camaraderie, when, suddenly, the
door of the waiting-room was opened from without, and the face of a
buxom young woman peered in.

"My good gracious!" exclaimed the apparition, panting out the words as
if suffering from short breath, or from the effects of more rapid
exertion than her physique usually permitted.  "If there isn't the young
imp as comfortably as you please; and me a hunting and a wild-goose
chasing on him all over the place!  Master Teddy, Master Teddy, you'll
be the death of me some day, that you will!"

Jupp jumped up at once, rightly imagining that this lady's unexpected
appearance would, as he mentally expressed it, "put a stopper" on the
mite's contemplated expedition, and so relieve him of any further
personal anxiety on his behalf, he having been puzzling his brains
vainly for the last half hour how to discover his whereabouts and get
him home to his people again; but, as for the little man himself, he did
not seem in the least put out by the interruption of his plans.

"Dat nussy," was all he said, clutching hold of Jupp's trouser leg, as
at first, in an appealing way: "Don't 'et her, man, tate away poor
kitty!"

"I won't sir, I promise you," whispered Jupp to comfort him; however,
before he could say any more, the panting female had drawn nearer from
the doorway and come up close to the fireplace, the flickering red light
from which made her somewhat rubicund countenance appear all the
ruddier.


