The winter was a long and severe one, covering the range of downs that
encircle Endleigh with a fleecy mantle of white which utterly eclipsed
the colour of the woolly coats of the sheep for which they were famous,
and heaping the valleys with huge drifts that defied locomotion; so that
Master Teddy, being unable to get out of doors much, was prevented from
wandering away from home again, had he been in that way inclined.

It may be added, too, that beyond breaking one of his arms in a tumble
downstairs through riding on the banisters in defiance of all commands
to the contrary, he managed for the next few months to keep pretty free
from scrapes--something surprising in such a long interval.

During all this time Jupp had been a very regular Sunday visitor at the
vicarage, coming up to the house after morning-service and being
entertained at dinner in the kitchen, after which meal he served as a
playfellow for the children until the evening, when he always
accompanied the vicar to church.

He had now come to be looked upon by all as a tried and valued friend,
Mr Vernon being almost as fond of chatting with him about his old sea
life as was Mary, the nurse; while Conny would consult him earnestly on
geographical questions illustrative of those parts of the globe he had
visited.

As for the younger ones, he was their general factotum, Teddy and Cissy
regarding him as a sort of good-natured giant who was their own especial
property and servant.

With all a sailor's ingenuity, he could carve the most wonderful things
out of the least promising and worthless materials that could be
imagined; while, as for making fun out of nothing, or telling thrilling
stories of fairies and pirates and the different folk amongst whom he
had mixed in his travels--some of them, to be sure, rather queer, as
Conny said--why, he hadn't an equal, and could make the dreariest
afternoon pass enjoyably to young and old alike, even Joe the gardener
taking almost as great pleasure in his society as Molly and Mary.

This was while the snow lay on the ground and Jack Frost had bound the
little river running through the village and the large pond in the water
meadow beyond with chains of ice, and life out of doors seemed at a
standstill; but, anon, when the breath of spring banished all the snow
and ice, and cowslips and violets began to peep forth from the released
hedgerows, and the sparrows chuckled instead of chirped, busying
themselves nest-building in the ivy round the vicarage, and when the
thrush sang to the accompaniment of the blackbird's whistle, the
children found that Jupp was even a better playfellow in the open than
he had been indoors, being nearly as much a child in heart as
themselves.

Whenever he had half a day given him in the week free from duty he would
make a point of coming up to take "Master Teddy and the young ladies"
out into the woods, fern-hunting and flower-gathering, the vicar
frequently popping upon the little picnickers unawares, whilst they were
watching the rabbits and rabbitikins combing out their whiskers under
the fir-trees, and Jupp and Mary getting an al fresco tea ready for the
party.

The little tabby kitten had long since been eclipsed in Teddy's
affections by a small Maltese terrier with a white curly coat of hair,
which his fond grandmother had rather foolishly given him, the poor
little animal being subjected to such rough treatment in the way of
petting that it must have over and over again wished itself back in its
Mediterranean home.

"Puck" was the little dog's name, and he appeared in a fair way of
"putting a girdle round the earth," if not in forty minutes like his
elfish namesake, at least in an appreciable limited space of time, Teddy
never being content except he carried about the unfortunate brute with
him everywhere he went, hugging it tightly in his arms and almost
smothering its life out by way of showing his affection.

Having once had his hair cut, too, unluckily by Mary, Teddy seized an
opportunity, when alone in the nursery, to treat poor Puck in similar
fashion, the result of which was that the little animal, deprived of his
long curly coat, not only shivered constantly with cold, but looked, in
his closely-shorn condition, like one of those toy lambs sold in the
shops in lieu of dolls for children, which emit a bleating sort of sound
when pressed down on their bellows-like stands.

Of course, Puck was as invariable an attendant at the picnic excursions
in the woods as Master Teddy himself, and, having developed sufficient
interest in the rabbits to summon up courage to run after them, which
Teddy graciously permitted him to do, these outings perhaps gave the
little animal the only pleasure he had in existence, save eating; for he
was then allowed, for a brief spell at all events, to use his own legs
instead of being carried about in baby fashion.

One day at the beginning of May, when the birds were gaily singing in
the branches of the trees overhead, through which an occasional peep of
blue sky could be had, the grass below being yellow with buttercups or
patched in white with daisies, Jupp and Mary were grouped with the
children beneath a spreading elm in the centre of a sort of fairy ring
in the wood, a favourite halting-place with them all.

The porter for once in a way had a whole holiday, and had spent the
morning helping Joe the gardener in mowing the lawn and putting out
plants in the flower-beds in front of the vicarage; so after their early
dinner, the children under Mary's care came out with him for a regular
picnic tea in the woods, carrying a kettle with them to make a fire,
with plenty of milk and cakes and bread and butter, for it was intended
to have quite a feast in honour of "papa's birthday," the vicar having
promised to come and join them as soon as he had finished his parish
work.

The little ones had been romping with Jupp all the way to the wood under
the downs, running races with him and making detours here and there in
search of wild anemones and meadow-sweet, or else chasing butterflies
and the low-flying swallows that heralded the advent of summer, so they
were rather tired and glad to lie down on the grass and rest when they
reached their old elm-tree; albeit, on Jupp setting to work to pick up
sticks for the fire that was to boil the kettle, first one and then
another jumped up to help, for, really, they could not be quiet very
long.

The sticks being collected and Jupp having slung the camp-kettle over
them by the means of two forked props, in campaigning fashion, as he
well knew how to do as an old sailor, a match was quickly applied, and
there was soon a pleasant crackling sound of burning wood, accompanied
with showers of sparks like fireworks as the wind blew the blaze aside.

Soon, too, a nice thick column of smoke arose that reminded Conny of
what she had read of Indian encampments, although Jupp told her that if
he were abroad and near any of such dark-skinned gentry he would take
precious good care when making a fire to have as little smoke as
possible.

"Why?" asked Conny, always anxious for information in order to improve
her mind.

"Because I shouldn't like them to discover my whereabouts, unless, miss,
I knew 'em to be friends," said Jupp in answer.

"And how would you manage to have no smoke?" she next pertinently
inquired, like the sensible young lady she was.

"By always burning the very driest wood I could find, miss," replied
Jupp.  "It is only the green branches and such as has sap in it that
makes the smoke."

"Oh!" ejaculated Conny, "I shall remember that.  Thank you, Mr Jupp,
for telling me.  I often wondered how they contrived to conceal their
camp-fires."

Teddy, with Cissy and Liz, had meanwhile been lying on the grass,
overcome with their exertions in stick-gathering, and were intently
watching a little glade in front of the elm-tree, some distance off
under a coppice.  Here they knew there were lots of rabbit-burrows, and
they were waiting for some of the little animals to come out and perform
their toilets, as they usually did in the afternoon and early evening,
preparing themselves for bed-time, as the children said; but, for a long
while, not one appeared in sight.

"Dere's a bunny at last," whispered Cissy as one peeped out from its
hiding-place; and, seeing no cause for alarm in the presence of the
little picnic party, with whom no doubt it was now well acquainted, it
came further out from the coppice, sitting up on its haunches in the
usual free-and-easy fashion of rabbitikins, and beginning to comb out
its whiskers with its paws.

At the sight of this, Puck, who of course was cuddled up tightly in
Teddy's arms, began to bark; but it was such a feeble little bark that
not even the most timid of rabbits would have been frightened at it,
while as for the one Puck wished to terrify, this simply treated him
with the utmost contempt, taking no notice either of bark or dog.

Three or four other rabbits, too, impressed with the beauty of the
afternoon and the advantages of the situation, now followed their
comrade's example, coming out from their burrows and squatting on the
turf of the sloping glade in a semicircle opposite the children; while,
the more poor Puck tried to express his indignation at their free-and-
easiness, the more nonchalantly they regarded him, sitting up
comfortably and combing away, enjoying themselves as thoroughly as if
there was no such thing as a dog in existence, Puck's faint coughing
bark being utterly thrown away upon them.

"Imp'dent tings!" said Teddy, unloosing the small terrier; "do and lick
'em, Puck!"

The little woolly lamb-like dog, who certainly possessed a larger amount
of courage than would reasonably have been imagined from his attenuated
appearance, at once darted after the rabbits, who, jerking their short
tails in the funniest way possible and throwing up their hind-legs as if
they were going to turn somersaults and come down on the other side,
darted off down the glade, making for the holes of their burrows under
the coppice.

The artful Puck, however, having chased the gentry before, was up to all
their little dodges, so, instead of running for the rabbits directly, he
attacked their flank, endeavouring to cut off their retreat; and, in
this object succeeding, away went the hunted animals, now scared out of
their lives, down the side of the hill to the bottom, with Puck charging
after them, and Teddy following close behind, and Cissy and Liz bringing
up the rear.

Miss Conny was much too dignified to chase rabbits.

"Stop, Master Teddy! stop!" cried Mary.  "Come back, Miss Liz and
Cissy--come back at once!"

The little girls immediately obeyed their nurse; but Teddy, who perhaps
in the ardour of the chase might not have heard her call, continued on
racing down the hill after Puck, as fast as his stumpy little legs could
carry him, his hat flying off and his pinafore streaming behind him in
the wind.

"Stop, Master Teddy, stop!" called out Mary again.

"Why can't you let him be?" said Jupp.  "He's only enj'ying hisself with
the rabbits, and can't come to no harm on the grass."

"Little you know about it," retorted Mary, rather crossly it seemed to
Jupp.  "Why, the river runs round just below the coppice; and if Master
Teddy runs on and can't stop himself, he'll fall into it--there!"

"My stars and stripes!" ejaculated Jupp starting up in alarm.  "I'll go
after him at once."

"You'd better," said Mary as he set off running down the hill after
Teddy, singing out loudly for him to stop in a sort of reef-topsails-in-
a-heavy-squall voice that you could have heard more than a cable's
length ahead!

The momentum Teddy had gained, however, from the descent of the glade
prevented him from arresting his rapid footsteps, although he heard
Jupp's voice, the slope inclining the more abruptly towards the bottom
of the hill.  Besides, Puck in pursuit of the rabbits was right in front
of him, and the dog, unable or unwilling to stop, bounded on into the
mass of rushes, now quite close, that filled the lower part of the
valley, and disappeared from Teddy's sight.

The next moment there was a wild yelp from Puck as he gripped the
rabbit, and both tumbled over the bank of the river into the water,
which was previously concealed from view; the dog's bark being echoed
immediately afterwards by a cry of alarm from Teddy and a heavy plunge,
as he, too, fell into the swiftly-flowing stream, and was borne out from
the bank by the rapid current away towards the mill-dam below!


