The weather was beautifully fine for October, with a bright warm sun
shining down and lighting up the water, which curled and crested before
the spanking nor'-east breeze, that brought with it that bracing tone
which makes the month, in spite of its autumnal voice warning us of the
approach of winter, one of the most enjoyable in our changeable
climate--especially to those dwelling along the south coast, which the
good ship _Greenock_ now trended by on her passage out of the Channel.

Teddy as yet, although this was his first experience of "a life on the
ocean wave," was not sea-sick; for, although the vessel heeled well over
to the wind on the starboard tack she did not roll, but ploughed through
the little wavelets as calmly as if on a mill-pond, only rising now and
again to make a graceful courtesy to some cross current that brought a
swell over from the opposite shore of France, for after passing Beachy
Head she kept well off the land on the English side.

A west-nor'-west course brought the _Greenock_ off Saint Catharine's
Point; but the evening had drawn in too much for Teddy to see anything
of the Isle of Wight, and when he woke up next morning the ship was
abreast of the Start Point.

From thence, he had a fair view of the Devon and Cornish coasts in the
distance all the way to the Lizard, the scene being like an ever-
changing panorama, with plenty of life and movement about in the vessels
the _Greenock_ was continually passing either outwards or homewards
bound; while the little trawlers and fishing-boats clustered in groups
here and there, and there was the occasional smoke from some steamer
steaming along the horizon, like a dark finger-post above the level of
the sea in the distance.

He enjoyed it all, as, although he had found his bunk in the cabin
rather close and stuffy after his nice airy bed-room at the vicarage, he
was still not sea-sick; and, as he leant over the taffrail, watching the
creamy wake the ship left behind her, spreading out broader and broader
until it was lost in the surrounding waste of waters, what with the
sniff of the saline atmosphere and the bracing breeze, he began to feel
hungry, longing for breakfast-time to come and wondering when he would
hear the welcome bell sound to tell that the meal was ready.

No one was on deck, at least on the poop, when he came up, save the
helmsman, and Mr Capstan, the latter walking up and down briskly on the
windward side and exchanging a word now and again with the pilot on the
bridge; so Teddy felt a little forlorn.

Presently, the second-mate, taking a longer turn in his quarterdeck
walk, came up and spoke to him.

"Well, young shaver," he said, "how are you getting on?"

"Very well, thank you, sir," replied Teddy, touching his cap, as Uncle
Jack had told him he must always do to his superior officer.

"Ah! you're like a young bear, and have all your troubles before you,"
the other next remarked consolingly, adding immediately afterwards the
query: "Seen any of your messmates yet?"

"No, sir," replied Teddy, looking a bit puzzled--"that is, excepting
yourself and the captain, and Uncle Jack, of course.  Are there any
other midshipmen like myself?"

"Aye, if you call the apprentices so, young shaver," said Mr Capstan
with an ironical grin which did not improve his rather ugly face.
"There are two more of you; and the lazy young hounds must be snoozing
below, for they haven't shown a leg yet.  However, I'll soon rouse 'em
up!"

So saying, he shouted out to one of the hands in the waist forwards:
"Here, Bill Summers!"

"Aye, aye, sir," replied the man, looking up towards the break of the
poop, whence the second-mate had hailed him, leaning over the rail.

"Just go and call Jones and Maitland.  Tell 'em to turn out sharp or
I'll stop their grog," cried Mr Capstan.

"Aye, aye, sir," said the man, proceeding towards the deck-house, which
occupied a middle position in the ship between the poop and fo'c's'le;
and presently, although hidden from the gaze of those aft, he could be
heard rapping at one of the doors, repeating in whispered tones the
order the second-mate had given him.

Ere long, a couple of striplings appeared, dressed in dirty uniforms
which presented a marked difference to that of Teddy; and he noticed
besides that one was considerably taller than he was while the second
was shorter and a little slimmer.

"Here, you, Jones and Maitland, I won't have you caulking away this
bright morning when the sun ought to be scorching the sleep out of your
eyes.  What do you mean by it, eh?" began Mr Capstan as if lashing
himself into a passion, but had not quite got enough steam up yet.

"I thought, sir, as this is our first day out and the ship still in
charge of the pilot, we needn't turn out so early," said Jones, the
biggest of the two, acting as spokesman.

"You thought!" snarled the second-mate, catching up a rope's-end with
the apparent intention of laying it across the shoulders of Jones, only
he kept a wary distance away.  "I've half a mind to give you something
for answering me like that!  No one has any business to think on board
ship."

"Aye, where you're boss!" said the offender speaking aside.

"What is that you're jabbering?" quickly interposed Mr Capstan--"some
impudence, I reckon.  Now, just you pull off those patent-leather pumps
of yours and set to work washing decks.  It's gone six bells, and it
ought to have been done half an hour ago."

Teddy thought this was a very unkind cut of the mate at poor Jones's
boots, which were a dilapidated pair of bluchers that needed mending
badly; still, he couldn't help smiling, which didn't seem to please Mr
Capstan, who, turning round, now addressed him:

"And you, my fine young shaver, with your dandy rig, you'd better be
doing something to earn your salt, and not be a useless lubber, looking
on like a fine lady!  You just put off and go and help Jones."

Teddy, though he didn't relish the job, obeyed willingly; and soon he
was paddling about in bare feet with his trousers rolled up to the knee,
while the crew under Jones's direction rigged the head pump and sluiced
the decks down from end to end of the ship, beginning with the poop and
ending with the midship section in the waist, where all the water was
collected in a sort of small lake and had to be swabbed out of the
scuttles.

Young Maitland meanwhile had been sent up the main royal mast to clear
the dog vane, which had somehow or other got fouled; so Mr Capstan,
satisfied at seeing everybody busily employed but himself, paced
contentedly up and down the poop, sniffing about and snorting
occasionally like an old grampus, as if in satisfaction at "taking it
out of the youngsters."

The man was naturally a bully, and loved to display the little authority
he had by "hazing" those under him, to use the technical sea phrase.

By dint of continually nagging at the men below from his commanding
position above, the second-mate hurried them up so with their work that
in a very short space of time the decks were scrubbed and washed, the
sun drying them almost without the use of the swab.

Mr Capstan then set them to work coiling down the loose ropes lying
about, there being nothing else to do, as the ship had not altered her
course but remained on the starboard tack with the wind well on her
quarter; and, although everything had been made snug before leaving the
Downs, he was just going to tell the hands to unship the motley contents
of the long-boat and stow it again afresh in default of some other task,
when eight bells struck, and Uncle Jack came up from below to relieve
him from his watch--a relief, it may be added, to all hands in more than
one sense!

Presently, Captain Lennard came on deck too; although he must not be
thought lazy for being so late, for he had remained up with the pilot on
the bridge all night conning the ship, only turning in for a short nap
at daylight.

Then, the passengers, of whom there were some sixty in the first-class
saloon, began to creep up the companion, one by one as if not yet
accustomed to the somewhat unsteady footing of a ship's deck at sea; as
for the steerage emigrants they remained below, and even after they had
been weeks afloat it required almost force to drive them up into the
fresh air.

Teddy was looking at the queer figures some of the gentlemen and ladies
presented on the poop, when all at once the breakfast gong sounded, and
they all scuttled down much faster than they had come up, the sea air
having given those able to get out of their bunks fresh appetites after
they had paid homage to Neptune.

He was not invited to go down with these, however, having to mess along
with Jones and Maitland in the deck-house close to the galley, where the
three mids consoled themselves with the reflection that if they were
excluded from the saloon, at all events they were nearer the place where
their meals were cooked, and so had the advantage of getting them
hotter!

After breakfast the pilot left the ship, a boat putting out for him from
the land when they were near Saint Michael's; and then Captain Lennard,
hauling round a bit, shaped a west-south-west course, steering out into
the broad Atlantic until he had reached longitude 12 degrees West, when
the vessel's head was turned to the south for Madeira and the Canaries.

Strange to say, Teddy up to now had not been once sick.

It is true they had not as yet had any rough weather; but the sea was
brisk enough to try the stomachs of all the landsmen on board, so it was
curious he was not affected in any way by the ship's motion.

As Uncle Jack said at the first, he was a born sailor!

Soon he began, too, to understand his duties; and being naturally quick
of intellect and active, he after a time became handier on the yards and
up aloft than little Maitland, who had been two voyages out and home
before; while Jones had to exert himself to hold his own with him--with
Uncle Jack, besides, coaching him up in seamanship, Teddy ere the vessel
had reached Madeira was a greenhand no longer.

At Teneriffe Captain Lennard put in to coal, the ship being, as formerly
mentioned, an auxiliary screw, and able to enlist the aid of steam when
she came to the calm latitudes, which they were now approaching.

The passengers being allowed to go on shore for a few hours, Teddy
received permission to accompany those taking advantage of the
opportunity of landing.

There was no time to try and climb up the celebrated peak, which can be
seen so far out at sea that it looks like an island in the clouds; but
there was much amusement gained in donkey riding and studying the
manners and customs of the natives.

The garments, Teddy noticed, of the ladies were rather limited in
dimensions; but what they lacked in quantity they made up for in style,
all the dresses being provided with those "improvers" of late fashion in
England.  These made the skirts of the Portuguese damsels stick out all
round, giving them a very funny appearance with their brown skins and
bare feet!

It was well they coaled here, for while they were yet in sight of the
huge cloud-cap't mountain above Santa Cruz, the wind that had favoured
them so well up to now dropped to a dead calm; so, Captain Lennard,
ordering the sails to be furled and the screw-propeller lowered, the
vessel was able to proceed under steam across the equator, making almost
as good time as when sailing before a good breeze--almost, but not
quite, as she was a clipper under canvas.

They touched once more at the Cape of Good Hope, to fill up the coal
they had expended in case of another emergency necessitating their
steaming again; but, the wind being favourable when the _Greenock_ got
below the forties, she bowled along steadily before it under canvas,
reaching Melbourne within sixty days.

Altogether, the voyage was uneventful except for one thing, and that was
the persistent bullying of Mr Capstan the second-mate, who, whether
from his relationship to Uncle Jack, his superior officer, or from some
other cause, had apparently conceived such a dislike to Teddy that he
tyrannised over him more than he seemed to think necessary either with
little Maitland or Jones--although they suffered, too, at his hands!

Teddy would not complain, though, to the captain; and as for his Uncle
Jack, he would have thought it dishonourable to breathe a word to him.
He would rather have suffered the crudest torture the bully could
inflict than that!

However, he and little Maitland matured their plans together, and coming
to the conclusion that they could not very well have any satisfaction
from Mr Capstan without telling tales, they determined to steal away
from the ship when she got into harbour, and run away ashore up into the
bush, Val Maitland retailing for Teddy's benefit the most wonderful
stories anent gold-digging and bush-ranging--stories that cordially
agreed with his own fancy.

Not long, therefore, after the _Greenock_ had entered within Port Philip
Heads and got up to Sandridge Pier, the two boys, mixing amongst the
crowd of passengers landing, touters touting for various boarding-
houses, and all the different sorts of people that throng round the
newly-arrived at the colonial metropolis, especially at its harbour
mouth, managed easily to get into the town unobserved, giving the slip
most successfully to their ship and all its belongings.

"And what shall we do now?" asked Teddy, his companion, although smaller
than himself, taking the lead, from being an older sailor and having
been previously in Australia.

"Do! why, go into the bush, of course!" promptly answered the other.

"And how shall we get there?" next inquired Teddy cheerfully, wishing to
start off that very moment for the golden land he had dreamt of.

"Why, by train," said Val.

"By train!" echoed Teddy in a voice of consternation, the idea was such
a terrible come down to what he had imagined.

"Yes, by train; come along with me," repeated little Maitland, catching
hold of his arm; and turning into Collins Street he soon made his way to
the railway depot and took a couple of tickets for Ballarat.


