The gale suddenly ceased during the night, but all hands remained on
deck; for, the sea was still rolling mountains high and coming in
occasionally over the broken bulwarks, causing Captain Lennard much
anxiety about the boats, which, fortunately, the broken top hamper kept
from being washed overboard.

In the morning it was quite calm again; but the poor old ship presented
a piteous scene of desolation, with her broken sides, and her gay array
of towering masts and spreading yards and spread of canvas all swept
away.

Teddy could nearly have cried at the sorry sight; not reflecting that
through the merciful care of a divine providence watching over all not a
life had been lost.

With the daylight, Captain Lennard took a rapid review of their
position.

He had caused a stout tarpaulin to be lashed over the engine-room hatch,
thus preventing any more water from passing down into the hold there in
any perceptible quantity; still, the carrying away of the bulwarks and
chain-plates had strained the ship very much on the port side, and when
the carpenter sounded the well at eight bells the ship was found to be
leaking fast, having already a depth of two feet in her.

"Man the pumps!" cried the captain; when Uncle Jack lending a willing
hand, the crew under his encouragement were soon working away steadily
with a clink-clank, clink-clank, the water pouring out through the
scuppers in a continuous stream.

However, on the well being sounded again presently, it was found to be
flowing in equally steadily, having risen already six inches more in
spite of all their pumping!

What was to be done?

The captain and Uncle Jack deliberated together, summoning the new third
mate to assist their counsels; but, they could only arrive at one
opinion.

The ship was sinking fast, and all hands knew it as well as they
themselves; for, in addition to the damage done to the sides and
bulwarks, the heavy propeller had aided the waves in wrenching away the
rudder, which carried with it the greater portion of the stern-post.

"We must take to the boats," said Captain Lennard.  "Thank God, they are
all right, and haven't been washed away in the storm!"

Leaving the useless pumps, therefore, for it was of no avail fatiguing
the men with the unnecessary exertion any longer, all the pumping in the
world being idle to save the vessel, the hands were at once set to work
clearing the boats and getting them over the side.

It was a ticklish job, the long-boat especially being very heavy, and
there being no means, now they had lost their masts, of rigging a tackle
aloft to hoist it off the chocks amidships.

Still, necessity teaches men alternatives in moments of great peril; so,
now, knocking away the under fastenings of the boat by main force, the
crew managed at last to get it free.  Then, improvising rollers out of
pieces of the broken topmast, they contrived by pulling and hauling and
shoving, all working with a will together, to launch it over the side
through the hole in the bulwarks.

The jolly-boat followed suit, an easier task; and then, the two being
deemed sufficient to accommodate all on board, just sixty-one in number
including the two passengers, Captain Lennard gave the order to
provision them, telling the steward to bring out all the cabin stores
for this purpose, there being now no further use for them on board the
ship, and officers and men being entitled to share alike without
distinction.

The captain himself, while this was being done, saw to the ship's log
and other papers, taking also out of the cabin his best chronometer and
a chart or two, as well as a sextant and some mathematical instruments.

These preparations for departure, though, were abruptly cut short by a
warning cry from Bill Summers, the boatswain.

"We'd better look sharp, sir," he called out to Uncle Jack, who was
busily engaged superintending the stowage of the provisions in the two
boats.  "The water is arising rapidly, and is now nearly up to the
'tween-decks!"

Uncle Jack passed on the word to the captain, who instantly came up the
companion.

Seeing the truth of the boatswain's statement from the deeper immersion
of the ship since he had gone below, he at once ordered the men down
into the boats, the passengers going first; then the foremast hands;
and, lastly, the officers.

"Mr Althorp," said the captain, "you will take charge of the jolly-boat
and shove off as soon as she's got her complement.  I will command the
long-boat myself."

"Aye, aye, sir," responded Uncle Jack, descending into the boat when she
had as many in her as she could safely hold; when, shoving off from the
ship's side and rowing a few strokes, the men lay on their oars,
remaining some twenty yards off so as to be out of the whirlpool or eddy
that would be formed when the vessel presently foundered.

The long-boat now received its quota of passengers, all descending into
it and seating themselves on the thwarts and in the bottom so as not to
be in the way of those rowing, Captain Lennard waiting till the last to
get into her.

Just as he got in, however, he suddenly remembered that he had forgotten
a compass, and hastily climbed back on board to get it.

"Look sharp, Cap'en!" shouted Bill Summers from the bow as the ship gave
a quiver all over.  "She's just about to founder."

The captain was quick enough, racing back to the companion and down the
stairs in two bounds, where, although the cabin was half full of water,
he contrived to wrench away the "tell-tale" compass that swung over the
saloon-table; and he was on the poop again with it in an instant.

The instrument, however, was heavy, but he had hard work to carry it
with both hands; and he managed to get to the side with it, when bending
down handed it to Bill Summers, who stood up in the bow of the boat to
receive it.

At that instant, the ship gave a violent lurch, and some one sang out to
shove off; when, the oars being dropped in the water, the boat was
impelled some yards from the side, leaving Captain Lennard still on
board.

"What, men, abandon your captain!"  Teddy cried, his voice quivering
with emotion.  "You cowards, row back at once!"

"We can't," sang out the same voice that had before ordered the men to
shove off.

Who it was no one noticed in the general flurry, nor knew afterwards;
but, while the men were hesitating which course to adopt, Teddy, without
saying another word, plunged overboard and swam back to the sinking
_Greenock_, having no difficulty in getting up the side now for it was
almost flush with the water.

"Come on board, sir!" said he jokingly, touching his forehead with his
finger, his cap having been washed off as he dived.

"My poor boy!" cried Captain Lennard, overcome with emotion at the
gallant lad's devotion; "you have only sacrificed two lives instead of
one!  Why did you not stay in the boat?"

"Because," began Teddy; but ere he could complete the sentence there was
a violent rush of air upwards from the hold, and a loud explosion, the
decks having burst.

At the same time, the ship made a deep bend forwards.

Then, her bows rose high in the air above the waves as the stern sank
with a gurgling moan; and, the next moment, Teddy and Captain Lennard
were drawn below the surface with the vessel as she foundered!

Teddy was nearly suffocated; but, holding his breath bravely, as Jupp
had taught him, and striking downwards with all his force, he presently
got his head above water, inhaling the delicious air of heaven, which he
thought would never more have entered his nostrils.

When he came to himself, he saw the captain's body floating face
downwards amongst a lot of broken planks and other debris of the wreck,
by some fragment of which he must have been struck as the _Greenock_
foundered.

To swim forwards and seize poor Captain Lennard, turning him face
upwards again and supporting his head above the water, was the work of a
moment only with Teddy; and then, holding on to a piece of broken spar,
he awaited the coming up of the launch, which, now that all danger was
over from the eddy rowed up to the scene, when he and the captain were
lifted on board--all hands enthusiastic about the courageous action of
the little hero, and none more so than Captain Lennard when he recovered
his consciousness.

"You have saved my life!" he said.  "Had you not been close by to turn
me over when I rose to the surface I should have been drowned before the
boat could have come up.  I will never forget it!"

Nor did he, as Teddy's subsequent advancement showed; but, there was no
time now for congratulation or passing compliments.

The peril of those preserved from the wreck was not yet over, for, they
were thousands of miles away from land floating on the wide ocean!

Hailing the jolly-boat, Captain Lennard announced what he thought the
proper course should be.

"The best place for us to make for now is Valparaiso," he said; "and if
we steer to the east-nor'-east we ought to fetch it in three weeks or so
under sail; that is, if our provisions hold out so long."

Uncle Jack approving, this course was adopted; and, day after day, the
boats, setting their sails, which Bill Summers had not forgotten to
place on board, made slow but steady progress towards the wished-for
goal.

One morning, all were wakened up by the welcome cry of "Land ho!" from
the look-out forwards in the bow of the long-boat, which kept a little
ahead of the jolly-boat, although always reducing sail if she forged too
much forward so as not to lose her.

A signal was made, therefore, telling the glad news to Uncle Jack and
those with him; while the boat pressed onwards towards the spot where
the hazy outline of a mountain could be dimly seen in the distance.

"That is not the American continent," said Captain Lennard to the men,
in order to allay any future disappointment that might be afterwards
felt.  "We are nearly a thousand miles off that yet.  It must be Easter
Island.  That is the only land I know of hereabouts in the Pacific; and,
although I have never visited the place myself, I have heard that the
natives are friendly to strangers.  At all events we'll pay them a call;
it will be a break in our long journey!"

Bye and bye the boats approached the shore and all landed, when a lot of
copper-coloured savages came down to the beach waving branches of trees
in sign of welcome.

The islanders had not much to eat; but Captain Lennard, seeing that
their provisions were well-nigh expended, determined to stop here, while
sending on Uncle Jack with a small party to Valparaiso to charter some
vessel to come and fetch them all, the boats being so crowded that
misfortune might await them all if they continued the voyage in such
small craft.

For months and months all awaited in constant expectation Uncle Jack's
return; but, he came not, and they at length believed that he and those
with him must have been lost in some hurricane that had sprung up off
the Chilian coast, and so had never reached Valparaiso at all!

They had no fear of starvation, however, the islands abounding in
poultry in a semi-wild state, which they had to hunt down for
themselves; for the natives lent them no assistance.  Indeed they were
rather hostile after a time; although the Englishmen were too numerous
for them to attack, especially as they were always on their guard
against surprise.

In wandering over the island, which is only some thirty miles round,
Teddy was surprised, like the others, by the numbers of stone obelisks,
rudely carved into the semblance of human faces and statues, which could
not possibly have been executed by the present inhabitants.

It is believed by geographers that Easter Island must have formed a
portion of a vast Polynesian continent peopled by some kindred race to
those that designed the colossal monuments of an extinct civilisation,
now almost overgrown with vegetation, that are yet to be found as
evidences of a past age amidst the forests of Central America.

One day, more than a year after Uncle Jack had left, and when they had
almost given up all hope of ever seeing him again, or of being relieved
from their island prison--the long-boat being dashed to pieces in the
surf soon after he started--a schooner in full sail was discovered
making for the island.

Presently, she came nearer and nearer.

Then she hove to, and a boat was seen to be lowered from her side, and
shortly afterwards being pulled in to the shore.

A moment later, and Uncle Jack's well-known face could be seen in the
stern-sheets, a glad hurrah being raised by the shipwrecked men at the
sight of him.

Soon, Uncle Jack landed, and he had a long tale to tell of the jolly-
boat losing her sail, and being tossed about on the ocean till picked up
by an American whaler, which first took a cruise down the South Seas,
there detaining him many weary months before landing him at Sandy Point,
in the Straits of Magellan, from whence he got finally to Valparaiso
after awaiting a passage for weeks.

Arrived here, however, he at once got in communication with the British
consul, and chartered a schooner to go to Easter Island and fetch his
comrades.

Uncle Jack, too, mentioned that he had written home to the owners of the
_Greenock_, telling of her loss and the safety of all hands on their
temporary island home; and he had also sent a letter to Endleigh, he
said, narrating all about Master Teddy's adventures, and saying that he
was safe and well.

Captain Lennard did not long delay the embarkation of his little band,
who were glad enough to leave Easter Island; so, in a couple of weeks'
time all landed safely in Valparaiso, where they luckily caught the
outgoing mail steamer as they arrived, and started off to England,
rejoicing in their timely rescue and preservation from peril amid all
the dangers of the deep.


