May-day--I forget whether by Zenobia's sole decree, or by the unanimous
vote of our community--had been declared a movable festival. It was
deferred until the sun should have had a reasonable time to clear away
the snowdrifts along the lee of the stone walls, and bring out a few of
the readiest wild flowers.  On the forenoon of the substituted day,
    after admitting some of the balmy air into my chamber, I decided that
    it was nonsense and effeminacy to keep myself a prisoner any longer.
    So I descended to the sitting-room, and finding nobody there, proceeded
    to the barn, whence I had already heard Zenobia's voice, and along with
    it a girlish laugh which was not so certainly recognizable.  Arriving
    at the spot, it a little surprised me to discover that these merry
    outbreaks came from Priscilla.

    The two had been a-maying together.  They had found anemones in
    abundance, houstonias by the handful, some columbines, a few
    long-stalked violets, and a quantity of white everlasting flowers, and
    had filled up their basket with the delicate spray of shrubs and trees.
    None were prettier than the maple twigs, the leaf of which looks like a
    scarlet bud in May, and like a plate of vegetable gold in October.
    Zenobia, who showed no conscience in such matters, had also rifled a
    cherry-tree of one of its blossomed boughs, and, with all this variety
    of sylvan ornament, had been decking out Priscilla. Being done with a
    good deal of taste, it made her look more charming than I should have
    thought possible, with my recollection of the wan, frost-nipt girl, as
    heretofore described.  Nevertheless, among those fragrant blossoms, and
    conspicuously, too, had been stuck a weed of evil odor and ugly aspect,
    which, as soon as I detected it, destroyed the effect of all the rest.
    There was a gleam of latent mischief--not to call it deviltry--in
    Zenobia's eye, which seemed to indicate a slightly malicious purpose in
    the arrangement.

    As for herself, she scorned the rural buds and leaflets, and wore
    nothing but her invariable flower of the tropics.

    "What do you think of Priscilla now, Mr. Coverdale?" asked she,
    surveying her as a child does its doll.  "Is not she worth a verse or
    two?"

    "There is only one thing amiss," answered I. Zenobia laughed, and flung
    the malignant weed away.

    "Yes; she deserves some verses now," said I, "and from a better poet
    than myself.  She is the very picture of the New England spring;
    subdued in tint and rather cool, but with a capacity of sunshine, and
    bringing us a few Alpine blossoms, as earnest of something richer,
    though hardly more beautiful, hereafter.  The best type of her is one
    of those anemones."

    "What I find most singular in Priscilla, as her health improves,"
    observed Zenobia, "is her wildness.  Such a quiet little body as she
    seemed, one would not have expected that.  Why, as we strolled the
    woods together, I could hardly keep her from scrambling up the trees,
    like a squirrel.  She has never before known what it is to live in the
    free air, and so it intoxicates her as if she were sipping wine. And
    she thinks it such a paradise here, and all of us, particularly Mr.
    Hollingsworth and myself, such angels!  It is quite ridiculous, and
    provokes one's malice almost, to see a creature so happy, especially a
    feminine creature."

    "They are always happier than male creatures," said I.

    "You must correct that opinion, Mr. Coverdale," replied Zenobia
    contemptuously, "or I shall think you lack the poetic insight.  Did you
    ever see a happy woman in your life?  Of course, I do not mean a girl,
    like Priscilla and a thousand others,--for they are all alike, while on
    the sunny side of experience,--but a grown woman.  How can she be
    happy, after discovering that fate has assigned her but one single
    event, which she must contrive to make the substance of her whole life?
    A man has his choice of innumerable events."

    "A woman, I suppose," answered I, "by constant repetition of her one
    event, may compensate for the lack of variety."

    "Indeed!" said Zenobia.

    While we were talking, Priscilla caught sight of Hollingsworth at a
    distance, in a blue frock, and with a hoe over his shoulder, returning
    from the field.  She immediately set out to meet him, running and
    skipping, with spirits as light as the breeze of the May morning, but
    with limbs too little exercised to be quite responsive; she clapped her
    hands, too, with great exuberance of gesture, as is the custom of young
    girls when their electricity overcharges them. But, all at once, midway
    to Hollingsworth, she paused, looked round about her, towards the
    river, the road, the woods, and back towards us, appearing to listen,
    as if she heard some one calling her name, and knew not precisely in
    what direction.

    "Have you bewitched her?"  I exclaimed.

    "It is no sorcery of mine," said Zenobia; "but I have seen the girl do
    that identical thing once or twice before.  Can you imagine what is the
    matter with her?"

    "No; unless," said I, "she has the gift of hearing those 'airy tongues
    that syllable men's names,' which Milton tells about."

    From whatever cause, Priscilla's animation seemed entirely to have
    deserted her.  She seated herself on a rock, and remained there until
    Hollingsworth came up; and when he took her hand and led her back to
    us, she rather resembled my original image of the wan and spiritless
    Priscilla than the flowery May-queen of a few moments ago.  These
    sudden transformations, only to be accounted for by an extreme nervous
    susceptibility, always continued to characterize the girl, though with
    diminished frequency as her health progressively grew more robust.

    I was now on my legs again.  My fit of illness had been an avenue
    between two existences; the low-arched and darksome doorway, through
    which I crept out of a life of old conventionalisms, on my hands and
    knees, as it were, and gained admittance into the freer region that lay
    beyond.  In this respect, it was like death.  And, as with death, too,
    it was good to have gone through it.  No otherwise could I have rid
    myself of a thousand follies, fripperies, prejudices, habits, and other
    such worldly dust as inevitably settles upon the crowd along the broad
    highway, giving them all one sordid aspect before noon-time, however
    freshly they may have begun their pilgrimage in the dewy morning.  The
    very substance upon my bones had not been fit to live with in any
    better, truer, or more energetic mode than that to which I was
    accustomed.  So it was taken off me and flung aside, like any other
    worn-out or unseasonable garment; and, after shivering a little while
    in my skeleton, I began to be clothed anew, and much more
    satisfactorily than in my previous suit.  In literal and physical
    truth, I was quite another man.  I had a lively sense of the exultation
    with which the spirit will enter on the next stage of its eternal
    progress after leaving the heavy burden of its mortality in an early
    grave, with as little concern for what may become of it as now affected
    me for the flesh which I had lost.

    Emerging into the genial sunshine, I half fancied that the labors of
    the brotherhood had already realized some of Fourier's predictions.
    Their enlightened culture of the soil, and the virtues with which they
    sanctified their life, had begun to produce an effect upon the material
    world and its climate.  In my new enthusiasm, man looked strong and
    stately,--and woman, oh, how beautiful!--and the earth a green garden,
    blossoming with many-colored delights.  Thus Nature, whose laws I had
    broken in various artificial ways, comported herself towards me as a
    strict but loving mother, who uses the rod upon her little boy for his
    naughtiness, and then gives him a smile, a kiss, and some pretty
    playthings to console the urchin for her severity.

    In the interval of my seclusion, there had been a number of recruits to
    our little army of saints and martyrs.  They were mostly individuals
    who had gone through such an experience as to disgust them with
    ordinary pursuits, but who were not yet so old, nor had suffered so
    deeply, as to lose their faith in the better time to come. On comparing
    their minds one with another they often discovered that this idea of a
    Community had been growing up, in silent and unknown sympathy, for
    years.  Thoughtful, strongly lined faces were among them; sombre brows,
    but eyes that did not require spectacles, unless prematurely dimmed by
    the student's lamplight, and hair that seldom showed a thread of
    silver.  Age, wedded to the past, incrusted over with a stony layer of
    habits, and retaining nothing fluid in its possibilities, would have
    been absurdly out of place in an enterprise like this.  Youth, too, in
    its early dawn, was hardly more adapted to our purpose; for it would
    behold the morning radiance of its own spirit beaming over the very
    same spots of withered grass and barren sand whence most of us had seen
    it vanish.  We had very young people with us, it is true,--downy lads,
    rosy girls in their first teens, and children of all heights above
    one's knee; but these had chiefly been sent hither for education, which
    it was one of the objects and methods of our institution to supply.
    Then we had boarders, from town and elsewhere, who lived with us in a
    familiar way, sympathized more or less in our theories, and sometimes
    shared in our labors.

    On the whole, it was a society such as has seldom met together; nor,
    perhaps, could it reasonably be expected to hold together long. Persons
    of marked individuality--crooked sticks, as some of us might be
    called--are not exactly the easiest to bind up into a fagot.  But, so
    long as our union should subsist, a man of intellect and feeling, with
    a free nature in him, might have sought far and near without finding so
    many points of attraction as would allure him hitherward. We were of
    all creeds and opinions, and generally tolerant of all, on every
    imaginable subject.  Our bond, it seems to me, was not affirmative, but
    negative.  We had individually found one thing or another to quarrel
    with in our past life, and were pretty well agreed as to the
    inexpediency of lumbering along with the old system any further.  As to
    what should be substituted, there was much less unanimity.  We did not
    greatly care--at least, I never did--for the written constitution under
    which our millennium had commenced.  My hope was, that, between theory
    and practice, a true and available mode of life might be struck out;
    and that, even should we ultimately fail, the months or years spent in
    the trial would not have been wasted, either as regarded passing
    enjoyment, or the experience which makes men wise.

    Arcadians though we were, our costume bore no resemblance to the
    beribboned doublets, silk breeches and stockings, and slippers fastened
    with artificial roses, that distinguish the pastoral people of poetry
    and the stage.  In outward show, I humbly conceive, we looked rather
    like a gang of beggars, or banditti, than either a company of honest
    laboring-men, or a conclave of philosophers. Whatever might be our
    points of difference, we all of us seemed to have come to Blithedale
    with the one thrifty and laudable idea of wearing out our old clothes.
    Such garments as had an airing, whenever we strode afield!  Coats with
    high collars and with no collars, broad-skirted or swallow-tailed, and
    with the waist at every point between the hip and arm-pit; pantaloons
    of a dozen successive epochs, and greatly defaced at the knees by the
    humiliations of the wearer before his lady-love,--in short, we were a
    living epitome of defunct fashions, and the very raggedest presentment
    of men who had seen better days.  It was gentility in tatters.  Often
    retaining a scholarlike or clerical air, you might have taken us for
    the denizens of Grub Street, intent on getting a comfortable livelihood
    by agricultural labor; or Coleridge's projected Pantisocracy in full
    experiment; or Candide and his motley associates at work in their
    cabbage garden; or anything else that was miserably out at elbows, and
    most clumsily patched in the rear.  We might have been sworn comrades
    to Falstaff's ragged regiment.  Little skill as we boasted in other
    points of husbandry, every mother's son of us would have served
    admirably to stick up for a scarecrow.  And the worst of the matter
    was, that the first energetic movement essential to one downright
    stroke of real labor was sure to put a finish to these poor
    habiliments.  So we gradually flung them all aside, and took to honest
    homespun and linsey-woolsey, as preferable, on the whole, to the plan
    recommended, I think, by Virgil,--"Ara nudus; sere nudus, "--which as
    Silas Foster remarked, when I translated the maxim, would be apt to
    astonish the women-folks.

    After a reasonable training, the yeoman life throve well with us. Our
    faces took the sunburn kindly; our chests gained in compass, and our
    shoulders in breadth and squareness; our great brown fists looked as if
    they had never been capable of kid gloves.  The plough, the hoe, the
    scythe, and the hay-fork grew familiar to our grasp.  The oxen
    responded to our voices.  We could do almost as fair a day's work as
    Silas Foster himself, sleep dreamlessly after it, and awake at daybreak
    with only a little stiffness of the joints, which was usually quite
    gone by breakfast-time.

    To be sure, our next neighbors pretended to be incredulous as to our
    real proficiency in the business which we had taken in hand.  They told
    slanderous fables about our inability to yoke our own oxen, or to drive
    them afield when yoked, or to release the poor brutes from their
    conjugal bond at nightfall.  They had the face to say, too, that the
    cows laughed at our awkwardness at milking-time, and invariably kicked
    over the pails; partly in consequence of our putting the stool on the
    wrong side, and partly because, taking offence at the whisking of their
    tails, we were in the habit of holding these natural fly-flappers with
    one hand and milking with the other.  They further averred that we hoed
    up whole acres of Indian corn and other crops, and drew the earth
    carefully about the weeds; and that we raised five hundred tufts of
    burdock, mistaking them for cabbages; and that by dint of unskilful
    planting few of our seeds ever came up at all, or, if they did come up,
    it was stern-foremost; and that we spent the better part of the month
    of June in reversing a field of beans, which had thrust themselves out
    of the ground in this unseemly way.  They quoted it as nothing more
    than an ordinary occurrence for one or other of us to crop off two or
    three fingers, of a morning, by our clumsy use of the hay-cutter.
    Finally, and as an ultimate catastrophe, these mendacious rogues
    circulated a report that we communitarians were exterminated, to the
    last man, by severing ourselves asunder with the sweep of our own
    scythes! and that the world had lost nothing by this little accident.

    But this was pure envy and malice on the part of the neighboring
    farmers.  The peril of our new way of life was not lest we should fail
    in becoming practical agriculturists, but that we should probably cease
    to be anything else.  While our enterprise lay all in theory, we had
    pleased ourselves with delectable visions of the spiritualization of
    labor.  It was to be our form of prayer and ceremonial of worship.
    Each stroke of the hoe was to uncover some aromatic root of wisdom,
    heretofore hidden from the sun.  Pausing in the field, to let the wind
    exhale the moisture from our foreheads, we were to look upward, and
    catch glimpses into the far-off soul of truth.  In this point of view,
    matters did not turn out quite so well as we anticipated.  It is very
    true that, sometimes, gazing casually around me, out of the midst of my
    toil, I used to discern a richer picturesqueness in the visible scene
    of earth and sky.  There was, at such moments, a novelty, an unwonted
    aspect, on the face of Nature, as if she had been taken by surprise and
    seen at unawares, with no opportunity to put off her real look, and
    assume the mask with which she mysteriously hides herself from mortals.
    But this was all.  The clods of earth, which we so constantly belabored
    and turned over and over, were never etherealized into thought.  Our
    thoughts, on the contrary, were fast becoming cloddish.  Our labor
    symbolized nothing, and left us mentally sluggish in the dusk of the
    evening. Intellectual activity is incompatible with any large amount of
    bodily exercise.  The yeoman and the scholar--the yeoman and the man of
    finest moral culture, though not the man of sturdiest sense and
    integrity--are two distinct individuals, and can never be melted or
    welded into one substance.

    Zenobia soon saw this truth, and gibed me about it, one evening, as
    Hollingsworth and I lay on the grass, after a hard day's work.

    "I am afraid you did not make a song today, while loading the
    hay-cart," said she, "as Burns did, when he was reaping barley."

    "Burns never made a song in haying-time," I answered very positively.
    "He was no poet while a farmer, and no farmer while a poet."

    "And on the whole, which of the two characters do you like best?" asked
    Zenobia.  "For I have an idea that you cannot combine them any better
    than Burns did.  Ah, I see, in my mind's eye, what sort of an
    individual you are to be, two or three years hence.  Grim Silas Foster
    is your prototype, with his palm of sole-leather, and his joints of
    rusty iron (which all through summer keep the stiffness of what he
            calls his winter's rheumatize), and his brain of--I don't know what his
    brain is made of, unless it be a Savoy cabbage; but yours may be
    cauliflower, as a rather more delicate variety.  Your physical man will
    be transmuted into salt beef and fried pork, at the rate, I should
    imagine, of a pound and a half a day; that being about the average
    which we find necessary in the kitchen.  You will make your toilet for
    the day (still like this delightful Silas Foster) by rinsing your
    fingers and the front part of your face in a little tin pan of water at
    the doorstep, and teasing your hair with a wooden pocket-comb before a
    seven-by-nine-inch looking-glass.  Your only pastime will be to smoke
    some very vile tobacco in the black stump of a pipe."

    "Pray, spare me!" cried I. "But the pipe is not Silas's only mode of
    solacing himself with the weed."

    "Your literature," continued Zenobia, apparently delighted with her
    description, "will be the 'Farmer's Almanac;' for I observe our friend
    Foster never gets so far as the newspaper.  When you happen to sit
    down, at odd moments, you will fall asleep, and make nasal proclamation
    of the fact, as he does; and invariably you must be jogged out of a
    nap, after supper, by the future Mrs. Coverdale, and persuaded to go
    regularly to bed.  And on Sundays, when you put on a blue coat with
    brass buttons, you will think of nothing else to do but to go and
    lounge over the stone walls and rail fences, and stare at the corn
    growing.  And you will look with a knowing eye at oxen, and will have a
    tendency to clamber over into pigsties, and feel of the hogs, and give
    a guess how much they will weigh after you shall have stuck and dressed
    them.  Already I have noticed you begin to speak through your nose, and
    with a drawl.  Pray, if you really did make any poetry to-day, let us
    hear it in that kind of utterance!"

    "Coverdale has given up making verses now," said Hollingsworth, who
    never had the slightest appreciation of my poetry.  "Just think of him
    penning a sonnet with a fist like that!  There is at least this good in
    a life of toil, that it takes the nonsense and fancy-work out of a man,
    and leaves nothing but what truly belongs to him.  If a farmer can make
    poetry at the plough-tail, it must be because his nature insists on it;
    and if that be the case, let him make it, in Heaven's name!"

    "And how is it with you?" asked Zenobia, in a different voice; for she
    never laughed at Hollingsworth, as she often did at me.  "You, I think,
    cannot have ceased to live a life of thought and feeling."

    "I have always been in earnest," answered Hollingsworth.  "I have
    hammered thought out of iron, after heating the iron in my heart!  It
    matters little what my outward toil may be.  Were I a slave, at the
    bottom of a mine, I should keep the same purpose, the same faith in its
    ultimate accomplishment, that I do now.  Miles Coverdale is not in
    earnest, either as a poet or a laborer."

    "You give me hard measure, Hollingsworth," said I, a little hurt.  "I
    have kept pace with you in the field; and my bones feel as if I had
    been in earnest, whatever may be the case with my brain!"

    "I cannot conceive," observed Zenobia with great emphasis,--and, no
    doubt, she spoke fairly the feeling of the moment,--"I cannot conceive
    of being so continually as Mr. Coverdale is within the sphere of a
    strong and noble nature, without being strengthened and ennobled by its
    influence!"

    This amiable remark of the fair Zenobia confirmed me in what I had
    already begun to suspect, that Hollingsworth, like many other
    illustrious prophets, reformers, and philanthropists, was likely to
    make at least two proselytes among the women to one among the men.
    Zenobia and Priscilla!  These, I believe (unless my unworthy self might
            be reckoned for a third), were the only disciples of his mission; and I
    spent a great deal of time, uselessly, in trying to conjecture what
    Hollingsworth meant to do with them--and they with him!


