Hollingsworth and I--we had been hoeing potatoes, that forenoon, while
the rest of the fraternity were engaged in a distant quarter of the
farm--sat under a clump of maples, eating our eleven o'clock lunch,
    when we saw a stranger approaching along the edge of the field. He had
    admitted himself from the roadside through a turnstile, and seemed to
    have a purpose of speaking with us.

    And, by the bye, we were favored with many visits at Blithedale,
    especially from people who sympathized with our theories, and perhaps
    held themselves ready to unite in our actual experiment as soon as
    there should appear a reliable promise of its success.  It was rather
    ludicrous, indeed (to me, at least, whose enthusiasm had insensibly
            been exhaled together with the perspiration of many a hard day's toil),
    it was absolutely funny, therefore, to observe what a glory was shed
    about our life and labors, in the imaginations of these longing
    proselytes.  In their view, we were as poetical as Arcadians, besides
    being as practical as the hardest-fisted husbandmen in Massachusetts.
    We did not, it is true, spend much time in piping to our sheep, or
    warbling our innocent loves to the sisterhood.  But they gave us credit
    for imbuing the ordinary rustic occupations with a kind of religious
    poetry, insomuch that our very cow-yards and pig-sties were as
    delightfully fragrant as a flower garden.  Nothing used to please me
    more than to see one of these lay enthusiasts snatch up a hoe, as they
    were very prone to do, and set to work with a vigor that perhaps
    carried him through about a dozen ill-directed strokes.  Men are
    wonderfully soon satisfied, in this day of shameful bodily enervation,
    when, from one end of life to the other, such multitudes never taste
    the sweet weariness that follows accustomed toil.  I seldom saw the new
    enthusiasm that did not grow as flimsy and flaccid as the proselyte's
    moistened shirt-collar, with a quarter of an hour's active labor under
    a July sun.

    But the person now at hand had not at all the air of one of these
    amiable visionaries.  He was an elderly man, dressed rather shabbily,
    yet decently enough, in a gray frock-coat, faded towards a brown hue,
    and wore a broad-brimmed white hat, of the fashion of several years
    gone by.  His hair was perfect silver, without a dark thread in the
    whole of it; his nose, though it had a scarlet tip, by no means
    indicated the jollity of which a red nose is the generally admitted
    symbol.  He was a subdued, undemonstrative old man, who would doubtless
    drink a glass of liquor, now and then, and probably more than was good
    for him,--not, however, with a purpose of undue exhilaration, but in
    the hope of bringing his spirits up to the ordinary level of the
    world's cheerfulness.  Drawing nearer, there was a shy look about him,
    as if he were ashamed of his poverty, or, at any rate, for some reason
    or other, would rather have us glance at him sidelong than take a full
    front view.  He had a queer appearance of hiding himself behind the
    patch on his left eye.

    "I know this old gentleman," said I to Hollingsworth, as we sat
    observing him; "that is, I have met him a hundred times in town, and
    have often amused my fancy with wondering what he was before he came to
    be what he is.  He haunts restaurants and such places, and has an odd
    way of lurking in corners or getting behind a door whenever
    practicable, and holding out his hand with some little article in it
    which he wishes you to buy.  The eye of the world seems to trouble him,
    although he necessarily lives so much in it.  I never expected to see
    him in an open field."

    "Have you learned anything of his history?" asked Hollingsworth.

    "Not a circumstance," I answered; "but there must be something curious
    in it.  I take him to be a harmless sort of a person, and a tolerably
    honest one; but his manners, being so furtive, remind me of those of a
    rat,--a rat without the mischief, the fierce eye, the teeth to bite
    with, or the desire to bite.  See, now!  He means to skulk along that
    fringe of bushes, and approach us on the other side of our clump of
    maples."

    We soon heard the old man's velvet tread on the grass, indicating that
    he had arrived within a few feet of where we Sat.

    "Good-morning, Mr. Moodie," said Hollingsworth, addressing the stranger
    as an acquaintance; "you must have had a hot and tiresome walk from the
    city.  Sit down, and take a morsel of our bread and cheese."

    The visitor made a grateful little murmur of acquiescence, and sat down
    in a spot somewhat removed; so that, glancing round, I could see his
    gray pantaloons and dusty shoes, while his upper part was mostly hidden
    behind the shrubbery.  Nor did he come forth from this retirement
    during the whole of the interview that followed.  We handed him such
    food as we had, together with a brown jug of molasses and water (would
            that it had been brandy, or some thing better, for the sake of his
            chill old heart!), like priests offering dainty sacrifice to an
    enshrined and invisible idol.  I have no idea that he really lacked
    sustenance; but it was quite touching, nevertheless, to hear him
    nibbling away at our crusts.

    "Mr. Moodie," said I, "do you remember selling me one of those very
    pretty little silk purses, of which you seem to have a monopoly in the
    market?  I keep it to this day, I can assure you."

    "Ah, thank you," said our guest.  "Yes, Mr. Coverdale, I used to sell a
    good many of those little purses."

    He spoke languidly, and only those few words, like a watch with an
    inelastic spring, that just ticks a moment or two and stops again. He
    seemed a very forlorn old man.  In the wantonness of youth, strength,
    and comfortable condition,--making my prey of people's individualities,
    as my custom was,--I tried to identify my mind with the old fellow's,
    and take his view of the world, as if looking through a smoke-blackened
    glass at the sun.  It robbed the landscape of all its life.  Those
    pleasantly swelling slopes of our farm, descending towards the wide
    meadows, through which sluggishly circled the brimful tide of the
    Charles, bathing the long sedges on its hither and farther shores; the
    broad, sunny gleam over the winding water; that peculiar
    picturesqueness of the scene where capes and headlands put themselves
    boldly forth upon the perfect level of the meadow, as into a green
    lake, with inlets between the promontories; the shadowy woodland, with
    twinkling showers of light falling into its depths; the sultry
    heat-vapor, which rose everywhere like incense, and in which my soul
    delighted, as indicating so rich a fervor in the passionate day, and in
    the earth that was burning with its love,--I beheld all these things as
    through old Moodie's eyes.  When my eyes are dimmer than they have yet
    come to be, I will go thither again, and see if I did not catch the
    tone of his mind aright, and if the cold and lifeless tint of his
    perceptions be not then repeated in my own.

    Yet it was unaccountable to myself, the interest that I felt in him.

    "Have you any objection," said I, "to telling me who made those little
    purses?"

    "Gentlemen have often asked me that," said Moodie slowly; "but I shake
    my head, and say little or nothing, and creep out of the way as well as
    I can.  I am a man of few words; and if gentlemen were to be told one
    thing, they would be very apt, I suppose, to ask me another. But it
    happens just now, Mr. Coverdale, that you can tell me more about the
    maker of those little purses than I can tell you."

    "Why do you trouble him with needless questions, Coverdale?"
    interrupted Hollingsworth.  "You must have known, long ago, that it was
    Priscilla.  And so, my good friend, you have come to see her? Well, I
    am glad of it.  You will find her altered very much for the better,
    since that winter evening when you put her into my charge. Why,
    Priscilla has a bloom in her cheeks, now!"

    "Has my pale little girl a bloom?" repeated Moodie with a kind of slow
    wonder.  "Priscilla with a bloom in her cheeks!  Ah, I am afraid I
    shall not know my little girl.  And is she happy?"

    "Just as happy as a bird," answered Hollingsworth.

    "Then, gentlemen," said our guest apprehensively, "I don't think it
    well for me to go any farther.  I crept hitherward only to ask about
    Priscilla; and now that you have told me such good news, perhaps I can
    do no better than to creep back again.  If she were to see this old
    face of mine, the child would remember some very sad times which we
    have spent together.  Some very sad times, indeed!  She has forgotten
    them, I know,--them and me,--else she could not be so happy, nor have a
    bloom in her cheeks.  Yes--yes--yes," continued he, still with the same
    torpid utterance; "with many thanks to you, Mr. Hollingsworth, I will
    creep back to town again."

    "You shall do no such thing, Mr. Moodie," said Hollingsworth bluffly.
    "Priscilla often speaks of you; and if there lacks anything to make her
    cheeks bloom like two damask roses, I'll venture to say it is just the
    sight of your face.  Come,--we will go and find her."

    "Mr. Hollingsworth!" said the old man in his hesitating way.

    "Well," answered Hollingsworth.

    "Has there been any call for Priscilla?" asked Moodie; and though his
    face was hidden from us, his tone gave a sure indication of the
    mysterious nod and wink with which he put the question.  "You know, I
    think, sir, what I mean."

    "I have not the remotest suspicion what you mean, Mr. Moodie," replied
    Hollingsworth; "nobody, to my knowledge, has called for Priscilla,
    except yourself.  But come; we are losing time, and I have several
    things to say to you by the way."

    "And, Mr. Hollingsworth!" repeated Moodie.

    "Well, again!" cried my friend rather impatiently.  "What now?"

    "There is a lady here," said the old man; and his voice lost some of
    its wearisome hesitation.  "You will account it a very strange matter
    for me to talk about; but I chanced to know this lady when she was but
    a little child.  If I am rightly informed, she has grown to be a very
    fine woman, and makes a brilliant figure in the world, with her beauty,
    and her talents, and her noble way of spending her riches.  I should
    recognize this lady, so people tell me, by a magnificent flower in her
    hair."

    "What a rich tinge it gives to his colorless ideas, when he speaks of
    Zenobia!"  I whispered to Hollingsworth.  "But how can there possibly
    be any interest or connecting link between him and her?"

    "The old man, for years past," whispered Hollingsworth, "has been a
    little out of his right mind, as you probably see."

    "What I would inquire," resumed Moodie, "is whether this beautiful lady
    is kind to my poor Priscilla."

    "Very kind," said Hollingsworth.

    "Does she love her?" asked Moodie.

    "It should seem so," answered my friend.  "They are always together."

    "Like a gentlewoman and her maid-servant, I fancy?" suggested the old
    man.

    There was something so singular in his way of saying this, that I could
    not resist the impulse to turn quite round, so as to catch a glimpse of
    his face, almost imagining that I should see another person than old
    Moodie.  But there he sat, with the patched side of his face towards me.

    "Like an elder and younger sister, rather," replied Hollingsworth.

    "Ah!" said Moodie more complacently, for his latter tones had harshness
    and acidity in them,--"it would gladden my old heart to witness that.
    If one thing would make me happier than another, Mr. Hollingsworth, it
    would be to see that beautiful lady holding my little girl by the hand."

    "Come along," said Hollingsworth, "and perhaps you may."

    After a little more delay on the part of our freakish visitor, they set
    forth together, old Moodie keeping a step or two behind Hollingsworth,
    so that the latter could not very conveniently look him in the face.  I
    remained under the tuft of maples, doing my utmost to draw an inference
    from the scene that had just passed.  In spite of Hollingsworth's
    off-hand explanation, it did not strike me that our strange guest was
    really beside himself, but only that his mind needed screwing up, like
    an instrument long out of tune, the strings of which have ceased to
    vibrate smartly and sharply. Methought it would be profitable for us,
    projectors of a happy life, to welcome this old gray shadow, and
    cherish him as one of us, and let him creep about our domain, in order
    that he might be a little merrier for our sakes, and we, sometimes, a
    little sadder for his. Human destinies look ominous without some
    perceptible intermixture of the sable or the gray.  And then, too,
    should any of our fraternity grow feverish with an over-exulting sense
    of prosperity, it would be a sort of cooling regimen to slink off into
    the woods, and spend an hour, or a day, or as many days as might be
    requisite to the cure, in uninterrupted communion with this deplorable
    old Moodie!

    Going homeward to dinner, I had a glimpse of him, behind the trunk of a
    tree, gazing earnestly towards a particular window of the farmhouse;
    and by and by Priscilla appeared at this window, playfully drawing
    along Zenobia, who looked as bright as the very day that was blazing
    down upon us, only not, by many degrees, so well advanced towards her
    noon.  I was convinced that this pretty sight must have been purposely
    arranged by Priscilla for the old man to see.  But either the girl held
    her too long, or her fondness was resented as too great a freedom; for
    Zenobia suddenly put Priscilla decidedly away, and gave her a haughty
    look, as from a mistress to a dependant.  Old Moodie shook his head;
    and again and again I saw him shake it, as he withdrew along the road;
    and at the last point whence the farmhouse was visible, he turned and
    shook his uplifted staff.


