Well, I betook myself away, and wandered up and down, like an exorcised
spirit that had been driven from its old haunts after a mighty
struggle.  It takes down the solitary pride of man, beyond most other
things, to find the impracticability of flinging aside affections that
have grown irksome.  The bands that were silken once are apt to become
iron fetters when we desire to shake them off.  Our souls, after all,
     are not our own.  We convey a property in them to those with whom we
     associate; but to what extent can never be known, until we feel the
     tug, the agony, of our abortive effort to resume an exclusive sway over
     ourselves.  Thus, in all the weeks of my absence, my thoughts
     continually reverted back, brooding over the bygone months, and
     bringing up incidents that seemed hardly to have left a trace of
     themselves in their passage.  I spent painful hours in recalling these
     trifles, and rendering them more misty and unsubstantial than at first
     by the quantity of speculative musing thus kneaded in with them.
     Hollingsworth, Zenobia, Priscilla!  These three had absorbed my life
     into themselves.  Together with an inexpressible longing to know their
     fortunes, there was likewise a morbid resentment of my own pain, and a
     stubborn reluctance to come again within their sphere.

     All that I learned of them, therefore, was comprised in a few brief and
     pungent squibs, such as the newspapers were then in the habit of
     bestowing on our socialist enterprise.  There was one paragraph, which
     if I rightly guessed its purport bore reference to Zenobia, but was too
     darkly hinted to convey even thus much of certainty. Hollingsworth,
     too, with his philanthropic project, afforded the penny-a-liners a
     theme for some savage and bloody minded jokes; and, considerably to my
     surprise, they affected me with as much indignation as if we had still
     been friends.

     Thus passed several weeks; time long enough for my brown and
     toil-hardened hands to reaccustom themselves to gloves.  Old habits,
     such as were merely external, returned upon me with wonderful
     promptitude.  My superficial talk, too, assumed altogether a worldly
     tone.  Meeting former acquaintances, who showed themselves inclined to
     ridicule my heroic devotion to the cause of human welfare, I spoke of
     the recent phase of my life as indeed fair matter for a jest.  But, I
     also gave them to understand that it was, at most, only an experiment,
     on which I had staked no valuable amount of hope or fear. It had
     enabled me to pass the summer in a novel and agreeable way, had
     afforded me some grotesque specimens of artificial simplicity, and
     could not, therefore, so far as I was concerned, be reckoned a failure.
     In no one instance, however, did I voluntarily speak of my three
     friends.  They dwelt in a profounder region.  The more I consider
     myself as I then was, the more do I recognize how deeply my connection
     with those three had affected all my being.

     As it was already the epoch of annihilated space, I might in the time I
     was away from Blithedale have snatched a glimpse at England, and been
     back again.  But my wanderings were confined within a very limited
     sphere.  I hopped and fluttered, like a bird with a string about its
     leg, gyrating round a small circumference, and keeping up a restless
     activity to no purpose.  Thus it was still in our familiar
     Massachusetts--in one of its white country villages--that I must next
     particularize an incident.

     The scene was one of those lyceum halls, of which almost every village
     has now its own, dedicated to that sober and pallid, or rather
     drab-colored, mode of winter-evening entertainment, the lecture.  Of
     late years this has come strangely into vogue, when the natural
     tendency of things would seem to be to substitute lettered for oral
     methods of addressing the public.  But, in halls like this, besides the
     winter course of lectures, there is a rich and varied series of other
     exhibitions.  Hither comes the ventriloquist, with all his mysterious
     tongues; the thaumaturgist, too, with his miraculous transformations of
     plates, doves, and rings, his pancakes smoking in your hat, and his
     cellar of choice liquors represented in one small bottle.  Here, also,
     the itinerant professor instructs separate classes of ladies and
     gentlemen in physiology, and demonstrates his lessons by the aid of
     real skeletons, and manikins in wax, from Paris.  Here is to be heard
     the choir of Ethiopian melodists, and to be seen the diorama of Moscow
     or Bunker Hill, or the moving panorama of the Chinese wall.  Here is
     displayed the museum of wax figures, illustrating the wide catholicism
     of earthly renown, by mixing up heroes and statesmen, the pope and the
     Mormon prophet, kings, queens, murderers, and beautiful ladies; every
     sort of person, in short, except authors, of whom I never beheld even
     the most famous done in wax.  And here, in this many-purposed hall
     (unless the selectmen of the village chance to have more than their
      share of the Puritanism, which, however diversified with later
      patchwork, still gives its prevailing tint to New England
      character),--here the company of strolling players sets up its little
     stage, and claims patronage for the legitimate drama.

     But, on the autumnal evening which I speak of, a number of printed
     handbills--stuck up in the bar-room, and on the sign-post of the hotel,
     and on the meeting-house porch, and distributed largely through the
     village--had promised the inhabitants an interview with that celebrated
     and hitherto inexplicable phenomenon, the Veiled Lady!

     The hall was fitted up with an amphitheatrical descent of seats towards
     a platform, on which stood a desk, two lights, a stool, and a capacious
     antique chair.  The audience was of a generally decent and respectable
     character: old farmers, in their Sunday black coats, with shrewd, hard,
     sun-dried faces, and a cynical humor, oftener than any other
     expression, in their eyes; pretty girls, in many-colored attire; pretty
     young men,--the schoolmaster, the lawyer, or student at law, the
     shop-keeper,--all looking rather suburban than rural.  In these days,
     there is absolutely no rusticity, except when the actual labor of the
     soil leaves its earth-mould on the person.  There was likewise a
     considerable proportion of young and middle-aged women, many of them
     stern in feature, with marked foreheads, and a very definite line of
     eyebrow; a type of womanhood in which a bold intellectual development
     seems to be keeping pace with the progressive delicacy of the physical
     constitution.  Of all these people I took note, at first, according to
     my custom.  But I ceased to do so the moment that my eyes fell on an
     individual who sat two or three seats below me, immovable, apparently
     deep in thought, with his back, of course, towards me, and his face
     turned steadfastly upon the platform.

     After sitting awhile in contemplation of this person's familiar
     contour, I was irresistibly moved to step over the intervening benches,
     lay my hand on his shoulder, put my mouth close to his ear, and address
     him in a sepulchral, melodramatic whisper: "Hollingsworth! where have
     you left Zenobia?"

     His nerves, however, were proof against my attack.  He turned half
     around, and looked me in the face with great sad eyes, in which there
     was neither kindness nor resentment, nor any perceptible surprise.

     "Zenobia, when I last saw her," he answered, "was at Blithedale."

     He said no more.  But there was a great deal of talk going on near me,
     among a knot of people who might be considered as representing the
     mysticism, or rather the mystic sensuality, of this singular age. The
     nature of the exhibition that was about to take place had probably
     given the turn to their conversation.

     I heard, from a pale man in blue spectacles, some stranger stories than
     ever were written in a romance; told, too, with a simple, unimaginative
     steadfastness, which was terribly efficacious in compelling the auditor
     to receive them into the category of established facts.  He cited
     instances of the miraculous power of one human being over the will and
     passions of another; insomuch that settled grief was but a shadow
     beneath the influence of a man possessing this potency, and the strong
     love of years melted away like a vapor.  At the bidding of one of these
     wizards, the maiden, with her lover's kiss still burning on her lips,
     would turn from him with icy indifference; the newly made widow would
     dig up her buried heart out of her young husband's grave before the
     sods had taken root upon it; a mother with her babe's milk in her bosom
     would thrust away her child.  Human character was but soft wax in his
     hands; and guilt, or virtue, only the forms into which he should see
     fit to mould it. The religious sentiment was a flame which he could
     blow up with his breath, or a spark that he could utterly extinguish.
     It is unutterable, the horror and disgust with which I listened, and
     saw that, if these things were to be believed, the individual soul was
     virtually annihilated, and all that is sweet and pure in our present
     life debased, and that the idea of man's eternal responsibility was
     made ridiculous, and immortality rendered at once impossible, and not
     worth acceptance.  But I would have perished on the spot sooner than
     believe it.

     The epoch of rapping spirits, and all the wonders that have followed in
     their train,--such as tables upset by invisible agencies, bells
     self-tolled at funerals, and ghostly music performed on
     jew's-harps,--had not yet arrived.  Alas, my countrymen, methinks we
     have fallen on an evil age!  If these phenomena have not humbug at the
     bottom, so much the worse for us.  What can they indicate, in a
     spiritual way, except that the soul of man is descending to a lower
     point than it has ever before reached while incarnate?  We are pursuing
     a downward course in the eternal march, and thus bring ourselves into
     the same range with beings whom death, in requital of their gross and
     evil lives, has degraded below humanity!  To hold intercourse with
     spirits of this order, we must stoop and grovel in some element more
     vile than earthly dust.  These goblins, if they exist at all, are but
     the shadows of past mortality, outcasts, mere refuse stuff, adjudged
     unworthy of the eternal world, and, on the most favorable supposition,
     dwindling gradually into nothingness.  The less we have to say to them
     the better, lest we share their fate!

     The audience now began to be impatient; they signified their desire for
     the entertainment to commence by thump of sticks and stamp of
     boot-heels.  Nor was it a great while longer before, in response to
     their call, there appeared a bearded personage in Oriental robes,
     looking like one of the enchanters of the Arabian Nights.  He came upon
     the platform from a side door, saluted the spectators, not with a
     salaam, but a bow, took his station at the desk, and first blowing his
     nose with a white handkerchief, prepared to speak.  The environment of
     the homely village hall, and the absence of many ingenious contrivances
     of stage effect with which the exhibition had heretofore been set off,
     seemed to bring the artifice of this character more openly upon the
     surface.  No sooner did I behold the bearded enchanter, than, laying my
     hand again on Hollingsworth's shoulder, I whispered in his ear, "Do you
     know him?"

     "I never saw the man before," he muttered, without turning his head.

     But I had seen him three times already.

     Once, on occasion of my first visit to the Veiled Lady; a second time,
     in the wood-path at Blithedale; and lastly, in Zenobia's drawing-room.
     It was Westervelt.  A quick association of ideas made me shudder from
     head to foot; and again, like an evil spirit, bringing up reminiscences
     of a man's sins, I whispered a question in Hollingsworth's ear,--"What
     have you done with Priscilla?"

     He gave a convulsive start, as if I had thrust a knife into him,
     writhed himself round on his seat, glared fiercely into my eyes, but
     answered not a word.

     The Professor began his discourse, explanatory of the psychological
     phenomena, as he termed them, which it was his purpose to exhibit to
     the spectators.  There remains no very distinct impression of it on my
     memory.  It was eloquent, ingenious, plausible, with a delusive show of
     spirituality, yet really imbued throughout with a cold and dead
     materialism.  I shivered, as at a current of chill air issuing out of a
     sepulchral vault, and bringing the smell of corruption along with it.
     He spoke of a new era that was dawning upon the world; an era that
     would link soul to soul, and the present life to what we call futurity,
     with a closeness that should finally convert both worlds into one
     great, mutually conscious brotherhood.  He described (in a strange,
             philosophical guise, with terms of art, as if it were a matter of
             chemical discovery) the agency by which this mighty result was to be
     effected; nor would it have surprised me, had he pretended to hold up a
     portion of his universally pervasive fluid, as he affirmed it to be, in
     a glass phial.

     At the close of his exordium, the Professor beckoned with his
     hand,--once, twice, thrice,--and a figure came gliding upon the
     platform, enveloped in a long veil of silvery whiteness.  It fell about
     her like the texture of a summer cloud, with a kind of vagueness, so
     that the outline of the form beneath it could not be accurately
     discerned. But the movement of the Veiled Lady was graceful, free, and
     unembarrassed, like that of a person accustomed to be the spectacle of
     thousands; or, possibly, a blindfold prisoner within the sphere with
     which this dark earthly magician had surrounded her, she was wholly
     unconscious of being the central object to all those straining eyes.

     Pliant to his gesture (which had even an obsequious courtesy, but at
             the same time a remarkable decisiveness), the figure placed itself in
     the great chair.  Sitting there, in such visible obscurity, it was,
     perhaps, as much like the actual presence of a disembodied spirit as
     anything that stage trickery could devise.  The hushed breathing of the
     spectators proved how high-wrought were their anticipations of the
     wonders to be performed through the medium of this incomprehensible
     creature.  I, too, was in breathless suspense, but with a far different
     presentiment of some strange event at hand.

     "You see before you the Veiled Lady," said the bearded Professor,
     advancing to the verge of the platform.  "By the agency of which I have
     just spoken, she is at this moment in communion with the spiritual
     world.  That silvery veil is, in one sense, an enchantment, having been
     dipped, as it were, and essentially imbued, through the potency of my
     art, with the fluid medium of spirits.  Slight and ethereal as it
     seems, the limitations of time and space have no existence within its
     folds.  This hall--these hundreds of faces, encompassing her within so
     narrow an amphitheatre--are of thinner substance, in her view, than the
     airiest vapor that the clouds are made of.  She beholds the Absolute!"

     As preliminary to other and far more wonderful psychological
     experiments, the exhibitor suggested that some of his auditors should
     endeavor to make the Veiled Lady sensible of their presence by such
     methods--provided only no touch were laid upon her person--as they
     might deem best adapted to that end.  Accordingly, several deep-lunged
     country fellows, who looked as if they might have blown the apparition
     away with a breath, ascended the platform.  Mutually encouraging one
     another, they shouted so close to her ear that the veil stirred like a
     wreath of vanishing mist; they smote upon the floor with bludgeons;
     they perpetrated so hideous a clamor, that methought it might have
     reached, at least, a little way into the eternal sphere.  Finally, with
     the assent of the Professor, they laid hold of the great chair, and
     were startled, apparently, to find it soar upward, as if lighter than
     the air through which it rose.  But the Veiled Lady remained seated and
     motionless, with a composure that was hardly less than awful, because
     implying so immeasurable a distance betwixt her and these rude
     persecutors.

     "These efforts are wholly without avail," observed the Professor, who
     had been looking on with an aspect of serene indifference.  "The roar
     of a battery of cannon would be inaudible to the Veiled Lady.  And yet,
     were I to will it, sitting in this very hall, she could hear the desert
     wind sweeping over the sands as far off as Arabia; the icebergs
     grinding one against the other in the polar seas; the rustle of a leaf
     in an East Indian forest; the lowest whispered breath of the
     bashfullest maiden in the world, uttering the first confession of her
     love.  Nor does there exist the moral inducement, apart from my own
     behest, that could persuade her to lift the silvery veil, or arise out
     of that chair."

     Greatly to the Professor's discomposure, however, just as he spoke
     these words, the Veiled Lady arose.  There was a mysterious tremor that
     shook the magic veil.  The spectators, it may be, imagined that she was
     about to take flight into that invisible sphere, and to the society of
     those purely spiritual beings with whom they reckoned her so near akin.
     Hollingsworth, a moment ago, had mounted the platform, and now stood
     gazing at the figure, with a sad intentness that brought the whole
     power of his great, stern, yet tender soul into his glance.

     "Come," said he, waving his hand towards her.  "You are safe!"

     She threw off the veil, and stood before that multitude of people pale,
     tremulous, shrinking, as if only then had she discovered that a
     thousand eyes were gazing at her.  Poor maiden!  How strangely had she
     been betrayed!  Blazoned abroad as a wonder of the world, and
     performing what were adjudged as miracles,--in the faith of many, a
     seeress and a prophetess; in the harsher judgment of others, a
     mountebank,--she had kept, as I religiously believe, her virgin reserve
     and sanctity of soul throughout it all.  Within that encircling veil,
     though an evil hand had flung it over her, there was as deep a
     seclusion as if this forsaken girl had, all the while, been sitting
     under the shadow of Eliot's pulpit, in the Blithedale woods, at the
     feet of him who now summoned her to the shelter of his arms. And the
     true heart-throb of a woman's affection was too powerful for the
     jugglery that had hitherto environed her.  She uttered a shriek, and
     fled to Hollingsworth, like one escaping from her deadliest enemy, and
     was safe forever.


