{"name": "Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219155156/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/boxcar-children/summary/chapter-10", "summary": "A little more on James Henry Alden: He's very rich. Just in case you didn't catch that from his offer of a $5,000 reward. Also, he's really supportive of young boys and sports, so he sponsors an annual Field Day. It's a very popular event. Field Day involves lots of different kinds of races, but the most popular event is a run called the free-for-all. Anyone can participate, and the prize is $25. So, it's Field Day, and Henry is mowing the lawn. Dr. Moore tells him that he can take the day off to watch the races; Dr. Moore can't stay to watch, so he wants Henry to give him the full report later. Henry decides he doesn't just want to watch, though--he wants to run in the free-for-all. As he changes into his track clothes, a man asks Henry how long he's been training. Most of the people in the race have been training all year. Henry says he didn't train; he's just running for the fun of it. And, they're off. Henry starts off slow because he knows it's going to be a long race. This means he's behind almost everyone else at the beginning. After a while, though, Henry decides to run faster. The crowd begins to pay attention--everyone loves an underdog. Henry passes, like, a million people, until in the end, it comes down to him and one other boy. Henry pulls out the win. Mr. Alden asks Henry for his name. Henry tells a lie of omission: He gives his name as Henry James, which is only his first and middle names. Without Henry realizing, Dr. Moore has watched this happen from the bleachers. He's amused to see Henry shake hands with Mr. Alden. Henry returns to Dr. Moore's and mows the lawn. When the doctor arrives, he lets Henry tell him all about Field Day, never telling the boy that he was there in the bleachers. Back at the boxcar, Jessie has prepared a vegetable dinner. Henry tells them all about Field Day and his big win. Another surprise: Henry brought home some potatoes. Jessie knows how to cook them. Apropos of nothing, Jessie decides that Benny needs to learn how to read. They have some paper and a makeshift pencil made from a charred stick, so the girls try to teach Benny the words \"see\" and \"me.\" This seems ambitious given that Benny hasn't even learned the alphabet. Benny has trouble at first. But, after he thinks Watch is beating him at reading, he tries harder and learns the two words. Then, he learns a few more words. Jessie cooks the potatoes by wrapping them in wet paper and putting them directly in the fire. When she finally rolls them out of the fire, Henry thinks they're burned. They're not burned, though, and the children add some toppings and dinner is served. Benny shows off his new reading skills, then everyone goes to bed.", "analysis": ""}