{"name": "Chapter XIV", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XIV<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>On the way to church one Sunday morning, the governess walks with Miles while Flora walks with Mrs. Grose. The governess wonders why the children are so obedient when she keeps them with her at all times - especially Miles, who dressed up like a little gentleman, seems independent and is just about to begin what the governess calls a \"revolution. PARAGRAPH>Miles suddenly asks the governess when he will go back to school. Though he speaks charmingly, the governess stops short and feels helpless to respond. Miles says that he is a fellow and cannot always be with a lady, even if she is perfect. He says he has been good except for the one night he snuck outside. The governess takes the opportunity to ask him again why he did it, and he says that it was to show her that he could but that he won't do it again. He asks again when he is going back to school. PARAGRAPH>Hoping to put him off until they get into the church, where he cannot ask any more questions, the governess tries to find out why Miles wants to go back to school if he is happy at Bly, and he finally tells her that he wants to see more life and wants his own sort. When the governess suggests that Flora is his own sort, he is offended by the comparison to a \"baby girl,\" which upsets the governess. PARAGRAPH>Miles then asks about his uncle's opinion on his schooling, and the governess lets it slip that the uncle doesn't care. Miles wonders if he can be made to come visit and says he will be the one to make him do so. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The governess's past observations of Miles's silence on the question of school foreshadowed its significance, and in this chapter, it is brought to a head. The governess's lack of action on this matter, separate from the question of ghosts, must make the reader question her responsibility in performing her job. In truth, she has only followed part of her employer's stipulations. She has not bothered him but neither has she dealt with the problem herself, instead choosing to ignore Miles's dismissal from school. Miles's question about going back to school suggests he may not be aware that his dismissal is permanent and may therefore provide evidence of why he has not mentioned it until this point. PARAGRAPH>This chapter provides evidence of the governess's - rather than the ghosts' - desire to possess the children. Logically, Miles should be in school. His uncle had enrolled him at school and clearly intends for him to be there. If there are ghosts at Bly, Miles would be safer away from them at school. The governess has had months in which to find him a new school. And yet, she asks him why he wants to return when in fact he has no reason not to expect to return to school after a summer holiday. PARAGRAPH>The governess's reactions to Miles's reasons for wanting to return illustrate her personal reasons for keeping him at Bly. She is distraught when Miles implies he would be just as happy at school as he is with her at Bly and is confused when he says he wants more of his own sort. To the governess, Miles is a special little angel, matched only by his equally angelic sister. Miles seems to simply refer to wanting to be with other little boys, but the governess's desire to believe that her pupils are special - which thus makes her special - does not allow her to see the obvious. PARAGRAPH>The subject of the uncle, brought up in the previous chapter and here as well, remains an important one in influencing the actions which occur in the remainder of the book. The governess herself says that with Miles's \"revolution,\" \"the curtain rose on the last act of my dreadful drama, and catastrophe was precipitated. Miles's announcement, at the end of the chapter, that he will do something to make his uncle come is the significant decision that will push the catastrophe forward. The governess, though she desires the uncle's approval and had previously imagined him visiting Bly, paradoxically seems terrified that he will actually come - first at Mrs. Grose's suggestion and now at Miles's. Looking at her fear from a psychoanalytic perspective, we must remember that her romantic imaginings about the uncle precipitated her sexual hysteria and that her fears of his tangible presence are intertwined with her fears of Quint as a representation of male sexuality. More so than Miles's desire to see his uncle, the governess's reaction to the boy's decision will be the deciding factor in the coming catastrophe", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411031822/https://www.gradesaver.com/turn-of-the-screw/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-16"}