{"name": "Chapter VIII", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter VIII<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Determined to remain rational about her suspicions, the governess talks with Mrs. Grose in her room late at night. She wonders how, if she made it up, she could have given such detailed descriptions of the two ghosts such that Mrs. Grose was able to identify them. Though Mrs. Grose wants to forget the subject entirely, the governess professes her belief that she will get used to the danger. PARAGRAPH>Upon seeing her pupils the next day, however, she finds it hard to believe that they could be at all evil. Their beautiful, innocent appearance and manner forces her to replay the moment at the lake over in her mind and the reasons for her certainty that Flora saw the ghosts and tried to conceal it from her. Thus suspicious of the children, she sees their increased babbling and playing as means of quelling her worries. PARAGRAPH>Saying that she does not really believe her previous horrible assumptions, the governess subtly elicits more details from Mrs. Grose. She wonders why Mrs. Grose spoke of Miles being bad when he has been a little angel while she has known him. Mrs. Grose explains that while Quint was there, he and Miles were \"perpetually together. Worried, she finally spoke out of her station to Miss Jessel to protest and was told to mind her own business. PARAGRAPH>The governess then begins to badger the housekeeper for clarification. Her many questions bring Mrs. Grose to reveal that she reminded Miles himself that he was a little gentleman and Quint a \"base menial. She also recalls Miles lying about times he had spent with Quint and his denial of knowing anything about Quint and Miss Jessel's relationship. The governess is certain that Miles knew the truth. PARAGRAPH>Launching into the subject of the headmaster's letter, the governess wonders if Miles seems to be an angel now how he was \"a fiend at school\" - and suggests Mrs. Grose should have suspected when she told her of the letter. She deduces that Miles called Mrs. Grose a \"base menial\" but that she forgave him. Trying to allay Mrs. Grose's suspicions that she is returning to her worries about the children, the governess tells her that Miles's bad acts are less than she had worried and that until further evidence arises, she does not accuse the children of anything. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The governess's contradictory thoughts and actions in this chapter reveal her discomfort with ambiguity. She must know if the children are all good or all bad. Looking at Flora's beautiful blue eyes, she is unable to imagine that the children might know about the ghosts and be good. For her, it is all or nothing. Her approach to questioning Mrs. Grose - telling her that she does not believe her previous suspicions were true while at the same time obsessing over and asking for evidence to support them - demonstrates her knowledge that to reveal her true thoughts would alienate the other woman. PARAGRAPH>The conversations between the governess and Mrs. Grose in this chapter may support a view of an antagonistic relationship between the two of them. James's very punctuation - such as dashes at the end of sentence, when the governess interrupts the housekeeper and finishes her sentences - prevent any definitive interpretation of any one speaker's intended meaning. Again, it is the very lack of evidence - the fact that Miles never mentioned Quint's relationship with Miss Jessel - that leads the governess to believe that he did know about it. Once again, she finds affirmation of the children's evilness in their denials. PARAGRAPH>The conflict between the governess and what she perceives as Miles's badness is at heart an issue of class. When asked what Miles did that warranted being called bad, Mrs. Grose describes how he spent many hours with Quint, though \"she liked to see young gentleman not forget their station. Miles refusal to obey her flouts the distinctions of class and reminds the housekeeper of her own position as a \"base menial\" - the words of the governess, who is also consorting with a servant below her station. Some critics suggest that Miles refusal to adhere to Victorian notions of class may have been what got him thrown out of school. PARAGRAPH>Clearly, class transgression is the most obvious element that makes the hours Miles spent \"quite as if Quint were his tutor\" abhorrent to the governess. Additionally, this chapter is one others have used to suggest Miles's corruption was actually an inappropriate homosexual relationship with Quint in the hours they were together. Just what Miles learned from Quint in their hours together is unclear but is nonetheless the source of what, the governess suspects, led to his dismissal from school. PARAGRAPH>The reminder that Mrs. Grose is a \"base menial\" also reminds the reader of the class divide which separates her from the governess. The governess, who herself refrains from speaking about their class difference during the conversation does not explicitly recognize that Mrs. Grose, too, cannot speak completely freely to a woman of another rank. Here, especially, where Mrs. Grose seems unbelieving of the governess's previous assertions, her lack of strong objection - and her mention of the difficulty she had contradicting Miss Jessel - illustrates her reticence to speak against her superior. Though the housekeeper does not here object, it should be noted that the governess's assertion that she gave such detailed descriptions of Quint and Miss Jessel as to receive affirmative identification is not completely true. Though Mrs. Grose identified Quint from the description, the governess herself identified the second ghost as Miss Jessel - even in the face of Mrs. Groses's initial skepticism", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411031822/https://www.gradesaver.com/turn-of-the-screw/study-guide/summary-chapters-5-8"}