{"name": "chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417141554/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Around_The_World_In_80_Days/Around_The_World_In_Eighty_Days22.html", "summary": "The island of Hong Kong is described. Passepartout goes roaming around the place. He sees Fix who looks extremely disappointed, Fix has yet not the warrant to arrest Fogg. Together, they go and engage cabins for four persons. Then Fix decides to let Passepartout in on the secret of his mission and offers him a drink. While they both talk thinking that they are referring to the same topic, in reality they are talking at two different tangents. While Fix is referring to the robbery, Passepartout is referring to the fact that Fix is an agent of the Reform Club members. Finally, Fix explains to Passepartout his real purpose, as a detective and Passepartout is shocked. The loyal valet believes not a word of Fix and is so upset that he drinks more and more. Fix gives the straightforward valet some opium too and the latter falls to the ground stupefied by the narcotic. Fix is happy that Fogg will not be informed about the hour of sailing of the Carnatic. Fix leaves the tavern.", "analysis": "Notes Hong Kong is depicted quaintly. Passepartout, the usual vagabond  roams the city before proceeding to the dockyard. He sees Fix yet again and is  glad to see him looking disillusioned. Passepartout is still under the delusion  that Fix is an agent when he really is not one. Passepartout makes fun of Fix  before they proceed once again to book their rooms on the ship Carnatic. The manner  in which Passepartout laughs at others never seems mean or deriding; it is plain  amusement and mirth and that is one quality that makes us like him. Fix is shown as an unscrupulous man in this chapter. Taking advantage of Passepartout's naivete, he offers the latter drinks and then proceeds to try and bribe him. But, Passepartout affirms his loyalty to his master and refuses to hamper his master's plan in any way. In fact Passepartout is so fond of his master that he is deeply upset when the charge of robbery is slapped against him. The flaw in Passepartout is that when he is emotional, he has no control over himself. He gets more and more intoxicated, while Fix plays a dirty trick on him and offers him opium. Finally, the valet collapses and we are very angry at Fix for this treachery. He is utterly selfish and is happy now, as he thinks that Fogg will not be informed correctly about the ship Carnatic's departure. We are left curious as to what will happen next."}