{"name": "chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417141554/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Around_The_World_In_80_Days/Around_The_World_In_Eighty_Days14.html", "summary": "The distance between Suez and Aden is thirteen hundred and ten miles, and the regulations of the company allow the steamers, one hundred and thirty-eight hours in which to traverse it. The Mongolia seemed likely, to reach her destination considerably within that time. Verne describes the nature of the passengers on board who were mostly bound for India - either Bombay or Calcutta. What with the military men, a number of rich young Englishmen on their travels, and the hospitable efforts of the purser, the time passed quickly on the Mongolia. The journey on the Mongolia is described. There are a lot of parties on board, which only cease when there are minor storms on the Red Sea. Phileas Fogg in the meantime was least bothered about the course of the ship and never really went up to the deck to see the various sights of the Red Sea. He passed his time by having four hearty meals every day, regardless of the most persistent rolling and pitching on the part of the steamer; and he played whist indefatigably, for he had found partners as enthusiastic in the game as himself. As for Passepartout, he, too, had escaped seasickness, and took his meals conscientiously in the forward cabin. He rather enjoyed the voyage, for he was well fed and well lodged, took a great interest in the scenes through which they were passing, and consoled himself with the delusion that his master's whim would end at Bombay. He was pleased, on the day after leaving Suez, to find on deck the obliging person with whom he had walked and chatted on the quays. Fix tells Passepartout that he is an agent for the Provinces and that he has made the journey to Bombay often. He casually asks how Fogg is and learns that Passepartout hopes that this mad trip around the world will end at Bombay. After this meeting, Passepartout and Fix got into the habit of chatting together, the latter making it a point to gain the worthy man's confidence. He frequently offered him a glass of whiskey or pale ale in the steamer bar room, which Passepartout never failed to accept with graceful alacrity, mentally pronouncing Fix, the best of good fellows. Meanwhile, the Mongolia was pushing forward rapidly. The Mongolia had still sixteen hundred and fifty miles to traverse before reaching Bombay, and was obliged to remain four hours at Steamer Point to coal up. But this delay, as it was foreseen, did not affect Phileas Fogg's program; besides, the Mongolia, instead of reaching Aden on the morning of the 15 th , when she was due, arrived there on the evening of the 14 th , a gain of fifteen hours. Mr. Fogg and his servant went ashore at Aden to have the passport validated again; Fix, followed them. The visa procured, Mr. Fogg returned on board to resume his former habits; while Passepartout, according to custom, sauntered about among the mixed population of Somalis, Banyans, Parsees, Jews, Arabs, and Europeans who comprised the twenty-five thousand inhabitants of Aden. At six p.m. the Mongolia slowly moved out of the roadstead, and was soon once more on the Indian Ocean. The steamer rolled but little, the ladies, in fresh toilets, reappeared on deck, and the singing and dancing were resumed. The trip was being accomplished most successfully, and Passepartout was enchanted with the congenial companion, which chance had secured him in the person of the delightful Fix. On October 20 th , they came in sight of the Indian coast. A range of hills lay against the sky in the horizon, and soon the rows of palms, which adorn Bombay, came distinctly into view. The steamer hauled up at the quays of Bombay. Fogg was in the act of finishing the thirty third rubber of the voyage, and his partner and himself having, by a bold stroke, captured all thirteen of the tricks, concluded this fine campaign with a brilliant victory. The Mongolia was due at Bombay on the 22 nd ; she arrived on the 20 th . This was a gain to Phileas Fogg of two days since his departure from London, and he calmly entered the fact in the itinerary, in the column of gains.", "analysis": "Notes Jules Verne gives here a description  of the ship's journey and the people who were aboard. The greater part of the  passengers from Brindisi were bound for India, some for Bombay, others for Calcutta  by way of Bombay, the nearest route thither, now that a railway crosses the Indian  peninsula. Verne's knowledge of India too is diverse and is on display here. He  writes - \"Among the passengers were a number of officials and military officers  of various grades, the latter being either attached to the regular British forces  or commanding the Sepoy troops, and receiving high salaries ever since the central  government has assumed the powers of the East India Company: for the sub-lieutenants  get 280 pounds, brigadiers, 2,400 pounds, and generals of divisions, 4,000 pounds.\" The journey on the Mongolia was quite enjoyable. The best of fare was spread upon the cabin tables at breakfast, lunch, dinner, and the eight o'clock supper, and the ladies scrupulously changed their toilets twice a day; and the hours were whirled away, when the sea was tranquil, with music, dancing, and games. But the Red Sea is full of caprice, and often boisterous, like most long and narrow gulfs. When the wind came from the African or Asian coasts the Mongolia, with her long hull, rolled fearfully. Then the ladies speedily disappeared below; the pianos were silent; singing and dancing suddenly ceased. Yet the good ship continued straight on, unrestrained by wind or wave, towards the straits of Babel-Mandeb. Verne adds a casual touch by actually asking the reader what we presume Mr. Fogg was doing all this time? The author adds that it might be thought that, in his anxiety, he would be constantly watching the changes of the wind, the disorderly raging of the billows--every chance, in short, which might force the Mongolia to slacken her speed, and thus interrupt his journey. But, if Fogg did think of these possibilities, he did not betray the fact by any outward sign. Always the same impassible member of the Reform Club, whom no incident could ruffle, as unvarying as the ship's chronometers, and seldom having the curiosity even to go upon the deck, he passed through the memorable scenes of the Red Sea with cold indifference. He did not care to recognize the historic towns and villages, which along its borders raised their picturesque outlines against the sky. He betrayed no fear of the dangers of the Arabic Gulf, which the old historians always spoke of with horror, and upon which the ancient navigators never ventured without propitiating the gods by ample sacrifices. Fogg passed the time by playing whist. He played with a few companions who were as enthusiastic about the game of whist as he was himself - a tax collector, on the way to his post at Goa; the Rev. Decimus Smith, returning to his parish at Bombay; and a brigadier general of the English army, who was about to rejoin his brigade at Benares. They played whist by the hour together in absorbing silence. Passepartout meets Fix on the Mongolia. He is pleasantly surprised at finding the gentleman who guided him at the Suez on board. Passepartout when he learns that Fix too is bound for Bombay, he questions him about India. Fix answers him with caution so as not to give his game away. Fix hints that perhaps Fogg's tour may conceal some secret errand or a diplomatic mission. To this Passepartout replies, \"Faith, Monsieur Fix, I assure you I know nothing about it, nor would I give half a crown to find out.\" After this conversation, Passepartout and Fix meet for many more such conversations. Fix humors the simple servant by treating him to drinks often. Passepartout never suspects that Fix is doing all this for a selfish reason and not for the sake of mere companionship. On the 13th, Mocha, surrounded by its ruined walls whereon date trees were growing, was sighted, and on the mountains beyond were espied vast coffee fields. Passepartout was ravished to behold this celebrated place, and thought that, with its circular walls and dismantled fort, it looked like an immense coffee cup and saucer. The following night they passed through the Strait of Babel Mandeb, which means in Arabic ' The Bridge of Tears', and the next day they put in at Steamer Point, northwest of Aden harbor, to take in coal. This matter of fuelling steamers is a serious one at such distances from the coalmines; it costs the Peninsular Company some eight hundred thousand pounds a year. In these distant seas, coal is worth three or four pounds sterling a ton. Thus, Verne is able to provide realistic pictures of the journey that the ship transcribes. Unlike Fogg, Passepartout takes keen interest in the scenes around him. He is a Frenchman with a taste for adventure. He gazed with wonder upon the fortifications of Aden, which make this place the Gibraltar of the Indian Ocean, and the vast cisterns where the English engineers were still at work, two thousand years after the engineers of Solomon. \"Very curious, very curious,\" said Passepartout to himself, on returning to the steamer. \"I see that it is by no means useless to travel, if a man wants to see something new.\" After the ship leaves Aden, the sea was favorable, the wind being in the northwest, and all sails aided the engine. The steamer manages to make it earlier to Bombay than expected. So far, Fogg seems to be on a winning spree. Not only does the ship reach two days earlier, Fogg also does well in the game of whist and wins a great deal of money. He seems to prove right the maxim that calmness and stability of mind lead to success. Fogg is undoubtedly the hero of the novel, but the question is that how long will his luck last."}