{"name": "Act 2, scene 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212220419/https://www.novelguide.com/cyrano-de-bergerac/summaries/act2-scenes1-10", "summary": "Cyrano commends Christian's bravery and, to Christian's astonishment, embraces him. Cyrano tells Christian that he is Roxane's cousin and that she loves him. Christian apologizes to Cyrano for insulting him. Christian fears that Roxane will lose interest in him as soon as he speaks to her, as he is so stupid. Cyrano proposes that he join his eloquence to Christian's good looks to create the perfect lover for Roxane. He will write some eloquent speeches for Christian to deliver to Roxane as his own. Cyrano claims that he only wants to do this to practise his literary skills. From his pocket, he produces the letter he wrote earlier to Roxane and hands it to Christian to give to her. Christian embraces Cyrano in gratitude. The other Guards, Lise, and the Musketeer enter and are astonished to see Cyrano embracing Christian. The Musketeer believes that Cyrano must have undergone a transformation that means it is safe to talk about his nose. He impudently stares at Cyrano's nose, asking what the smell could be. Cyrano cries, \"It's pigshit. and floors the Musketeer with a blow.", "analysis": "of Act 2, scenes 1-10. Act 2 draws a stark contrast between Cyrano's fearlessness in matters of courage and honor in battle, and his terror when faced with his love for Roxane. Christian, another brave man whose courage fails him in love, is Cyrano's mirror when it comes to feeling inadequate as a lover. But Christian is Cyrano's opposite when it comes to the reasons for his feelings of inadequacy. Christian is self-assured about his looks but is certain that he is so stupid that Roxane will lose interest in him the moment he opens his mouth to speak. Cyrano, on the other hand, feels physically unattractive but is confident in his wit and intelligence. Cyrano's suggestion that they combine his own wit and eloquence to Christian's good looks to make the perfect lover for Roxane is significant on many levels. First, it comments ironically on a conviction held by many a lover in every age: that they are not good enough to be loved by the object of their desires as they really are. Cyrano believes that if only he had Christian's looks, he would succeed with Roxane, and Christian believes that if only he had Cyrano's intelligence, he would succeed with Roxane. Second, the two men's decision to combine forces  also carries the implicit suggestion that no one is perfect, so people should celebrate whatever good qualities they possess and not dwell on their shortcomings. In the character of Cyrano, the play focuses on a source of inadequacy that is particularly relevant to the modern age: the obsession with physical perfection. Third, Cyrano's suggestion represents a fall from grace for a man who in every other respect has shown honor, integrity, and a devotion to truth. However honorable and selfless Cyrano's final aim might be , the means by which he will achieve his aim is deception of Roxane. Roxane shows herself to be a person of intelligence, compassion, and integrity, and the reader may well feel indignant that she should be wooed by a chimera, an illusion that does not really exist. Fourth, Cyrano's suggestion sets in motion the major conflict that drives the action of the play. The notion of combining forces with Christian will enable him to have the vicarious joy of declaring his love for Roxane, but the fact that Cyrano deceives her into believing that his words are Christian's means that he can never win her for himself. The power of words, as embodied in literature, continues to be an important theme in Act 2. Rostand shows how words can both divide people  and bring them closer together in love. Their intention that Christian will recite Cyrano's lines just as an actor recites lines in a play symbolically turns the wooing of Roxane into a piece of theater in which Cyrano is the playwright, Christian the unintelligent but attractive leading man, and Roxane the audience. This mirrors the opening scenes of the play, in which Cyrano directed events, Montfleury was the untalented actor, and Roxane was, once again, a spectator. There is bitter dramatic irony in the scene between Roxane and Cyrano. Cyrano, emboldened by Le Bret's encouragement, is ready to declare his love, but Roxane has invited him to the meeting in order to ask him to protect Christian. Ordinarily, Cyrano and Christian would be rivals or even enemies due to their love for the same woman. But Roxane's request to Cyrano that he protect Christian means that he must become Christian's friend and supporter. Cyrano's embrace of this unforeseen role is his greatest act of heroism so far. He is sacrificing his own self-interest for the sake of  others' happiness"}