{"name": "Chapter 23", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 23<PARAGRAPH>After spending a season in the countryside, Jurgis heads back into the city to find work for the winter. He brings with him fifteen dollars from his earnings, which he believes will buy him some time to find a job and a place to stay while looking for work. Jurgis begins searching all over the city for a job, though not at the packinghouses since he is on the blacklist. There is no work for him at first, but he then stumbles upon a newspaper advertisement offering jobs for one hundred men. Jurgis takes the job and begins the work of building tunnels under the city streets of Chicago. PARAGRAPH>The tunnels are a vast web, lit with electricity and laid with railroad track. A collective of corporations and businesses is building the tunnels in order to break the teamsters' union. When \"these freight tunnels were completed, connecting all the big factories and stores with the railroad depots, they would have the teamsters' union by the throat. The tunnels can also be dangerous, however. One night, as Jurgis is leaving the tunnel, one of the rail freight cars gets away and comes barreling down the tunnel. It hits Jurgis on the shoulder, breaking his arm and knocking him out cold. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis spends his Christmas in a hospital, and it is \"the pleasantest Christmas he had had in America. After a two-week stay, the hospital kicks him out to the street so that they can give his bed to someone that is worse off than he is. Jurgis has very little money left because he spent most of it at a saloon before being injured. He tries to get his boardinghouse keeper to let him keep his room but, because he is injured, she knows he will not be working and so decides to throw him out instead. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis becomes terrified of the world outside. He knows that he cannot get a job while he is hurt and he cannot even sell papers. Jurgis is \"like a wounded animal in the forest;. forced to compete with his enemies upon unequal terms. There is a bitter cold spell that hits Chicago just at this time and so Jurgis spends much of his days just trying to find a place to stay warm. He moves from saloon to saloon, but they will not let him stay too long if he is not a paying customer. Some of the saloonkeepers run a scam in which they allow beggars to come sit by the fire. These beggars draw others in and offer to hear the hard stories of the other men. After a while, the other man has spent a dollar on drinks, and the saloonkeeper has made money. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis attends a religious revival because it takes place in a warm hall. The place is packed with street people and beggars. No one comes for the revival but only to keep warm on the cold night. The evangelist preaches of sin and redemption but this only fills Jurgis's soul with hatred. What did he know about sin and suffering - with his smooth, black coat and his neatly starched collar, his body warm, and his belly full, and money in his pocket - and lecturing men who were struggling for their lives, men at the death-grapple with the demon powers of hunger and cold. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis's final nickels run out and he now has nowhere to sleep. He begins to beg on the street, but he finds that there are even beggars that are professionals and that he is \"simply a blundering amateur in competition with organized and scientific professionalism. As pitiful and downtrodden as Jurgis looks, some are even worse off than he is. There are the \"dregs of the city's cesspools, wretches who hid at night in the rain-soaked cellars of old ramshackle tenements. with abandoned women in the last stages of the harlot's progress - women who had been kept by Chinamen and turned away at last to die. These are the lowest of classes, all people driven to insanity because of their poverty", "analysis": "Without other options, Jurgis makes the conscious choice to remain in Chicago and care for his child. Though work is difficult to find because he is blacklisted at the meat packing plant, Jurgis is able to obtain employment at two other factories -- the Harvester Trust and the Steel Mills. Jurgis's jobs at these places allow Sinclair to compare and contrast different methods of capitalism and to eventually show how each is a corruption of the other.<PARAGRAPH>The first place that Jurgis finds a job is with the Harvester Trust. This Trust is run by businessmen and philanthropists. Their factory creates farm machinery and is run in a way that makes life more humane for workers. Sinclair notes that the Harvester Trust is considered a jewel of American industrialism by the businessmen and philanthropists who own it. In a way, the Trust is a kind of propaganda for the large industrial interests of Chicago.<PARAGRAPH>The second place that Jurgis finds a job is in the steel mill. This place is no better in terms of safety or humanity than the meat packing plants. Ironically, Jurgis get this job through the help of a \"settlement worker.\" During the Progressive Era, the settlement worker movement would employ young men and women from affluent society to move into the slums and ghettos of large industrial cities where they would volunteer their time to give back to the poor. Sinclair uses this irony to show how even the charity of the rich is inextricably tied to the power and wealth of industrial society. Although the settlement worker means only to help, this person has no way of helping Jurgis except by placing him in an industrial factory that enslaves and injures him.<PARAGRAPH>The jobs that Jurgis holds in these two industries helps Sinclair show how tangled the web of capitalism had become in the United States. Although Sinclair does not make the connection explicitly, his readers would have surely known about the connection between the Harvester Trust, the Steel Trust, and the Beef Trust. The Harvester Trust was actually majority-owned by the leaders of the other great monopolistic industries of the time . Each of these enterprises cut deals with the other to get labor and materials cheaper than would otherwise be available. For instance, the Steel Industry would provide materials for the Harvester Trust to make machines cheaply. The Harvester Trust could then sell these machines to the sugar or beef industry. More products would mean that more railroad tracks would need to be built, meaning more steel would need to be manufactured. The Beef Trust would profit as well. These webs of industry all happen many levels above the understanding of a common worker like Jurgis. All that he knows is that his job can disappear at any time.<PARAGRAPH>The death of little Antanas by drowning is another example of the ways in which characters have only the whim of nature to keep them alive or to kill them. Jurgis's life now takes a new direction. He attempts to find a new way of living outside of the city. In this way, Jurgis is surrendering himself to nature. When he returns to the country, however, he finds that nature is more kind to him here. While in the country, Jurgis is able to fend for himself. He is able to survive and to take advantage of the natural world around him to regain his strength, even if his motives are not always pure.<PARAGRAPH>The contrasts between farm life and city life suggest that in city life Sinclair sees a perversion of nature. The scene in which Jurgis becomes drunk and hires a prostitute is a scene establishing Jurgis's final loss of innocence. The reader is reminded of the Garden of Eden narrative once again. This loss of innocence means that Jurgis must leave the natural world that had sustained him and return to the depraved world of the city.<PARAGRAPH>The final scene of Chapter Twenty Three in which Jurgis attends a revival is Sinclair's criticism of organized religion. Throughout the novel, Sinclair takes several different viewpoints on the value of religion. In this particular take, he portrays the evangelist preacher as being out of touch with the real needs of the people. The preacher offers the word of God, while the poor and hungry only want a warm place to stay. This inefficacy of religion means that Jurgis feels no shame or guilt when he begins to fall in with the criminals and poorest of the poor who use trickery and deceit to steal what they can.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-20-23"}