{"name": "Chapter 19", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 19<PARAGRAPH>Jurgis goes to Madame Haupt, a midwife. She is a fat Dutch woman, wearing a \"filthy blue wrapper\" with black teeth. Jurgis enters her room looking \"like a man that had risen from the tomb. He begs Madame Haupt to come and save his wife, but she complains that she has not yet eaten her dinner. Jurgis tells her that he only has a dollar and a quarter to pay her. He begs with her and tells her that he will pay the twenty-five dollars that she asks as soon as he can. She laughs at him and tells him that she cannot do it for that small sum. They continue to barter, Madame Haupt telling him that she cannot work for such a small sum, but as Jurgis begins to leave her house, she stops him and tells him that she will work if he can borrow five dollars from someone. He is furious and tells her that he cannot get the money and Madame Haupt relents, saying that she cannot stand to think of anyone suffering, but that he will have to pay her the full twenty-five dollars within the month. PARAGRAPH>When they arrive at the house, Madame Haupt complains that she must climb a ladder to get to the dark attic where Ona lays. She scolds them for keeping a sick woman in such conditions. There is no real floor in the attic, only boards laid across the house's supports. Aniele comes to Jurgis and tells him he must go away from the night. Jurgis leaves and goes to a saloon. He sits at the bar and tells the bartender that he has lost his home, that his wife is ill, and that \"I'm done up. The saloonkeeper gives him a glass of whiskey and a meal and then offers him a room for the night. Jurgis cannot sleep, however, because he is so wracked with fear and worry. He leaves the saloon at four in the morning and returns to the home. PARAGRAPH>When he arrives, there is no crying or noise. Marija tells him that there is no news yet. Madame Haupt comes down the ladder of the attic. She looks like \"one of the workers on the killing-beds. Her hands and arms were smeared with blood, and blood was splashed up on her clothing and her face. She scolds Jurgis and the other women for leaving Ona in such a bad condition. She tells Jurgis that she has called for a priest and that there is nothing she can do for the woman. She is going to be dead in a short while, and the baby is stillborn. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis rushes up to the attic and sits by Ona. He cries out for her and for a brief instant, she opens her eyes and recognizes him. She fades from him and dies. He cries out in agony, and the priest tries to comfort him, to no avail. He sleeps for only a while and then comes down. Kotrina comes in from being gone for three days selling papers, and Jurgis demands to know how much money she had made. She tells him three dollars and he demands that she give it to him. He takes the money and immediately goes to the nearest saloon where he orders a whole bottle of whiskey, telling the bartender that he wants to get drunk", "analysis": "While the Christmas Eve bells symbolized a future salvation for Jurgis, that salvation has not come yet. In the opening of Chapter Seventeen, the reader sees Jurgis beginning to descend into new depths. Though he is in jail for attacking a man, Sinclair suggests that such violence is understandable, if not honorable, in the situation of poverty that Jurgis and his family find themselves. In the character of Jack Duane, however, the reader sees a new temptation for Jurgis. The seeds are planted in Jurgis's mind for a life of crime that is not so honorable, though he still has enough of his innocence and dignity left to not act on such impulses.<PARAGRAPH>A theme throughout the novel, which is apparent here, is the way in which Sinclair uses themes of American Naturalist tradition in the novel. In the American Naturalist tradition of literature, characters are driven not by any internal struggle or thought. Instead, characters lives are solely reactionary to the environment around them. They have little agency and, instead, are subject to systems of control found outside of themselves. In Sinclair's novel, this natural world includes both nature and systems of economy, government, etc. created by human thought and activity. This is evident in the way that Sinclair describes the prisoners in Bridewell. He describes how men are born \"without their consent\" and are then thrust into poverty and hardship by the world around them. This Naturalist tradition is an important part of the sustained attack Sinclair wishes to wage on capitalist systems of economy.<PARAGRAPH>Sinclair's descriptions of Jurgis's time in prison are another example of the ways in which Sinclair uncovers the unspoken injustices of \"normal\" society. Sinclair does not use much explicit irony in the novel since he attempts to maintain a political and social seriousness to the work, but the reader is allowed to make inferences about the ironic nature of society. Bridewell Prison is such an example. Though prison life is harsh, Jurgis is given food, clothing, and a place to sleep inside from the cold. Prison, thus, offers a better life than does the world outside.<PARAGRAPH>Perhaps the most wrenching scene in the novel is Ona's death. Sinclair makes the connection here between the horrors of the killing beds and the horrors of natural life forced upon the residents of Packingtown. It is in this scene, following Jurgis's moment of understanding of the way in which the natural world destines some people for lives of poverty, where Jurgis understands and comes to hate the natural systems of the world. Jurgis comes to understand the \"horrible nature of nature.\"<PARAGRAPH>Critics have used this scene in the novel to argue for Sinclair's gynophobic tendencies in the novel. The obesity, smell, and bad teeth of Madame Haupt symbolize the distaste for the female body. In the birth room, Ona's body, which had been slowly breaking down since her last experience of childbirth, is tormented and broken completely. The blood on Madame Haupt suggests the horror of childbirth and the indecency of the natural bodily functions of the woman.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-17-19"}