{"name": "Chapter 8", "summary": "Chapter 8<PARAGRAPH>Marija and Tamoszius Kuszleika begin a love affair. Tamoszius is a \"petite\" man, while Marija is a burly woman. He finds, however, that she has the \"heart of a baby,\" and he courts her by playing his violin on Sunday afternoons. Tamoszius earns \"big money\" by playing events in the community, so his presence adds some financial gain for the family. One Saturday evening, Marija and Tamoszius express their love to each other. Soon they hold each other for hours in a small corner of the kitchen, and the family has a \"tacit convention. to know nothing of what was going on in that corner. PARAGRAPH>Marija becomes an expert at her job. She can paint two cans a minute, and at fourteen cents for every one hundred and ten cans, she brings home large sums of money, which she saves and spends on items for the family. She is \"really the capitalist of the party. Marija's fortune changes one day, however. One Saturday afternoon, the canning factory where Marija paints cans is closed down. She is told that it is because of the season; there is no demand for canned meat, so there is no need for workers to paint the cans. Marija is furious and becomes manic with energy. She attempts to find other work, even going to the rich parts of town, but there are no jobs because all the work in all the factories has slowed down and everyone is looking for a job. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis's work on the killing beds has also moved to a grinding pace. Often, cattle do not start coming down the chutes until ten or eleven in the morning. Sometimes they do not come until one or two o'clock in the afternoon. Because it is the rule that all cattle bought must be slaughtered on the same day, it often means that the workers are forced to stay at the factory until midnight or one in the morning to finish the work. The worst part is that men are paid only for the work that they do. Therefore, if a man is standing around on the cold killing-floor, waiting for the cattle buyers to send cattle to be slaughtered, that man does not earn any money. Likewise, men do not get paid if they do not work a full hour. At the end of the day, the floor bosses often try and work the men for fifty minutes, just under an hour. This means the men do not get paid for that work. There is great tension between the workers and the floor bosses because of these tactics. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis now understands the bitterness that the other workers have for the factories. When he is approached again by union representatives, he accepts their offer \"in a far different spirit. In the unions, Jurgis now has \"the first inkling of a meaning in the phrase 'a free country. Every member of his family soon has union cards. Marija is especially vocal. She makes an impassioned speech at a union meeting, though it is all in Lithuanian so no one understands her. Jurgis attends every union meeting. He meets several strange characters there, including Tommy Finnegan, a small Irishman with bad teeth who corners him with crazy stories of \"higher intelligences\" and spirits. Jurgis becomes a strong advocate of the unions. He makes it his mission to try to sign up all the Lithuanian community to the union cause. With the Lithuanians he will \"labor and wrestle in prayer, trying to show them the right,\" though many are not willing to accept his message", "analysis": "In Chapter Eight, Sinclair makes distinctions between the theoretical promise of capitalism and the reality of capitalism. In the theoretical world of capitalist economies, each person's private interests, as well as the interests of the industries they create, all work together to bring about a maximum good for individuals and for society. This theory is best exemplified in Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations. This theoretical good of capitalist systems is exemplified in this chapter by Marija's slow advancement in society. With a good job and an improving social life, it seems as though Marija's own self-interest as \"the capitalist of the party\" is improving her life.<PARAGRAPH>This improvement, however, is short lived. When demand for canned meat falls, as it does every spring and summer, Marija loses her job and is forced to live on her savings. This means that she will never be able to advance in an economic sense. This, Sinclair proposes, is the reality of capitalism. In this reality, certain individuals and their industries profit from their self-interests while others in the system do not. In fact, those individuals that do not profit suffer hardships. Capitalism, thus, is a hindrance to social good, not a benefit.<PARAGRAPH>It is important to note how Sinclair's narrative and the way in which he describes the hardships of the Rudkus family moves from a general notion of oppressive systems to exact descriptions of social and economic systems that cause hardship. In early chapter, the family understands their hardships as simply the \"way\" that things function in America. As the narrative progresses, however, each member of the family begins to gain a consciousness of the particular systems and events that create their suffering.  They see the ways in which the food industry fixes the wage system against workers; unsanitary food processing that sucks nutrition from meat and causes disease for workers and consumers; and the industries unwillingness to support its workers in low demand seasons. These examples are one way in which Jurgis and his family move from a state of unconscious acceptance to a state of consciousness about corrupted morals.<PARAGRAPH>At the end of Chapter Eight, Sinclair uses religious language to describe the work of the unions, a theme that he returns to in later chapters to describe the work of the Socialist Party in Packingtown politics. Jurgis is described here as a church-going man, yet a person for which religion \"never touched him\" in the way that it affected women. Socialist politics, however, is \"a new religion...and with all the zeal and fury of a convert he went out as a missionary.\" Some critics of the novel have noted that Sinclair's interpretation of socialism is naive and this is one example. In portraying socialism as a truer religion than anything that has come before, Sinclair is overlooking many of the negative aspects of the economic theory.<PARAGRAPH>Chapter Ten marks a turning point for Ona Rudkus. Although her work in the factories is difficult, her hardships are compounded by giving birth and then being forced to return to manual labor so quickly. She develops an addiction to alcoholic elixirs, the only way she can cope with her work. Ona is the first character for whom the mental and financial hardships of her life are manifested in a physical way. Almost all of the main characters of the novel progress in this way. The hardships pressed upon the family by an unjust society become true physical hardships. Sinclair shows how poverty and powerlessness is not simply a mental or social hardship. It is a physical hardship as well.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-8-10"}