{"name": "Chapter 3", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 3<PARAGRAPH>Jokubas Szedvilas, who is a long time resident of Packingtown, tells his new company that he will secure jobs for them through a policeman that he knows. The policeman works for Durham, and he finds suitable men for employment. Jurgis is confident that he can find employment on his own, and he goes to Brown's, where he is immediately picked out of the line because of his size. One of the bosses asks him if he can \"shovel guts,\" and Jurgis, though he does not understand the English of the boss, accepts a job. The boss tells him he must show up at seven the next morning. Jurgis is ecstatic that he has found work so quickly. PARAGRAPH>To celebrate, Jokubas takes his new friends on a tour of Packingtown. For Jokubas, \"the packers might own the land, but he claimed the landscape. He takes them down to the yards where there are pens of cattle for as far as the eye can see. Jurgis feels pride in taking part in all of this because he ha just gotten a job and \"become a sharer in all this activity, a cog in this marvelous machine. Teta Elzbieta asks what becomes of all the cattle when they are bought and sold in the stockyards. Jokubas tells her that they are all weighed, loaded on trains, and taken to the slaughterhouses, where they will be killed and cut up for food. Everyone could think \"only of the wonderful efficiency of it all. PARAGRAPH>The party goes up to Durham's, one of the meatpacking plants, and begins a tour of the factory. The tours are advertisements for the companies and the multiple products that they sell: \"Durham's Pure Leaf Lard. Durham's Breakfast Bacon, Durham's Canned Beef, Potted Ham, Devilled Chicken, Peerless Fertilizer. They climb a series of stairways and see the chute where hogs come into the factory. The hogs come into a narrow room where men chain their legs, and they are lifted up by a wheel to a trolley. The hogs begin to squeal a sound that is \"appalling, perilous to the ear-drums,\" and many of the visitors laugh nervously at each other while some of the women have tears in their eyes. On the packing floor, men cut the throats of the hogs and throw them into vats of boiling water. It was pork-making by machinery, pork-making by applied mathematics. PARAGRAPH>A visitor cannot help but become philosophical about the process and think on the idea of an afterlife for hogs, and on how each hog \"had an individuality of his own, a will of his own, a hope, and a heart's desire. Upon watching the slaughtering, Jurgis says, \"I'm glad I'm not a hog. Once the hog is done in the boiling water, it is scooped up by a machine and put on another trolley. Two lines of men stand on each side of the trolley. Each man is responsible for a specific job: one scrapes the legs, one cuts off the head, one saws through the breastbone, and one pulls out the guts. At the end of the trolley, the hog has been gone over several times, and an incompetent and lazy government inspector either looks over or ignores it. It then goes to the splitter, the most expert workers in the factory, who cut the hog in two. It is then butchered, and each part goes to different parts of the factories to be processed and shipped out. Signs everywhere demand cleanliness from the employees, and Jokubas translates these to Jurgis in a sarcastic manner. PARAGRAPH>The visitors move to another gallery. This one views the cattle-slaughtering process. As the cattle are loaded into a pen, a man stands over them and bludgeons their heads with a large hammer. As the animals fall, they are moved to the \"killing-bed,\" where they are strung upside down by chains, and the butcher slices their throats, letting the blood drain to the floor. Though men attempt to sweep all the blood into holes in the floor, they cannot keep up the pace, so the men do their work while standing in half an inch of blood. The heads are taken off, and the skin is sliced off. The carcasses of beef are then butchered. No part of the animal is wasted. The parts are made into diverse products: soaps, glue, violin strings, gelatin, lard, and fertilizer. The process amazes Jurgis, and he sees that he has been \"given a place in it and a share in its wonderful activities. He does not even realize that he has been hired at Brown's, a competing plant that is supposed to be a \"deadly rival\" to Durham. Jokubas tells them that Durham has handled nearly a quarter of a billion animals since its founding. All of the meat packing factories are now almost as one, \"the greatest aggregation of labor and capital ever gathered in one place", "analysis": "Chapter Two begins the novel's narrative by describing Jurgis Rudkus. Sinclair describes Jurgis's character through physical traits. He is big and strong ,and the meat packing plant bosses quickly hire him. His physical characteristics influence his attitude towards other workers who are not as strong and not as enthusiastic about their work. Jurgis has a judgmental attitude towards these workers.<PARAGRAPH>In this early chapter, Sinclair strikes a balance between portraying the difficulties of the immigrants' move to America and the difficulties of life in Lithuania. Life in Lithuania is difficult, though it will not be as difficult as life in America, as the family will find out. Sinclair works here, however, not to idealize Eastern European life and to allow room for the validity of the American Dream. The American Dream, generally defined, is the belief in the ability of the individual to gain a sense of agency and economic or social advancement for themselves in American culture. Sinclair will use the contrast between dream and reality throughout the novel. In this early chapter, the dream is idealized.<PARAGRAPH>This power of this dream is evident in the family's trek to America. They immediately meet difficult circumstances. Their money is stolen, and they are extorted by being held captive. In addition, they find that while wages are higher in America, prices are also higher, which partly extinguishes a hope for riches, but the dream remains alive through the story of Jonas's friend in Chicago who has made a fortune.<PARAGRAPH>The dream is still alive when the family reaches Packingtown. Packingtown is a neighborhood in Chicago and the main setting for the novel. Packingtown contained the country's largest meat producing industries and was a destination for millions of immigrants looking for work in the early twentieth century. Packingtown remained a leading meat-producing neighborhood until the 1970's. While Packingtown was originally home to many German and Irish immigrant, many of them skilled butchers and meat producers, these groups were eventually replaced by cheaper labor, in the form of millions of unskilled Eastern European immigrants that flooded the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Because of the influx of such large populations, Packingtown became a slum filled with trash, disease, and poor living conditions.<PARAGRAPH>Sinclair uses the metaphor of thousands of lowing cattle, all making the same droning noise that the family hears as they ride into the stockyards, as a symbol for the masses of people crowded into Packingtown. The lowing noise of the cows is a metaphor for the unheard agony of these immigrant populations who are forced into difficult living conditions. At the end of Chapter Two, Jurgis and Ona's American dream is symbolized in the way that they literally stand on top of the garbage of Packingtown. For the moment, Sinclair suggests, their industry and determination in coming to America has helped them rise above the poorer people and lower classes  surrounding them.<PARAGRAPH>Chapter Three is a realistic description of the packinghouses and the process of killing and butchering cattle and hogs for public consumption. The chapter is often graphic in its depiction of violence towards animals. Sinclair's original publisher would not publish his novel because of such scenes and Sinclair was forced to self-publish the novel before it was finally bought by a mainstream publishing house. The irony of the chapter is best summed up in Jurgis's line: \"But I'm glad I'm not a hog!\" In fact, the process of killing and breaking down animals is a similar process to the ways in which Jurgis himself will be broken down by the conditions of the city. This is not just a metaphorical breaking down, either, as a physical process of cutting and wounding is a primary cause of demise in the packing plants.<PARAGRAPH>Chapters Three and Four offer two visions of America's capitalist economy. Both visions show how unskilled, uneducated workers such as Jurgis's family have no hope of successfully navigating this economy towards any kind of economic or social success. The first vision of capitalism is offered through the packinghouse where Jurgis works. While Henry Ford is generally considered the creator of the modern assembly line process of manufacturing, it was the Chicago meat packing plants that first revolutionized the process of mass production and assembly line techniques. The mantra that these plants \"use every part of the hog except for the squeal\" exemplifies the way that capitalist industry seeks to eliminate waste, even if such elimination results in unsanitary and unsafe conditions.<PARAGRAPH>The second vision of capitalism is exemplified in the family's deal with the real estate agent. The agent attempts to sell the family a house that is not as advertised. In the quest for profit, Sinclair suggests that businessmen will use whatever means necessary to rip off or cheat others. A family such as Jurgis's will be the first victims of this capitalist greed because they have no education of the system. Sinclair suggests that capitalism is a rigged economic system that only benefits those with inside knowledge of how to manipulate others for personal gain.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-2-4"}