{"name": "Chapter 28", "summary": "Chapter 28<PARAGRAPH>Jurgis narrowly escapes recognition by the judge when he appears in court the next morning. Marija and the other whores are fined five dollars, which is paid by their madam. They leave the court and return to the brothel where business resumes as usual. Marija and Jurgis talk for a while. She tells him of the whore trade, how girls are brought over from foreign countries and forced into prostitution. Their madam gives him morphine so that they become addicted and reliant on staying in the brothel to afford more of the drug. She tells him of how women, contrary to opinion, do not like such work, and how they are forced into such labor by starvation and poverty. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis tells Marija of his own travels. She assures him that if he returns to Elzbieta's house, he will not be judged for leaving. She gives him only a quarter and tells him to go there. He leaves the brothel and gets a meal with the quarter. He tries to find work so that he will not have to face Elzbieta, but he cannot find a job. As he walks past the meeting hall, he sees there is another political rally forming. He enters the hall and finds that it is almost full. He takes one of the last seats in the back of the room. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis is lost in his thoughts and before he realizes it, he falls asleep and is awakened by another man. Suddenly, a young woman whispers in his ear, \"'If you would try to listen, comrade, perhaps you would be interested. Jurgis is startled and sees that the young woman that whispered to him is finely dressed and intently listening to the man giving the political speech. He is shocked that a woman of such standing would call him \"comrade. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis focuses his attention on the speaker and is transfixed. He is surprised by how emotional he becomes at seeing the man's eyes. It was like coming suddenly upon some wild sight of nature, -- a mountain forest lashed by a tempest, a ship tossed about upon a stormy sea. Jurgis is confused and disoriented, but cannot help but pay attention to the man. PARAGRAPH>The man begins to give a long speech that captures the attention of the audience. He uses wild gestures and a powerful voice. He tells of how the workingmen of the Chicago are oppressed and believe that there is nothing they can do to escape the harsh conditions they face. He tells of how women must prostitute themselves to survive and how the institutions of the city, such as government, industry, and churches, do nothing to help. He tells of how children face desperation and starvation. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis is \"trembling  smitten with wonder\" by this speaker, and everyone in the hall cheers and then is silent as the man continues his speech. The man tells the crowd that a person can be \"delivered from his self-created slavery\" and that the systems of degradation will never again ensnare him. He goads the crowd into taking action here in Chicago. He tells them that they must rise up against the thousands of people that \"do nothing to earn what they receive,\" those masters of industry who live in palaces and luxury while their workers starve. The speaker tells the crowd that they must speak with the \"voice of Labor, despised and outraged; a mighty giant, lying prostrate. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis stands and cheers with the crowd, overwhelmed by his emotion. He hears a voice within him, \"a voice with strange intonations that rang through the chambers of the soul like the clanging of a bell. All of his old emotions come flooding back to him, and he comes to a realization about his state and what has put him there", "analysis": "As Jurgis leaves Marija's brothel, he is in danger of falling back into the same cycle of poverty and unemployment as before. By chance, he enters the Socialist Party rally and undergoes his most significant awakening. Some scholars have likened this awakening to a conversion experience for Jurgis. The conversion narrative is a fixture of much of modern Western literature. Based upon narratives that began appearing in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and which found their greatest popularity in Puritan and Evangelical literature of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, these narratives generally focus around a specific time in which a character undergoes some kind of intense personal or intellectual change. Jurgis's conversion fits this pattern. Through no effort of his own, Jurgis transforms from a character that is at the whim of the horrors of the natural world around him to a person with agency and the ability to influence his life and the lives of others.<PARAGRAPH>This conversion is seen in the reappearance of the voices and noises inside of Jurgis's head. In the novel's previous chapter, these voices and noises, symbolic of the spark of life, were extinguished. This represented the mental and interior death of Jurgis, even if his physical self still exists. The return of these voices represents a resurrection. This shows how Jurgis can be considered a Christ-figure in the novel's narrative.<PARAGRAPH>The Socialist Party movement is a typical description of revolutionary movements in America during this time. As shown by the singing of the Marseillaise, the French national anthem written during the Revolution of 1789. Sinclair had used the scene of Jurgis at the meat packing plant owner's house to propose that the reader understand the developing class conflict in Chicago in terms of previous revolutionary activity. By singing this anthem, Sinclair firmly establishes the Socialist Party in America as in the lineage of the French Revolution.<PARAGRAPH>These final chapters of The Jungle shows a shift in Sinclair's narrative technique. From Chapter Two until Chapter Twenty-Eight, Sinclair uses a narrative arc, mostly of the demise of Jurgis and his family. This arc ends in Chapter Twenty-Eight and Twenty-Nine with Jurgis's conversion to Socialism. The remaining chapters of the novel move from a narrative to an explanatory style of writing. Sinclair uses the final chapters to explain the tenets and the merits of socialism to his reading audience. Scholars and critics have not always approved of this technique since it abandons the Naturalist mode of writing Sinclair established in the rest of the novel.<PARAGRAPH>The discussion between Lucas and Schliemann allows Sinclair to elaborate on the breadth of the socialist movement. Lucas's argument that Christianity can be fully reconciled with the political aspirations of socialism demonstrates the thinking of the Social Gospel movement. This movement, unofficially led by pastors and writers who often ministered in the country's working class slums, seeks to portray the Christian church as originally a socialist movement. Their goal is to reclaim the social message of the gospel and to support socialist political goals. Schliemann's arguments for socialism follow the more traditional intellectual explanation of the movement. Schliemann relies heavily on the arguments framed by Marx and Engels in The Communist Manifesto and Capital.<PARAGRAPH>The novel's ending has been another point of criticism from scholars and critics. The novel resolves with a victory, if not in actual votes than in momentum,  for the Socialist Party. Jurgis's narrative is never resolved beyond experiencing his spiritual and intellectual awakening, and the reader is unsure as to whether his life truly improved or if he remained subject to the forces of the natural world that caused his previous demise. The novel's closing chapters, critics have charged, resemble propagandist material more than literary achievement, a fault that some feel keeps The Jungle from achieving the literary ambitions that Sinclair proposed for the novel.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-28-31"}