{"name": "Chapter 30", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 30<PARAGRAPH>Jurgis, now awakened by Socialism, returns to Elzbieta's house where he attempts to convince her of the system's merits. She is skeptical, but decides that anything that keeps Jurgis away from drink and makes him industrious is worth it. Jurgis begins looking for a job and fortunately comes to find one in a hotel as a porter. When Ostrinski learns of Jurgis's job, he tells him that the hotel owner is one of the most passionate Socialist Party members in the city. PARAGRAPH>The hotel, owned by a man name Hinds, is a hotbed of Socialist activity. Hinds tells Jurgis of his own life and struggles and anytime he is faced with adversity he mutters: \"'Capitalism, my boy, Capitalism. Ecrasez l'Infame. The hotel employs a number of Socialist Party members and every night the employees get into intense arguments and debates with guests who defend systems of capitalism and individualism. Hinds explains how the Oil Trust, the Beef Trust, and the Railroad Trust actually own the country and the politicians. Some guests change their minds and attitudes towards socialism, and some do not. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis begins to spend all his time and much of his money on spreading the Socialist cause, though he does occasionally fall into old habits of drink. At those times, he remembers, however, that it is a \"wicked thing to spend one's pennies for a drink, when the working-class was wandering in darkness, and waiting to be delivered. Jurgis attempts to convert his neighbors to socialism, though he makes many enemies and almost gets into a few fights during the process. The people tell Jurgis that socialism is \"paternalism,\" but Jurgis argues that by letting the capitalists rule the country and build the libraries and social structures, they are not allowing the workers to build their own country. Capitalism is true paternalism. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis meets and hears a number of famous socialist speakers and writers. He meets the \"Little Giant,\" a little person who \"had written a veritable encyclopedia\" of Socialism. He hears a young author from California that had made a fortune selling books but that had never ceased to fight for the poor. He begins to read the \"Appeal to Reason,\" a tabloid newspaper that spreads the word of socialism through fantastical stories. Jurgis and the Socialist Party members distribute flyers and pamphlets telling the people of Packingtown what they can do to fight the Beef Trust when their strike fails. Feeling pressure, Mike Scully brings in the South Carolina \"pitchfork Senator\" to speak to the workers and to fight for the Republican Party. Jurgis stands up, however, and gives his own speech in the meeting, telling the crowd how he himself had been a part of the political machine that had bought votes and oppressed the voice of the people", "analysis": "As Jurgis leaves Marija's brothel, he is in danger of falling back into the same cycle of poverty and unemployment as before. By chance, he enters the Socialist Party rally and undergoes his most significant awakening. Some scholars have likened this awakening to a conversion experience for Jurgis. The conversion narrative is a fixture of much of modern Western literature. Based upon narratives that began appearing in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and which found their greatest popularity in Puritan and Evangelical literature of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, these narratives generally focus around a specific time in which a character undergoes some kind of intense personal or intellectual change. Jurgis's conversion fits this pattern. Through no effort of his own, Jurgis transforms from a character that is at the whim of the horrors of the natural world around him to a person with agency and the ability to influence his life and the lives of others.<PARAGRAPH>This conversion is seen in the reappearance of the voices and noises inside of Jurgis's head. In the novel's previous chapter, these voices and noises, symbolic of the spark of life, were extinguished. This represented the mental and interior death of Jurgis, even if his physical self still exists. The return of these voices represents a resurrection. This shows how Jurgis can be considered a Christ-figure in the novel's narrative.<PARAGRAPH>The Socialist Party movement is a typical description of revolutionary movements in America during this time. As shown by the singing of the Marseillaise, the French national anthem written during the Revolution of 1789. Sinclair had used the scene of Jurgis at the meat packing plant owner's house to propose that the reader understand the developing class conflict in Chicago in terms of previous revolutionary activity. By singing this anthem, Sinclair firmly establishes the Socialist Party in America as in the lineage of the French Revolution.<PARAGRAPH>These final chapters of The Jungle shows a shift in Sinclair's narrative technique. From Chapter Two until Chapter Twenty-Eight, Sinclair uses a narrative arc, mostly of the demise of Jurgis and his family. This arc ends in Chapter Twenty-Eight and Twenty-Nine with Jurgis's conversion to Socialism. The remaining chapters of the novel move from a narrative to an explanatory style of writing. Sinclair uses the final chapters to explain the tenets and the merits of socialism to his reading audience. Scholars and critics have not always approved of this technique since it abandons the Naturalist mode of writing Sinclair established in the rest of the novel.<PARAGRAPH>The discussion between Lucas and Schliemann allows Sinclair to elaborate on the breadth of the socialist movement. Lucas's argument that Christianity can be fully reconciled with the political aspirations of socialism demonstrates the thinking of the Social Gospel movement. This movement, unofficially led by pastors and writers who often ministered in the country's working class slums, seeks to portray the Christian church as originally a socialist movement. Their goal is to reclaim the social message of the gospel and to support socialist political goals. Schliemann's arguments for socialism follow the more traditional intellectual explanation of the movement. Schliemann relies heavily on the arguments framed by Marx and Engels in The Communist Manifesto and Capital.<PARAGRAPH>The novel's ending has been another point of criticism from scholars and critics. The novel resolves with a victory, if not in actual votes than in momentum,  for the Socialist Party. Jurgis's narrative is never resolved beyond experiencing his spiritual and intellectual awakening, and the reader is unsure as to whether his life truly improved or if he remained subject to the forces of the natural world that caused his previous demise. The novel's closing chapters, critics have charged, resemble propagandist material more than literary achievement, a fault that some feel keeps The Jungle from achieving the literary ambitions that Sinclair proposed for the novel.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-28-31"}