{"name": "Chapter 17", "summary": "Chapter 17<PARAGRAPH>A man named Jack Duane joins Jurgis in his cell. Duane is an educated man who has seen much of the world. He is a professional safecracker, though he is in jail for being a public nuisance. His arrest had been because the police could gather no evidence against him for safe-cracking crimes, according to Duane. Jurgis and Duane converse about the situations that put them behind bars. Jurgis listens with wonder to Duane's stories \"of midnight ventures and perilous escapes, of feastings and orgies, of fortunes squandered in a night. Jurgis finds it pleasant to talk with such a man and Duane introduces him to all the other prisoners whom he knows by name. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis's jail is \"a Noah's ark of the city's crime. It holds all the petty thieves and vice criminals. In these criminals, Jurgis sees the worst in society and he sees how they have been beaten down by the world. Into this wild-beast tangle these men had been born without their consent, they had taken part in it because they could not help it; that they were in jail was no disgrace to them, for the game had never been fair, the dice were loaded. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis arrives back in Justice Callahan's courtroom. Teta Elzbieta and Kotrina are there in the courtroom, but Jurgis does not speak to them. Jurgis sees Connor come in wrapped in bandages. He wants to jump up and attack the man again, but he is held back by the guards. Jurgis goes before the judge, who asks him if he had beaten this man. Jurgis admits to the whole thing and, through a translator, gives the reasons why. When the judge asks Connor if it is true that he had raped Jurgis's wife, Connor denies it. The judge sentences Jurgis to thirty days in prison. He tries to cry out for his family, but the judge only tells him, \"'You would have done well to think about them before you committed the assault. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis goes to Bridewell, a prison even more filthy than the city prison. Jurgis is put to work, cracking stones to make gravel. One day, Jurgis goes to a room where he meets Stanislovas. Stanislovas tells Jurgis that Ona is very sick. She cannot go to work and lost her place at the factory. Marija has also cut her hand very badly and the doctor tells her that she might lose it. Because of a snowstorm, Stanislovas tells Jurgis that even he lost his job and now has to go sell papers with the other children. He tells Jurgis that the family is starving and that their landlords are threatening to kick them out if they do not pay the rent. He asks Jurgis for help, but Jurgis tells him there is nothing he can do while in jail. It will be three more weeks before he can return to them. Stanislovas leaves, taking Jurgis's fourteen cents, and Jurgis reels and sways before going back to work breaking stone", "analysis": "While the Christmas Eve bells symbolized a future salvation for Jurgis, that salvation has not come yet. In the opening of Chapter Seventeen, the reader sees Jurgis beginning to descend into new depths. Though he is in jail for attacking a man, Sinclair suggests that such violence is understandable, if not honorable, in the situation of poverty that Jurgis and his family find themselves. In the character of Jack Duane, however, the reader sees a new temptation for Jurgis. The seeds are planted in Jurgis's mind for a life of crime that is not so honorable, though he still has enough of his innocence and dignity left to not act on such impulses.<PARAGRAPH>A theme throughout the novel, which is apparent here, is the way in which Sinclair uses themes of American Naturalist tradition in the novel. In the American Naturalist tradition of literature, characters are driven not by any internal struggle or thought. Instead, characters lives are solely reactionary to the environment around them. They have little agency and, instead, are subject to systems of control found outside of themselves. In Sinclair's novel, this natural world includes both nature and systems of economy, government, etc. created by human thought and activity. This is evident in the way that Sinclair describes the prisoners in Bridewell. He describes how men are born \"without their consent\" and are then thrust into poverty and hardship by the world around them. This Naturalist tradition is an important part of the sustained attack Sinclair wishes to wage on capitalist systems of economy.<PARAGRAPH>Sinclair's descriptions of Jurgis's time in prison are another example of the ways in which Sinclair uncovers the unspoken injustices of \"normal\" society. Sinclair does not use much explicit irony in the novel since he attempts to maintain a political and social seriousness to the work, but the reader is allowed to make inferences about the ironic nature of society. Bridewell Prison is such an example. Though prison life is harsh, Jurgis is given food, clothing, and a place to sleep inside from the cold. Prison, thus, offers a better life than does the world outside.<PARAGRAPH>Perhaps the most wrenching scene in the novel is Ona's death. Sinclair makes the connection here between the horrors of the killing beds and the horrors of natural life forced upon the residents of Packingtown. It is in this scene, following Jurgis's moment of understanding of the way in which the natural world destines some people for lives of poverty, where Jurgis understands and comes to hate the natural systems of the world. Jurgis comes to understand the \"horrible nature of nature.\"<PARAGRAPH>Critics have used this scene in the novel to argue for Sinclair's gynophobic tendencies in the novel. The obesity, smell, and bad teeth of Madame Haupt symbolize the distaste for the female body. In the birth room, Ona's body, which had been slowly breaking down since her last experience of childbirth, is tormented and broken completely. The blood on Madame Haupt suggests the horror of childbirth and the indecency of the natural bodily functions of the woman.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-17-19"}