{"name": "Chapter 5", "summary": "Chapter 5<PARAGRAPH>The family is excited about moving into their new home, and they spend their remaining week in old Mrs. Jukniene's flat talking of the furnishings they will put into it. Everyone is impressed with the way advertisements helped them \"obtain full information as to pretty much everything a human creature could need. Through such advertisements, one can find a cure for his ills or a product that will improve his life and \"make smooth his paths through the world. Marija finds an advertisement that catches her eye. Two birds advertise a company that will \"feather your nest,\" providing furniture for a four-room house. Although they have no money left, Teta Elzbieta signs papers that allow them to pay a few dollars every month to own the things now. The family moves into their new home and begins to stock it with belongings and food. It is a \"never-ending delight, the fixing up of this house. Jurgis and Ona decide they will marry when they save up a little money, and they marvel that this is to be their home. PARAGRAPH>Jurgis is happy with his job, though he never thought of the \"flesh-and-blood side of it\" until he works on the killing floor. The pace of the workers is very fast, and Jurgis notices how the bosses hire men that can speed up the pace of the other workers and install those men in crucial positions along the killing lines. This process is \"speeding up the gang,\" and anyone who cannot keep pace loses his job. Jurgis is dismayed to learn that unlike him, most men in the factory hate their jobs. An Irish union representative approaches him and tries to make him join the union for a portion of his pay. Jurgis is furious at this and believes that every man should work as he is able and receive just compensation for this work. Although Jurgis does not know what \"laissez-faire\" economics is, \"he had been round the world enough to know that a man has to shift for himself in it, and that if he gets the worst of it, there is nobody to listen to him holler. PARAGRAPH>However, Jurgis is also bothered by the fact that his father Dede Antanas cannot find work. One day, a man approaches Antanas and offers to give him a job if Antanas will give him part of his pay. Jurgis asks his friend Tamoszius Kuszleika about such arrangements, and Tamoszius tells him that some of the bosses make such deals in order to put more money into their pockets. When the bosses' supervisors find out, they make the bosses give part of their pay in order to stay out of trouble, and the whole scam moves up the chain of command. Durham, Tamoszius explained, is a company run by a man seeking to make as much money as possible and he \"did not care in the least how he did it. Below him are managers and bosses that attempt to squeeze out as much work from the man below him as possible. At the bottom are workers like Jurgis and him, all living in terror of losing their jobs. The factory is a \"seething cauldron of jealousies and hatreds. Tamoszius assures Jurgis that no man can rise without being a \"knave. PARAGRAPH>Only two days after starting his job, Antanas comes home raging of the horrors of the place. Antanas's job is to clean the traps. After beef is removed from a chemical vat for canning, they dump the remains on the floor where they are swept into a drain. Every week, Antanas must clean out the drain and put the disgusting waste into the same truck that hauls away the good meat for canning. Jurgis also finds that his job has similar horrors. Cattle that are about the give birth to calves are not fit for food, yet when a calving cow comes along, the men simply strip the calve out of the cow, and Jurgis pushes it down a drain where it is skinned and butchered for food. The cow is then skinned and butchered, and its meat is snuck past the government inspector and put in with the rest of the meat. One evening, Jurgis has the job of clearing out all the wounded or dead cattle from the train cars. Those cattle are then butchered, and the rotting meat is scattered amongst the good meat so that no one knows the difference. After this experience, Jurgis returns home \"having begun to see at last how those might be right who had laughed at him for his faith in America", "analysis": "Sinclair begins Chapter Five with a sarcastic assault on the advertising industry. Before the late nineteenth century, advertising had mostly consisted of selling space in newspapers and publications. Industries focused their advertisements on listing available items and services. With the industrial revolution in the nineteenth century, advertising transitioned into an industry of influence; advertisers helped companies distinguish themselves and their products from other products. Sinclair attacks the advertising industry because of its duplicitous nature. Advertisements portray a product in the best light, yet in doing so they often lie to consumers about the quality of products. Jurgis and his family are too naive to know about such lies and tricks, so they believe that such advertisements are meant to inform them, not persuade them.<PARAGRAPH>This ignorance of the ways of capitalist society and its mechanisms of persuasion and trickery exemplify the innocence of Jurgis and his family. The family, in this way, is an archetype of innocence. An archetype is a character that represents common themes in culture. The loss of innocence archetype is most commonly associated with the story of Adam and Eve from the Hebrew Bible. These characters come into the world without understanding the way in which the culture around them has devolved into a \"sinful\" world that seeks to take advantage of them. The result is that such archetypes lose their naive understandings of the world by going through extreme hardships. Often the loss of innocence involves death.<PARAGRAPH>Tamoszius Kuszleika's speech to Jurgis explaining the mechanism of worker exploitation in the meat packing factories is one of the novel's important passages. Tamoszius is now his own character, yet he also retains some identification with Sinclair's own personality in the first chapter. By explaining the mechanisms of capitalist exploitation in the factories, Tamoszius acts as a kind of prophet, foretelling Jurgis's future in the industry as the story of everyman's struggle to survive. This is similar to Sinclair's own understanding of his role in writing the novel.<PARAGRAPH>In his innocence, Jurgis denies the principles of laissez-faire economics to Tamoszius. Laissez-faire is an economic system that stipulates that all industry should be free from governmental regulation or control. In laissez-faire economics, a society will succeed through the mechanisms of pure capitalism in which individuals and individual corporations can grow at any cost and without interference. Jurgis does not understand that such a system usually only applies in a macroeconomic sense, to large economies and industries. In the microeconomic sense, laissez-faire economics seeks to take advantage of those persons or industries that are smaller and less influential. No person is smaller in the novel than Jurgis, though he does not initially understand this dynamic.<PARAGRAPH>Grandmother Majauszkiene also serves a prophetic role in the novel. She gives the family the history of Packingtown and tells them of the particular history of their house. Everyone in that house undergoes intense hardships and each family has lost a child while living there. This is an instance of foreshadowing for, in a future chapter, Jurgis and Ona will lose two children. The loss of Jurgis's first-born son will be a turning point in the novel.<PARAGRAPH>In Chapter Seven, Sinclair uses Chicago's brutal weather as a metaphor for the family's growing difficulty and as a chance to foreshadow their demise. The weather is described in both realistic and metaphorical terms. As an example of realism, the cold rain of December causes severe illness in Ona. This begins her physical hardships, which directly cause her emotional and mental hardships. As a metaphor, Sinclair describes the way in which the weather kills the blooming trees and flowers of summer. The blooming foliage represents the dream of Jurgis and the family. The weather represents the general conditions that cause the family's demise.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-5-7"}