{"name": "Chapter 14", "summary": "CHAPTER SUMMARY AND NOTES CHAPTER 14 Summary The monster now learns the history of his \"protectors.\" He has been living on the property of a French family by the name of De Lacey. This family is quite well known in France: Felix was a soldier, while Agatha figures among ladies of high distinction. They were once quite well off, but now they are in exile in Germany. Safie's father, a Turkish merchant, was accused of betraying the French government, for which he was tried and imprisoned. Felix, who was present at the trial and enraged at the injustice he saw, decided to help him to escape from prison, and in the process, he fell in love with Safie. Her mother is a Christian Arab who had been enslaved by the Turks. A day before the execution, Felix helped the Turk to escape from Paris. Felix had passports for himself, Agatha and their father, who were residing in some obscure place in Paris. Felix took them through France to Lyon and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the Turk tried to depart for Turkish territory. Little did Felix know that the Turk was using him to escape. He did not want Safie to marry Felix, but instead wanted her to return to Constantinople. In the meantime, Agatha and Felix's father were imprisoned. Felix decided to rescue them. He insisted that Safie should be lodged at a convent at Leghorn. Agatha and De Lacey were in prison for months. They lost their wealth and were sent into exile. The monster finds them living in Germany. The Turk and Safie escaped from Italy, and the former sent Felix a sum of money to aid him in future plans. The Turk had expected Safie to forget all about Felix, but she refused to do so. He learned that they were not safe at Leghorn anymore and planned to leave for Constantinople. However, Safie left Italy for Germany. She traveled with an attendant who spoke her language. Some distance away from the cottage of De Lacey, the attendant fell ill and died. After this, Safie was on her own until she arrived safely at the cottage of the De Lacey family. Notes This chapter concentrates on the story of the De Lacey family and how they have ended up in their present condition. They had been an affluent family. However, they are brought to ruin by Safie's father, a cunning man, who uses Felix for ulterior motives. His daughter stands in stark contrast to him. She is kind-hearted and mild mannered and does not betray her lover, Felix. The reasons for the Turk's betrayal of the government are not specified. However, everyone considers the death sentence pronounced on him to be a severe judgment. They believed his wealth and religion had been the major cause. This indicates a criticism of the government for its nationalist tendencies. In addition, Safie's plight as a woman is well portrayed. Her mother, a Christian Arab, is enslaved by the Turks. She has taught her daughter an independence of spirit, which was perhaps rare for female followers of Mohammed. The status of women in the society is illustrated. Safie's defiance of the orthodox rules dictated by her religion and her bold move in marrying a Christian are notable.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820054109/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmFrankenstein25.asp"}