{"name": "Chapter 11", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417171403/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-house-of-the-seven-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-10-12", "summary": "The Arched Window: Clifford seemed content to spend one day after another interminably in the way previously described, but Phoebe often would suggest that he should look to life outside of the house. Clifford was the most inveterate of conservatives. All antique fashions were dear to him. One afternoon a scissor-grinder stops by Pyncheon Street in front of the arched window. Children come running with their mothers' scissors for sharpening. The disagreeable sound annoys everyone but Clifford, who listens with rapturous delight, for the sound had a brisk life and was a reminder of the past. Clifford would lament that there were no stagecoaches nowadays. Only those things that Clifford found beautiful did not need the association of the past. Often Italian boys with barrel-organs would be on Pyncheon Street. They would grind the organs and out would pop little figures, such as a scholar with his book, a miser with his gold, and two lovers kissing. The lovers' kiss was the saddest of these when it ended. Clifford became sad when the organ-grinder would stop, and others could not comprehend his emotions. He went into a tumult, and Hepzibah and Phoebe thought that he went mad. Clifford needed a shock to return to human life; perhaps he even required the great final remedy of death. Clifford mentions to Hepzibah that he could pray again if he went to church, if only because he would have others around him praying. They prepare to go to church, but Clifford relents. He claims that they are ghosts who have no right among human beings, doomed to haunt their house. However, this is not a fair picture of his existence, for Clifford spent most of his time with a childlike lack of grief. One afternoon Clifford was blowing soap bubbles when Judge Pyncheon passes by the house. He makes a sarcastic comment about Clifford still blowing soap bubbles. A palsy of fear overcomes Clifford, as he felt the original horror of the judge proper to a weak character in the presence of such strength.", "analysis": "From the arched window of the House of the Seven Gables, Clifford has a view of the outside world but cannot actually be part of it. Clifford shows the most affinity for those things in the window that remind him most of childhood in general and his experiences as a youth in particular. Clifford is not simply a man who exhibits childlike characteristics; he exists as a youth whose maturation was completely interrupted by his prison sentence. He can only experience fragments of that life he experienced before convicted of murder. Hawthorne uses the organ grinder and its dancing figures as a metaphor with multiple meanings. The miniature figures on the organ are dense with meaning. They share some affinity with the existence that Clifford experiences. They go through the motions of life but are nevertheless only replicas of actual life. And like Clifford, these figures are subjected to periodic interruptions; just as Clifford experienced decades of cruel stasis while in jail, the figures stop at the whim of the organ grinder. The kissing lovers are the most tragic of these figures because, like Clifford, they are barred from human intercourse. The other figures are solitary persons engaged in simple labor, thus the interruption in their activity only stops them from performing simple, isolated tasks. Hawthorne does not limit the metaphorical implications of the organ grinder to Clifford. He instead inflates the metaphor to encompass all of society. The interruptions in the figures' movement exposes the absurdity of the individual act when examined in a static state. Each of these figures is subject to the whims of the organ grinder, unable to control his fate, but Hawthorne sees this as ridiculous rather than the cause for cynicism. Hawthorne does mention that the scene may indicate how all persons are subject to the same fate and how one's actions eventually come to nothing, but he dismisses this as the musings of a bitter cynic. Rather, Hawthorne adopts for a less nihilistic perspective, intending the scene to show how each of these figures returns to its original state. All return to precisely the same condition as before, corresponding to the novel's theme of the recurring past. Hawthorne does not find the actions of these figures meaningless, for the action is an end in itself. The figures are defined by their actions, thus they cease to have meaning when they stop performing that action. This relates back to Clifford, who exists as one of the figures in stasis. He lacks the humanizing quality of action. Clifford finally loses his final traces of sanity when he has his most firm grip on reality. He realizes that both he and Hepzibah are not fit to be around normal people, for they exist as ghosts haunting the House of the Seven Gables. He can only find comfort in his childlike behavior, which contrasts sharply with that of the imposing Judge Pyncheon, whose appearance is a sharp reminder that Clifford is not completely isolated within the house. Although Clifford believes he is a ghost, his actions are visible through the arched window. This is particularly painful for Clifford because the Judge intrudes upon Clifford's fragile reality. Clifford demonstrates a palpable fear of the Judge based on past events; these events, Hawthorne indicates, may conform to Pyncheon custom and repeat"}