{"name": "chapter 23", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417141554/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Around_The_World_In_80_Days/Around_The_World_In_Eighty_Days24.html", "summary": "The next morning Passepartout is famished and resolves that he just has to get himself something to eat. Before becoming a strolling artist, he decides to change his garments for old clothes. He gets into a Japanese robe and has a small breakfast. While moving towards the docks, he sees an immense placard carried by a sort of clown. Following the clown, he reaches Honorable Batulcar's establishment, who is the manager of a troupe of buffoons, jugglers, clowns, acrobats and gymnasts. Passepartout finds employment with Batulcar as a Jack-of-all-work and he is happy because within a week, he would be on his way to San Francisco with the rest to of the troupe. He was to lend the support of his shoulders in the making of the 'human cluster' accompanied by the Long Noses of the god Tingou. This is a part of the performance in a large hall. When it is the chance for the 'human cluster' Passepartout takes his place at the bottom of the pyramid. But when he sees his master in the audience, he moves away and the human structure collapses. Honorable Batulcar is furious but his wrath is silenced by Fogg who throws some banknotes to him. Fogg, Aouda and Passepartout manage to board the American boat, together once again.", "analysis": "Notes We are with Passepartout in Yokohama  again. His adventures in this Japanese City form the main focus of this chapter. Passepartout, like his master is a never say die man who is capable of looking after himself. We saw how Passepartout roughed out the day before in Yokohama. Now in his second day at Yokohama he starts fending for himself. After selling his old clothes he gets some money, which he uses to eat something. Passepartout decides to go and get some employment at the dock. On his way, he sees a poster that interests him and he finds employment with a manager of a troupe. We know that Passepartout has lead a colorful and exciting life before joining Fogg. We realize it even more now. We are told that he sings well and now we see that he is acrobatic as well. He gets hired as a long nosed stuntman who has to be a supporting pillar at the base of a human pyramid. We see an interesting character-the Honorable Batulcar. He makes a very interesting statement about his two reliable servants being his two hands. But he is just as greedy as the other people that Fogg comes across. When Passepartout breaks the pyramid with his impatience, Fogg recompenses Batulcar with some bank notes. We are glad as readers that Fogg and Passepartout are reunited. Fogg comes to see Honorable Batulcar's troupe and that's where Fogg and Passepartout meet. Now Aouda, Fogg and Passepartout aboard the American liner for America. They are on track once again and we wait to see how they will fare in their travels."}