NOTE ON THE RELIGION OF THE SALVATION ARMY



The religious faith of the Salvation Army, as I have observed and
understand it (for little has been said to me on this matter), is
extremely simple. It believes in an eternal Heaven for the righteous
and--a sad doctrine this, some of us may think--in a Hell, equally
eternal, for the wicked.[8] Its bedrock is the Bible, especially the
New Testament, which it accepts as true without qualification, from
the first word to the last, troubling itself with no doubts or
criticisms. Especially does it believe in the dual nature of the
Saviour, in Christ as God, and in Christ as man, and in the
possibility of forgiveness and redemption for even the most degraded
and defiled of human beings. Love is its watchword, the spirit of love
is its spirit, love arrayed in the garments of charity.

In essentials, with one exception, its doctrines much resemble those
of the Church of England, and of various dissenting Protestant bodies.
The exception is, that it does not make use of the Sacraments, even of
that of Communion, although, on the other hand, it does not deny the
efficacy of those Sacraments, or object to others, even if they be
members of the Army, availing themselves of them. Thus, I have known
an Army Officer to join in the Communion Service. The reason for this
exception is, I believe, that in the view of General Booth, the
Sacraments complicate matters, are open to argument and attack, and
are not understood by the majority of the classes with which the Army
deals. How their omission is reconciled with certain prominent
passages and directions laid down in the New Testament I do not know.
To me, I confess, this disregard of them seems illogical.

The motto of the Army is 'Salvation for all,' and, as I have hinted in
these pages, it has a sure conviction of the essential persistence of
miracle in these modern days. It holds that when a man kneels at the
Penitent-Form and 'gets converted,' a miracle takes place within him,
if his repentance is true, and that thenceforward some Grace from on
High will give him the power to overcome the evil in his heart and
blood.

It believes, too, in the instant efficacy of earnest prayer, and in
the possibility of direct communication by this means between man and
his Maker.

Here is an instance of this statement. While inspecting the Shelters
in one of the provincial cities, I was shown a certain building which
had recently passed into the possession of the Army. The Officer who
was conducting me said that the negotiations preliminary to the
acquisition of the lease of this building had been long and difficult.
I remarked that these must have caused him anxiety. 'Oh, no,' he
answered, simply. 'You see I had talked with the Lord about it, and I
knew that we should get the place in the end.'

This reply may cause some to smile, but I confess I find such
childlike faith touching and even beautiful.

There is small doubt that consciously or unconsciously, the Salvation
Army has followed St. Paul's example of being all things to all men,
if 'by all means' it may save some. This is the reason of its methods
which to many seem so vulgar and offensive. Once I spoke to an Officer
high up in the Army of this matter, instancing, amongst other things,
its brass bands and loud-voiced preaching at street corners.

'My dear sir,' he replied, 'if we came to convert _you_, we should not
bring a brass band or send a missionary who shouted out sacred names
every minute. Possibly, if we thought that you were open to the
influences of music, we might send a first-rate violinist to play
pieces from the classical masters, and we should certainly send a man
whom we knew to be your intellectual equal, and who could therefore
appeal to your reason. But our mission at present is not so much to
you and your class, as to the dregs of humanity. The folk we deal with
live in a state of noise of which you have no conception, and if we
want to force them to listen to us, we must begin by making a greater
noise in order to attract their attention at all. In the same way it
is of no use wasting subtleties on them; we have to go straight to the
main points, which are clear and sharp enough to pierce their
drink-besotted intelligences, or to reach any fragment of conscience
they may have remaining in them.'

I thought the argument sound and well put, and results have proved its
force, since the Salvation Army undoubtedly gets a hold of people that
few other forms of religious effort seem able to grasp, at least to
any considerable extent.

I wish to make it clear, however, that I hold no particular brief for
the Army, its theology, and its methods. I recognize fully, as I know
it does, the splendid work that is being done in the religious and
social fields by other Organizations of the same class, especially by
Dr. Barnardo's Homes, by the Waifs and Strays Society, by the Church
Army, and, above all, perhaps, by another Society, with which I have
had the honour to be connected in a humble capacity for many years,
that for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. Still it remains true
that the Salvation Army is unique, if only on account of the colossal
scale of its operations. Its fertilizing stream flows on steadily from
land to land, till it bids fair to irrigate the whole earth. What I
have written about is but one little segment of a work which
flourishes everywhere, and even lifts its head in Roman Catholic
countries, although in these, as yet, it makes no very great progress.

How potent then, and how generally suited to the needs of stained and
suffering mankind, must be that religion which appeals both to the
West and to the East, which is as much at home in Java and Korea as it
is in Copenhagen or Glasgow. For it should be borne in mind that the
basis of the Salvation Army is religious, that it aims, above
everything, at the conversion of men to an active and lively faith in
the plain, uncomplicated tenets of Christianity to the benefit of
their souls in some future state of existence and, incidentally, to
the Reformation of their characters while on earth.

The social work of which I have been treating is a mere by-product or
consequence of its main idea. Experience has shown, that it is of
little use to talk about his soul to a man with an empty stomach.
First, he must be fed and cleansed and given some other habitation
than the street. Also the Army has learned that Christ still walks the
earth in the shape of Charity; and that religion, after all, is best
preached by putting its maxims into practice; that the poor are always
with us; and that the first duty of the Christian is to bind their
wounds and soothe their sorrows. Afterwards, he may hope to cure them
of their sins, for he knows that unless such a cure is effected,
temporal assistance avails but little. Except in cases of pure
misfortune which stand upon another, and, so far as the Army work is
concerned, upon an outside footing, the causes of the fall must be
removed, or that fall will be repeated. The man or woman must be born
again, must be regenerated. Such, as I understand it, is at once the
belief of the Salvation Army and the object of all its efforts.
Therefore, I give to this book its title of 'Regeneration.'




THE NEED IS GREAT!

       *       *       *       *       *

_The principal items of the Salvation Army's expenditure for Social
Work during the financial year ending September 30, 1911, are as
follows, and help is earnestly asked to meet these, the work being
entirely dependent upon Voluntary Gifts_.

For Maintenance of Work amongst the Destitute
  and Outcast Men and Women, including Shelters
  for Homeless Men and Women, Homes for Children,
  Rescue Homes, etc.....................................  L15,000

For Maintenance of the Slum Sisterhood and Nurses
  for the Sick Poor.....................................   L3,000

For Prison Visitation Staff and Prison-Gate Work........   L5,000

For Work among Youths and Boys..........................   L2,000

For Special Relief and Distress Agencies................   L5,000

For Development of the Work and Agricultural
  Departments of the Hadleigh Colony....................   L3,000

For Assistance and Partial Maintenance of the
  Unemployed and Inefficient............................   L5,000

For Assisting suitable Men and Women to Emigrate........   L3,000

Towards the provision of New Institutions for Men
  and Boys in London and various provincial Cities......  L10,000

For the General Management and Supervision of all
  the above Operations..................................   L2,000
                                                          -------
                                                          L53,000

Cheques and Postal Orders should be made payable to WILLIAM BOOTH,
crossed 'Bank of England, Law Courts Branch,' and sent to MRS. BOOTH,
101 Queen Victoria Street, London, E.C. Clothes for the poor and
articles for sale are always needed.




LEGACIES

       *       *       *       *       *

Ladies and Gentlemen are earnestly asked to remember the needs of the
Salvation Army's Social Work (the 'Darkest England' Social Scheme), in
connexion with the preparation of their wills.

       *       *       *       *       *

All kinds of property can now be legally bequeathed for charitable
purposes, and the following form of legacy is recommended. Where a
legacy does not consist of a certain amount of money, care should be
taken to identify clearly the property, shares, stock, or whatever it
may be intended to be bequeathed.

_'I GIVE AND BEQUEATH TO WILLIAM BOOTH, or other the General for the
time being of the Salvation Army, and Director of the "Darkest
England" Social Scheme, the sum of L............_ (or) _MY TWO
freehold houses known as Nos.......... in the county
of................_ (or) _my L............ ordinary stock of the
London and North-Western Railway Company_ (or) _my shares
in............Limited_ (or as the case may be) _to be used or applied
by him, at his discretion, for the general purposes of the "Darkest
England" Social Scheme. And I direct the said last-mentioned Legacy to
be paid within twelve months after my decease.'_

       *       *       *       *       *

DIRECTIONS FOR EXECUTION OF WILL

       *       *       *       *       *

The Will must be executed by the Testator in the presence of two
witnesses, who must sign their names, addresses, and occupations at
the end of the Will in the presence of the Testator. The best method
to adopt for a Testator to be quite sure that his Will is executed
properly, is for him to take the Will and his two witnesses into a
room, lock the door, and tell the witnesses that he wishes them to
attest his Will. All three must sign in the room and nobody must go
out until all have signed.

GENERAL BOOTH will always be pleased to procure further advice for any
friends desiring to benefit the Salvation Army's work in any of its
departments, by Will or otherwise, and will treat any communications
made to him on the subject as strictly private and confidential.
Letters dealing with the matter should be marked Private, and
addressed to GENERAL BOOTH, 101 QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, E.C.




APPENDIX A


NOTES ON THE ARMY'S FUTURE

(Following My Conversation with Mr. Rider Haggard)

BY BRAMWELL BOOTH

When asked to give my own view of the present and probable future
influence of the Salvation Army upon the world, I feel in no danger of
exaggeration. If any one could imagine what it has been for me to sit
at its centre almost without intermission for more than thirty-five
years, receiving continual reports of its development and progress in
one nation after another, studying from within not only its strength
and vitality, but its weaknesses and failures, and labouring to devise
remedies and preventatives, until what was a little unknown Mission in
the East End of London has become the widely, I might almost say, the
universally recognized Army of to-day, he could perhaps understand
something of my great confidence.

Curious indeed seem to be the thoughts of many people about
us!--people, I mean, who have only had a glance at one of our open-air
meetings, or have only heard some wild challenge of General Booth's
good faith, and have then more or less carefully avoided any closer
acquaintance with us. They often appear to be under the impression
that you have only to persuade a few people to march through any
crowded thoroughfare with a band, to gather a congregation, and, if
you please, to form out of it an Army, and from that again to secure a
vast revenue! I often wish that such people could know the struggles
of almost every individual, even amongst the very poorest, between the
moment of first contact with us and that of resolving to enlist in our
ranks. How few, even now, seem aware of the fact that so far from
paying or rewarding any one for joining in our efforts, all who do so
are from the first called upon daily not only to give to our funds,
but by sacrifice of time, labour, money, and often of health as well,
to constitute themselves efficient soldiers of their Corps, and assist
in providing it with every necessity.

Every one of the 3,000,000 meetings held annually, even in this
country, depends upon the voluntary giving up of the time and effort
of working-men and women who have in most cases to hurry from work to
home, and from home to meeting-place, after a hard day's labour. Much
the same may be said of the 450,000 meetings held annually on the
Continent of Europe; with this difference, that our people there have
mostly to begin work earlier in the day, and to conclude much later
than is the case here. Their evening meetings, in conformity with the
habits of the country concerned, must needs be begun, therefore,
later, and conclude much later than similar gatherings in the United
Kingdom.

A cursory glance through the seventy-four newspapers and periodicals
published by the Army--generally weekly--in twenty-one languages,
would show any one how variously our people everywhere are seeking to
meet the different habits of life in each country, and how constantly
new plans are being tried to attain the supreme object of all our
multitudinous agencies--the arousing of men's attention to the claims
of God and their ingathering to His Kingdom.

The original plan adopted in this country of going to the people by
means of meetings and marches in the streets, is in many lands not
legally permissible, while in others it is almost useless. Our
leaders, therefore, have always to be finding out other means of
attaining the same end. This has resulted in very great gains of
liberty in several ways. On the Continent, for example, though it is
not possible to get a general permission to hold open-air meetings in
the streets, it is becoming more and more usual to let our people hold
such gatherings in the large pleasure-grounds, provided within or on
the outskirts both of the great cities and the lesser towns. In some
cases the announcements of further meetings, made somewhat after the
style of the public crier, develops into a series of short open-air
addresses. In other cases, conspicuously in Italy, where our work is
only as yet in its infancy--the sale of our paper, both by individual
hawkers and by groups of comrades singing the songs it contains in
marketplaces, largely makes up for the want of the more regularized
open-air work.

And in the courts of the great blocks of buildings which abound in
cities like Berlin, Copenhagen, Stockholm, and elsewhere, meetings are
held which are really often more effective in impressing whole
families of various classes than any of our open-air proceedings in
countries like England and the United States.

But everywhere the Army seeks especially, though not by any means
exclusively, for those who are to be found frequenting the
public-houses, cafes, beer gardens, dives, saloons, and other
drinking-places of the world. In all countries our people sell our
papers amidst these crowds, as well as at the doors of the theatres
and other places of amusement, and the mere offer of these papers, now
that their unflinching character as to God and goodness is well known,
constitutes an act of war, a submission to which in so many million
cases is no slight evidence of confidence among the masses of the
people in our sincerity, and, so far, a sign of our success.

But 'The War Cry' seller is in the countries of more scattered
population, such as Switzerland, some of the colonies, and large parts
of India, much more than is the case in the big cities, the
representative of every form of helpfulness. He, or she, not merely
offers the paper for sale to those who have neither opportunity nor
inclination to attend religious services of any kind, but enters
himself where no paper ever comes, holds little meetings with groups
of those who have never prayed, heartens those who are sinking down
under pressure of calamity, visits the sick-room of the friendless,
and often becomes the intermediary of the suffering and destitute and
those who can help them in their dismal necessities.

Of the persistent hopefulness with which our people everywhere go to
the apparently abandoned, I will only say that it constitutes a store
of moral and material help, not only for those people themselves, but
for all who become acquainted with it, the value of which in the
present it is difficult to exaggerate, and the influence of which on
the future it is equally difficult to over-estimate.

While leaving the utmost possible freedom for initiative to our
leaders, we are seeking everywhere to solidify and regularize every
effort that has once been shown to be of any practical use. Any one
amongst us, down to the youngest and poorest in any part of the world,
may do a new thing next week which will prove a blessing to his
fellows, and some one will be on the watch to see that that good
thing, once done, be repeated, and, so far as may be, kept up in
perpetuity.

Where special classes of needs exist, we must of course employ special
agencies. The vitality and adaptability of the Army in the presence of
new opportunities is one of the happy auguries for the future. While
all that is virile and forceful in it increases, there is less and
less of the rigid and formal.

Fourteen or fifteen years ago some Officers were set apart to visit
the Lapps who range over all the Territories to the north of
Scandinavia. This meant at first only months of solitary travelling
during the summer, and no little suffering in the winter, with little
apparent result. But gradually a system of meetings was established,
the people's confidence was gained, and at length it has been found
possible to group together various centres of regular activity amongst
these interesting but little-known people, and now experienced leaders
will see both to the permanence of all that has already been begun,
and to the further extension of the work.

In Holland, where our work has assumed the proportions of a national
movement, the beneficent effects of which are recognized by all
classes, the canal population is helped by means of a small sailing
ship, on which are held regular meetings for them. Our Norwegian
people also have a life-boat called the _Catherine Booth_ stationed
upon a stormy and difficult part of the coast, which not only goes out
to help into safety boats and boats' crews, but whose crew also holds
meetings on islands in remote fisher hamlets where no other religious
visitors come.

The same principle of adaptation to local conditions and requirements
will, I doubt not, quickly ensure success for the small detachment of
Officers we have just sent to commence operations in Russia.

In Dutch India we have not only a growing Missionary work amongst both
Javanese and Chinese, but Government Institutions have been placed
under our care, where lepers, the blind, and other infirm natives, as
well as neglected children, are medically cared for and helped in
other ways.

In South Africa, both English and Dutch-speaking peoples are united
under one Flag, and give themselves up to work amongst the native
races round them--races which constitute so grave a problem in the
eyes of all thoughtful men who know anything of the true position in
South Africa. One of the latest items of news is that an Angoni has
accepted salvation at one of our settlements in Mashonaland, and on
return to his own home and work--lying away between Lake Nyassa and
the Zambezi--has begun to hold meetings and to exercise an influence
upon his people which cannot but end in the establishment of our work
amongst them.

But, to my mind, one of the most important features of our work in all
Eastern and African lands is our development of the native power under
experienced guidance to purely Salvationist and therefore
non-political purposes. Surely the most potent possible corrective for
the sort of half rebel influence that has grown or is growing up in
Africa under the name of Ethiopianism, as well as for much of the
strange uneasiness among the dumb masses of India, is the complete
organization of native races under leaders who, whilst of their own
people, are devoted to the highest ethical aims, and stand in happy
subjection to men of other lands who have given them a training in
discipline and unity which does not contemplate bloodshed.

We are now beginning both in India and Africa, as well as in the West
Indies, to find experienced native Officers capable of taking Staff
positions; that is, of becoming reliable leaders in large districts
where we are at work. These men have not merely all the advantages of
language and of fitness for the varieties of climate which are so
trying to Westerners, but they show a courage and tenacity and
tact--in short, a capacity for leadership and administration such as
no one--at any rate, no one that I know of--expected to find in them.
Here is opened a prospect of the highest significance.

More than can be easily estimated has been done in spreading
information about us for some years past by Salvationists belonging to
various national armies and navies. We encourage all such men to group
themselves into brigades, so far as may be allowed, in their various
barracks and ships. Thus united, they work for their mutual
encouragement, and for the spreading of good influences among others.
It was such a little handful that really began our work in the West
Indies, and we have now a Corps in Sierra Leone, on the west coast of
Africa, formed by men of a West Indian regiment temporarily quartered
there. The same thing has happened in Sumatra by means of Dutch and
Javanese soldiers.

For British India we naturally felt ourselves first of all, as to the
heathen world, under obligation to do something. And no inconsiderable
results have followed the efforts which were first commenced there
twenty-eight years ago. Our pioneers, though they greatly disturbed
the official white world, won the hearts of the people at a stroke, by
wearing Indian dress, living amongst and in the style of the poorer
villages. Soon Indian converts offered themselves for service, and
after training; were commissioned as Officers, and it was at once seen
that they would be far more influential than any foreigners. From the
point at which that discovery was really made, the work assumed
important proportions, passing at once in large measure from the
position of a foreign mission to being a movement of the people
themselves.

The vastness of the country and the difference of language have led to
our treating it as five separate commands, now under the general lead
of one headquarters. Incidentally, this has helped us in dealing with
some of the difficulties connected with caste, as it has been possible
to remove Indian Officers from one part of India to another, and we
have made some efforts which have, I admit, proved less successful in
some districts than in others, to deal with castes which, within their
own lines, are often little more than Trade Unions with a mixture of
superstition.

Meanwhile, the practical character of our work has shown itself in
efforts to help in various ways the lowest of the people to improve
their circumstances. The need for this is instantly apparent when one
reflects that some 40,000,000 of the inhabitants of India are always
hungry. A system of loan banks, which has now been adopted in part by
the Government, has been of great service to the small
agriculturalists. The invention of an extremely simple and yet greatly
improved hand loom has proved, and will prove, very valuable to the
weavers. New plans of relief in times of scarcity and famine have also
greatly helped in some districts to win the confidence of the people.
Industrial schools, chiefly for orphan children, have also been a
feature of the work in some districts.

Recently the Government, having seen with what success our people have
laboured for the salvation of the lower castes, have decided to hand
over to us the special care of several of the criminal tribes, who are
really the remnants of the Aborigines. Although this work is at
present only in its experimental stage, all who have examined the
results so far have been delighted at the rapidity with which we have
brought many into habits of self-supporting industry, who, with their
fathers before them, had been accustomed to live entirely by plunder.
About 2,000 persons of this class are already under our care.

There are some 3,000,000 of these robbers in different parts of India.
They are only kept under anything like control at great cost for
police and military supervision; but we are satisfied that, if
reasonable support be given, a great proportion of them can be
reclaimed from their present courses of idleness and crime, and in any
case their children can be saved.

We have been able in India, perhaps more than in any other part of the
world, to realize the international character of our work by linking
together Officers from England, Germany, Holland, and the Scandinavian
countries, as well as from America, in the one great object of helping
the heathen peoples. But most of all we have rejoiced in being able to
blend East and West, European Officers having often been placed under
more experienced Indian comrades, as well as vice versa. The great
common purpose dominating all sections of the Army, and the influences
of the Spirit of God, have united men of different levels of
intelligence, and knit them together in the same fellowship, without
any unwise mingling of races. We have now 2,000 Officers in India, and
that alone is a testimony of the highest significance to the success
of our efforts, and to the possibilities which lie before us. But even
more important in its bearing upon the future, in my estimation, is
the wonderful ambition dominating our people there to reach every
class, but most of all to deal with the low caste, or outcast, as they
are sometimes called. Many of our Indian Officers have followed in the
steps of our pioneers in the country, and, consumed by an enthusiasm
amounting to a passion for their fellows, have literally sacrificed
their lives in the ceaseless pressing forward of their work.

In America we have had to deal, perhaps, with the other extreme of
human needs. Throughout Canada there is very little to be seen of
poverty and wretchedness. In the United States the great cities begin
indeed to have areas of vice and misery not to be surpassed in any of
the older cities of the world. But everywhere we have found people who
have become forgetful of God, neglectful of every higher duty, and
abandoned to one or other form of selfishness. Our work in the United
States especially has been confronted with difficulties peculiar to
the country, its widespread populations and their cosmopolitan
character being not the least of these. Nevertheless, we have now in
the States and Canada nearly 4,000 Officers leading the work in 1,380
Corps and Societies, and 350 Social Institutions. I ought to say that
it has not been found easy to raise large numbers in many places, but
of the generosity and devotion of those who have united themselves
with us, and the immense amount of work which they accomplish for
their fellows, it is impossible to speak too highly.

I look with confidence to the future in both these great countries.
Governments and local Authorities are beginning to grant us the
facilities and help we need to deal effectually with their abandoned
classes, as well as to attack some other problems of a difficult
nature. Within the last few years, we have placed in Canada more than
50,000 emigrants, chiefly from this country. Their characteristics,
and their success in their new surroundings, have won for us the
highest commendation of the Authorities concerned.

In the vast fields of South America, we have as yet only small forces,
but we have established a good footing with the various populations,
and have already received no inconsiderable help for our purely
philanthropic work from several of the Governments. Our latest new
extensions, Chile, Paraguay, and Peru, and Panama, seem to offer
prospects of success, even greater than we have been able to record in
the Argentine or Uruguay. Before your book is published, we shall
probably have made a beginning also in both Bolivia and Brazil.

The South American Republics--chiefly populated by the descendants of
the poorest classes of Southern Europe--are professedly Roman
Catholic. The influence of the priesthood, however, owing to various
causes, seems to be on the wane, and a habit of abandoning all
religious thought is much on the increase. But the realization that
our people never attack any Church, or quibble about details of creed
and ceremonial, has won their way to the hearts of many, and there can
be no doubt that we have a great future amongst these peoples. In Peru
the law does not allow any persons not of the Romish Church to offer
prayer in public places, but when it was found that our Officers made
no trouble of this, but managed all the same to hold open-air and
theatre services very much in our usual style, great numbers of the
people were astonished at the 'new religion,' and so many had soon
begun to pray 'in private' that we have little doubt about the future
of our work there.

In thinking of the future, I cannot overlook our plans of organization
which have, I am persuaded, much to do with the proper maintenance and
continuance of the work we have taken in hand.

While striving as much as possible to avoid red tape, or indeed any
methods likely to hinder initiative and enterprise, we are careful to
apply a systemization comprehensible to the most untrained minds, so
that we may make every one feel a proper degree of responsibility, as
well as guard them from mere emotionalism and spasmodic activity,
accompanied as that kind of thing often is, by general neglect.

Thus no one can join the Army until after satisfying the local Officer
and some resident of the place during a period of trial of the
sincerity of his profession. He must then sign our Articles of War.
These Articles describe precisely our doctrines, our promise to
abstain from intoxicants, worldly pleasures, and fashions, bad or
unworthy language, or conduct, and unfairness to either employer or
employe, as well as our purpose to help and benefit those around us.
(See Appendix B.)

Some local voluntary worker becomes responsible for setting each
recruit a definite task in connexion with our efforts, and all are
placed under the general oversight of their Captain. A Corps, which is
the unit of our Organization, is organized under a Captain and
Lieutenant who have been trained in the work they have to do as
leaders. Corps are linked together into divisions under Officers, who,
in addition to seeing that they regularly carry out their work, have
the oversight of a considerable tract of country, with the duty of
extending our operations within that area. In some countries a number
of divisions are sometimes grouped into provinces with an Officer in
charge of the whole province, and each country has its national
headquarters under a Territorial Commissioner, all being under the
lead of the International Headquarters in London.

No time is wasted in committee-ing or debating amongst us, and yet in
all matters of finance and property there is such arrangement that
several individuals are cognizant of every detail, and that no one
person's fault or neglect shall necessarily involve permanent injury
or loss. The central accounts in each country, including those in
London, are under the care of public auditors; but we have also our
own International Audit Department, whose representatives visit every
headquarters from time to time, so as to make sure, not only that the
accounts are kept on our approved system, but that all expenditure is
rigidly criticized. All who really look into our financial methods are
impressed by their economy and precision. The fact is that almost all
our people have been well schooled in poverty. They have learned the
value of pence.

All this seems to me to have great importance in connexion with
estimates of our future. On the one hand we are ever seeking to
impress on all our people the supreme need of God's spirit of love and
life and freedom, without whose presence the most carefully managed
system could not but speedily grow cold and useless. But at the same
time, we insist that the service of God, however full of love and
gladness, ought to be more precise, more regular, nay, more exacting
than that of any inferior master.

II

As to your question whether we are generally making progress, I think
I can say that, viewing the whole field of activity, and taking into
account every aspect of the work, the Army is undoubtedly on the
up-grade. Naturally progress is not so rapid in one country as
another, nor is it always so marked in one period as in another in
particular countries, nor is it always so evident in some departments
of effort as in others; but speaking of the whole, there is, as indeed
there has been from the very beginnings, steady advance.

In some countries, of course, there is more rapid development of our
purely evangelistic propaganda, while in others our philanthropic
agencies are more active. Progress in human affairs is generally
tidal. It has been so with us. A period of great outward activity is
sometimes followed by one of comparative rest, and in the same way the
spirit of advance in one department sometimes passes from that for a
time to others. A period of great progress in all kinds of pioneer
work, for example in Germany, is just now being followed there by one
of consolidation and organization. A time of enormous advance in all
our departments of charitable effort in the United States is now being
succeeded by a wonderful manifestation of purely spiritual fervour and
awakening.

In this, the old country, our very success has in some ways militated
against our continued advance at the old rate of progress. Not only
has much ground already been occupied, but innumerable agencies,
modelled outwardly, at least, after those we first established, have
sprung into existence, and are working on a field of effort which was
at one time largely left to us. And yet during the last five years the
Army has enormously strengthened its hold on the confidence of all
classes of the people here, increased its numbers, developed in a
remarkable degree its internal organization, greatly added to its
material resources, as well as maintained and extended its offering of
men and money for the support of the work in heathen countries.

But even in places where we have appeared to be stagnant, in the sense
of not undertaking any new aggressive activities, we are constantly
making as a part of our regular warfare new captures from the enemy of
souls, maintaining the care of congregations and people linked with
us, working at full pressure our social machinery, training the
children for future labour, raising up men and women to go out into
the world as missionaries of one kind or another, and doing it all
while carrying on vigorous efforts to bring to those who are most
needy in every locality both material and spiritual support.

Like all aggressive movements, the Army is, of course, peculiarly
subject to loss of one kind or another. That arising from the removals
of its people alone constitutes a serious item. Any one who knows
anything of religious work amongst the working-classes will understand
how great a loss may be caused--even where the population is,
generally speaking, increasing--by the removal of one or two zealous
local leaders. But such losses are trifling compared with those which
follow from some stoppage of employment when large numbers of workmen
must either migrate or starve.

Similar results often occur from the change of leadership. The removal
of our Officers from point to point, and even from country to country,
is one of our most indispensable needs; but, of course, we have to pay
for it, chiefly in the dislocation and discouragements and losses
which it often necessarily entails.

So far from such variations being in any way discreditable to us, we
think them one of the most valuable tests of the vitality and courage
of our people, both Officers and Soldiers, that they fight on
unflinchingly under such circumstances--fight on happily, to prove
that while fluctuations of this character are very trying, they often
also open the way both to the wider diffusion of our work elsewhere
and to the breaking up of entirely new ground in the old centres.

In brief, it is with us at all times a real warfare wherein triumphs
can only be secured at the cost of struggles that are very often
painful and unpleasant. You cannot have the aggression, the advance,
the captures of war without the change, the alarms, the cost, the
wounds, the losses, which are inseparable from it.

A very striking and thoughtful description of some of the work done at
one of our London Corps has recently been issued by a well-known
writer. I refer to 'Broken Earthenware,' by Mr. Harold Begbie. No one
can read the book without being impressed by the sense of personal
insight which it reveals. But how few take in its main lesson, that
the Army is in every place going on, not only with the recovery but
with the development of broken men and women into more and more
capable and efficient servants and rescuers of their fellows.

That this should be so is remarkable enough as applied to Westerners,
broken by evil habits and more or less surrounded by wreckage, but how
much more valuable when applied to the teeming populations of the
East! There in so many cases there is no past of criminality or even
of vice as we understand it to forget, but only an infancy of darkness
and ignorance as to Christ and the liberty He brings.

Many of our best Indian Officers have been snatched from one form or
other of outrageous selfishness, but thousands of our people there are
gradually emerging from what is really the prolonged childhood of a
race to see and know how influential the light of God can make even
them amongst their fellows. Ten years ago in Japan a Salvationist
Officer was a strange if not an unknown phenomenon, but with every
increase of the Christian and Western influences in that country,
every capable witness to Christ becomes, quite apart from any effort
of his own, a much more noticed, consulted, and imitated example than
he was before. In Korea, after a couple of years' effort, we have seen
most striking results of our work, and have just sent, to work among
their own people, our first twenty married Koreans, after a
preliminary period of training for Officership. It is most difficult
to realize the revolution involved in the whole outlook on life to men
who have been looked upon as little more than serfs, without any
prospect of influence in their country.

The same processes of inner and outer development which have made of
the unknown English workman or workwoman of twenty years ago, the
recognized servants of the community, welcomed everywhere by mayors
and magistrates to help in the service of the poor, will, out of the
clever Oriental, I believe, far more rapidly develop leaders in the
new line of Christian improvement in every sphere of life. It is
considerations such as these which make me say sometimes that the
danger in the Army is not in the direction of magnifying, but rather
of minimizing the influences that are carrying us upward and outward
in every part of the world.

But in our own estimation there is another reason which perhaps equals
all these for calculating upon a wider development of the Army's
future influence. During the last twenty years we have been pressing
forward amongst a very large number of Church and missionary efforts.
Our speakers have notoriously been amongst the most unlearned and
ungrammatical, and therefore often despised, while so many thousands
of university men were preaching and writing of Christ. But no one now
disputes the fact that the old-fashioned proclamation of the doctrine
of Jesus Christ as a Divine Saviour of the lost has largely gone out
of fashion. The influence of the priest, of the clerk in holy orders,
of the minister, has been so largely undermined that candidates for
the ministry are becoming scarce in many Churches, just while we are
seeing them arise in steadily increasing numbers from among the very
people who know the Army and its work best, and who have most
carefully observed the demands of sacrifice and labour it makes upon
its leaders.

One cannot but rejoice when one hears ever and anon of some conference
or congress at which various efforts are made to recover, at any rate,
the appearance of a forward movement in the Churches. But the most
serious fact of all, perhaps, is the mixture amongst these
Christianizing plans, whether in one country or another, of the
unbelieving leaven, so that it is possible for men to go forth as the
emissaries of Christianity who have ceased to believe in the Divine
nature of its Founder, and who look for success rather to schemes of
education and of social and temporal improvement than to that new
creation of man by God's power, wherein lies all our hope, as indeed
it must be the hope of every true servant of Christ.

But I call attention to these facts not to reproach any Church. Far
from it. I simply desire to point out one reason for thinking
ourselves justified in anticipating for the Army a future influence
far beyond anything we have yet experienced.

Recent 'defences' of Christian revelation have, in our view, been far
more seriously damaging than any attacks that have ever been made from
the hostile camp. In the hope--a vain hope--of conciliating
opposition, there has too often been a timid surrender of much that
can alone give authority to Christian testimony. If Jesus Christ was
not competent to decide the truth or untruth of the Divine revelation,
which He fully and constantly endorsed as such, how absurd it is to
suppose that any eulogies of His character can save Him from the just
contempt of all fearless thinkers, no matter to what nationality they
belong.

The Army finds itself already, and every year seems more and more
likely to find itself, the only firm and unalterable witness to the
truth of Christ and of His redeeming work in many neighbourhoods and
districts, among them even some wide stretches of Christian territory.
And the times can only bring upon us, it seems to me, more and more
the scrutiny of all who wish to know whether the declarations of the
Scriptures as to God's work in men are or are not reliable. This,
then, however melancholy the reflection may be--and to me it is in
some aspects melancholy indeed--assures to us a future of far wider
importance and influence than any we have dreamed of in the past.

Our strength, as your book eloquently shows, in dealing with the
deepest sunken, the forgotten, the outcasts of society, the pariahs
and lepers of modern life; has ever been our absolute certainty with
regard to Christ's love and power to help them. How much greater must
of necessity be the value and influence of our testimony where the
very existence of Christ and His salvation becomes a matter of doubt
and dispute! Here, at any rate, is one reason which leads me to
believe that the Salvation Army has before it a future of the highest
moment to the world.

III

In relation to other religious bodies, our position is marvellously
altered from the time when they nearly all, if not quite all,
denounced us.

I do not think that any of the Churches in any part of the world do
this now, although no doubt individuals here and there are still
bitterly hostile to us. In the United States and in many of the
British Colonies the Churches welcome our help, and generally speak
well of our work; and even many Roman Catholic leaders, as well as
authorities of the Jewish faith, may be included in this statement. On
the Continent there are signs that they are slowly turning the same
way.

Now, I confidently expect a steady extension of this feeling towards
us as the Churches come more and more to recognize that we not only do
not attack them, but that we are actually auxiliaries to their forces,
not only gaining our audiences and recruits from those who are outside
their ministrations, but even serving them by doing work for their
adherents which for a variety of reasons they find it very difficult,
if not impossible, to accomplish themselves.

At the same time it would be a mistake to think that we have any
desire to adopt any of their methods or ceremonials. We keep
everywhere to our simple and non-ecclesiastical habits, and while we
certainly have some very significant and impressive ceremonials of our
own, the way our buildings are fitted, the style of our songs and
music, and the character of our prayers and public talking are
everywhere entirely distinctive, and are nowhere in any danger of
coming into serious competition with the worship adopted by the
Churches.

Some of our leading Officers think that in one respect our relations
to the Churches, their pastors, and people are unsatisfactory. In the
United States it is customary for the clergy and leaders of every
Church to treat our leaders with the most manifest sympathy and
respect. But there is far too marked a contrast between that treatment
and that which we receive in many other countries. There are, of
course, splendid exceptions. Still few members of any Church are
willing to be seen in active association with us.

I daresay this is very largely a question of class or caste, and I am
very far from making it a matter of complaint. We would, in fact, far
rather that our people should be regarded as outcasts, than that they
should be tempted to tone down the directness of their witness, or
that they should come under the influence of those uncertainties and
misgivings to which I have already made reference. Nevertheless, it is
certainly no wish of ours that there should remain any distance
between us and any true followers of Christ by whatever name they may
be called. And so we keep firmly, even where it may seem difficult or
impolitic to do so, to our original attitude of entire friendliness
with all those who name the Name of Christ.

I give a few figures bearing upon the present extent of our
operations:--

  Number of Countries and Colonies occupied by
    the Salvation Army                                       56
  Languages in which the Work is carried on                  33
  Corps, Circles, and Societies of Salvationists          8,768
  Number of persons wholly supported by and employed
    in Salvation Army Work                               21,390
    Of those, with Rank                                  16,220
    Without Rank                                          5,170
  Number of Training Colleges for Officers and
    workers                                                  35
    Providing accommodation for                           1,866
  SOCIAL OPERATIONS.--
    Number of Institutions                                  954
    Number of Officers and Cadets employed                2,573
    Number of Local Officers, voluntary and unpaid       60,260
    NUMBER OF PERIODICALS                                    74
      These Periodicals are published in twenty-one languages,
      and have a total circulation per issue of about one million
      copies.




APPENDIX B


THE SALVATION ARMY'S ARTICLES OF WAR


HAVING received with all my heart the salvation offered to me by the
tender mercy of Jehovah, I do here and now publicly acknowledge God to
be my Father and King, Jesus Christ to be my Saviour, and the Holy
Spirit to be my Guide, Comforter, and Strength; and that I will, by
His help, love, serve, worship, and obey this glorious God through
time and through eternity,

BELIEVING solemnly that the Salvation Army has been raised up by God,
and is sustained and directed by Him, I do here declare my full
determination, by God's help, to be a true Soldier of the Army till I
die.

     I am thoroughly convinced of the truth of the Army's
     teaching.

     I believe that repentance towards God, faith in our Lord
     Jesus Christ, and conversion by the Holy Spirit are
     necessary to salvation, and that all men may be saved.

     I believe that we are saved by grace, through faith in our
     Lord Jesus Christ, and he that believeth hath the witness of
     it in himself. I have got it. Thank God!

     I believe that the Scriptures were given by inspiration of
     God, and that they teach that not only does continuance in
     the favour of God depend upon continued faith in and
     obedience to Christ, but that it is possible for those who
     have been truly converted to fall away and be eternally
     lost.

     I believe that it is the privilege of all God's people to be
     wholly sanctified, and that 'their whole spirit and soul and
     body' may 'be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
     Lord Jesus Christ,' That is to say, I believe that after
     conversion there remain in the heart of the believer
     inclinations to evil, or roots of bitterness, which, unless
     overpowered by divine grace, produce actual sin; but these
     evil tendencies can be entirely taken away by the Spirit of
     God, and the whole heart, thus cleansed from anything
     contrary to the will of God, or entirely sanctified, will
     then produce the fruit of the Spirit only. And I believe
     that persons thus entirely sanctified may, by the power of
     God, be kept unblameable and unreprovable before Him.

     I believe in the immortality of the soul; in the
     resurrection of the body; in the general judgment at the end
     of the world; in the eternal happiness of the righteous; and
     in the everlasting punishment of the wicked.

THEREFORE,

     I do here and now, and for ever, renounce the world with all
     its sinful pleasures, companionships, treasures, and
     objects, and declare my full determination boldly to show
     myself a soldier of Jesus Christ in all places and
     companies, no matter what I may have to suffer, do, or lose,
     by so doing.

     I do here and now declare that I will abstain from the use
     of all intoxicating liquors, and from the habitual use of
     opium, laudanum, morphia, and all other baneful drugs,
     except when in illness such drugs shall be ordered for me by
     a doctor.

     I do here and now declare that I will abstain from the use
     of all low or profane language; from the taking of the name
     of God in vain; and from all impurity, or from taking part
     in any unclean conversation, or the reading of any obscene
     book or paper at any time, in any company, or in any place.

     I do here declare that I will not allow myself in any
     falsehood, deceit, misrepresentation, or dishonesty; neither
     will I practise any fraudulent conduct in my business, my
     home, nor in any other relation in which I may stand to my
     fellow-men, but that I will deal truthfully, fairly,
     honourably, and kindly with all those who may employ me, or
     whom I may myself employ,

     I do here declare that I will never treat any woman, child,
     or other person, whose life, comfort, or happiness may be
     placed within my power, in an oppressive, cruel or cowardly
     manner, but that I will protect such from evil and danger so
     far as I can, and promote to the utmost of my ability their
     present welfare and eternal salvation.

     I do here declare that I will spend all the time, strength,
     money, and influence I can in supporting and carrying on
     this war, and that I will endeavour to lead my family,
     friends, neighbours, and all others whom I can influence, to
     do the same, believing that the sure and only way to remedy
     all the evils in the world is by bringing men to submit
     themselves to the Government of the Lord Jesus Christ.

     I do here declare that I will always obey the lawful orders
     of my Officers, and that I will carry out to the utmost of
     my powers all the orders and regulations of the Army; and
     further that I will be an example of faithfulness to its
     principles, advance to the utmost of my ability its
     operations, and never allow, where I can prevent it, any
     injury to its interests, or hindrance to its success.

AND

     I do here and now call upon all present to witness that I
     enter into this undertaking, and sign these Articles of War
     of my own free will, feeling that the love of Christ, who
     died to save me, requires from me this devotion of my life
     to His service for the salvation of the whole world, and
     therefore wish now to be enrolled as a Soldier of the
     Salvation Army.

     _Signed_...........................................

     _Image (full Christian and Surname)_

     _Address_........................................

     _Date_........................    _Corps_.............



APPENDIX C

COPY OF THE SALVATION ARMY BALANCE SHEET, EXTRACTED FROM THE
FORTY-THIRD ANNUAL STATEMENTS OF ACCOUNT FOR THE YEAR ENDING
SEPTEMBER 30, 1909.

_Copies of this Balance Sheet with Statements of Account can be had
upon application. The Balance Sheet and Statements of Account for the
year ending September 30, 1910, will be posted from the press early
next year. The Balance Sheet of The Army's Social Fund can be obtained
from the Secretary._


LIABILITIES

 DR.
                                       L     s. d.
TO LOANS UPON MORTGAGE,
    including accrued Interest     540,277   3  11

"  LOANS FOR FIXED PERIODS,
    including accrued Interest     121,958   8   1

"  RESERVE FUNDS, including
    General and Special Reserves   176,143  15   1/2

"  SUNDRY CREDITORS                 10,359   3   2

"  COLONIAL AND FOREIGN
    TERRITORIES FUND                55,219  10   7

"  SELF-DENIAL FUND
    (Balance)                        3,463  12   3


                                   ----------------
Carried Forward                   L907,621  13 1/2


ASSETS

 CR.
                                    L    s. d.          L     s. d.
BY FREEHOLD and LEASEHOLD
    PROPERTY (at or below
    cost) in the United
    Kingdom, as on September
    30, 1908                    1,066,923 16  2-1/2
"  Additions during the year       23,271  4  6
                               --------------------
                                1,090,195  2  8-1/2
"  Freehold Estate in
    Australia                      10,375  3  6
                               -----------------   1,100,571  6  4-1/2
"  INVESTMENTS, including
    Investment of Reserve
    and Sinking Funds                                196,412  9  2
"  FURNITURE and FITTINGS
    at Headquarters, Officers'
    Quarters, and
    Training College, as on
    September 30, 1908              5,412 16  1
"  Additions during the year        2,768  9  5-1/2
                                    ---------------
                                    8,181  5  6-1/2
   _Less_ Depreciation              2,433 19  9
                                    ---------------    5,748  5  9-1/2
                                                     -----------------
Carried forward                                   L1,802,732  1  4


BALANCE SHEET--_continued_

DR.

Brought forward                                       907,621 13 0-1/2

To The Salvation Army Fund,

as per last Balance Sheet         411,701  0 6-1/4

" Donations and Subscriptions
    For Capital Purposes
(including building
Contributions,
L20,044 0s. 2d.)                   37,044  6 2

" General Income and Expenditure
     Account
(Balance)                           1,309 17 8-1/2

----------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                      450,064 18 4-1/2
                                                     -----------------

                                                   L1,357,706 11 5

CR.

Brought forward                                      1,302,732 1 4

By Loans

" Trade Headquarters Fund              27,902 16 5

" Sundry Colonial and
    Foreign Territories                 8,606 16 0
                                      ------------

                                                       34,506 12 5

" Sundry Debtors                                       18,360 10 4

" Cash at Bank                                           2,107 7 4

                                                   ---------------
                                                   L1,357,706 11 5

We have examined the above Statement with the Books, Accounts, and
Vouchers relating thereto, and certify the same to be correct. We have
also verified the Bank balances and Investments.

KNOX, CROPPER & CO.,

_Chartered Accountants._

16 FINSBURY CIRCUS, E.C.

_December_ 31, 1909.




APPENDIX D

A FEW FIGURES SHOWING SOME OF THE WORK OF THE DARKEST ENGLAND SCHEME
IN THE UNITED KINGDOM.

        TO SEPTEMBER 30, 1909              DURING     TOTAL TO
                                           1910       SEPT. 30, 1910
Number of Meals supplied at
  Cheap Food Depots            69,784,480  6,869,897  76,654,377
Number of Cheap Lodgings for
  the Homeless                 27,850,674  2,445,300  30,295,974
Number of Meetings held in
  Shelters                        140,747      8,660     149,407
Number of Applications from
  Unemployed registered at
  Labour Bureaux                  302,538     13,009     315,547
Number received into Factories     63,694      6,754      70,448
Number for whom Employment
  (temporary or permanent) has
  been found                      249,453     20,210     269,663
Number of Ex-Criminals received
  into Homes                        8,840        416       9,256
Number of Ex-Criminals assisted,
  restored to Friends,
  sent to situations, etc.          7,886      1,166       9,052
Number of Applications for Lost
  Persons                          44,001      2,120      46,121
Number of Lost Persons found       13,710        398      14,108
Number of Women and Girls
  received into Rescue Homes       44,417      3,679      48,096
Number of Women and Girls
  received into Rescue Homes
  who were sent to Situations,
  restored to Friends, etc.        37,168      3,346      40,514
Number of Families visited in
  Slums                           998,079    109,750   1,107,829
Number of Families prayed with    577,550     64,141     641,691
Number of Public-houses visited   630,021     33,188     663,209
Number of Lodging-houses
  visited                          17,330      3,457      20,787
Number of Lodging-house Meetings
  held                              7,319      1,792       9,111
Number of Sick People visited
  and nursed                       93,233     21,912     115,145




NOTES:


[1: See Appendix C]

[2: The following extract from the recently issued 'Report of
the Commissioners of Prisons and the Directors of Convict Prisons,'
for the year ended March 31, 1910, Part I [Cd. 5360], published since
the above was written, sets out the present views of the Authorities
on this important matter:--

     'Out of the present inmates of convict prisons over 40 per
     cent have been previously in penal servitude, viz. out of
     3,046 male convicts in convict prisons, 1,253 had been
     previously sentenced to penal servitude, 672 once, 271
     twice, 196 three times, and 114 four times or more. Mr.
     Secretary Churchill has referred to us the question whether,
     and in what way, it would be possible to make any impression
     on this roll of recidivism--this unyielding _corpus_ of
     habitual crime. The problem is never absent from the minds
     of those responsible for the administration of prisons and
     the treatment of crime, and during recent years great
     efforts have been made to improve the machinery of
     assistance on discharge, fully impressed as we are with the
     truth of the old French saying, "_Le difficile ce n'est pas
     emprisoner un homme, c'est de le relacher_." We have tried
     to avail ourselves fully of the resources offered by such
     powerful agencies as the Church Army, Salvation Army, as
     well as other societies who have for years operated in this
     particular field of charitable effort. We recognize the
     ready help given by all these agencies. No doubt by their
     efforts many difficult and unpromising cases have been
     rehabilitated; but after full consideration we have come to
     the opinion that the task of rehabilitation in the case of
     men returning to freedom after a sentence of penal servitude
     is too difficult and too costly to be left entirely to
     voluntary societies, unaided by any grant of public funds,
     and working independently of each other at a problem where
     unity of method and direction is above all things required.
     Mr. Secretary Churchill, to whom these views have been
     represented, at once agreed that the difficulty lay in this
     question of discharge, and that the official authority,
     acting in close and friendly co-operation with the voluntary
     societies must take a more active part than hitherto in
     controlling the passage into free life of a man emerging
     from penal servitude. ... A plan is now under consideration
     for establishing a Central Agency of Control for Discharged
     Convicts, on which both the official and unofficial element
     will be represented, with a subsidy from public funds, the
     purpose of which will be to take in hand the guidance and
     direction of every convict on the day of discharge' (pp. 15,
     16).]

[3: See Parliamentary Blue Book [Cd. 2562].]

[4: The scale of pay in the Salvation Array for Officers in charge of
Corps (or Stations) is as follows:--For Single Men: Lieutenants, 16s.
weekly; Captains, 18s. weekly. For Single Women: Lieutenants, 12s.
weekly; Captains, 15s. weekly. For Married Men, 27s. per week and 1s.
per week for each child under 7 years of age, and 2s. per week for
each child between the ages of 7 and 14. Furnished lodgings are
provided in addition.]

[5: But the day before this proof came into my hands it was my duty to
help to try a case illustrative of these remarks. In that case a girl
when only just over the age of sixteen had been seduced by a young man
and borne a son. First the father admitted parentage and promised
marriage. Then he denied parentage, and, apparently without a shadow
of evidence, alleged that the child was the result of an incestuous
intercourse between its mother and a relative. At the trial, having,
it seemed, come to the conclusion that this wicked slander would not
enable him to escape an affiliation order, he again frankly admitted
his parentage. In the country districts, at any rate, such examples
are common.--H. R. H.]

[6: The loss is being reduced annually, that for the financial year
which has just closed being the lowest on record.]

[7: See Appendix A]

[8: On this and other points see the Salvation Army's 'Articles of
War,' Appendix B.]




INDEX


Affiliation Orders, 91, 109-110.

'Ann Fowler' Home, 166, 168.

Anti-Suicide Bureau, 151-164.

Ardenshaw Women's Home, Glasgow, 188.

Argyll, Duchess of, 103.

'Articles of War,' 257.

Australia, 14, 83.

Balance-sheet for 1909, 260-261.

Barlow, Sir Thomas, 123.

Barnardo, The late Dr., 71, 73, 233.

Blackfriars Shelter, 41.

Booth, General, 7, 10-12, 14-18, 57, 61, 63, 85, 97, 200-201, 206,
  208-217, 223.

Booth, Mr. Bramwell, 218-225.

Booth, Mrs. Bramwell, 87, 89, 91-93, 95, 144.

Boxted Small Holdings, 69, 200-207.

British Government, The, and Colonial Land Scheme, 82.

Canada, 14, 82-86.

Carrington, Earl, 206.

Central Labour Bureau, 75.

Chief of the Staff, The: see Mr. Bramwell Booth.

Cox, Commissioner, 96, 98, 119, 120.

Criminals in England, 61.

Crossley, Mrs., 176.

Drink, 37.

Duke Street, Glasgow, 188.

Edinburgh, 179.

Embankment Soup Distribution, 22, 39, 40.

Emigration Department, 80;
  Emigration Board, 85.

Employers' Liability Act, 38.

Ex-Criminals, 54.

First Offenders Act, 168.

Free Breakfast Service, 41.

Future of the Salvation Army, Notes on, 237.

Glasgow, 165, 178-182, 192.

Government Labour Bureaux, 75-76.

Government Subsidy, 57.

Great Peter St. Shelter, 33, 157.

Great Titchfield St., 94, 140, 150.

Hadleigh Land Colony, 76, 182, 184, 194, 198, 199.

Hanbury St. Workshop, 65-70.

Herring, The late Mr. George, 19, 200, 201, 207, 212.

Hillsborough House Inebriates' Home, 98, 102, 122.

Hollies,' 'The, 168, 169.

Home Office, The, 55.

Iliffe, Lieut.-Colonel, 204.

Impressions of General Booth, 208.

India, 23.

Inebriates' Home, The, Springfield Lodge, 122.

International Investigation Department, 77.

Ivy House Maternity Hospital, 107.

Java, 233.

Jolliffe, Lieut.-Colonel, 41, 148, 185-186, 190-191.

King Edward Hospital Fund, 201.

Labour Bureau, Central, Whitechapel, 75;
  Statistics, 76.

Labour Party and Trade.
  Unions, 65, 85-86.

Lamb, Colonel, 81, 83-85.

Lambert, Colonel, 115.

Land Colony, Hadleigh, 194.

Laudanum-drinking, 124, 183.

Laurie, Lieut.-Colonel, 194-196.

Laurier, Sir Wilfrid, 82.

Liverpool, 165.

London County Council, 129.

London Maternity Home, 169.

Lorne House, 103, 105.

Manchester, 165;
  Social Institutions, 172.

Maternity Home, Lorne House, Stoke Newington, 103.

Maternity Home, Brent House, Hackney, 105-106.

Maternity Hospital,
  Hackney, 105, 107;
  Liverpool, 171.

Maternity Hospital, New, required, 170.

Men's Social Work,
  Glasgow, 178;
  London, 19, 65;
  Manchester, 171.

Middlesex Street Shelter, 19.

Midnight Work, Social, 94.

Needs, Our, 235.

Nest,' 'The, Clapton, 112.

Oakhill House, Manchester, 176.

Old-Age Pensions Act, 130.

Paris, 93.

Parliamentary Committee of the Trade Unions, 65.

Penitent Form, The, 46-48, 51, 230.

Pentonville Prison, 56.

Piccadilly Midnight Work, 140.

Prevention of Cruelty to Children, Society for the, 233.

Princess Louise, H.R.H., 103.

Prison Act, The New, 63.

Prison Reform, 62, 63 (note).

Prison Visitation, 55, 188.

Prisoners' Aid Society, 180.

Quaker Street, 54.

Religion of the Salvation Army, Note on the, 229.

Rescue Home, The, 117.

'Revivalism!' 49.

Roosevelt, Mr. 214-215.

'Rural England,' 10.

Sacraments, The, 230.

Salvation Army, Some Statistics of the, 9-10.

Scale of pay, Officers', 90 (note).

Scotland, 131, 179.

Slum Settlement, The Hackney Road, 131.

Slum Sisters, 88;
  Some Statistics of their work, 131.

Small Holdings, 200-207.

Southwood, Sydenham, 126.

Spa Road Elevator, 27, 46, 79.

Sturge House, 71-74.

Sturgess, Commissioner, 19, 36, 47, 54, 55, 57, 186.

Sweating, Charges of, refuted, 28, 66, 120-121.

Titchfield Street Home, The, 140, 145, 150.

Trade Unions and rate of Wages, 15-16.

Training Institute for Women Social Workers, The, 115.

Unsworth, Colonel, 155, 157, 160, 164.

Vegetarianism, 99, 113-114.

Visitation of prisoners by Salvation Army Officers, 55-56.

Wandsworth Prison, 56.

Waste Paper Department,
  Spa Road, 27, 31, 52;
  Manchester, 172;
  Glasgow, 180.

White Slave Traffic, 87, 93.

Whitechapel, 72, 75, 95, 132, 142.

Women's Industrial Home, Hackney, 119;
  Sydenham, 126.

Women's Shelter, 129.

Women's Social Work, London, 87;
  Headquarters, 96.

