{"name": "Chapter Twenty-Three", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210116113822/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/emma/summary/chapter-twenty-three", "summary": "Emma hatches a plan: she'll drive Harriet out to the Martins' farm, wait fifteen minutes, and then drive back to pick her up. This way, Harriet can get all the excitement of a new visit - and there will be no chance that she'll slip back into her old friendships. Everything goes according to plan. Harriet seems delighted to have met the Martins again. As she tells Emma, it was awkward at first, sure, but then they got started talking about the cows Harriet met last summer...and who doesn't get excited about cows? The Martins also point to the place where Harriet once measured her height on a wall. Looking at the spot, Harriet remembers Robert. Sigh. Just as Harriet starts to feel at home again with the Martins, however, Emma's carriage pulls up. The Martins recognize this for what it is - an attempt to show them that Harriet only came to visit out of politeness, not out of friendship. They're hurt. Emma feels a teenie-weenie bit bad about helping Harriet to be so cruel...but, after all, one must make sacrifices to remain in good society! A visit to the Westons at Randalls will push Harriet and her messy love life out of Emma's mind - she heads over to their house, but they've just left. Disappointed, Emma returns home. Once there, she finds that Mr. Weston is sitting in the parlor. With the long-awaited Frank Churchill. Gasp. He's everything she dreamed of. Handsome, friendly, polite and apparently attached to his new step-mother, Frank charms all the people he meets - including Emma. Emma immediately starts daydreaming about marrying Frank. He's the perfect match, really, and she can tell that the Westons are already thinking about the same thing. Mr. Woodhouse isn't thinking about marriage at all. But that's because marriage is the greatest evil he can think of. It takes people away from him. Emma finds out that Frank met Miss Jane Fairfax while he was in Weymouth. The Westons leave to visit the Bateses.", "analysis": ""}