A.D. 1483

The Duke of Buckingham.--Historical doubts.--Richard at Baynard's
Castle.--The expense-book.--Items from the expense-book.--Richard's
plans.--Richard's determination in respect to Jane Shore.--Jane's
character.--Her jewelry confiscated.--The punishment of Jane
Shore.--Alleged marriage of Edward IV. to Elinor Talbot.--Particulars
of the story.--Plan for publishing it.--Sermon preached by Dr. Shaw
near St. Paul's.--Ingenious contrivance.--Coolness of the
people.--Meeting at the Guildhall.--The people do not respond.--The
appeals to the people fail.--Grand council convened.--Arrangements
made by Buckingham.--The petition.--Substance of the petition.--Real
object of it.--Richard receives the petition at Baynard's
Castle.--Richard concludes to accept the crown.--Ceremonies connected
with the investiture of the king.--Richard marches through London.--Is
every where proclaimed king.--Extraordinary character of the reign of
Edward V.


Richard, having thus obtained control of every thing essential to the
success of his plans, began to prepare for action. His chief friend
and confederate, the one on whom he relied most for the execution of
the several measures which he proposed to take, was a powerful
nobleman named the Duke of Buckingham. I shall proceed in this chapter
to describe the successive steps of the course which Richard and the
Duke of Buckingham pursued in raising Richard to the throne, as
recorded by the different historians of those days, and as generally
believed since, though, in fact, there have been great disputes in
respect to these occurrences, and it is now quite difficult to
ascertain with certainty what the precise truth of the case really is.
This, however, is, after all, of no great practical importance, for,
in respect to remote transactions of this nature, the thing which is
most necessary for the purposes of general education is to understand
what the story is, in detail, which has been generally received among
mankind, and to which the allusions of orators and poets, and the
discussions of statesmen and moralists in subsequent ages refer, for
it is with this story alone that for all the purposes of general
reading we have any thing to do.

       *       *       *       *       *

Richard was residing at this time chiefly at Baynard's Castle with his
mother.[N] The young king and his brother, the Duke of York, were in
the Tower. They were not nominally prisoners, but yet Richard kept
close watch and ward over them, and took most effectual precautions to
prevent their making their escape. The queen, Elizabeth Woodville,
with her daughters, was in the sanctuary. Richard's wife, with the
young child, was still at Middleham Castle.

[Footnote N: For view of this castle, see page 273.]

It is a very curious circumstance, showing how sometimes records of
the most trivial and insignificant things come down to us from ancient
times in a clear and certain form, while all that is really important
to know is involved in doubt and obscurity--that the household
expense-book of Anne at Middleham is still extant, showing all the
little items of expense incurred for Richard's son, while all is
dispute and uncertainty in respect to the great political schemes and
measures of his father. In this book there is a charge of 22_s._ 9_d._
for a piece of green cloth, and another of 1_s._ 8_d._ for making it
into gowns for "my lord prince." There is also a charge of 5_s._ for a
feather for him, and 13_s._ 1_d._ paid to a shoemaker, named Dirick,
for a pair of shoes. This expense-book was continued after Anne left
Middleham Castle to go to London, as will be presently related. There
are several charges on the journey for offerings and gifts made by the
child at churches on the way. Two men were paid 6_s._ 8_d._ for
running on foot by the side of his carriage. These men's names were
Medcalf and Pacock. There is also a charge of 2_d._ for mending a
whip!

But to return to our narrative. The time for the coronation of Edward
the Fifth was drawing near, but Richard intended to prevent the
performance of this ceremony, and to take the crown for himself
instead. The first thing was to put in circulation the story that his
two nephews were not the legitimate children of his brother, Edward
the Fourth, and to prepare the way for this, he wished first, by every
means, to cast odium on Edward's character. This was easily done, for
Edward's character was bad enough to merit any degree of odium which
his brother might wish it to bear.

Accordingly, Richard employed his friends and partisans in talking as
much as possible in all quarters about the dissoluteness and the vices
of the late king. False stories would probably have been invented, if
it had not been that there were enough that were true. These stories
were all revived and put in circulation, and every thing was made to
appear as unfavorable for Edward as possible. Richard himself, on the
other hand, feigned a very strict and scrupulous regard for virtue and
morality, and deemed it his duty, he said, to do all in his power to
atone for and wipe away the reproach which his brother's loose and
wicked life had left upon the court and the kingdom. Among other
things, the cause of public morals demanded, he said, that an example
should be made of Jane Shore, who had been the associate and partner
of the king in his immoralities.

Jane Shore, it will be recollected, was the wife of a rich citizen of
London, whom Edward had enticed away from her husband and brought to
court. She was naturally a very amiable and kind-hearted woman, and
all accounts concur in saying that she exercised the power that she
acquired over the mind of the king in a very humane and praiseworthy
manner. She was always ready to interpose, when the king contemplated
any act of harshness or severity, to avert his anger and save his
intended victim, and, in general, she did a great deal to soften the
brutality of his character, and to protect the innocent and helpless
from the wrongs which he would otherwise have often done them. These
amiable and gentle traits of character do not, indeed, atone at all
for the grievous sin which she committed in abandoning her husband and
living voluntarily with the king, but they did much toward modifying
the feeling of scorn and contempt with which she would have otherwise
been regarded by the people of England.

Richard caused Jane to be arrested and sent to prison. He also seized
all her plate and jewels, and confiscated them. She had a very rich
and valuable collection of these things.[O] Richard then caused an
ecclesiastical court to be organized, and sent her before it to be
tried. The court, undoubtedly in accordance with instructions that
Richard himself gave them, sentenced her, by way of penance for her
sins, to walk in midday through the streets of London, from one end of
the city to the other, almost entirely undressed. The intention of
this severe exposure was to designate her to those who should assemble
to witness the punishment as a wanton, and thus to put her to shame,
and draw upon her the scorn and derision of the populace. They found
some old and obsolete law which authorized such a punishment. The
sentence was carried into effect on a Sunday. The unhappy criminal was
conducted through the principal streets of the city, wearing a
night-dress, and carrying a lighted taper in her hand, between rows of
spectators that assembled by thousands along the way to witness the
scene. But, instead of being disposed to receive her with taunts and
reproaches, the populace were moved to compassion by her saddened look
and her extreme beauty. Their hearts were softened by the remembrance
of the many stories they had heard of the kindness of her heart, and
the amiableness and gentleness of her demeanor, in the time of her
prosperity and power. They thought it hard, too, that the law should
be enforced so rigidly against her alone, while so many multitudes in
all ranks of society, high as well as low, were allowed to go
unpunished.

[Footnote O: The husband with whom she had lived before she became
acquainted with Edward was a wealthy goldsmith and jeweler.]

Still, Richard's object in this exhibition was accomplished. The
transaction had the effect of calling the attention of the public
universally and strongly to the fact that Edward the Fourth had been a
loose and dissolute man, and prepared people's minds for the charge
which was about to be brought against him.

This charge was that he had been secretly married to another lady
before his union with Elizabeth Woodville, and that consequently by
this latter marriage he was guilty of bigamy. Of course, if this were
true, the second marriage would be null and void, and the children
springing from it would have no rights as heirs.

Whether there was any truth in this story or not can not now ever be
certainly known. All that is certain is that Richard circulated the
report, and he found several witnesses to testify to the truth of it.
The maiden name of the lady to whom they said the king had been
married was Elinor Talbot. She had married in early life a certain
Lord Boteler, whose widow she was at the time that Edward was alleged
to have married her. The marriage was performed in a very private
manner by a certain bishop, nobody being present besides the parties
except the bishop himself, and he was strictly charged by the king to
keep the affair a profound secret. This he promised to do.
Notwithstanding his promise, however, the bishop some time
subsequently, after the king had been married to Elizabeth Woodville,
revealed the secret of the previous marriage to Gloucester, at which
the king, when he heard of it, was extremely angry. He accused the
bishop of having betrayed the trust which he had reposed in him, and,
dismissing him at once from office, shut him up in prison.

Richard having, as he said, kept these facts secret during his
brother's lifetime, out of regard for the peace of the family, now
felt it his duty to make them known, in order to prevent the wrong
which would be done by allowing the crown to descend to a son who, not
being born in lawful wedlock, could have no rights as heir.

After disseminating this story among the influential persons connected
with the court, and through all the circles of high life, during the
week, it was arranged that on the following Sunday the facts should be
made known publicly to the people.

There was a large open space near St. Paul's Cathedral, in the very
heart of London, where it was the custom to hold public assemblies of
all kinds, both religious and political. There was a pulpit built on
one side of this space, from which sermons were preached, orations
and harangues pronounced, and proclamations made. Oaths were
administered here too, in cases where it was required to administer
oaths to large numbers of people.

From this pulpit, on the next Sunday after the penance of Jane Shore,
a certain Dr. Shaw, who was a brother of the Lord-mayor of London,
preached a sermon to a large concourse of citizens, in which he openly
attempted to set aside the claims of the two boys, and to prove that
Richard was the true heir to the crown.

He took for his text a passage from the Wisdom of Solomon, "The
multiplying brood of the ungodly shall not thrive." In this discourse
he explained to his audience that Edward, when he was married to
Elizabeth Woodville, was already the husband of Elinor Boteler, and
consequently that the second marriage was illegal and void, and the
children of it entirely destitute of all claims to the crown. He also,
it is said, advanced the idea that neither Edward nor Clarence were
the children of their reputed father, the old Duke of York, but that
Richard was the oldest legitimate son of the marriage, in proof of
which he offered the fact that Richard strongly resembled the duke in
person, while neither Edward nor Clarence had borne any resemblance to
him at all.

It was arranged, moreover--so it was said--that, when the preacher
came to the passage where he was to speak of the resemblance which
Richard bore to his father, the great Duke of York, Richard himself
was to enter the assembly as if by accident, and thus give the
preacher the opportunity to illustrate and confirm what he had said by
directing his audience to observe for themselves the resemblance which
he had pointed out, and also to excite them to a burst of enthusiasm
in Richard's favor by the eloquent appeal which the incident of
Richard's entrance was to awaken. But this intended piece of stage
effect, if it was really planned, failed in the execution. Richard did
not come in at the right time, and when he did come in, either the
preacher managed the case badly, or else the people were very little
disposed to espouse Richard's cause; for when the orator, at the close
of his appeal, expected applause and acclamations, the people uttered
no response, but looked at each other in silence, and remained wholly
unmoved.

In the course of the following two or three days, other attempts were
made to excite the populace to some demonstration in Richard's favor,
but they did not succeed. The Duke of Buckingham met a large concourse
of Londoners at the Guildhall, which is in the centre of the business
portion of the city. He was supported by a number of nobles, knights,
and distinguished citizens, and he made a long and able speech to the
assembly, in which he argued strenuously in favor of calling Richard
to the throne. He denounced the character of the former king, and
enlarged at length on the dissipated and vicious life which he had
led. He also related to the people the story of Edward's having been
the husband of Lady Elinor Boteler at the time when his marriage with
Queen Elizabeth took place, which fact, as Buckingham showed, made the
marriage with Elizabeth void, and cut off the children from the
inheritance. The children of Clarence had been cut off, too, by the
attainder, and so Richard was the only remaining heir.

The duke concluded his harangue by asking the assembly if, under those
circumstances, they would not call upon Richard to ascend the throne.
A few of the poorer sort, very likely some that had been previously
hired to do it, threw up their caps into the air in response to this
appeal, and cried out, "Long live King Richard!" But the major part,
comprising all the more respectable portion of the assembly, looked
grave and were silent. Some who were pressed to give their opinion
said they must take time to consider.

Thus these appeals to the people failed, so far as the object of them
was to call forth a popular demonstration in Richard's favor. But in
one respect they accomplished the object in view: they had the effect
of making it known throughout London and the vicinity that a
revolution was impending, and thus preparing men's minds to acquiesce
in the change more readily than they might perhaps have done if it had
come upon them suddenly and with a shock.

On the following day after the address at the Guildhall, a grand
assembly of all the lords, bishops, councilors, and officers of state
was convened in Westminster. It was substantially a Parliament, though
not a Parliament in form. The reason why it was not called as a
Parliament in form was because Richard, having doubts, as he said,
about the right of Edward to the throne, could not conscientiously
advise that any public act should be performed in his name, and a
Parliament could only be legally convened by summons from a king.
Accordingly, this assembly was only an informal meeting of the peers
of England and other great dignitaries of Church and State, with a
view of consulting together to determine what should be done. Of
course, it was all fully arranged and settled beforehand, among those
who were in Richard's confidence, what the result of these
deliberations was to be. The Duke of Buckingham, Richard's principal
friend and supporter, managed the business at the meeting. The
assembly consisted, of course, chiefly of the party of Richard's
friends. The principal leaders of the parties opposed to him had been
beheaded or shut up in prison; of the rest, some had fled, some had
concealed themselves, and of the few who dared to show themselves at
the meeting, there were none who had the courage, or perhaps I ought
rather to say the imprudence and folly, to oppose any thing which
Buckingham should undertake to do.

The result of the deliberations of this council was the drawing up of
a petition to be presented to Richard, declaring him the true and
rightful heir to the crown, and praying him to assume at once the
sovereign power.

A delegation was appointed to wait upon Richard and present the
petition to him. Buckingham was at the head of this delegation. The
petition was written out in due form upon a roll of parchment. It
declared that, inasmuch as it was clearly established that King Edward
the Fourth was already the husband of "Dame Alionora Boteler," by a
previous marriage, at the time of his pretended marriage with
Elizabeth Woodville, and that consequently his children by Elizabeth
Woodville, not being born in lawful wedlock, could have no rights of
inheritance whatever from their father, and especially could by no
means derive from him any title to the crown; and inasmuch as the
children of Clarence had been cut off from the succession by the bill
of attainder which had been passed against their father; and inasmuch
as Richard came next in order to these in the line of succession,
therefore he was now the true and rightful heir. This his right
moreover by birth was now confirmed by the decision of the estates of
the realm assembled for the purpose; wherefore the petition, in
conclusion, invited and urged him at once to assume the crown which
was thus his by a double title--the right of birth and the election of
the three estates of the realm.

Of course, although the petition was addressed to Richard as if the
object of it was to produce an effect upon his mind, it was really all
planned and arranged by Richard himself, and by Buckingham in
conjunction with him; and the representations and arguments which it
contained were designed solely for effect on the mind of the public,
when the details of the transaction should be promulgated throughout
the land.

The petition being ready, Buckingham, in behalf of the delegation,
demanded an audience of the Lord Protector that they might lay it
before him. Richard accordingly made an appointment to receive them at
his mother's residence at Baynard's Castle.

At the appointed time the delegation appeared, and were received in
great state by Richard in the audience hall. The Duke of Buckingham
presented the petition, and Richard read it. He seemed surprised, and
he pretended to be at a loss what to reply. Presently he began to say
that he could not think of assuming the crown. He said he had no
ambition to reign, but only desired to preserve the kingdom for his
nephew the king until he should become of sufficient age, and then to
put him peaceably in possession of it. But the Duke of Buckingham
replied that this could never be. The people of England, he said,
would never consent to be ruled by a prince of illegitimate birth.

"And if you, my lord," added the duke, "refuse to accept the crown,
they know where to find another who will gladly accept it."

[Illustration: BAYNARD'S CASTLE.]

In the end, Richard allowed himself to be persuaded that there was no
alternative but for him to accept the crown, and he reluctantly
consented that, on the morrow, he would proceed in state to
Westminster, and publicly assume the title and the prerogatives of
king.

Accordingly, the next day, a grand procession was formed, and Richard
was conducted with great pomp to Westminster Hall. Here he took his
place on the throne, with the leading lords of his future court, and
the bishops and archbishops around him. The rest of the hall was
crowded with a vast concourse of people that had assembled to witness
the ceremony.

First the king took the customary royal oath, which was administered
by the archbishop. He then summoned the great judges before him, and
made an address to them, exhorting them to administer the laws and
execute judgment between man and man in a just and impartial manner,
inasmuch as to secure that end, he said, would be the first and
greatest object of his reign.

After this Richard addressed the concourse of people in the hall, who,
in some sense, represented the public, and pronounced a pardon for all
offenses which had been committed against himself, and ordered a
proclamation to be made of a general amnesty throughout the land.
These announcements were received by the people with loud
acclamations, and the ceremony was concluded by shouts of "Long live
King Richard!" from all the assembly.

We obtain a good idea of this scene by the following engraving, which
is copied exactly from a picture contained in a manuscript volume of
the time.

[Illustration: THE KING ON HIS THRONE.]

The royal dignity having thus been assumed by the new king at the
usual centre and seat of the royal power, the procession was again
formed, and Richard was conducted to Westminster Abbey for the purpose
of doing the homage customary on such occasions at one of the shrines
in the church. The procession of the king was met at the door of the
church by a procession of monks chanting a solemn anthem as they came.

After the religious ceremonies were completed, Richard, at the head of
a grand cavalcade of knights, noblemen, and citizens, proceeded into
the city to the Church of St. Paul. The streets were lined with
spectators, who saluted the king with cheers and acclamations as he
passed. At the Church of St. Paul more ceremonies were performed and
more proclamations were made. The popular joy, more or less sincere,
was expressed by the sounding of trumpets, the waving of banners, and
loud acclamations of "Long live King Richard!" At length, when the
services in the city were concluded, the king returned to Westminster,
and took up his abode at the royal palace; and while he was returning,
heralds were sent to all the great centres of concourse and
intelligence in and around London to proclaim him king.

This proclamation of Richard as king took place on the twenty-sixth of
June. King Edward the Fourth died just about three months before.
During this three months Edward the Fifth is, in theory, considered as
having been the King of England, though, during the whole period, the
poor child, instead of exercising any kingly rights or prerogatives,
was a helpless prisoner in the hands of others, who, while they
professed to be his protectors, were really his determined and
relentless foes.



