

At noon on Wednesday, 10th April 1912, the _Titanic_ started from
Southampton on her maiden voyage. Small enough was her experience of the
sea before that day. Many hands had handled her; many tugs had fussed
about her, pulling and pushing her this way and that as she was
manoeuvred in the waters of Belfast Lough and taken out to the entrance
to smell the sea. There she had been swung and her compasses adjusted.
Three or four hours had sufficed for her trial trip, and she had first
felt her own power in the Irish Sea, when all her new machinery working
together, at first with a certain reserve and diffidence, had tested and
tried its various functions, and she had come down through St. George's
Channel and round by the Lizard, and past the Eddystone and up the
Solent to Southampton Water, feeling a little hustled and strange, no
doubt, but finding this business of ploughing the seas surprisingly easy
after all. And now, on the day of sailing, amid the cheers of a crowd
unusually vast even for Southampton Docks, the largest ship in the world
slid away from the deep-water jetty to begin her sea life in earnest.

In the first few minutes her giant powers made themselves felt. As she
was slowly gathering way she passed the liner _New York_, another ocean
monarch, which was lying like a rock moored by seven great hawsers of
iron and steel. As the _Titanic_ passed, some mysterious compelling
influence of the water displaced by her vast bulk drew the _New York_
towards her; snapped one by one the great steel hawsers and pulled the
liner from the quayside as though she had been a cork. Not until she was
within fifteen feet of the _Titanic_, when a collision seemed imminent,
did the ever-present tugs lay hold of her and haul her back to
captivity.

Even to the most experienced traveller the first few hours on a new ship
are very confusing; in the case of a ship like this, containing the
population of a village, they are bewildering. So the eight hours spent
by the _Titanic_ in crossing from Southampton to Cherbourg would be
spent by most of her passengers in taking their bearings, trying to find
their way about and looking into all the wonders of which the voyage
made them free. There were luxuries enough in the second class, and
comforts enough in the third to make the ship a wonder on that account
alone; but it was the first-class passengers, used as they were to all
the extravagant luxuries of modern civilized life, on whom the
discoveries of that first day of sun and wind in the Channel must have
come with the greatest surprise. They had heard the ship described as a
floating hotel; but as they began to explore her they must have found
that she contained resources of a perfection unattained by any hotel,
and luxuries of a kind unknown in palaces. The beauties of French
chateaux and of English country-houses of the great period had been
dexterously combined with that supreme form of comfort which the modern
English and Americans have raised to the dignity of a fine art. Such a
palace as a great artist, a great epicure, a great poet and the most
spoilt and pampered woman in the world might have conjured up from their
imagination in an idle hour was here materialized and set, not in a
fixed landscape of park and woodland, but on the dustless road of the
sea, with the sunshine of an English April pouring in on every side, and
the fresh salt airs of the Channel filling every corner with tonic
oxygen.

Catalogues of marvels and mere descriptions of wonders are tiresome
reading, and produce little effect on the mind; yet if we are to realize
the full significance of this story of the _Titanic_, we must begin as
her passengers began, with an impression of the lavish luxury and beauty
which was the setting of life on board. And we can do no better than
follow in imagination the footsteps of one ideal voyager as he must have
discovered, piece by piece, the wonders of this floating pleasure house.

If he was a wise traveller he would have climbed to the highest point
available as the ship passed down the Solent, and that would be the
boat-deck, which was afterwards to be the stage of so tragic a drama.
At the forward end of it was the bridge--that sacred area paved with
snow-white gratings and furnished with many brightly-polished
instruments. Here were telephones to all the vital parts of the ship,
telegraphs to the engine room and to the fo'c'stle head and
after-bridge; revolving switches for closing the water-tight doors in
case of emergency; speaking-tubes, electric switches for operating the
foghorns and sirens--all the nerves, in fact, necessary to convey
impulses from this brain of the ship to her various members. Behind the
bridge on either side were the doors leading to the officers' quarters;
behind them again, the Marconi room--a mysterious temple full of
glittering machines of brass, vulcanite, glass, and platinum, with
straggling wires and rows of switches and fuse boxes, and a high priest,
young, clean-shaven, alert and intelligent, sitting with a telephone
cap over his head, sending out or receiving the whispers of the ether.
Behind this opened the grand staircase, an imposing sweep of decoration
in the Early English style, with plain and solid panelling relieved here
and there with lovely specimens of deep and elaborate carving in the
manner of Grinling Gibbons; the work of the two greatest wood-carvers in
England. Aft of this again the white pathway of the deck led by the
doors and windows of the gymnasium, where the athletes might keep in
fine condition; and beyond that the white roof above ended and the rest
was deck-space open to the sun and the air, and perhaps also to the
smoke and smuts of the four vast funnels that towered in buff and black
into the sky--each so vast that it would have served as a tunnel for a
railway train.

But the ship has gathered way, and is sliding along past the Needles,
where the little white lighthouse looks so paltry beside the towering
cliff. The Channel air is keen, and the bugles are sounding for lunch;
and our traveller goes down the staircase, noticing perhaps, as he
passes, the great clock with its figures which symbolize Honour and
Glory crowning Time. Honour and Glory must have felt just a little
restive as, having crowned one o'clock, they looked down from Time upon
the throng of people descending the staircase to lunch. There were a few
there who had earned, and many who had received, the honour and glory
represented by extreme wealth; but the two figures stooping over the
clock may have felt that Success crowning Opportunity would have been a
symbol more befitting the first-class passengers of the _Titanic_.
Perhaps they looked more kindly as one white-haired old man passed
beneath--W. T. Stead, that untiring old warrior and fierce campaigner in
peaceful causes, who in fields where honour and glory were to be found
sought always for the true and not the false. There were many kinds of
men there--not every kind, for it is not every man who can pay from fifty
to eight hundred guineas for a four days' journey; but most kinds of men
and women who can afford to do that were represented there.

Our solitary traveller, going down the winding staircase, does not pause
on the first floor, for that leads forward to private apartments, and
aft to a writing-room and library; nor on the second or third, for the
entrance-halls there lead to state-rooms; but on the fourth floor down
he steps out into a reception room extending to the full width of the
ship and of almost as great a length. Nothing of the sea's restrictions
or discomforts here! Before him is an Aubusson tapestry, copied from
one of the "Chasses de Guise" series of the National Garde-Meuble; and
in this wide apartment there is a sense, not of the cramping necessities
of the sea, but of all the leisured and spacious life of the land.
Through this luxurious emptiness the imposing dignities of the
dining-saloon are reached; and here indeed all the insolent splendour of
the ship is centred. It was by far the largest room that had ever
floated upon the seas, and by far the largest room that had ever moved
from one place to another. The seventeenth-century style of Hatfield and
Haddon Hall had been translated from the sombreness of oak to the
lightness of enamelled white. Artist-plasterers had moulded the lovely
Jacobean ceiling, artist-stainers had designed and made the great
painted windows through which the bright sea-sunlight was filtered; and
when the whole company of three hundred was seated at the tables it
seemed not much more than half full, since more than half as many again
could find places there without the least crowding. There, amid the
strains of gay music and the hum of conversation and the subdued clatter
of silver and china and the low throb of the engines, the gay company
takes its first meal on the _Titanic_. And as our traveller sits there
solitary, he remembers that this is not all, that in another great
saloon farther off another three hundred passengers of the second-class
are also at lunch, and that on the floor below him another seven hundred
of the third-class, and in various other places near a thousand of the
crew, are also having their meal. All a little oppressive to read about,
perhaps, but wonderful to contrive and arrange. It is what everyone is
thinking and talking about who sits at those luxurious tables, loaded
not with sea-fare, but with dainty and perishable provisions for which
half the countries of the world have been laid under tribute.

The music flows on and the smooth service accomplishes itself; Honour
and Glory, high up under the wrought-iron dome of the staircase, are
crowning another hour of Time; and our traveller comes up into the fresh
air again in order to assure himself that he is really at sea. The
electric lift whisks him up four storeys to the deck again; there all
around him are the blue-gray waters of the Channel surging in a white
commotion past the towering sides of the ship, spurned by the tremendous
rush and momentum of these fifty thousand tons through the sea. This
time our traveller stops short of the boat-deck, and begins to explore
the far vaster B deck which, sheltered throughout its great length by
the boat-deck above, and free from all impediments, extends like a vast
white roadway on either side of the central deck. Here the busy deck
stewards are arranging chairs in the places that will be occupied by
them throughout the voyage. Here, as on the parade of a fashionable
park, people are taking their walks in the afternoon sunshine.

From the staircase forward the deck houses are devoted to apartments
which are still by force of habit called cabins, but which have nothing
in fact to distinguish them from the most luxurious habitations ashore,
except that no dust ever enters them and that the air is always fresh
from the open spaces of the sea. They are not for the solitary
traveller; but our friend perhaps is curious and peeps in through an
uncurtained window. There is a complete habitation with bed-rooms,
sitting-room, bath-room and service-room complete. They breathe an
atmosphere of more than mechanical luxury, more than material
pleasures. Twin bedsteads, perfect examples of Empire or Louis Seize,
symbolize the romance to which the most extravagant luxury in the world
is but a minister. Instead of ports there are windows--windows that look
straight out on to the blue sea, as might the windows of a castle on a
cliff. Instead of stoves or radiators there are open grates, where fires
of sea-coal are burning brightly. Every suite is in a different style,
and each and all are designed and furnished by artists; and the love and
repose of millionaires can be celebrated in surroundings of Adam or
Hepplewhite, or Louis Quatorze or the Empire, according to their tastes.
And for the hire of each of these theatres the millionaire must pay some
two hundred guineas a day, with the privilege of being quite alone, cut
off from the common herd who are only paying perhaps five-and-twenty
pounds a day, and with the privilege, if he chooses, of seeing nothing
at all that has to do with a ship, not even the sea.

For there is one thing that the designers of this sea-palace seem to
have forgotten and seem to be a little ashamed of--and that is the sea
itself. There it lies, an eternal prospect beyond these curtained
windows, by far the most lovely and wonderful thing visible; but it
seems to be forgotten there. True, there is a smoke-room at the after
extremity of the deck below this, whose windows look out into a great
verandah sheeted in with glass from which you cannot help looking upon
the sea. But in order to counteract as much as possible that austere and
lovely reminder of where we are, trellis-work has been raised within the
glass, and great rose-trees spread and wander all over it, reminding you
by their crimson blossoms of the earth and the land, and the scented
shelter of gardens that are far from the boisterous stress of the sea.
No spray ever drifts in at these heights, no froth or spume can ever in
the wildest storms beat upon this verandah. Here, too, as almost
everywhere else on the ship, you can, if you will, forget the sea.



