

Wonderful, even for experienced travellers, is that first waking to a
day on which there shall be no sight of the shore, and the first of
several days of isolation in the world of a ship. There is a quality in
the morning sunshine at sea as it streams into the ship and is reflected
in the white paint and sparkling water of the bath-rooms, and in the
breeze that blows cool and pure along the corridors, that is like
nothing else. The company on the _Titanic_ woke up on Friday morning to
begin in earnest their four days of isolated life. Our traveller, who
has found out so many things about the ship, has not found out
everything yet; and he continues his explorations, with the advantage,
perhaps, of a special permit from the Captain or Chief Engineer to
explore other quarters of the floating city besides that in which he
lives. Let us, with him, try to form some general conception of the
internal arrangements of the ship.

The great superstructure of decks amidships which catches the eye so
prominently in a picture or photograph, was but, in reality, a small
part, although the most luxurious part, of the vessel. Speaking roughly,
one might describe it as consisting of three decks, five hundred feet
long, devoted almost exclusively to the accommodation of first-class
passengers, with the exception of the officers' quarters (situated
immediately aft of the bridge on the top deck of all), and the
second-class smoking-room and library, at the after end of the
superstructure on the third and fourth decks. With these exceptions, in
this great four-storied building were situated all the most magnificent
and palatial accommodations of the ship. Immediately beneath it,
amidships, in the steadiest part of the vessel where any movement would
be least felt, was the first-class dining saloon, with the pantries and
kitchens immediately aft of it. Two decks below it were the third-class
dining saloons and kitchens; below them again, separated by a heavy
steel deck, were the boiler-rooms and coal bunkers, resting on the
cellular double bottom of the ship. Immediately aft of the boiler-rooms
came the two engine-rooms; the forward and larger one of the two
contained the reciprocating engines which drove the twin screws, and the
after one the turbine engine for driving the large centre propeller.

Forward and aft of this centre part of the ship, which in reality
occupied about two-thirds of her whole length, were two smaller
sections, divided (again one speaks roughly) between second-class
accommodation, stores and cargo in the stern section, and third-class
berths, crew's quarters and cargo in the bow section. But although the
first-class accommodation was all amidships, and the second-class all
aft, that of the third-class was scattered about in such blank spaces as
could be found for it. Thus most of the berths were forward, immediately
behind the fo'c'stle, some were right aft; the dining-room was
amidships, and the smoke-room in the extreme stern, over the rudder; and
to enjoy a smoke or game of cards a third-class passenger who was
berthed forward would have to walk the whole length of the ship and back
again, a walk not far short of half a mile. This gives one an idea of
how much more the ship resembled a town than a house. A third-class
passenger did not walk from his bedroom to his parlour; he walked from
the house where he lived in the forward part of the ship to the club a
quarter of a mile away where he was to meet his friends.

If, thinking of the _Titanic_ storming along westward across the
Atlantic, you could imagine her to be split in half from bow to stern so
that you could look, as one looks at the section of a hive, upon all her
manifold life thus suddenly laid bare, you would find in her a microcosm
of civilized society. Up on the top are the rulers, surrounded by the
rich and the luxurious, enjoying the best of everything; a little way
below them their servants and parasites, ministering not so much to
their necessities as to their luxuries; lower down still, at the very
base and foundation of all, the fierce and terrible labour of the
stokeholds, where the black slaves are shovelling and shovelling as
though for dear life, endlessly pouring coal into furnaces that devoured
it and yet ever demanded a new supply--horrible labour, joyless life; and
yet the labour that gives life and movement to the whole ship. Up above
are all the beautiful things, the pleasant things; down below are the
terrible and necessary things. Up above are the people who rest and
enjoy; down below the people who sweat and suffer.

Consider too the whirl of life and multitude of human employments that
you would have found had you peered into this section of the ship that
we are supposing to have been laid bare. Honour and Glory, let us say,
have just crowned ten o'clock in the morning beneath the great dome of
glass and iron that covers the central staircase. Someone has just come
down and posted a notice on the board--a piece of wireless news of
something that happened in London last night. In one of the sunny
bed-rooms (for our section lays everything bare) someone is turning over
in bed again and telling a maid to shut out the sun. Eighty feet below
her the black slaves are working in a fiery pit; ten feet below them is
the green sea. A business-like-looking group have just settled down to
bridge in the first-class smoking-room. The sea does not exist for them,
nor the ship; the roses that bloom upon the trellis-work by the verandah
interest them no more than the pageant of white clouds which they could
see if they looked out of the wide windows. Down below the chief
steward, attended by his satellites, is visiting the stores and getting
from the store-keeper the necessaries for his day's catering. He has
plenty to draw from. In those cold chambers behind the engine-room are
gathered provisions which seem almost inexhaustible for any population;
for the imagination does not properly take in the meaning of such items
as a hundred thousand pounds of beef, thirty thousand fresh eggs, fifty
tons of potatoes, a thousand pounds of tea, twelve hundred quarts of
cream. In charge of the chief steward also, to be checked by him at the
end of each voyage, are the china and glass, the cutlery and plate of
the ship, amounting in all to some ninety thousand pieces. But there he
is, quietly at work with the store-keeper; and not far from him, in
another room or series of rooms, another official dealing with the
thousands upon thousands of pieces of linen for bed and table with which
the town is supplied.

Everything is on a monstrous scale. The centre anchor, which it took a
team of sixteen great horses to drag on a wooden trolley, weighs over
fifteen tons; its cable will hold a dead weight of three hundred tons.
The very rudder, that mere slender and almost invisible appendage under
the counter, is eighty feet high and weighs a hundred tons. The men on
the look-out do not climb up the shrouds and ratlines in the old sea
fashion; the mast is hollow and contains a stairway; there is a door in
it from which they come out to take their place in the crow's nest.

Are you weary of such statistics? They were among the things on which
men thought with pride on those sunny April days in the Atlantic. Man
can seldom think of himself apart from his environment, and the house
and place in which he lives are ever a preoccupation with all men. From
the clerk in his little jerry-built villa to the king in his castle,
what the house is, what it is built of, how it is equipped and adorned,
are matters of vital interest. And if that is true of land, where all
the webs of life are connected and intercrossed, how much more must it
be true when a man sets his house afloat upon the sea; detaches it from
all other houses and from the world, and literally commits himself to
it. This was the greatest sea town that had ever been built; these were
the first inhabitants of it; theirs were the first lives that were lived
in these lovely rooms; this was one of the greatest companies that had
ever been afloat together within the walls of one ship. No wonder they
were proud; no wonder they were preoccupied with the source of their
pride.

But things stranger still to the life of the sea are happening in some
of the hundreds of cells which our giant section-knife has laid bare. An
orchestra is practising in one of them; in another, some one is catching
live trout from a pond; Post Office sorters are busy in another with
letters for every quarter of the western world; in a garage,
mechanicians are cleaning half a dozen motor-cars; the rippling tones of
a piano sound from a drawing-room where people are quietly reading in
deep velvet armchairs surrounded by books and hothouse flowers; in
another division people are diving and swimming in a great bath in water
deep enough to drown a tall man; in another an energetic game of squash
racquets is in progress; and in great open spaces, on which it is only
surprising that turf is not laid, people by hundreds are sunning
themselves and breathing the fresh air, utterly unconscious of all these
other activities on which we have been looking. For even here, as
elsewhere, half of the world does not know and does not care how the
other half lives.

All this magnitude had been designed and adapted for the realization of
two chief ends--comfort and stability. We have perhaps heard enough
about the arrangements for comfort; but the more vital matter had
received no less anxious attention. Practically all of the space below
the water-line was occupied by the heaviest things in the ship--the
boilers, the engines, the coal bunkers and the cargo. And the
arrangement of her bulkheads, those tough steel walls that divide a
ship's hull into separate compartments, was such that her designers
believed that no possible accident short of an explosion in her boilers
could sink her. If she rammed any obstruction head on, her bows might
crumple up, but the steel walls stretching across her hull--and there
were fifteen of them--would prevent the damage spreading far enough aft
to sink her. If her broadside was rammed by another ship, and one or
even two of these compartments pierced, even then the rest would be
sufficient to hold her up at least for a day or two. These bulkheads
were constructed of heavy sheet steel, and extended from the very bottom
of the ship to a point well above the water-line. Necessarily there were
openings in them in order to make possible communication between the
different parts of the ship. These openings were the size of an ordinary
doorway and fitted with heavy steel doors--not hinged doors, but panels,
sliding closely in water-tight grooves on either side of the opening.
There were several ways of closing them; but once closed they offered a
resistance as solid as that of the bulkheads.

The method of opening and closing them was one of the many marvels of
modern engineering. The heavy steel doors were held up above the
openings by a series of friction clutches. Up on the bridge were
switches connected with powerful electro-magnets at the side of the
bulkhead openings. The operation of the switches caused each magnet to
draw down a heavy weight which instantly released the friction clutches,
so that the doors would slide down in a second or two into their places,
a gong ringing at the same time to warn anyone who might be passing
through to get out of the way. The clutches could also be released by
hand. But if for any reason the electric machinery should fail, there
was a provision made for closing them automatically in case the ship
should be flooded with water. Down in the double bottom of the ship were
arranged a series of floats connected with each set of bulkhead doors.
In the event of water reaching the compartment below the doors, it would
raise the floats, which, in their turn, would release the clutches and
drop the doors. These great bulkheads were no new experiment; they had
been tried and proved. When the White Star liner _Suevic_ was wrecked a
few years ago off the Lizard, it was decided to divide the part of her
which was floating from the part which was embedded in the rocks; and
she was cut in two just forward of the main collision bulkhead, and the
larger half of her towed into port with no other protection from the sea
than this vast steel wall which, nevertheless, easily kept her afloat.
And numberless other ships have owed their lives to the resisting power
of these steel bulkheads and the quick operation of the sliding doors.

As for the enormous weight that made for the _Titanic's_ stability, it
was, as I have said, contained chiefly in the boilers, machinery and
coal. The coal bunkers were like a lining running round the boilers, not
only at the sides of the ship, but also across her whole breadth, thus
increasing the solidity of the steel bulkheads; and when it is
remembered that her steam was supplied by twenty-nine boilers, each of
them the size of a large room, and fired by a hundred and fifty-nine
furnaces, the enormous weight of this part of the ship may be dimly
realized.

There are two lives lived side by side on such a voyage, the life of the
passengers and the life of the ship. From a place high up on the
boat-deck our traveller can watch the progress of these two lives. The
passengers play games or walk about, or sit idling drowsily in deck
chairs, with their eyes straying constantly from the unheeded book to
the long horizon, or noting the trivial doings of other idlers. The
chatter of their voices, the sound of their games, the faint tinkle of
music floating up from the music-room are eloquent of one of these
double lives; there on the bridge is an expression of the other--the
bridge in all its spick-and-span sanctities, with the officers of the
watch in their trim uniform, the stolid quartermaster at the wheel, and
his equally stolid companion of the watch who dreams his four hours away
on the starboard side of the bridge almost as motionless as the bright
brass binnacles and standards, and the telegraphs that point
unchangeably down to Full Ahead....

The Officer of the watch has a sextant at his eye. One by one the
Captain, the Chief, the Second and the Fourth, all come silently up and
direct their sextants to the horizon. The quartermaster comes and
touches his cap: "Twelve o'clock, Sir." There is silence--a deep sunny
silence, broken only by the low tones of the Captain to the Chief: "What
have you got?" says the Captain. "Thirty," says the Chief,
"Twenty-nine," says the Third. There is another space of sunny silent
seconds; the Captain takes down his sextant. "Make it eight bells," he
says. Four double strokes resound from the bridge and are echoed from
the fo'c'stle head; and the great moment of the day, the moment that
means so much, is over. The officers retire with pencils and papers and
tables of logarithms; the clock on the staircase is put back, and the
day's run posted; from the deck float up the sounds of a waltz and
laughing voices; Time and the world flow on with us again.



