

For anything that the eye could see the _Titanic_, in all her strength
and splendour, was solitary on the ocean. From the highest of her decks
nothing could be seen but sea and sky, a vast circle of floor and dome
of which, for all her speed of five-and-twenty miles an hour, she
remained always the centre. But it was only to the sense of sight that
she seemed thus solitary. The North Atlantic, waste of waters though it
appears, is really a country crossed and divided by countless tracks as
familiar to the seaman as though they were roads marked by trees and
milestones. Latitude and longitude, which to a landsman seem mere
mathematical abstractions, represent to seamen thousands and thousands
of definite points which, in their relation to sun and stars and the
measured lapse of time, are each as familiar and as accessible as any
spot on a main road is to a landsman. The officer on the bridge may see
nothing through his glasses but clouds and waves, yet in his mind's eye
he sees not only his own position on the map, which he could fix
accurately within a quarter of a mile, but the movements of dozens of
other ships coming or going along the great highways. Each ship takes
its own road, but it is a road that passes through a certain known
territory; the great liners all know each other's movements and where or
when they are likely to meet. Many of such meetings are invisible; it is
called a meeting at sea if ships pass twenty or thirty miles away from
each other and far out of sight.

For there are other senses besides that of sight which now pierce the
darkness and span the waste distances of the ocean. It is no voiceless
solitude through which the _Titanic_ goes on her way. It is full of
whispers, summonses, questions, narratives; full of information to the
listening ear. High up on the boat deck the little white house to which
the wires straggle down from the looped threads between the mastheads is
full of the voices of invisible ships that are coming and going beyond
the horizon. The wireless impulse is too delicate to be used to actuate
a needle like that of the ordinary telegraph; a little voice is given to
it, and with this it speaks to the operator who sits with the telephone
cap strapped over his ears; a whining, buzzing voice, speaking not in
words but in rhythms, corresponding to the dots and dashes made on
paper, out of which a whole alphabet has been evolved. And the wireless
is the greatest gossip in the world. It repeats everything it hears; it
tells the listener everyone else's business; it speaks to him of the
affairs of other people as well as his own. It is an ever-present
eavesdropper, and tells you what other people are saying to one another
in exactly the same voice in which they speak to you. When it is sending
your messages it shouts, splitting the air with crackling flashes of
forked blue fire; but when it has anything to say to you it whispers in
your ear in whining, insinuating confidence. And you must listen
attentively and with a mind concentrated on your own business if you are
to receive from it what concerns you, and reject what does not; for it
is not always the loudest whisper that is the most important. The
messages come from near and far, now like the rasp of a file in your
ear, and now in a thread of sound as fine as the whine of a mosquito;
and if the mosquito voice is the one that is speaking to you from far
away, you may often be interrupted by the loud and empty buzzing of one
nearer neighbour speaking to another and loudly interrupting the message
which concerns you.

Listening to these voices in the Marconi room of the _Titanic_, and
controlling her articulation and hearing, were two young men, little
more than boys, but boys of a rare quality, children of the golden age
of electricity. Educated in an abstruse and delicate science, and loving
the sea for its largeness and adventure, they had come--Phillips at the
age of twenty-six, and Bride in the ripe maturity of twenty-one--to wield
for the _Titanic_ the electric forces of the ether, and to direct her
utterance and hearing on the ocean. And as they sat there that Friday
and Saturday they must have heard, as was their usual routine, all the
whispers of the ships for two hundred miles round them, their trained
faculties almost automatically rejecting the unessential, receiving and
attending to the essential. They heard talk of many things, talk in
fragments and in the strange rhythmic language that they had come to
know like a mother tongue; talk of cargoes, talk of money and business,
of transactions involving thousands of pounds; trivial talk of the
emotions, greetings and good wishes exchanged on the high seas; endless
figures of latitude and longitude--for a ship is an eternal egoist and
begins all her communications by an announcement of Who she is and Where
she is. Ships are chiefly interested in weather and cargo, and their
wireless talk on their own account is constantly of these things; but
most often of the weather. One ship may be pursuing her way under a calm
sky and in smooth waters, while two hundred miles away a neighbour may
be in the middle of a storm; and so the ships talk to one another of
the weather, and combine their forces against it, and, by altering
course a little, or rushing ahead, or hanging back, cheat and dodge
those malignant forces which are ever pursuing them.

But in these April days there was nothing much to be said about the
weather. The winds and the storms were quiet here; they were busy
perhaps up in Labrador or furiously raging about Cape Horn, but they had
deserted for the time the North Atlantic, and all the ships ploughed
steadily on in sunshine and smooth seas. Here and there, however, a
whisper came to Phillips or Bride about something which, though not
exactly weather, was as deeply interesting to the journeying ships--ice.
Just a whisper, nothing more, listened to up there in the sunny Marconi
room, recorded, dealt with, and forgotten. "I have just come through
bad field-ice," whispers one ship; "April ice very far south," says
another; and Phillips taps out his "O.K., O.M.," which is a kind of
cockney Marconi for "All right, old man." And many other messages come
and go, of money and cargoes, and crops and the making of laws; but just
now and then a pin-prick of reminder between all these other topics
comes the word--ICE.

April ice and April weed are two of the most lovely products of the
North Atlantic, but they are strangely opposite in their bearings on
human destiny. The lovely golden April weed that is gathered all round
the west coast of Ireland, and is burnt for indigo, keeps a whole
peasant population in food and clothing for the rest of the year; the
April ice, which comes drifting down on the Arctic current from the
glacier slopes of Labrador or the plateau of North Greenland, keeps the
seafaring population of the North Atlantic in doubt and anxiety
throughout the spring and summer. Lovely indeed are some of these
icebergs that glitter in the sun like fairy islands or the pinnacles of
Valhalla; and dreamy and gentle is their drifting movement as they come
down on the current by Newfoundland and round Cape Race, where, meeting
the east-going Gulf Stream, they are gradually melted and lost in the
waters of the Atlantic. Northward in the drift are often field-ice and
vast floes; the great detached bergs sail farther south into the
steamship tracks, and are what are most carefully looked for. This April
there was abundance of evidence that the field-ice had come farther
south than usual. The _Empress of Britain_, which passed the _Titanic_
on Friday, reported an immense quantity of floating ice in the
neighbourhood of Cape Race. When she arrived in Liverpool it transpired
that, when three days out from Halifax, Nova Scotia, she encountered an
ice-field, a hundred miles in extent, with enormous bergs which appeared
to be joined to the ice-field, forming an immense white line, broken
with peaks and pinnacles on the horizon. The _Carmania_ and the
_Nicaragua_, which were going westward ahead of the _Titanic_, had both
become entangled in ice, and the _Nicaragua_ had sustained considerable
damage. And day by day, almost hour by hour, news was coming in from
other ships commenting on the unusual extent southward of the ice-field,
and on the unusual number of icebergs which they had encountered. No
doubt many of the passengers on the _Titanic_ were hoping that they
would meet with some; it is one of the chief interests of the North
Atlantic voyage in the spring and summer; and nothing is more lovely in
the bright sunshine of day than the sight of one of these giant islands,
with its mountain-peaks sparkling in the sun, and blue waves breaking on
its crystal shores; nothing more impressive than the thought, as one
looks at it, that high as its glittering towers and pinnacles may soar
towards heaven there is eight times as great a depth of ice extending
downwards into the dark sea. It is only at night, or when the waters are
covered with a thick fog produced by the contact of the ice with the
warmer water, that navigating officers, peering forward into the mist,
know how dreadful may be the presence of one of these sheeted monsters,
the ghostly highwaymen of the sea.



