

We must now visit in imagination some other parts of the ship, parts
isolated from the bridge and the spacious temple of luxury amidships,
and try to understand how the events of this half hour appeared to the
denizens of the lower quarters of the ship. The impact that had been
scarcely noticed in the first-class quarters had had much more effect
down below, and especially forward, where some of the third-class
passengers and some of the crew were berthed. A ripping, grinding crash
startled all but the heaviest sleepers here into wakefulness; but it was
over so soon and was succeeded by so peaceful a silence that no doubt
any momentary panic it might have caused was soon allayed. One of the
firemen describing it said: "I was awakened by a noise, and between
sleeping and waking I thought I was dreaming that I was on a train that
had run off the lines, and that I was being jolted about." He jumped out
and went on deck, where he saw the scattered ice lying about. "Oh, we
have struck an iceberg," he said, "that's nothing; I shall go back and
turn in," and he actually went back to bed and slept for half an hour,
until he was turned out to take his station at the boats.

The steerage passengers, who were berthed right aft, heard nothing and
knew nothing until the news that an accident had happened began slowly
to filter down to them. But there was no one in authority to give them
any official news, and for a time they were left to wonder and speculate
as they chose. Forward, however, it became almost immediately apparent
to certain people that there was something grievously wrong; firemen on
their way through the passage along the ship's bottom leading between
their quarters and No. 1 stokehold found water coming in, and rapidly
turned back. They were met on their way up the staircase by an officer
who asked them what they were doing. They told him. "There's water
coming into our place, Sir," they said; and as he thought they were off
duty he did not turn them back.

Mr. Andrews, a partner in Harland and Wolff's, and one of the
_Titanic's_ designers, had gone quietly down by himself to investigate
the damage, and, great as was his belief in the giant he had helped to
create, it must have been shaken when he found the water pouring into
her at the rate of hundreds of tons a minute. Even his confidence in
those mighty steel walls that stretched one behind the other in
succession along the whole length of the ship could not have been proof
against the knowledge that three or four of them had been pierced by the
long rip of the ice-tooth. There was just a chance that she would hold
up long enough to allow of relief to arrive in time; but it is certain
that from that moment Mr. Andrews devoted himself to warning people, and
helping to get them away, so far as he could do so without creating a
panic.

Most of the passengers, remember, were still asleep during this half
hour. One of the most terrible things possible at sea is a panic, and
Captain Smith was particularly anxious that no alarm should be given
before or unless it was absolutely necessary. He heard what Mr. Andrews
had to say, and consulted with the engineer, and soon found that the
whole of the ship's bottom was being flooded. There were other
circumstances calculated to make the most sanguine ship-master uneasy.
Already, within half an hour, the _Titanic_ was perceptibly down by the
head. She would remain stationary for five minutes and then drop six
inches or a foot; remain stationary again, and drop another foot--a
circumstance ominous to experienced minds, suggesting that some of the
smaller compartments forward were one by one being flooded, and letting
the water farther and farther into her hull.

Therefore at about twenty-five minutes past midnight the Captain gave
orders for the passengers to be called and mustered on the boat deck.
All the ship's crew had by this time been summoned to their various
stations; and now through all the carpeted corridors, through the
companion-ways and up and down staircases, leading to the steerage
cabins, an army of three hundred stewards was hurrying, knocking loudly
on doors, and shouting up and down the passages, "All passengers on
deck with life-belts on!" The summons came to many in their sleep; and
to some in the curtained firelight luxury of their deck state-rooms it
seemed an order so absurd that they scorned it, and actually went back
to bed again. These, however, were rare exceptions; for most people
there was no mistaking the urgency of the command, even though they were
slow to understand the necessity for it. And hurry is a thing easily
communicated; seeing some passengers hastening out with nothing over
their night clothes but a blanket or a wrapper, others caught the
infection, and hurried too; and struggling with life-belts, clumsily
attempting to adjust them over and under a curious assortment of
garments, the passengers of the _Titanic_ came crowding up on deck, for
the first time fully alarmed.



