

When the people came on deck it was half-past twelve. The first-class
passengers came pouring up the two main staircases and out on to the
boat deck--some of them indignant, many of them curious, some few of them
alarmed. They found there everything as usual except that the long deck
was not quite level; it tilted downwards a little towards the bow, and
there was a slight list towards the starboard side. The stars were
shining in the sky and the sea was perfectly smooth, although dotted
about it here and there were lumps of dark-coloured ice, almost
invisible against the background of smooth water. A long line of
stewards was forming up beside the boats on either side--those solid
white boats, stretching far aft in two long lines, that became suddenly
invested with practical interest. Officers were shouting orders, seamen
were busy clearing up the coils of rope attached to the davit tackles,
fitting the iron handles to the winches by which the davits themselves
were canted over from the inward position over the deck to the outward
position over the ship's side. Almost at the same time a rush of people
began from the steerage quarters, swarming up stairways and ladders to
reach this high deck hitherto sacred to the first-class passengers. At
first they were held back by a cordon of stewards, but some broke
through and others were allowed through, so that presently a large
proportion of the ship's company was crowding about the boat deck and
the one immediately below it.

Then the business of clearing, filling, and lowering the boats was
begun--a business quickly described, but occupying a good deal of time in
the transaction. Mr. Murdoch, the Chief Officer, ordered the crews to
the boats; and with some confusion different parties of stewards and
sailors disentangled themselves from the throng and stood in their
positions by each of the sixteen boats. Every member of the crew, when
he signs on for a voyage in a big passenger ship, is given a number
denoting which boat's crew he belongs to. If there has been boat drill,
every man knows and remembers his number; if, as in the case of the
_Titanic_, there has been no boat drill, some of the men remember their
numbers and some do not, the result being a certain amount of confusion.
But at last a certain number of men were allotted to each boat, and
began the business of hoisting them out.

First of all the covers had to be taken off and the heavy masts and
sails lifted out of them. Ship's boats appear very small things when one
sees a line of them swinging high up on deck; but, as a matter of fact,
they are extremely heavy, each of them the size of a small sailing
yacht. Everything on the _Titanic_ having been newly painted, everything
was stiff and difficult to move. The lashings of the heavy canvas covers
were like wire, and the covers themselves like great boards; the new
ropes ran stiffly in the new gear. At last a boat was cleared and the
order given, "Women and children first." The officers had revolvers in
their hands ready to prevent a rush; but there was no rush. There was a
certain amount of laughter. No one wanted to be the first to get into
the boat and leave the ship. "Come on," cried the officers. There was a
pause, followed by the brief command, "Put them in."

The crew seized the nearest women and pushed or lifted them over the
rail into the first boat, which was now hanging over the side level with
the deck. But they were very unwilling to go. The boat, which looked big
and solid on the deck, now hung dizzily seventy-five feet over the dark
water; it seemed a far from attractive prospect to get into it and go
out on to the cold sea, especially as everyone was convinced that it was
a merely formal precaution which was being taken, and that the people in
the boats would merely be rowed off a little way and kept shivering on
the cold sea for a time and then brought back to the ship when it was
found that the danger was past. For, walking about the deck, people
remembered all the things that they had been thinking and saying since
first they had seen the _Titanic_; and what was the use of travelling by
an unsinkable ship if, at the first alarm of danger, one had to leave
her and row out on the icy water? Obviously it was only the old habit of
the sea asserting itself, and Captain Smith, who had hitherto been such
a favourite, was beginning to be regarded as something of a nuisance
with his ridiculous precautions.

The boats swung and swayed in the davits; even the calm sea, now that
they looked at it more closely, was seen to be not absolutely like a
millpond, but to have a certain movement on its surface which, although
utterly helpless to move the huge bulk of the _Titanic_, against whose
sides it lapped, as ineffectually as against the walls of a dock, was
enough to impart a swinging movement to the small boats. But at last,
what with coercion and persuasion, a boat was half filled with women.
One of the things they liked least was leaving their husbands; they felt
that they were being sacrificed needlessly to over-elaborate
precautions, and it was hard to leave the men standing comfortably on
the firm deck, sheltered and in a flood of warm yellow light, and in the
safety of the great solid ship that lay as still as a rock, while they
had to go out, half-clad and shivering, on the icy waters.

But the inexorable movements of the crew continued. The pulleys squealed
in the sheaves, the new ropes were paid out; and jerking downwards, a
foot or two at a time, the first boat dropped down towards the water,
past storey after storey of the great structure, past rows and rows of
lighted portholes, until at last, by strange unknown regions of the
ship's side, where cataracts and waterfalls were rushing into the sea,
it rested on the waves. The blocks were unhooked, the heavy ash oars
were shipped, and the boat headed away into the darkness. And then, and
not till then, those in the boat realized that something was seriously
wrong with the _Titanic_. Instead of the trim level appearance which she
presented on the picture postcards or photographs, she had an ungraceful
slant downwards to the bows--a heavy helpless appearance like some
wounded monster that is being overcome by the waters. And even while
they looked, they could see that the bow was sinking lower.

After the first boat had got away, there was less difficulty about the
others. The order, "Women and children first," was rigidly enforced by
the officers; but it was necessary to have men in the boats to handle
them, and a number of stewards, and many grimy figures of stokers who
had mysteriously appeared from below were put into them to man them.
Once the tide of people began to set into the boats and away from the
ship, there came a certain anxiety to join them and not to be left
behind. Here and there indeed there was over-anxiety, which had to be
roughly checked. One band of Italians from the steerage, who had good
reason to know that something was wrong, tried to rush one of the boats,
and had to be kept back by force, an officer firing a couple of shots
with his pistol; they desisted, and were hauled back ignominiously by
the legs. In their place some of the crew and the passengers who were
helping lifted in a number of Italian women limp with fright.

And still everyone was walking about and saying that the ship was
unsinkable. There was a certain subdued excitement, natural to those who
feel that they are taking part in a rather thrilling adventure which
will give them importance in the eyes of people at home when they relate
it. There was as yet no call for heroism, because, among the
first-class passengers certainly, the majority believed that the safest
as well as the most comfortable place was the ship. But it was painful
for husbands and wives to be separated, and the wives sent out to brave
the discomforts of the open boats while the husbands remained on the dry
and comfortable ship.

The steerage people knew better and feared more. Life had not taught
them, as it had taught some of those first-class passengers, that the
world was an organization specially designed for their comfort and
security; they had not come to believe that the crude and ugly and
elementary catastrophes of fate would not attack them. On the contrary,
most of them knew destiny as a thing to fear, and made haste to flee
from it. Many of them, moreover, had been sleeping low down in the
forward part of the ship; they had heard strange noises, had seen water
washing about where no water should be, and they were frightened. There
was, however, no discrimination between classes in putting the women
into the boats. The woman with a tattered shawl over her head, the woman
with a sable coat over her nightdress, the woman clasping a baby, and
the woman clutching a packet of trinkets had all an equal chance; side
by side they were handed on to the harsh and uncomfortable thwarts of
the lifeboats; the wife of the millionaire sat cheek by jowl with a
dusty stoker and a Russian emigrant, and the spoiled woman of the world
found some poor foreigner's baby thrown into her lap as the boat was
lowered.

By this time the women and children had all been mustered on the second
or A deck; the men were supposed to remain up on the boat deck while the
boats were being lowered to the level of the women, where sections of
the rail had been cleared away for them to embark more easily; but this
rule, like all the other rules, was not rigidly observed. The crew was
not trained enough to discipline and coerce the passengers. How could
they be? They were trained to serve them, to be obsequious and obliging;
it would have been too much to expect that they should suddenly take
command and order them about.

There were many minor adventures and even accidents. One woman had both
her legs broken in getting into the boat. The mere business of being
lowered in a boat through seventy feet of darkness was in itself
productive of more than one exciting incident. The falls of the first
boat jammed when she was four feet from the water, and she had to be
dropped into it with a splash. And there was one very curious incident
which happened to the boat in which Mr. Beezley, the English
schoolmaster already referred to, had been allotted a place as a helper.
"As the boat began to descend," he said, "two ladies were pushed
hurriedly through the crowd on B deck, and a baby ten months old was
passed down after them. Then down we went, the crew shouting out
directions to those lowering us. 'Level,' 'Aft,' 'Stern,' 'Both
together!' until we were some ten feet from the water. Here occurred the
only anxious moment we had during the whole of our experience from the
time of our leaving the deck to our reaching the _Carpathia_.

"Immediately below our boat was the exhaust of the condensers, and a
huge stream of water was pouring all the time from the ship's side just
above the water-line. It was plain that we ought to be smart away from
it if we were to escape swamping when we touched the water. We had no
officers on board, and no petty officer or member of the crew to take
charge, so one of the stokers shouted, 'Some one find the pin which
releases the boat from the ropes and pull it up!' No one knew where it
was. We felt as well as we could on the floor, and along the sides, but
found nothing. It was difficult to move among so many people. We had
sixty or seventy on board. Down we went, and presently we floated with
our ropes still holding us, and the stream of water from the exhaust
washing us away from the side of the vessel, while the swell of the sea
urged us back against the side again.

"The result of all these forces was that we were carried parallel to the
ship's side, and directly under boat No. 14, which had filled rapidly
with men, and was coming down on us in a way that threatened to submerge
our boat.

"'Stop lowering 14,' our crew shouted, and the crew of No. 14, now only
20 feet above, cried out the same. The distance to the top, however, was
some 70 feet, and the creaking of the pulleys must have deadened all
sound to those above, for down she came, 15 feet, 10 feet, 5 feet, and a
stoker and I reached up and touched the bottom of the swinging boat
above our heads. The next drop would have brought her on our heads. Just
before she dropped another stoker sprang to the ropes with his knife
open in his hand. 'One,' I heard him say, and then 'Two,' as the knife
cut through the pulley rope.

"'The next moment the exhaust stream carried us clear, while boat No. 14
dropped into the water, taking the space we had occupied a moment
before. Our gunwales were almost touching. We drifted away easily, and
when our oars were got out, we headed directly away from the ship.'"

But although there was no sense of danger, there were some painful
partings on the deck where the women were embarked; for you must think
of this scene as going on for at least an hour amid a confusion of
people pressing about, trying to find their friends, asking for
information, listening to some new rumour, trying to decide whether they
should or should not go in the boats, to a constant accompaniment of
shouted orders, the roar of escaping steam, the squeal and whine of the
ropes and pulleys, and the gay music of the band, which Captain Smith
had ordered to play during the embarkation. Every now and then a woman
would be forced away from her husband; every now and then a husband,
having got into a boat with his wife, would be made to get out of it
again. If it was hard for the wives to go, it was harder for the
husbands to see them go to such certain discomfort and in such strange
company. Colonel Astor, whose young wife was in a delicate state of
health, had got into the boat with her to look after her; and no wonder.
But he was ordered out again and came at once, no doubt feeling
bitterly, poor soul, that he would have given many of his millions to be
able to go honourably with her. But he stepped back without a word of
remonstrance and gave her good-bye with a cheery message, promising to
meet her in New York. And if that happened to him, we may be sure it was
happening over and over again in other boats. There were women who
flatly refused to leave their husbands and chose to stay with them and
risk whatever fate might be in store for them, although at that time
most of the people did not really believe that there was much danger.
Yet here and there there were incidents both touching and heroic. When
it came to the turn of Mrs. Isidore Straus, the wife of a Jewish
millionaire, she took her seat but got back out of the boat when she
found her husband was not coming. They were both old people, and on two
separate occasions an Englishman who knew her tried to persuade her to
get into a boat, but she would not leave her husband. The second time
the boat was not full and he went to Mr. Straus and said: "Do go with
your wife. Nobody can object to an old gentleman like you going. There
is plenty of room in the boat." The old gentleman thanked him calmly and
said: "I won't go before the other men." And Mrs. Straus got out and,
going up to him, said: "We have been together for forty years and we
will not separate now." And she remained by his side until that happened
to them which happened to the rest.



