

There is one other separate point of view from which we may look at the
ship during this fateful hour before all points of view become merged in
one common experience. Mr. Boxhall, the Fourth Officer, who had been on
the bridge at the moment of the impact, had been busy sending up rockets
and signals in the effort to attract the attention of a ship whose
lights could be seen some ten miles away; a mysterious ship which cannot
be traced, but whose lights appear to have been seen by many independent
witnesses on the _Titanic_. So sure was he of her position that Mr.
Boxhall spent almost all his time on the bridge signalling to her with
rockets and flashes; but no answer was received. He had, however, also
been on a rapid tour of inspection of the ship immediately after she had
struck. He went down to the steerage quarters forward and aft, and he
was also down in the deep forward compartment where the Post Office men
were working with the mails, and he had at that time found nothing
wrong, and his information contributed much to the sense of security
that was spread amongst the passengers.

Mr. Pitman, the Third Officer, was in his bunk at the time of the
collision, having been on duty on the bridge from six to eight, when the
Captain had also been on the bridge. There had been talk of ice among
the officers on Sunday, and they had expected to meet with it just
before midnight, at the very time, in fact, when they had met with it.
But very little ice had been seen, and the speed of the ship had not
been reduced. Mr. Pitman says that when he awoke he heard a sound which
seemed to him to be the sound of the ship coming to anchor. He was not
actually awake then, but he had the sensation of the ship halting, and
heard a sound like that of chains whirling round the windlass and
running through the hawseholes into the water. He lay in bed for three
or four minutes wondering in a sleepy sort of way where they could have
anchored. Then, becoming more awake, he got up, and without dressing
went out on deck; he saw nothing remarkable, but he went back and
dressed, suspecting that something was the matter. While he was dressing
Mr. Boxhall looked in and said: "We have struck an iceberg, old man;
hurry up!"

He also went down below to make an inspection and find out what damage
had been done. He went to the forward well deck, where ice was lying,
and into the fo'c's'le, but found nothing wrong there. The actual
damage was farther aft, and at that time the water had not come into the
bows of the ship. As he was going back he met a number of firemen coming
up the gangway with their bags of clothing; they told him that water was
coming into their place. They were firemen off duty, who afterwards were
up on the boat deck helping to man the boats. Then Mr. Pitman went down
lower into the ship and looked into No. 1 hatch, where he could plainly
see water. All this took time; and when he came back he found that the
men were beginning to get the boats ready, a task at which he helped
under Mr. Murdoch's orders. Presently Mr. Murdoch ordered him to take
command of a boat and hang about aft of the gangway. Pitman had very
little relish for leaving the ship at that time, and in spite of the
fact that she was taking in water, every one was convinced that the
_Titanic_ was a much safer place than the open sea. He had about forty
passengers and six of the crew in his boat, and as it was about to be
lowered, Mr. Murdoch leant over to him and shook him heartily by the
hand: "Good-bye, old man, and good luck," he said, in tones which rather
surprised Pitman, for they seemed to imply that the good-bye might be
for a long time. His boat was lowered down into the water, unhooked, and
shoved off, and joined the gradually increasing fleet of other boats
that were cruising about in the starlight.

There was one man walking about that upper deck whose point of view was
quite different from that of anyone else. Mr. Bruce Ismay, like so many
others, was awakened from sleep by the stopping of the engines; like so
many others, also, he lay still for a few moments, and then got up and
went into the passage-way, where he met a steward and asked him what was
the matter. The steward knew nothing, and Mr. Ismay went back to his
state-room, put on a dressing-gown and slippers, and went up to the
bridge, where he saw the Captain. "What has happened?" he asked. "We
have struck ice," was the answer. "Is the injury serious?" "I think so,"
said the Captain. Then Mr. Ismay came down in search of the Chief
Engineer, whom he met coming up to the bridge; he asked him the same
question, and he also said he thought the injury serious. He understood
from them that the ship was certainly in danger, but that there was hope
that if the pumps could be kept going there would be no difficulty in
keeping her afloat quite long enough for help to come and for the
passengers to be taken off. Whatever was to be the result, it was a
terrible moment for Mr. Ismay, a terrible blow to the pride and record
of the Company, that this, their greatest and most invulnerable ship,
should be at least disabled, and possibly lost, on her maiden voyage.
But like a sensible man, he did not stand wringing his hands at the
inevitable; he did what he could to reassure the passengers, repeating,
perhaps with a slight quaver of doubt in his voice, the old
word--unsinkable. When the boats began to be launched he went and tried
to help, apparently in his anxiety getting rather in the way. In this
endeavour he encountered the wrath of Mr. Lowe, the Fifth Officer, who
was superintending the launching of boat No. 5. Mr. Lowe did not know
the identity of the nervous, excited figure standing by the davits, nor
recognize the voice which kept saying nervously, "Lower away! lower
away!" and it was therefore with no misgivings that he ordered him away
from the boat, saying brusquely, "If you will kindly get to hell out of
this perhaps I'll be able to do something!"--a trifling incident, but
evidence that Mr. Ismay made no use of his position for his own personal
ends. He said nothing, and went away to another boat, where he succeeded
in being more useful, and it was not till afterwards that an
awe-stricken steward told the Fifth Officer who it was that he had
chased away with such language. But after that Mr. Ismay was among the
foremost in helping to sort out the women and children and get them
expeditiously packed into the boats, with a burden of misery and
responsibility on his heart that we cannot measure.

One can imagine a great bustle and excitement while the boats were being
sent away; but when they had all gone, and there was nothing more to be
done, those who were left began to look about them and realize their
position. There was no doubt about it, the _Titanic_ was sinking, not
with any plunging or violent movement, but steadily settling down, as a
rock seems to settle into the water when the tide rises about it.

Down in the engine-room and stokeholds, in conditions which can hardly
be imagined by the ordinary landsman, men were still working with a grim
and stoic heroism. The forward stokeholds had been flooded probably an
hour after the collision; but it is practically certain that the
bulkheads forward of No. 5 held until the last. The doors in those aft
of No. 4 had been opened by hand after they had been closed from the
bridge, in order to facilitate the passage of the engineering staff
about their business; and they remained open, and the principal bulkhead
protecting the main engine-room, held until the last. Water thus found
its way into some compartments, and gradually rose; but long after
those in charge had given up all hope of saving the ship, the stokehold
watch were kept hard at work drawing the fires from under the boilers,
so that when the water reached them there should be no steam. The duty
of the engine-room staff was to keep the pumps going as long as possible
and to run the dynamos that supplied the current for the light and the
Marconi installation. This they did, as the black water rose stage by
stage upon them. At least twenty minutes before the ship sank the
machinery must have been flooded, and the current for the lights and the
wireless supplied from the storage plant. No member of the engine-room
staff was ever seen alive again, but, when the water finally flooded the
stokeholds, the watch were released and told to get up and save
themselves if they could.

And up on deck a chilly conviction of doom was slowly but certainly
taking the place of that bland confidence in the unsinkable ship in
which the previous hour had been lightly passed. That confidence had
been dreadfully overdone, so much so that the stewards had found the
greatest difficulty in persuading the passengers to dress themselves and
come up on deck, and some who had done so had returned to their
state-rooms and locked themselves in. The last twenty minutes, however,
must have shown everyone on deck that there was not a chance left. On a
ship as vast and solid as the _Titanic_ there is no sensation of actual
sinking or settling. She still seemed as immovable as ever, but the
water was climbing higher and higher up her black sides. The sensation
was not that of the ship sinking, but of the water rising about her. And
the last picture we have of her, while still visible, still a firm
refuge amid the waters, is of the band still playing and a throng of
people looking out from the lamplit upper decks after the disappearing
boats, bracing themselves as best they might for the terrible plunge and
shock which they knew was coming. Here and there men who were determined
still to make a fight for life climbed over the rail and jumped over; it
was not a seventy foot drop now--perhaps under twenty, but it was a
formidable jump. Some were stunned, and some were drowned at once before
the eyes of those who waited; and the dull splashes they made were
probably the first visible demonstration of the death that was coming.
Duties were still being performed; an old deck steward, who had charge
of the chairs, was busily continuing to work, adapting his duties to the
emergency that had arisen and lashing chairs together. In this he was
helped by Mr. Andrews, who was last seen engaged on this strangely
ironic task of throwing chairs overboard--frail rafts thrown upon the
waters that might or might not avail some struggling soul when the
moment should arrive, and the great ship of his designing float no
longer. Throughout he had been untiring in his efforts to help and
hearten people; but in this the last vision of him, there is something
not far short of the sublime.

The last collapsible boat was being struggled with on the upper deck,
but there were no seamen about who understood its stiff mechanism;
unaccustomed hands fumbled desperately with it, and finally pushed it
over the side in its collapsed condition for use as a raft. Many of the
seamen and stewards had gathered in the bar-room, where the attendant
was serving out glasses of whiskey to any and all who came for it; but
most men had an instinct against being under cover, and preferred to
stand out in the open.

And now those in the boats that had drawn off from the ship could see
that the end was at hand. Her bows had gone under, although the stern
was still fairly high out of the water. She had sunk down at the forward
end of the great superstructure amidships; her decks were just awash,
and the black throng was moving aft. The ship was blazing with light,
and the strains of the band were faintly heard still playing as they had
been commanded to do. But they had ceased to play the jolly rag-time
tunes with which the bustle and labour of getting off the boats had been
accompanied; solemn strains, the strains of a hymn, could be heard
coming over the waters. Many women in the boats, looking back towards
that lighted and subsiding mass, knew that somewhere, invisible among
the throng, was all that they held dearest in the world waiting for
death; and they could do nothing. Some tried to get the crews to turn
back, wringing their hands, beseeching, imploring; but no crew dared
face the neighbourhood of the giant in her death agony. They could only
wait, and shiver, and look.



