

As the ship sank and the commotion and swirl of the waves subsided, the
most terrible experience of all began. The seas were not voiceless; the
horrified people in the surrounding boats heard an awful sound from the
dark central area, a collective voice, compound of moans, shrieks, cries
and despairing calls, from those who were struggling in the water. It
was an area of death and of agony towards which those in the boats dared
not venture, even although they knew their own friends were perishing
and crying for help there. They could only wait and listen, hoping that
it might soon be over. But it was not soon over. There was a great deal
of floating wreckage to which hundreds of people clung, some for a
short time, some for a long time; and while they clung on they cried out
to their friends to save them. One boat--that commanded by Mr. Lowe, the
Fifth Officer--did, after transshipping some of its passengers into other
boats, and embarking a crew of oarsmen, venture back into the dark
centre of things. The wreckage and dead bodies showed the sea so thickly
that they could hardly row without touching a dead body; and once, when
they were trying to reach a survivor who was clinging to a piece of
broken staircase, praying and calling for help, it took them nearly half
an hour to cover the fifty feet that separated them from him, so thick
were the bodies. This reads like an exaggeration, but it is well
attested. The water was icy cold, and benumbed many of them, who thus
died quickly; a few held on to life, moaning, wailing, calling--but in
vain.

A few strong men were still making a desperate fight for life. The
collapsible boat, which Bride had seen a group of passengers attempting
to launch a few minutes before the ship sank, was washed off by a wave
in its collapsed condition. Such boats contain air compartments in their
bottom, and thus, even although they are not opened, they float like
rafts, and can carry a considerable weight. Some of those who were swept
off the ship by the same wave that took the boat found themselves near
it and climbed on to it. Mr. Lightoller, the Second Officer, had dived
as the ship dived, and been sucked down the steep submerged wall of the
hull against the grating over the blower for the exhaust steam. Far down
under the water he felt the force of an explosion which blew him up to
the surface, where he breathed for a moment, and was then sucked back
by the water washing into the ship as it sank. This time he landed
against the grating over the pipes that furnished the draught for the
funnels, and stuck there. There was another explosion, and again he came
to the surface not many feet from the ship, and found himself near the
collapsible boat, to which he clung. It was quite near him that the huge
funnel fell over into the water and killed many swimmers before his
eyes. He drifted for a time on the collapsible boat, until he was taken
off into one of the lifeboats.

Bride also found himself strangely involved with this boat, which he had
last seen on the deck of the ship. When he was swept off, he found
himself in the horrible position of being trapped under water beneath
this boat. He struggled out and tried to climb on to it, but it took
him a long time; at last, however, he managed to get up on it, and found
five or six other people there. And now and then some other swimmer,
stronger than most, would come up and be helped on board. Some thus
helped died almost immediately; there were four found dead upon this
boat when at last the survivors were rescued.

There was another boat also not far off, a lifeboat, capsized likewise.
Six men managed to scramble on to the keel of this craft; it was almost
all she could carry. Mr. Caldwell, a second-class passenger, who had
been swimming about in the icy water for nearly an hour, with dead
bodies floating all about him, was beginning to despair when he found
himself near a crate to which another man was clinging. "Will it hold
two?" he asked. And the other man, with a rare heroism, said: "Catch
hold and try; we will live or die together." And these two, clinging
precariously to the crate, reached the overturned lifeboat and were
hauled up to its keel. Presently another man came swimming along and
asked if they could take him on. But the boat was already dangerously
loaded; the weight of another man would have meant death for all, and
they told him so. "All right," he cried, "good-bye; God bless you all!"
And he sank before their eyes.

Captain Smith, who had last been seen washed from the bridge as the ship
sank, with a child in his arms, was seen once more before he died. He
was swimming, apparently only in the hope of saving the child that he
held; for in his austere conception of his duty there was no place of
salvation for him while others were drowning and struggling. He swam up
to a boat with the child and gasped out: "Take the child!" A dozen
willing hands were stretched out to take it, and then to help him into
the boat; but he shook them off. Only for a moment he held on, asking:
"What became of Murdoch?" and when they said that he was dead, he let go
his hold, saying: "Let me go"; and the last that they saw of him was
swimming back towards the ship. He had no lifebelt; he had evidently no
wish that there should be any gruesome resurrection of his body from the
sea, and undoubtedly he found his grave where he wished to find it,
somewhere hard by the grave of his ship.

The irony of chance, the merciless and illogical selection which death
makes in a great collective disaster, was exemplified over and over
again in the deaths of people who had escaped safely to a boat, and the
salvation of others who were involved in the very centre of destruction.
The strangest escape of all was probably that of Colonel Gracie of the
United States army, who jumped from the topmost deck of the ship when
she sank and was sucked down with her. He was drawn down for a long
while, and whirled round and round, and would have been drawn down to a
depth from which he could never have come up alive if it had not been
for the explosion which took place after the ship sank. "After sinking
with the ship," he says, "it appeared to me as if I was propelled by
some great force through the water. This may have been caused by
explosions under the waters, and I remembered fearful stories of people
being boiled to death. Innumerable thoughts of a personal nature, having
relation to mental telepathy, flashed through my brain. I thought of
those at home, as if my spirit might go to them to say good-bye. Again
and again I prayed for deliverance, although I felt sure that the end
had come. I had the greatest difficulty in holding my breath until I
came to the surface. I knew that once I inhaled, the water would
suffocate me. I struck out with all my strength for the surface. I got
to the air again after a time that seemed to me unending. There was
nothing in sight save the ocean strewn with great masses of wreckage,
dying men and women all about me, groaning and crying piteously. I saw
wreckage everywhere, and what came within reach I clung to. I moved from
one piece to another until I reached the collapsible boat. She soon
became so full that it seemed as if she would sink if more came on board
her. We had to refuse to let any others climb on board. This was the
most pathetic and horrible scene of all. The piteous cries of those
around us ring in my ears, and I will remember them to my dying day.
'Hold on to what you have, old boy,' we shouted to each man who tried
to get on board. 'One more of you would sink us all.' Many of those whom
we refused answered, as they went to their death, 'Good luck; God bless
you.' All the time we were buoyed up and sustained by the hope of
rescue. We saw lights in all directions--particularly some green lights
which, as we learned later, were rockets burned by one of the
_Titanic's_ boats. So we passed the night with the waves washing over
and burying our raft deep in the water."

It was twenty minutes past two when the _Titanic_ sank, two hours and
forty minutes after she had struck the iceberg; and for two hours after
that the boats drifted all round and about, some of them in bunches of
three or four, others solitary. Almost every kind of suffering was
endured in them, although, after the mental horrors of the preceding
hour, physical sufferings were scarcely felt. Some of the boats had
hardly anyone but women in them; in many the stokers and stewards were
quite useless at the oars. But here and there, in that sorrowful,
horror-stricken company, heroism lifted its head and human nature took
heart again. Women took their turn at the oars in boats where the men
were either too few or incapable of rowing; and one woman notably, the
Countess of Rothes, practically took command of her boat and was at an
oar all the time. Where they were rowing to most of them did not know.
They had seen lights at the time the ship went down, and some of them
made for these; but they soon disappeared, and probably most of the
boats were following each other aimlessly, led by one boat in which some
green flares were found, which acted as a beacon for which the others
made. One man had a pocket electric lamp, which he flashed now and
then, a little ray of hope and guidance shining across those dark and
miserable waters. Not all of the boats had food and water on board. Many
women were only in their night-clothes, some of the men in evening
dress; everyone was bitterly cold, although, fortunately, there was no
wind and no sea.

The stars paled in the sky; the darkness became a little lighter; the
gray daylight began to come. Out of the surrounding gloom a wider and
wider area of sea became visible, with here and there a boat discernible
on it, and here and there some fragments of wreckage. By this time the
boats had rowed away from the dreadful region, and but few floating
bodies were visible. The waves rose and fell, smooth as oil, first gray
in colour, and then, as the light increased, the pure dark blue of
mid-ocean. The eastern sky began to grow red under the cloud bank, and
from red to orange, and from orange to gold, the lovely pageantry of an
Atlantic dawn began to unfold itself before the aching eyes that had
been gazing on prodigies and horrors. From out that well of light in the
sky came rays that painted the wave-backs first with rose, and then with
saffron, and then with pure gold. And in the first flush of that blessed
and comforting light the draggled and weary sufferers saw, first a speck
far to the south, then a smudge of cloud, and then the red and black
smoke-stack of a steamer that meant succour and safety for them.



