{"name": "Chapter Thirty-Eight: How, Without Incommoding Himself, Athos Procured His Equipment", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210624190147/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/three-musketeers/summary/chapter-thirty-eight-how-without-incommoding-himself-athos-procured-his-equipment", "summary": "D'Artagnan runs straight to Athos's house. Athos, luckily, recognizes his friend. D'Artagnan relates the past events to his friend. D'Artagnan asks if Athos is sure that the other lady with a fleur-de-lis brand on her shoulder is dead. Athos asks for a full description of Milady. It now seems highly likely that Milady is indeed Athos's wife. Athos points out that they are all leaving for La Rochelle soon. Grimaud goes off to fetch D'Artagnan some actual clothes. D'Artagnan gives the sapphire ring to Athos, saying that he can raise the needed money with it. Athos accepts on the condition that D'Artagnan split the money with him. Grimaud returns with Planchet, who is anxious to see how his master is doing. Everyone heads over to D'Artagnan's place. Monsieur Bonacieux sees them go inside, and tells D'Artagnan that a young girl is waiting for him. It's Kitty. He asks what happened after he left. Kitty says she's not sure, since she made her escape as quickly as possible. She asks if he can help her find employment somewhere outside of Paris. D'Artagnan orders Planchet to find Aramis. On his own, D'Artagnan has no connections for getting a maid employed, but his friends might be able to help. D'Artagnan then lies to Kitty about his being in love with Madame Bonacieux; he says that it is Athos who is in love with her. They are reminded that the Cardinal has spies everywhere, and a propos, Athos goes down to check if Bonacieux is still around. He's not. They make a decision to leave as soon as possible. Aramis shows up. D'Artagnan asks if he can find Kitty some work. Aramis sends her to Tours. Before leaving, Kitty makes protestations of love to D'Artagnan. D'Artagnan, Aramis, and Athos part ways, agreeing to meet at four o'clock at Athos's house. Planchet is left behind to guard the apartment. D'Artagnan and Athos sell the sapphire ring and uses the proceeds to buy some horses. Athos is now properly equipped for war!", "analysis": ""}