{"name": "Chapter Two: The Antechamber of M. de Treville", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210624190147/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/three-musketeers/summary/chapter-two-the-antechamber-of-m-de-trville", "summary": "We start this chapter with some background on M. de Treville. He embodies the classic story of a self-made man: he was once a small town boy with big dreams who showed up in the big city with barely a nickel in his pocket... and worked his way up to being one of the country's head honchos. Not only is Treville good with a sword, he is also capable of immense loyalty. Both qualities endear him to the King . When the King sets up his own private army of Musketeers, he picks Treville as the commander. As soon as the Cardinal sees that the King has got an army of soldiers carrying fancy swords, he gets jealous and wants one too. The King and the Cardinal settle down to a competition to determine France's best swordsmen. Not being able to actually fight each other, the Cardinal and the King also have polite conversations meant for the sole purpose of bragging about their fighting men. The King's Musketeers are a loud, rowdy, and drunken bunch; they listen only to Treville, whom they adore. Basically, Treville is the man. If you were a man in 17th century France, you'd want to meet either the Cardinal or the King. If that fails, however, you would want to meet Treville. His hotel is crammed non-stop with men trying to meet him, and fifty to sixty Musketeers that do nothing but hang out and look imposing. Into this melee, D'Artagnan shows up. He's a small-town boy, remember, so he's intimidated , and ends up just feeling ridiculous. Making his way through Treville's hotel the way a new kid makes his way through a cafeteria at lunchtime, D'Artagnan finally makes it to a stairwell. He stops. A man on the top step is dueling three men on a lower step. D'Artagnan believes for a moment that the swords are blunt, but then realizes that the Musketeers are using real equipment. Inside one of the rooms , men are gossiping about all the latest happenings at court. Finally a servant notices D'Artagnan and asks him what's up. D'Artagnan tells him that he would like to speak with M. de Treville. The servant goes off and D'Artagnan finally takes his time to actually look around. He spies a group of Musketeers with a really tall, arrogant guy at the center. He's dressed uncommonly well in a blue shirt, a gold baldric , and a red velvet cloak. The man looks good, but he's complaining about having a cold, . Then the man talks about how his cloak is ridiculous, but a) it's fashionable and b) he needs some way of spending his inheritance. One of the other Musketeers says: \"No way, Porthos--you got that from your sugar mama.\" Porthos defends himself as the other Musketeers start questioning him. Finally, Porthos turns to some other guy, calls him \"Aramis,\" and asks him to back him up. Aramis is short and stout , with an honest face and slow manner of speaking. He backs Porthos up, which dispels all the naysayers. Conversation turns to the latest court scandal. Basically, the Cardinal is a terrible man who kills people on trumped-up charges. In the course of the conversation, Porthos tells Aramis that it's a pity he never followed his first calling to become a priest. Aramis replies that he will become a priest someday; he is continuing his theological studies. He also tells Porthos that he is vain. The two of them start fighting, but are interrupted when a servant flings open a door and tells D'Artagnan that Treville is ready to see him. Everyone shuts up as D'Artagnan walks over, pleased to have avoided seeing the fight.", "analysis": ""}