{"name": "Chapter Forty-Six: the Bastion Saint-Gervais", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210624190147/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/three-musketeers/summary/chapter-forty-six-the-bastion-saint-gervais", "summary": "D'Artagnan arrives at his friends' lodging, grumbling that his friends better have a good reason for taking him from his much-needed rest. Athos asks Aramis if the Parpaillot inn was crowded the other day. Aramis replies that it was rather empty. Athos says they should go there since their current room has very thin walls. On their way, they encounter Grimaud, whom Athos commands to accompany them. Unfortunately the Parpaillot is packed to the brim with people. Athos asks D'Artagnan how his night was, but before D'Artagnan can answer, some guy sipping brandy says that he heard the Guards did not fare too well against the Rochellais. A Swiss guy asks if they took control of a bastion. D'Artagnan replies to them both, saying that they took the bastion St. Gervais last night with a loss of five men. The first guy points out that the Rochellais will likely send people to repair the bastion today. Athos calls for a wager--he bets the first man that he, Porthos, Aramis, and D'Artagnan will go and have breakfast in the bastion and stay there for an hour, no matter what the enemy might do to chase them away. The innkeeper announces that their breakfast is ready, and Athos calls for Grimaud to pack it up. The friends and Grimaud head for the bastion. D'Artagnan is confused; Athos tells him that they can talk privately in the bastion. D'Artagnan points out that there are other private places that might be less dangerous. Athos replies that the Cardinal's spies would have reported the four of them holding a council. By getting together this way, their actions are out in the open. Athos also says that if they are attacked, they can always fight and talk at the same time. Porthos points out that they only have one musket. Athos notes that since the bodies from last night's battle are still at the bastion, they'll have plenty of ammo. The friends arrive at the bastion and turn around to find that they have an audience of over three hundred soldiers watching them. The two groups salute each other.", "analysis": ""}