{"name": "Chapter Forty-Two: The Anjou Wine", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210624190147/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/three-musketeers/summary/chapter-forty-two-the-anjou-wine", "summary": "The King isn't in the best of health, but he's eager to join the siege as soon as he can. D'Artagnan is much more relaxed after his near brush with death; his only worry is that he has not heard from his friends. He gets a letter, however, written by the supplier of the Musketeers. It obliges him to accept twelve bottles of wine from his friends, who wish for him to toast them with it. D'Artagnan is pleased, and he invites a couple of his Guardsmen friends over for dinner that night. Due to conflicting schedules, they decide to have dinner together the day after that. Planchet gets help from another lackey named Fourreau, along with the would-be assassin. This man's name is Brisemont. The men prepare dinner. When Brisemont pours out the wine, the first bottle is a little thick at the bottom. D'Artagnan instructs him to pour the lees into a glass and drink it, as Brisemont is still weak from his wound. At the dinner, everyone is about to pick up their wine glasses when a canon sounds and they are obliged to rush out. It turns out that the King has arrived with ten thousand troops! The Musketeers proceed in before the King, and D'Artagnan spots his friends and Treville. Greetings are exchanged all around, and D'Artagnan introduces his new friends, explaining that they were about to drink the wine sent by the Musketeers. Athos, Porthos, and Aramis deny having sent wine. Moreover, Athos looks at the letter from the supplier, and declares that it's not the man's handwriting. D'Artagnan wonders out loud if Milady can be behind this. When they return to the dining room, Brisemont is dying. He castigates D'Artagnan, saying that he was spared only to be poisoned later. D'Artagnan denies this. No one really wants to celebrate after this. D'Artagnan's Guardsmen friends leave, and the four friends retreat into another room to discuss the situation. Athos says that D'Artagnan cannot live in constant fear that Milady will kill him. D'Artagnan accepts the situation, since he is a man, but mourns over Constance's fate. Aramis points out that the letter D'Artagnan discovered indicates that Constance was moved from a prison to a convent by the Queen. They ask Porthos if his mistress can help them discover which convent it is. Porthos says no. Aramis then says he will do it. When questioned, he says he knows one of the Queen's servants, but it is clear that he will write to a certain noblewoman in Tours.", "analysis": ""}