106. OF VALGARD THE GUILEFUL

Valgard the Guileful came back to Iceland that summer; he was
then still heathen.  He fared to Hof to his son Mord's house, and
was there the winter over.  He said to Mord, "Here I have ridden
far and wide all over the neighbourhood, and methinks I do not
know it for the same.  I came to Whiteness, and there I saw many
tofts of booths and much ground levelled for building.  I came to
Thingskala-Thing, and there I saw all our booths broken down.
What is the meaning of such strange things?"

"New priesthoods," answers Mord, "have been set up here, and a
law for a Fifth Court, and men have declared themselves out of my
Thing, and have gone over to Hauskuld's Thing."

"Ill hast thou repaid me," said Valgard, "for giving up to thee
my priesthood, when thou hast handled it so little like a man,
and now my wish is that thou shouldst pay them off by something
that will drag them all down to death; and this thou canst do by
setting them by the ears by talebearing, so that Njal's sons may
slay Hauskuld; but there are many who will have the blood-feud
after him, and so Njal's sons will be slain in that quarrel."

"I shall never be able to get that done," says Mord.

"I will give thee a plan," says Valgard; "thou shalt ask Njal's
sons to thy house, and send them away with gifts, but thou shalt
keep thy tale-bearing in the background until great friendship
has sprung up between you, and they trust thee no worse than
their own selves.  So wilt thou be able to avenge thyself on
Skarphedinn for that he took thy money from thee after Gunnar's
death; and in this wise, further on, thou wilt be able to seize
the leadership when they are all dead and gone."

This plan they settled between them should be brought to pass;
and Mord said, "I would, father, that thou wouldst take on thee
the new faith.  Thou art an old man."

"I will not do that," says Valgard.  "I would rather that thou
shouldst cast off the faith, and see what follows then."

Mord said he would not do that.  Valgard broke crosses before
Mord's face, and all holy tokens.  A little after Valgard took a
sickness and breathed his last, and he was laid in a cairn by
Hof.




