11. THORWALD'S SLAYING

Thorwald rode home from the bridal feast, and his wife with him,
and Thiostolf, who rode by her horse's side, and still talked to
her in a low voice.  Oswif turned to his son and said, "Art thou
pleased with thy match?  and how went it when ye talked
together."

"Well," said he, "she showed all kindness to me.  Thou mightst
see that by the way she laughs at every word I say."

"I don't think her laughter so hearty as thou dost," answered
Oswif, "but this will be put to the proof by and by."

So they ride on till they come home, and at night she took her
seat by her husband's side, and made room for Thiostolf next
herself on the inside.  Thiostolf and Thorwald had little to do
with each other, and few words were thrown away between them that
winter, and so time went on.  Hallgerda was prodigal and
grasping, and there was nothing that any of their neighbours had
that she must not have too, and all that she had, no matter
whether it were her own or belonged to others she wasted.  But
when the spring came there was a scarcity in the house, both of
meal and stock fish, so Hallgerda went up to Thorwald and said,
"Thou must not be sitting in-doors any longer, for we want for
the house both meal and fish."

"Well," said Thorwald, "I did not lay in less for the house this
year than I laid in before, and then it used to last till
summer."

"What care I," said Hallgerda, "if thou and thy father have made
your money by starving yourselves."

Then Thorwald got angry and gave her a blow on the face and drew
blood, and went away and called his men and ran the skiff down to
the shore.  Then six of them jumped into her and rowed out to the
Bear-isles, and began to load her with meal and fish.

Meantime it is said that Hallgerda sat out of doors heavy at
heart.  Thiostolf went up to her and saw the wound on her face,
and said, "Who has been playing thee this sorry trick?"

"My husband, Thorwald," she said, "and thou stoodst aloof, though
thou wouldst not if thou hadst cared at all for me."

"Because I knew nothing about it," said Thiostolf, "but I will
avenge it."

Then he went away down to the shore and ran out a six-oared boat,
and held in his hand a great axe that he had with a haft overlaid
with iron.  He steps into the boat and rows out to the
Bear-isles, and when he got there all the men had rowed away but
Thorwald and his followers, and he stayed by the skiff to load
her, while they brought the goods down to him.  So Thiostolf came
up just then and jumped into the skiff, and began to load with
him, and after a while he said, "Thou canst do but little at this
work, and that little thou dost badly."

"Thinkst thou thou canst do it better," said Thorwald.

"There's one thing to be done which I can do better than thou,"
said Thiostolf, and then he went on, "The woman who is thy wife
has made a bad match, and you shall not live much longer
together."

Then Thorwald snatched up a fishing-knife that lay by him, and
made a stab at Thiostolf; he had lifted his axe to his shoulder
and dashed it down.  It came on Thorwald's arm and crushed the
wrist, but down fell the knife.  Then Thiostolf lifted up his axe
a second time and gave Thorwald a blow on the head, and he fell
dead on the spot.




