117. NJAL AND SKARPHEDINN TALK TOGETHER

Now, we must say how Njal said to Skarphedinn.

"What plan have ye laid down for yourselves, thou and thy
brothers and Kari?"

"Little reck we of dreams in most matters," said Skarphedinn;
"but if thou must know, we shall ride to Tongue to Asgrim
Ellidagrim's son, and thence to the Thing; but, what meanest thou
to do about thine own journey, father?"

"I shall ride to the Thing," says Njal, "for it belongs to my
honour not to be severed from your suit so long as I live.  I
ween that many men will have good words to say of me, and so I
shall stand you in good stead, and do you no harm."

There, too, was Thorhall Asgrim's son, and Njal's fosterson.  The
sons of Njal laughed at him because he was clad in a coat of
russet, and asked how long he meant to wear that?

"I shall have thrown it off," he said, "when I have to follow up
the blood-feud for my foster-father."

"There will ever be most good in thee," said Njal, "when there
is most need of it."

So they all busked them to ride away from home, and were nigh
thirty men in all, and rode till they came to Thursowater.  Then
came after them Njal's kinsmen, Thorleif Crow, and Thorgrim the
Big; they were Holt-Thorir's sons, and offered their help and
following to Njal's sons, and they took that gladly.

So they rode altogether across Thursowater, until they came on
Laxwater bank, and took a rest and baited their horses there, and
there Hjallti Skeggi's son came to meet them, and Njal's sons
fell to talking with him, and they talked long and low.

"Now, I will show," said Hjallti, "that I am not blackhearted;
Njal has asked me for help, and I have agreed to it, and given my
word to aid him; he has often given me and many others the worth
of it in cunning counsel."

Hjallti tells Njal all about Flosi's doings.  They sent Thorhall
on to Tongue to tell Asgrim that they would be there that
evening; and Asgrim made ready at once, and was out of doors to
meet them when Njal rode into the "town."

Njal was clad in a blue cape, and had a felt hat on his head, and
a small axe in his hand.  Asgrim helped Njal off his horse, and
led him and sate him down in his own seat.  After that they all
went in, Njal's sons and Kari.  Then Asgrim went out.

Hjallti wished to turn away, and thought there were too many
there; but Asgrim caught hold of his reins, and said he should
never have his way in riding off, and made men unsaddle their
horses, and led Hjallti in and sate him down by Njal's side; but
Thorleif and his brother sat on the other bench and their men
with them.

Asgrim sate him down on a stool before Njal, and asked, "What
says thy heart about our matter?"

"It speaks rather heavily," says Njal, "for I am afraid that we
shall have no lucky men with us in the suit; but I would, friend,
that thou shouldest send after all the men who belong to thy
Thing, and ride to the Althing with me."

"I have always meant to do that," says Asgrim; "and this I will
promise thee at the same time, that I will never leave thy cause
while I can get any men to follow me."

But all those who were in the house thanked him, and said that
was bravely spoken.  They were there that night, but the day
after all Asgrim's band came thither.

And after that they all rode together till they come up on the
Thing-field, and fit up their booths.




