128. NJAL'S BURNING

Now they took fire, and made a great pile before the doors.  Then
Skarphedinn said, "What, lads!  are ye lighting a fire, or are ye
taking to cooking?"

"So it shall be," answered Grani Gunnar's son; "and thou shalt
not need to be better done."

"Thou repayest me," said Skarphedinn, "as one may look for from
the man that thou art.  I avenged thy father, and thou settest
most store by that duty which is farthest from thee."

Then the women threw whey on the fire, and quenched it as fast as
they lit it.  Some, too, brought water, or slops.

Then Kol Thorstein's son said to Flosi, "A plan comes into my
mind; I have seen a loft over the hall among the crosstrees, and
we will put the fire in there, and light it with the vetch-stack
that stands just above the house."

Then they took the vetch-stack and set fire to it, and they who
were inside were not aware of it till the whole hall was a-blaze
over their heads.

Then Flosi and his men made a great pile before each of the
doors, and then the women folk who were inside began to weep and
to wail.

Njal spoke to them and said, "Keep up your hearts, nor utter
shrieks, for this is but a passing storm, and it will be long
before ye have another such; and put your faith in God, and
believe that he is so merciful that he will not let us burn both
in this world and the next."

Such words of comfort had he for them all, and others still more
strong.

Now the whole house began to blaze.  Then Njal went to the door
and said, "Is Flosi so near that he can hear my voice."

Flosi said that he could hear it.

"Wilt thou," said Njal, "take an atonement from my sons, or allow
any men to go out."

"I will not," answers Flosi, "take any atonement from thy sons,
and now our dealings shall come to an end once for all, and I
will not stir from this spot till they are all dead; but I will
allow the women and children and house-carles to go out."

Then Njal went into the house, and said to the fold, "Now all
those must go out to whom leave is given, and so go thou out
Thorhalla Asgrim's daughter, and all the people also with thee
who may."

Then Thorhalla said, "This is another parting between me and
Helgi than I thought of a while ago; but still I will egg on my
father and brothers to avenge this manscathe which is wrought
here."

"Go, and good go with thee," said Njal, "for thou art a brave
woman."

After that she went out and much folk with her.

Then Astrid of Deepback said to Helgi Njal's son, "Come thou out
with me, and I will throw a woman's cloak over thee, and tie thy
head with a kerchief."

He spoke against it at first, but at last he did so at the prayer
of others.

So Astrid wrapped the kerchief round Helgi's head, but Thorhilda,
Skarphedinn's wife, threw the cloak over him, and he went out
between them, and then Thorgerda Njal's daughter, and Helga her
sister, and many other folk went out too.

But when Helgi came out Flosi said, "That is a tall woman and
broad across the shoulders that went yonder, take her and hold
her."

But when Helgi heard that, he cast away the cloak.  He had got
his sword under his arm, and hewed at a man, and the blow fell on
his shield and cut off the point of it, and the man's leg as
well.  Then Flosi came up and hewed at Helgi's neck, and took off
his head at a stroke.

Then Flosi went to the door and called out to Njal, and said he
would speak with him and Bergthora.

Now Njal does so, and Flosi said, "I will offer thee, master
Njal, leave to go out, for it is unworthy that thou shouldst burn
indoors."

"I will not go out," said Njal, "for I am an old man, and little
fitted to avenge my sons, but I will not live in shame."

Then Flosi said to Bergthora, "Come thou out, housewife, for I
will for no sake burn thee indoors."

"I was given away to Njal young," said Bergthora, "and I have
promised him this, that we would both share the same fate."

After that they both went back into the house.

"What counsel shall we now take," said Bergthora.

"We will go to our bed," says Njal, "and lay us down; I have long
been eager for rest."

Then she said to the boy Thord, Kari's son, "Thee will I take
out, and thou shalt not burn in here."

"Thou hast promised me this, grandmother," says the boy, "that we
should never part so long as I wished to be with thee; but
methinks it is much better to die with thee and Njal than to live
after you."

Then she bore the boy to her bed, and Njal spoke to his steward
and said, "Now thou shalt see where we lay us down, and how I
lay us out, for I mean not to stir an inch hence, whether reek or
burning smart me, and so thou wilt be able to guess where to look
for our bones,"

He said he would do so.

There had been an ox slaughtered and the hide lay there.  Njal
told the steward to spread the hide over them, and he did so.

So there they lay down both of them in their bed, and put the boy
between them.  Then they signed themselves and the boy with the
cross, and gave over their souls into God's hand, and that was
the last word that men heard them utter.

Then the steward took the hide and spread it over them, and went
out afterwards.  Kettle of the Mark caught hold of him, and
dragged him out, he asked carefully after his father-in-law Njal,
but the steward told him the whole truth.  Then Kettle said,
"Great grief hath been sent on us, when we have had to share such
ill-luck together."

Skarphedinn saw how his father laid him down, and how he laid
himself out, and then he said, "Our father goes early to bed, and
that is what was to be looked for, for he is an old man."

Then Skarphedinn, and Kari, and Grim, caught the brands as fast
as they dropped down, and hurled them out at them, and so it went
on awhile.  Then they hurled spears in at them, but they caught
them all as they flew, and sent them back again.

Then Flosi bade them cease shooting, "for all feats of arms will
go hard with us when we deal with them; ye may well wait till the
fire overcomes them."

So they do that, and shoot no more.

Then the great beams out of the roof began to fall, and
Skarphedinn said, "Now must my father be dead, and I have neither
heard groan nor cough from him."

Then they went to the end of the hall, and there had fallen down
a cross-beam inside which was much burnt in the middle.

Kari spoke to Skarphedinn, and said, "Leap thou out here, and I
will help thee to do so, and I will leap out after thee, and then
we shall both get away if we set about it so, for hitherward
blows all the smoke."

"Thou shalt leap first," said Skarphedinn; "but I will leap
straightway on thy heels."

"That is not wise," says Kari, "for I can get out well enough
elsewhere, though it does not come about here."

"I will not do that," says Skarphedinn; "leap thou out first, but
I will leap after thee at once."

"It is bidden to every man," says Kari, "to seek to save his life
while he has a choice, and I will do so now; but still this
parting of ours will be in such wise that we shall never see one
another more; for if I leap out of the fire, I shall have no mind
to leap back into the fire to thee, and then each of us will have
to fare his own way."

"It joys me, brother-in-law," says Skarphedinn, "to think that if
thou gettest away thou wilt avenge me."

Then Kari took up a blazing bench in his hand, and runs up along
the cross-beam, then he hurls the bench out at the roof, and it
fell among those who were outside.

Then they ran away, and by that time all Kari's upper clothing
and his hair were a-blaze, then he threw himself down from the
roof, and so crept along with the smoke.

Then one man said who was nearest, "Was that a man that leapt out
at the roof?"

"Far from it," says another; "more likely it was Skarphedinn who
hurled a firebrand at us."

After that they had no more mistrust.

Kari ran till he came to a stream, and then he threw himself down
into it, and so quenched the fire on him.

After that he ran along under shelter of the smoke into a hollow,
and rested him there, and that has since been called Kari's
Hollow.




