146. THE AWARD OF ATONEMENT WITH THORGEIR CRAGGEIR

Hall of the Side and his son Kol, seven of them in all, rode west
over Loomnip's Sand, and so west over Amstacksheath, and did not
draw bridle till they came into Myrdale.  There they asked
whether Thorgeir would be at home at Holt, and they were told
that they would find him at home.

The men asked whither Hall meant to go.

"Thither to Holt," he said.

They said they were sure he went on a good errand.

He stayed there some while and baited their horses, and after
that they mounted their horses and rode to Solheim about even,
and they were there that night, but the day after they rode to
Holt.

Thorgeir was out of doors, and Kari too, and their men, for they
had seen Hall's coming.  He rode in a blue cape, and had a little
axe studded with silver in his hand; but when they came into the
"town," Thorgeir went to meet him, and helped him off his horse,
and both he and Kari kissed him and led him in between them into
the sittingroom, and sate him down in the high seat on the dais,
and they asked him tidings about many things.

He was there that night.  Next morning Hall raised the question
of the atonement with Thorgeir, and told him what terms they
offered him; and he spoke about them with many fair and kindly
words.

"It may be well known to thee," answers Thorgeir, "that I said I
would take no atonement from the burners."

"That was quite another matter then," says Hall; "ye were then
wroth with fight, and, besides, ye have done great deeds in the
way of manslaying since."

"I daresay ye think so," says Thorgeir, "but what atonement do ye
offer to Kari?"

"A fitting atonement shall be offered him," says Hall, "if he
will take it."

Then Kari said, "I pray this of thee, Thorgeir, that thou wilt be
atoned, for thy lot cannot be better than good."

"Methinks," says Thorgeir, "it is ill done to take in atonement,
and sunder myself from thee, unless thou takest the same
atonement as I."

"I will not take any atonement," says Kari, "but yet I say that
we have avenged the burning; but my son, I say, is still
unavenged, and I mean to take that on myself alone, and see what
I can get done."

But Thorgeir would take no atonement before Kari said that he
would take it ill if he were not atoned.  Then Thorgeir
handselled a truce to Flosi and his men, as a step to a meeting
for atonement; but Hall did the same on behalf of Flosi and the
sons of Sigfus.

But ere they parted, Thorgeir gave Hall a gold ring and a scarlet
cloak, but Kari gave him a silver brooch, and there were hung to
it four crosses of gold.  Hall thanked them kindly for their
gifts, and rode away with the greatest honour.  He did not draw
bridle till he came to Swinefell, and Flosi gave him a hearty
welcome.  Hall told Flosi all about his errand and the talk he
had with Thorgeir, and also that Thorgeir would not take the
atonement till Kari told him he would quarrel with him if he did
not take it; but that Kari would take no atonement.

"There are few men like Kari," said Flosi, "and I would that my
mind were shapen altogether like his."

Hall and Kol stayed there some while, and afterwards they rode
west at the time agreed on to the meeting for atonement, and met
at Headbrink, as had been settled between them.

Then Thorgeir came to meet them from the west, and then they
talked over their atonement, and all went off as Hall had said.

Before the atonement, Thorgeir said that Kari should still have
the right to be at his house all the same if he chose.

"And neither side shall do the others any harm at my house; and I
will not have the trouble of gathering in the fines from each of
the burners; but my will is that Flosi alone shall be answerable
for them to me, but he must get them in from his followers.  My
will also is that all that award which was made at the Thing
about the burning shall be kept and held to; and my will also is,
Flosi, that thou payest me up my third share in unclipped coin."

Flosi went quickly into all these terms.

Thorgeir neither gave up the banishment nor the outlawry.

Now Flosi and Hall rode home east, and then Hall said to Flosi,
"Keep this atonement well, son-in-law, both as to going abroad
and the pilgrimage to Rome (1), and the fines, and then thou wilt
be thought a brave man, though thou hast stumbled into this
misdeed, if thou fulfillest handsomely all that belongs to it."

Flosi said it should be so.

Now Hall rode home east, but Flosi rode home to Swinefell, and
was at home afterwards.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Pilgrimage to Rome."  This condition had not been mentioned
     before.




