148. OF FLOSI AND THE BURNERS

Now Flosi spoke to the burners, his companions, "It will no
longer serve our turn to sit still, for now we shall have to
think of our going abroad and of our fines, and of fulfilling our
atonement as bravely as we can, and let us take a passage
wherever it seems most likely to get one."

They bade him see to all that.  Then Flosi said, "We will ride
east to Hornfirth; for there that ship is laid up, which is owned
by Eyjolf Nosy, a man from Drontheim, but he wants to take to him
a wife here, and he will not get the match made unless he settles
himself down here.  We will buy the ship of him, for we shall
have many men and little freight.  The ship is big and will take
us all."

Then they ceased talking of it.

But a little after they rode east, and did not stop before they
came east to Bjornness in Homfirth, and there they found Eyjolf,
for he had been there as a guest that winter.

There Flosi and his men had a hearty welcome, and they were there
the night.  Next morning Flosi dealt with the captain for the
ship, but he said he would not be hard to sell the ship if he
could get what he wanted for her.  Flosi asked him in what coin
he wished to be paid for her; the Easterling says he wanted land
for her near where he then was.

Then Eyjolf told Flosi all about his dealings with his host, and
Flosi says he will pull an oar with him, so that his marriage
bargain might be struck, and buy the ship of him afterwards.  The
Easterling was glad at that.  Flosi offered him land at
Borgarhaven, and now the Easterling holds on with his suit to his
host when Flosi was by, and Flosi threw in a helping word, so
that the bargain was brought about between them.

Flosi made over the land at Borgarhaven to the Easterling, but
shook hands on the bargain for the ship.  He got also from the
Easterling twenty hundreds in wares, and that was also in their
bargain for the land.

Now Flosi rode back home.  He was so beloved by his men that
their wares stood free to him to take either on loan or gift,
just as he chose.

He rode home to Swinefell, and was at home a while.

Then Flosi sent Kol Thorstein's son and Gunnar Lambi's son east
to Hornfirth.  They were to be there by the ship, and to fit her
out, and set up booths, and sack the wares, and get all things
together that were needful.

Now we must tell of the sons of Sigfus how they say to Flosi that
they will ride west to Fleetlithe to set their houses in order,
and get wares thence, and such other things as they needed.
"Kari is not there now to be guarded against," they say, "if he
is in the north country as is said."

"I know not," answers Flosi, "as to such stories, whether there
be any truth in what is said of Kari's journeyings; methinks, we
have often been wrong in believing things which are nearer to
learn than this.  My counsel is that ye go many of you together,
and part as little as ye can, and be as wary of yourselves as ye
may.  Thou, too, Kettle of the Mark shalt bear in mind that dream
which I told thee, and which thou prayedst me to hide; for many
are those in thy company who were then called."

"All must come to pass as to man's life," said Kettle, "as it is
foredoomed; but good go with thee for thy warning."

Now they spoke no more about it.

After that the sons of Sigfus busked them and those men with them
who were meant to go with them.  They were eight in all, and then
they rode away, and ere they went they kissed Flosi, and he bade
them farewell, and said he and some of those who rode away would
not see each other more.  But they would not let themselves be
hindered.  They rode now on their way, and Flosi said that they
should take his wares in Middleland, and carry them east, and do
the same in Landsbreach and Woodcombe.

After that they rode to Skaptartongue, and so on the fell, and
north of Eyjafell Jokul, and down into Godaland, and so down into
the woods in Thorsmark.

Bjorn of the Mark caught sight of them coming, and went at once
to meet them.

Then they greeted each other well, and the sons of Sigfus asked
after Kari Solmund's son.

"I met Kari," said Bjorn, "and that is now very long since; he
rode hence north on Goose-sand, and meant to go to Gudmund the
Powerful, and methought if he were here now, he would stand in
awe of you, for he seemed to be left all alone."

Grani Gunnar's son said, "He shall stand more in awe of us yet
before we have done with him, and he shall learn that as soon as
ever he comes within spearthrow of us; but as for us, we do not
fear him at all, now that he is all alone."

Kettle of the Mark bade them be still, and bring out no big
words.

Bjorn asked when they would be coming back.

"We shall stay near a week in Fleetlithe," said they, and so they
told him when they should be riding back on the fell.

With that they parted.

Now the sons of Sigfus rode to their homes, and their households
were glad to see them.  They were there near a week.

Now Bjorn comes home and sees Kari, and told him all about the
doings of the sons of Sigfus, and their purpose.

Kari said he had shown in this great faithfulness to him, and
Bjorn said, "I should have thought there was more risk of any
other man's failing in that than of me if I had pledged my help
or care to any one."

"Ah," said his mistress, "but you may still be bad and yet not be
so bad as to be a traitor to thy master."

Kari stayed there six nights after that.




