151. OF KARI AND BJORN AND THORGEIR

Now we must tell of Bjorn and Kari that they ride down on the
Sand, and lead their horses under the banks where the wild oats
grew, and cut the oats for them, that they might not die of
hunger.  Kari made such a near guess, that he rode away thence at
the very time that they gave over seeking for him.  He rode by
night up through the Hundred, and after that he took to the fell;
and so on all the same way as they had followed when they rode
east, and did not stop till they came at Midmark.

Then Bjorn said to Kari, "Now shalt thou be my great friend
before my mistress, for she will never believe one word of what I
say; but everything lies on what you do, so now repay me for the
good following which I have yielded to thee."

"So it shall be; never fear," says Kari.

After that they ride up to the homestead, and then the mistress
asked them what tidings, and greeted them well.

"Our troubles have rather grown greater, old lass!"

She answered little, and laughed; and then the mistress went on
to ask, "How did Bjorn behave to thee, Kari?"

"Bare is back," he answers, "without brother behind it, and Bjorn
behaved well to me.  He wounded three men, and, besides, he is
wounded himself, and he stuck as close to me as he could in
everything."

They were three nights there, and after that they rode to Holt to
Thorgeir, and told him alone these tidings, for those tidings had
not yet been heard there.

Thorgeir thanked him, and it was quite plain that he was glad at
what he heard.  He asked Kari what now was undone which he meant
to do.

"I mean," answers Kari, "to kill Gunnar Lambi's son and Kol
Thorstein's son, if I can get a chance.  Then we have slain
fifteen men, reckoning those five whom we two slew together.  But
one boon I will now ask of thee."

Thorgeir said he would grant him whatever he asked.

"I wish, then, that thou wilt take under thy safeguard this man
whose name is Bjorn, and who has been in these slayings with me,
and that thou wilt change farms with him, and give him a farm
ready stocked here close by thee, and so hold thy hand over him
that no-vengeance may befall him; but all this will be an easy
matter for thee who art such a chief."

"So it shall be," says Thorgeir.

Then he gave Bjorn a ready-stocked farm at Asolfskal, but he took
the farm in the Mark into his own hands.  Thorgeir flitted all
Bjorn's household stuff and goods to Asolfskal, and all his live
stock; and Thorgeir settled all Bjorn's quarrels for him, and he
was reconciled to them with a full atonement.  So Bjorn was
thought to be much more of a man than he had been before.

Then Kari rode away, and did not draw rein till he came west to
Tongue to Asgrim Ellidagrim's son.  He gave Kari a most hearty
welcome, and Kari told him of all the tidings that had happened
in these slayings.

Asgrim was well pleased at them, and asked what Kari meant to do
next.

"I mean," said Kari, "to fare abroad after them, and so dog their
footsteps and slay them, if I can get at them."

Asgrim said there was no man like him for bravery and hardihood.

He was there some nights, and after that he rode to Gizur the
White, and he took him by both hands.  Kari stayed there some
while, and then he told Gizur that he wished to ride down to
Eyrar.

Gizur gave Kari a good sword at parting.

Now he rode down to Eyrar, and took him a passage with Kolbein
the Black; he was an Orkneyman and an old friend of Kari, and he
was the most forward and brisk of men.

He took Kari by both hands, and said that one fate should befall
both of them.




