24. GUNNAR AND HRUT STRIVE AT THE THING.

Gunnar rode to the Althing, and Hrut and Hauskuld rode thither
too with a very great company.  Gunnar pursues his suit, and
began by calling on his neighbours to bear witness, but Hrut and
his brother had it in their minds to make an onslaught on him,
but they mistrusted their strength.

Gunnar next went to the court of the men of Broadfirth, and bade
Hrut listen to his oath and declaration of the cause of the suit,
and to all the proofs which he was about to bring forward.  After
that he took his oath, and declared his case.  After that he
brought forward his witnesses of the summons, along with his
witnesses that the suit had been handed over to him.  All this
time Njal was not at the court.  Now Gunnar pursued his suit till
he called on the defendant to reply.  Then Hrut took witness, and
said the suit was naught, and that there was a flaw in the
pleading; he declared that it had broken down because Gunnar had
failed to call those three witnesses which ought to have been
brought before the court.  The first, that which was taken before
the marriage-bed, the second, before the man's door, the third,
at the Hill of Laws.  By this time Njal was come to the court and
said the suit and pleading might still be kept alive if they
chose to strive in that way.

"No," says Gunnar, "I will not have that; I will do the same to
Hrut as he did to Mord my kinsman; or, are those brothers Hrut
and Hauskuld so near that they may hear my voice."

"Hear it we can," says Hrut.  "What dost thou wish?"

Gunnar said, "Now all men here present be ear-witnesses, that I
challenge thee Hrut to single combat, and we shall fight to-day
on the holm, which is here in Oxwater.  But if thou wilt not
fight with me, then pay up all the money this very day."

After that Gunnar sung a stave --

     "Yes, so must it be, this morning --
     Now my mind is full of fire --
     Hrut with me on yonder island
     Raises roar of helm and shield.
     All that bear my words bear witness,
     Warriors grasping Woden's guard,
     Unless the wealthy wight down payeth
     Dower of wife with flowing veil."

After that Gunnar went away from the court with all his
followers.  Hrut and Hauskuld went home too, and the suit was
never pursued nor defended from that day forth.  Hrut said, as
soon as he got inside the booth, "This has never happened to me
before, that any man has offered me combat and I have shunned
it."

"Then thou must mean to fight," says Hauskuld, "but that shall
not be if I have my way; for thou comest no nearer to Gunnar than
Mord would have come to thee, and we had better both of us pay up
the money to Gunnar."

After that the brothers asked the householders of their own
country what they would lay down, and they one and all said they
would lay down as much as Hrut wished.

"Let us go then," says Hauskuld, "to Gunnar's booth, and pay down
the money out of hand."  That was told to Gunnar, and he went out
into the doorway of the booth, and Hauskuld said, "Now it is
thine to take the money."

Gunnar said, "Pay it down, then, for I am ready to take it."

So they paid down the money truly out of hand, and then Hauskuld
said, "Enjoy it now, as thou hast gotten it."  Then Gunnar sang
another stave: --

     "Men who wield the blade of battle
     Hoarded wealth may well enjoy,
     Guileless gotten this at least,
     Golden meed I fearless take;
     But if we for woman's quarrel,
     Warriors born to brandish sword,
     Glut the wolf with manly gore,
     Worse the lot of both would be."

Hrut answered, "Ill will be thy meed for this."

"Be that as it may," says Gunnar.

Then Hauskuld and his brother went home to their booth, and he
had much upon his mind, and said to Hrut, "Will this unfairness
of Gunnar's never be avenged?"

"Not so," says Hrut; "'twill be avenged on him sure enough, but
we shall have no share nor profit in that vengeance.  And after
all it is most likely that he will turn to our stock to seek for
friends."

After that they left off speaking of the matter.  Gunnar showed
Njal the money, and he said, "The suit has gone off well."

"Ay," says Gunnar, "but it was all thy doing."

Now men rode home from the Thing, and Gunnar got very great
honour from the suit.  Gunnar handed over all the money to Unna,
and would have none of it, but said he thought he ought to look
more for help from her and her kin hereafter than from other men.
She said, so it should be.




