29. GUNNAR GOES ABROAD

So Gunnar fared abroad, and Kolskegg with him.  They sailed first
to Tonsberg (1), and were there that winter.  There had then been
a shift of rulers in Norway.  Harold Grayfell was then dead, and
so was Gunnhillda.  Earl Hacon the Bad, Sigurd's son, Hacon's
son, Gritgarth's son, then ruled the realm.  The mother of Hacon
was Bergliot, the daughter of Earl Thorir.  Her mother was Olof
Harvest-heal.  She was Harold Fair-hair's daughter.

Hallvard asks Gunnar if he would make up his mind to go to Earl
Hacon?

"No; I will not do that," says Gunnar.  "Hast thou ever a long-
ship?"

"I have two," he says.

"Then I would that we two went on warfare; and let us get men to
go with us."

"I will do that," says Hallvard.

After that they went to the Bay, and took with them two ships,
and fitted them out thence.  They had good choice of men, for
much praise was said of Gunnar.

"Whither wilt thou first fare?" says Gunnar.

"I wish to go south-east to Hisingen, to see my kinsman Oliver,"
says Hallvard.

"What dost thou want of him?" says Gunnar.

He answered, "He is a fine brave fellow, and he will be sure to
get us some more strength for our voyage."

"Then let us go thither," says Gunnar.

So, as soon as they were "boun," they held on east to Hisingen,
and had there a hearty welcome.  Gunnar had only been there a
short time ere Oliver made much of him.  Oliver asks about his
voyage, and Hallvard says that Gunnar wishes to go a-warfaring to
gather goods for himself.

"There's no use thinking of that," says Oliver, "when ye have no
force."

"Well," says Hallvard, "then you may add to it."

"So I do mean to strengthen Gunnar somewhat," says Oliver; "and
though thou reckonest thyself my kith and kin, I think there is
more good in him."

"What force, now, wilt thou add to ours?" he asks.

"Two long-ships, one with twenty, and the other with thirty seats
for rowers."

"Who shall man them?" asks Hallvard.

"I will man one of them with my own house-carles, and the freemen
around shall man the other.  But still I have found out that
strife has come into the river, and I know not whether ye two
will be able to get away; for they are in the river."

"Who?" says Hallvard.

"Brothers twain," says Oliver; "one's name is Vandil, and the
other's Karli, sons of Sjolf the Old, east away out of Gothland."

Hallvard told Gunnar that Oliver had added some ships to theirs,
and Gunnar was glad at that.  They busked them for their voyage
thence, till they were "allboun."  Then Gunnar and Hallvard went
before Oliver, and thanked him; he bade them fare warily for the
sake of those brothers.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  A town at the mouth of the Christiania Firth.  It was a
     great place for traffic in early times, and was long the
     only mart in the south-east of Norway.




