3. HRUT AND GUNNHILLDA, KING'S MOTHER

At that time Harold Grayfell reigned in Norway; he was the son of
Eric Bloodaxe, who was the son of Harold Fair-hair; his mother's
name was Gunnhillda, a daughter of Auzur Toti, and they had their
abode east, at the King's Crag.  Now the news was spread, how a
ship had come thither east into the Bay, and as soon as
Gunnhillda heard of it, she asked what men from Iceland were
abroad, and they told her Hrut was the man's name, Auzur's
brother's son.  Then Gunnhillda said, "I see plainly that he
means to claim his heritage, but there is a man named Soti, who
has laid his hands on it."

After that she called her waiting-man, whose name was Augmund,
and said, "I am going to send thee to the Bay to find out Auzur
and Hrut, and tell them that I ask them both to spend this winter
with me.  Say, too, that I will be their friend, and if Hrut will
carry out my counsel, I will see after his suit, and anything
else he takes in hand, and I will speak a good word, too, for him
to the king."

After that he set off and found them; and as soon as they knew
that he was Gunnhillda's servant, they gave him good welcome.  He
took them aside and told them his errand, and after that they
talked over their plans by themselves.  Then Auzur said to Hrut,
"Methinks, kinsman, here is little need for long talk, our plans
are ready made for us; for I know Gunnhillda's temper; as soon as
ever we say we will not go to her she will drive us out of the
land, and take all our goods by force; but if we go to her, then
she will do us such honour as she has promised."

Augmund went home, and when he saw Gunnhillda, he told her how
his errand had ended, and that they would come, and Gunnhillda
said, "It is only what was to be looked for; for Hrut is said to
be a wise and well-bred man; and now do thou keep a sharp look
out, and tell me as soon as ever they come to the town."

Hrut and Auzur went east to the King's Crag, and when they
reached the town, their kinsmen and friends went out to meet and
welcome them.  They asked whether the king were in the town, and
they told them he was.  After that they met Augmund, and he
brought them a greeting from Gunnhillda, saying, that she could
not ask them to her house before they had seen the king, lest men
should say, "I make too much of them."  Still she would do all
she could for them, and she went on, "Tell Hrut to be out-spoken
before the king, and to ask to be made one of his body-guard;"
"and here," said Augmund, "is a dress of honour which she sends
to thee, Hrut, and in it thou must go in before the king."  After
that he went away.

The next day Hrut said, "Let us go before the king."

"That may well be," answered Auzur.

So they went, twelve of them together, and all of them friends or
kinsmen, and came into the hall where the king sat over his
drink.  Hrut went first and bade the king "Good-day," and the
king, looking steadfastly at the man who was well-dressed, asked
him his name.  So he told his name.

"Art thou an Icelander?" said the king.

He answered, "Yes."

"What drove thee hither to seek us?"

Then Hrut answered, "To see your state, lord; and, besides,
because I have a great matter of inheritance here in the land,
and I shall have need of your help if I am to get my rights."

The king said, "I have given my word that every man shall have
lawful justice here in Norway; but hast thou any other errand in
seeking me?"

"Lord!" said Hrut, "I wish you to let me live in your court, and
become one of your men."

At this the king holds his peace, but Gunnhillda said, "It seems
to me as if this man offered you the greatest honour, for
methinks if there were many such men in the body-guard, it would
be well filled."

"Is he a wise man?" asked the king.

"He is both wise and willing," said she.

"Well," said the king, "methinks my mother wishes that thou
shouldst have the rank for which thou askest, but for the sake of
our honour and the custom of the land, come to me in half a
month's time, and then thou shalt be made one of my body-guard.
Meantime, my mother will take care of thee, but then come to me."

Then Gunnhillda said to Augmund, "Follow them to my house, and
treat them well."

So Augmund went out, and they went with him, and he brought them
to a hall built of stone, which was hung with the most beautiful
tapestry, and there too was Gunnhillda's high seat.

Then Augmund said to Hrut, "Now will be proved the truth of all
that I said to thee from Gunnhillda.  Here is her high seat, and
in it thou shalt sit, and this seat thou shalt hold, though she
comes herself into the hall."

After that he made them good cheer, and they had sat down but a
little while when Gunnhillda came in.  Hrut wished to jump up and
greet her.

"Keep thy seat!" she says, "and keep it too all the time thou art
my guest."

Then she sat herself down by Hrut, and they fell to drink, and at
even she said, "Thou shalt be in the upper chamber with me
to-night, and we two together."

"You shall have your way," he answers.

After that they went to sleep, and she locked the door inside.
So they slept that night, and in the morning fell to drinking
again.  Thus they spent their life all that halfmonth, and
Gunnhillda said to the men who were there, "Ye shall lose nothing
except your lives if you say to any one a word of how Hrut and I
are going on."

When the half-month was over Hrut gave her a hundred ells of
household woollen and twelve rough cloaks, and Gunnhillda thanked
him for his gifts.  Then Hrut thanked her and gave her a kiss and
went away.  She bade him "farewell."  And next day he went before
the king with thirty men after him and bade the king "Good-day."
The king said, "Now, Hrut, thou wilt wish me to carry out towards
thee what I promised."

So Hrut was made one of the king's body-guard, and he asked,
"Where shall I sit?"

"My mother shall settle that," said the king.

Then she got him a seat in the highest room, and he spent the
winter with the king in much honour.




