55. NJAL'S ADVICE TO GUNNAR

Now those tidings are heard far and wide, and many said that they
thought they had not happened before it was likely.  Gunnar rode
to Bergthorsknoll and told Njal of these deeds.

Njal said, "Thou hast done great things, but thou hast been
sorely tried."

"How will it now go henceforth?" says Gunnar.

"Wilt thou that I tell thee what hath not yet come to pass?" asks
Njal.  "Thou wilt ride to the Thing, and thou wilt abide by my
counsel and get the greatest honour from this matter.  This will
be the beginning of thy manslayings."

"But give me some cunning counsel," says Gunnar.

"I will do that," says Njal, "never slay more than one man in the
same stock, and never break the peace which good men and true
make between thee and others, and least of all in such a matter
as this."

Gunnar said, "I should have thought there was more risk of that
with others than with me."

"Like enough," says Njal, "but still thou shalt so think of thy
quarrels, that if that should come to pass of which I have warned
thee, then thou wilt have but a little while to live; but
otherwise, thou wilt come to be an old man."

Gunnar said, "Dost thou know what will be thine own death?"

"I know it," says Njal.

"What?" asks Gunnar.

"That," says Njal, "which all would be the last to think."

After that Gunnar rode home.

A man was sent to Gizur the White and Geir the Priest, for they
had the blood-feud after Otkell.  Then they had a meeting, and
had a talk about what was to be done; and they were of one mind
that the quarrel should be followed up at law.  Then some one was
sought who would take the suit up, but no one was ready to do
that.

"It seems to me," says Gizur, "that now there are only two
courses, that one of us two undertakes the suit, and then we
shall have to draw lots who it shall be, or else the man will be
unatoned.  We may make up our minds, too, that this will be a
heavy suit to touch; Gunnar has many kinsmen and is much beloved;
but that one of us who does not draw the lot, shall ride to the
Thing and never leave it until the suit comes to an end."

After that they drew lots, and Geir the Priest drew the lot to
take up the suit.

A little after, they rode from the west over the river, and came
to the spot where the meeting had been by Rangriver, and dug up
the bodies, and took witness to the wounds.  After that they gave
lawful notice and summoned nine neighbours to bear witness in the
suit.

They were told that Gunnar was at home with about thirty men;
then Geir the Priest asked whether Gizur would ride against him
with one hundred men.

"I will not do that," says he, "though the balance of force is
great on our side."

After that they rode back home.  The news that the suit was set
on foot was spread all over the country, and the saying ran that
the Thing would be very noisy and stormy.




