74. KOLSKEGG GOES ABROAD

Thrain Sigfus' son said to his wife that he meant to fare abroad
that summer.  She said that was well.  So he took his passage
with Hogni the White.

Gunnar took his passage with Arnfin of the Bay; and Kolskegg was
to go with him.

Grim and Helgi, Njal's sons, asked their father's leave to go
abroad too, and Njal said, "This foreign voyage ye will find hard
work, so hard that it will be doubtful whether ye keep your
lives; but still ye two will get some honour and glory, but it is
not unlikely that a quarrel will arise out of your journey when
ye come back."

Still they kept on asking their father to let them go, and the
end of it was that he bade them go if they chose.

Then they got them a passage with Bard the Black, and Olof
Kettle's son of Elda; and it is the talk of the whole country
that all the better men in that district were leaving it.

By this time Gunnar's sons, Hogni and Grani, were grown up; they
were men of very different turn of mind.  Grani had much of his
mother's temper, but Hogni was kind and good.

Gunnar made men bear down the wares of his brother and himself to
the ship, and when all Gunnar's baggage had come down, and the
ship was all but "boun," then Gunnar rides to Bergthorsknoll, and
to other homesteads to see men, and thanked them all for the help
they had given him.

The day after he gets ready early for his journey to the ship,
and told all his people that he would ride away for good and all,
and men took that much to heart, but still they said that they
looked to his coming back afterwards.

Gunnar threw his arms round each of the household when he was
"boun," and every one of them went out of doors with him; he
leans on the butt of his spear and leaps into the saddle, and he
and Kolskegg ride away.

They ride down along Markfleet, and just then Gunnar's horse
tripped and threw him off.  He turned with his face up towards
the Lithe and the homestead at Lithend, and said, "Fair is the
Lithe; so fair that it has never seemed to me so fair; the corn
fields are white to harvest and the home mead is mown; and now I
will ride back home, and not fare abroad at all."

"Do not this joy to thy foes," says Kolskegg, "by breaking thy
atonement, for no man could think thou wouldst do thus, and thou
mayst be sure that all will happen as Njal has said."

"I will not go away any whither," said Gunnar, "and so I would
thou shouldest do too."

"That shall not be," says Kolskegg; "I will never do a base thing
in this, nor in any thing else which is left to my good faith;
and this is that one thing that could tear us asunder; but tell
this to my kinsman and to my mother that I never mean to see
Iceland again, for I shall soon learn that thou art dead,
brother, and then there will be nothing left to bring me back."

So they parted there and then.  Gunnar rides home to Lithend, but
Kolskegg rides to the ship, and goes abroad.

Hallgerda was glad to see Gunnar when he came home, but his
mother said little or nothing.

How Gunnar sits at home that fall and winter, and had not many
men with him.

Now the winter leaves the farmyard.  Olaf the Peacock asked
Gunnar and Hallgerda to come and stay with him; but as for the
farm, to put it into the hands of his mother and his son Hogni.

Gunnar thought that a good thing at first, and agreed to it, but
when it came to the point he would not do it.

But at the Thing next summer, Gizur the White, and Geir the
Priest, gave notice of Gunnar's outlawry at the Hill of Laws; and
before the Thing broke up Gizur summoned all Gunnar's foes to
meet in the "Great Rift." (1)  He summoned Starkad under the
Threecorner, and Thorgeir his son; Mord and Valgard the Guileful;
Geir the Priest and Hjalti Skeggi's son; Thorbrand and Asbrand,
Thorleik's sons; Eyjulf, and Aunund his son.  Aunund of Witchwood
and Thorgrim the Easterling of Sandgil.

Then Gizur spoke and said, "I will make you all this offer, that
we go out against Gunnar this summer and slay him."

"I gave my word to Gunnar," said Hjalti, "here at the Thing,
when he showed himself most willing to yield to my prayer, that I
would never be in any attack upon him; and so it shall be."

Then Hjalti went away, but those who were left behind made up
their minds to make an onslaught on Gunnar, and shook hands on
the bargain, and laid a fine on any one that left the
undertaking.

Mord was to keep watch and spy out when there was the best chance
of falling on him, and they were forty men in this league, and
they thought it would be a light thing for them to hunt down
Gunnar, now that Kolskegg was away, and Thrain and many other of
Gunnar's friends.

Men ride from the Thing, and Njal went to see Gunnar, and told
him of his outlawry, and how an onslaught was planned against
him.

"Methinks thou art the best of friends," says Gunnar; "thou
makest me aware of what is meant."

"Now," says Njal, "I would that Skarphedinn should come to thy
house, and my son Hauskuld; they will lay down their lives for
thy life."

"I will not," says Gunnar, "that thy sons should be slain for my
sake, and thou hast a right to look for other things from me."

"All thy care will come to nothing," says Njal; "quarrels will
turn thitherward where my sons are as soon as thou art dead and
gone."

"That is not unlikely," says Gunnar, "but still it would mislike
me that they fell into them for me; but this one thing I will ask
of thee, that ye see after my son Hogni, but I say naught of
Grani, for he does not behave himself much after my mind."

Njal rode home, and gave his word to do that.

It is said that Gunnar rode to all meetings of men, and to all
lawful Things, and his foes never dared to fall on him.

And so some time went on that he went about as a free and
guiltless man.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Great Rift," Almannagja -- The great volcanic rift, or
     "geo," as it would be called in Orkney and Shetland, which
     bounds the plain of the Allthing on one side.




