76. GUNNAR'S SLAYING

Gunnar woke up in his hall and said, "Thou hast been sorely
treated, Sam, my fosterling, and this warning is so meant that
our two deaths will not be far apart."

Gunnar's hall was made all of wood, and roofed with beams above,
and there were window-slits under the beams that carried the
roof, and they were fitted with shutters.

Gunnar slept in a loft above the hall, and so did Hallgerda and
his mother.

Now when they were come near to the house they knew not whether
Gunnar were at home, and bade that some one would go straight up
to the house and see if he could find out.  But the rest sat them
down on the ground.

Thorgrim the Easterling went and began to climb up on the hall;
Gunnar sees that a red kirtle passed before the windowslit, and
thrusts out the bill, and smote him on the middle.  Thorgrim's
feet slipped from under him, and he dropped his shield, and down
he toppled from the roof.

Then he goes to Gizur and his band as they sat on the ground.

Gizur looked at him and said, "Well, is Gunnar at home?"

"Find that out for yourselves," said Thorgrim; "but this I am
sure of, that his bill is at home," and with that he fell down
dead.

Then they made for the buildings.  Gunnar shot out arrows at
them, and made a stout defence, and they could get nothing done.
Then some of them got into the out houses and tried to attack him
thence, but Gunnar found them out with his arrows there also, and
still they could get nothing done.

So it went on for a while, then they took a rest, and made a
second onslaught.  Gunnar still shot out at them, and they could
do nothing, and fell off the second time.  Then Gizur the White
said, "Let us press on harder; nothing comes of our onslaught."

Then they made a third bout of it, and were long at it, and then
they fell off again.

Gunnar said, "There lies an arrow outside on the wall, and it is
one of their shafts; I will shoot at them with it, and it will be
a shame to them if they get a hurt from their own weapons."

His mother said, "Do not so, my son; nor rouse them again when
they have already fallen off from the attack."

But Gunnar caught up the arrow and shot it after them, and struck
Eylif Aunund's son, and he got a great wound; he was standing all
by himself, and they knew not that he was wounded.

"Out came an arm yonder," says Gizur, "and there was a gold ring
on it, and took an arrow from the roof, and they would not look
outside for shafts if there were enough in doors; and now ye
shall made a fresh onslaught."

"Let us burn him house and all," said Mord.

"That shall never be," says Gizur, "though I knew that my life
lay on it; but it is easy for thee to find out some plan, such a
cunning man as thou art said to be."

Some ropes lay there on the ground, and they were often used to
strengthen the roof.  Then Mord said, "Let us take the ropes and
throw one end over the end of the carrying beams, but let us
fasten the other end to these rocks and twist them tight with
levers, and so pull the roof off the hall."

So they took the ropes and all lent a hand to carry this out, and
before Gunnar was aware of it, they had pulled the whole roof off
the hall.

Then Gunnar still shoots with his bow so that they could never
come nigh him.  Then Mord said again that they must burn the
house over Gunnar's head.  But Gizur said, "I know not why thou
wilt speak of that which no one else wishes, and that shall never
be."

Just then Thorbrand Thorleik's son, sprang up on the roof, and
cuts asunder Gunnar's bowstring.  Gunnar clutches the bill with
both hands, and turns on him quickly and drives it through him,
and hurls him down on the ground.

Then up sprung Asbrand his brother.  Gunnar thrusts at him with
his bill, and he threw his shield before the blow, but the bill
passed clean through the shield and broke both his arms, and down
he fell from the wall.

Gunnar had already wounded eight men and slain those twain (1).
By that time Gunnar had got two wounds, and all men said that he
never once winced either at wounds or death.

Then Gunnar said to Hallgerda, "Give me two locks of thy hair,
and ye two, my mother and thou, twist them together into a
bowstring for me."

"Does aught lie on it?" she says.

"My life lies on it;" he said; "for they will never come to close
quarters with me if I can keep them off with my bow."

"Well!" she says, "now I will call to thy mind that slap on the
face which thou gavest me; and I care never a whit whether thou
holdest out a long while or a short."

Then Gunnar sang a song:

     "Each who hurts the gory javelin
     Hath some honour of his own,
     Now my helpmeet wimple-hooded
     Hurries all my fame to earth.
     No one owner of a war-ship
     Often asks for little things,
     Woman, fond of Frodi's flour (2),
     Wends her hand as she is wont."

"Every one has something to boast of," says Gunnar, "and I will
ask thee no more for this."

"Thou behavest ill," said Rannveig, "and this shame shall long be
had in mind."

Gunnar made a stout and bold defence, and now wounds other eight
men with such sore wounds that many lay at death's door.  Gunnar
keeps them all off until he fell worn out with toil.  Then they
wounded him with many and great wounds, but still he got away out
of their hands, and held his own against them a while longer, but
at last it came about that they slew him.

Of this defence of his, Thorkell the Skald of Gota-Elf sang in
the verses which follow --

     "We have heard how south in Iceland
     Gunnar guarded well himself,
     Boldly battle's thunder wielding,
     Fiercest foeman on the wave;
     Hero of the golden collar,
     Sixteen with the sword he wounded;
     In the shock that Odin loveth,
     Two before him tasted death."

But this is what Thormod Olaf's son sang --

     "None that scattered sea's bright sunbeams (3),
     Won more glorious fame than Gunnar,
     So runs fame of old in Iceland,
     Fitting fame of heathen men;
     Lord of fight when helms were crashing,
     Lives of foeman twain he took,
     Wielding bitter steel he sorely
     Wounded twelve, and four besides."

Then Gizur spoke and said, "We have now laid low to earth a
mighty chief, and hard work has it been, and the fame of this
defence of his shall last as long as men live in this land."

After that he went to see Rannveig and said, "Wilt thou grant us
earth here for two of our men who are dead, that they may lie in
a cairn here?"

"All the more willingly for two," she says, "because I wish with
all my heart I had to grant it to all of you."

"It must be forgiven thee," he says, "to speak thus, for thou
hast had a great loss."

Then he gave orders that no man should spoil or rob anything
there.

After that they went away.

Then Thorgeir Starkad's son said, "We may not be in our house at
home for the sons of Sigfus, unless thou Gizur or thou Geir be
here south some little while."

"This shall be so," says Gizur, and they cast lots, and the lot
fell on Geir to stay behind.

After that he came to the Point, and set up his house there; he
had a son whose name was Hroald; he was base born, and his
mother's name was Biartey (4); he boasted that he had given
Gunnar his death blow.  Hroald was at the Point with his father.

Thorgeir Starkad's son boasted of another wound which he had
given to Gunnar.

Gizur sat at home at Mossfell.  Gunnar's slaying was heard of,
and ill spoken of throughout the whole country, and his death was
a great grief to many a man.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Thorgrim Easterling and Thorbrand.
(2)  "Frodi's flour," a periphrasis for "gold."
(3)  "Sea's bright sunbeams," a periphrasis for "gold."
(4)  She was a sister of Thorwald the Scurvy, who was slain at
     Horsebeck in Grimsness.





