78. GUNNAR OF LITHEND AVENGED

"Now we shall set off at once," says Skarphedinn, "this very
night; for if they learn that I am here, they will be more wary
of themselves."

"I will fulfil thy counsel," says Hogni.

After that they took their weapons when all men were in their
beds.  Hogni takes down the bill, and it gave a sharp ringing
sound.

Rannveig sprang up in great wrath and said, "Who touches the
bill, when I forbade every one to lay hand on it?"

"I mean," says Hogni, "to bring it to my father, that he may bear
it with him to Valhalla, and have it with him when the warriors
meet."

"Rather shalt thou now bear it," she answered, "and avenge thy
father; for the bill has spoken of one man's death or more."

Then Hogni went out, and told Skarphedinn all the words that his
grandmother had spoken.

After that they fare to the Point, and two ravens flew along with
them all the way.  They came to the Point while it was still
night.  Then they drove the flock before them up to the house,
and then Hroald and Tjorfi ran out and drove the flock up the
hollow path, and had their weapons with them.

Skarphedinn sprang up and said, "Thou needest not to stand and
think if it be really as it seems.  Men are here."

Then Skarphedinn smites Tjorfi his deathblow.  Hroald had a spear
in his hand, and Hogni rushes at him; Hroald thrusts at him, but
Hogni hewed asunder the spear-shaft with his bill, and drives the
bill through him.

After that they left them there dead, and turn away thence under
the Threecorner.

Skarphedinn jumps up on the house and plucks the grass, and those
who were inside the house thought it was cattle that had come on
the roof.  Starkad and Thorgeir took their weapons and upper
clothing, and went out and round about the fence of the yard.
But when Starkad sees Skarphedinn he was afraid, and wanted to
turn back.

Skarphedinn cut him down by the fence.  Then Hogni comes against
Thorgeir and slays him with the bill.

Thence they went to Hof, and Mord was outside in the field, and
begged for mercy, and offered them full atonement.

Skarphedinn told Mord the slaying of those four men, and sang a
song:

     "Four who wielded warlike weapons
     We have slain, all men of worth,
     Them at once, gold-greedy fellow,
     Thou shalt follow on the spot;
     Let us press this pinch-purse so,
     Pouring fear into his heart;
     Wretch! reach out to Gunnar's son
     Right to settle all disputes."

"And the like journey," says Skarphedinn, "shalt thou also fare,
or hand over to Hogni the right to make his own award, if he will
take these terms."

Hogni said his mind had been made up not to come to any terms
with the slayers of his father; but still at last he took the
right to make his own award from Mord.




