86. HRAPP'S VOYAGE FROM ICELAND

There was a man named Kolbein, and his surname was Arnljot's son;
he was a man from Drontheim; he sailed out to Iceland that same
summer in which Kolskegg and Njal's sons went abroad.  He was
that winter east in Broaddale; but the spring after, he made his
ship ready for sea in Gautawick; and when men were almost "boun,"
a man rowed up to them in a boat, and made the boat fast to the
ship, and afterwards he went on board the ship to see Kolbein.

Kolbein asked that man for his name.

"My name is Hrapp," says he.

"What wilt thou with me?" says Kolbein.

"I wish to ask thee to put me across the Iceland main."

"Whose son art thou?" asks Kolbein.

"I am a son of Aurgunleid, the son of Geirolf the Fighter."

"What need lies on thee," asked Kolbein, "to drive thee abroad?"

"I have slain a man," says Hrapp.

"What manslaughter was that," says Kolbein, "and what men have
the blood-feud?"

"The men of Weaponfirth," says Hrapp, "but the man I slew was
Aurlyg, the son of Aurlyg, the son of Roger the White."

"I guess this," says Kolbein, "that he will have the worst of it
who bears thee abroad."

"I am the friend of my friend," said Hrapp, "but when ill is done
to me I repay it.  Nor am I short of money to lay down for my
passage."

Then Kolbein took Hrapp on board, and a little while after a fair
breeze sprung up, and they sailed away on the sea.

Hrapp ran short of food at sea and then he sate him down at the
mess of those who were nearest to him.  They sprang up with ill
words, and so it was that they came to blows, and Hrapp, in a
trice, has two men under him.

Then Kolbein was told, and he bade Hrapp to come and share his
mess, and he accepted that.

Now they come off the sea, and lie outside off Agdirness.

Then Kolbein asked where that money was which he had offered to
pay for his fare?

"It is out in Iceland," answers Hrapp.

"Thou wilt beguile more men than me, I fear," says Kolbein; "but
now I will forgive thee all the fare."

Hrapp bade him have thanks for that.  "But what counsel dost thou
give as to what I ought to do?"

"That first of all," he says, "that thou goest from the ship as
soon as ever thou canst, for all Easterlings will bear thee bad
witness; but there is yet another bit of good counsel which I
will give thee, and that is, never to cheat thy master."

Then Hrapp went on shore with his weapons, and he had a great axe
with an iron-bound haft in his hand.

He fares on and on till he comes to Gudbrand of the Dale.  He was
the greatest friend of Earl Hacon.  They two had a shrine between
them, and it was never opened but when the earl came thither.
That was the second greatest shrine in Norway, but the other was
at Hlada.

Thrand was the name of Gudbrand's son, but his daughter's name
was Gudruna.

Hrapp went in before Gudbrand, and hailed him well.

He asked whence he came and what was his name.  Hrapp told him
about himself, and how he had sailed abroad from Iceland.

After that he asks Gudbrand to take him into his household as a
guest.

"It does not seem," said Gudbrand, "to look on thee, as thou wert
a man to bring good luck."

"Methinks, then," says Hrapp, "that all I have heard about thee
has been great lies; for it is said that thou takest every one
into thy house that asks thee; and that no man is thy match for
goodness and kindness, far or near; but now I shall have to speak
against that saying, if thou dost not take me in."

"Well, thou shalt stay here," said Gudbrand.

"To what seat wilt thou shew me?" says Hrapp.

"To one on the lower bench, over against my high seat."

Then Hrapp went and took his seat.  He was able to tell of many
things, and so it was at first that Gudbrand and many thought it
sport to listen to him; but still it came about that most men
thought him too much given to mocking, and the end of it was that
he took to talking alone with Gudruna, so that many said that he
meant to beguile her.

But when Gudbrand was aware of that, he scolded her much for
daring to talk alone with him, and bade her beware of speaking
aught to him if the whole household did not hear it.  She gave
her word to be good at first, but still it was soon the old story
over again as to their talk.  Then Gudbrand got Asvard, his
overseer, to go about with her, out of doors and in, and to be
with her wherever she went.  One day it happened that she begged
for leave to go into the nutwood for a pastime, and Asvard went
along with her.  Hrapp goes to seek for them and found them, and
took her by the hand, and led her away alone.

Then Asvard went to look for her, and found them both together
stretched on the grass in a thicket.

He rushes at them, axe in air, and smote at Hrapp's leg, but
Hrapp gave himself a sudden turn, and he missed him.  Hrapp
springs on his feet as quick as he can, and caught up his axe.
Then Asvard wished to turn and get away, but Hrapp hewed asunder
his back-bone.

Then Gudruna said, "Now hast thou done that deed which will
hinder thy stay any longer with my father; but still there is
something behind which he will like still less, for I go with
child."

"He shall not learn this from others," says Hrapp, "but I will go
home and tell him both these tidings."

"Then," she says, "thou wilt not come away with thy life."

"I will run the risk of that," he says.

After that he sees her back to the other women, but he went home.
Gudbrand sat in his high seat, and there were few men in the
room.

Hrapp went in before him, and bore his axe high.

"Why is thine axe bloody?" asks Gudbrand.

"I made it so by doing a piece of work on thy overseer Asvard's
back," says Hrapp.

"That can be no good work," says Gudbrand; "thou must have slain
him."

"So it is, be sure," says Hrapp.

"What did ye fall out about?" asks Gudbrand.

"Oh!" says Hrapp, "what you would think small cause enough.  He
wanted to hew off my leg."

"What hadst thou done first?" asked Gudbrand.

"What he had no right to meddle with," says Hrapp.

"Still thou wilt tell me what it was."

"Well!" said Hrapp, "if thou must know, I lay by thy daughter's
side, and he thought that bad."

"Up men!" cried Gudbrand, "and take him.  He shall be slain out
of hand."

"Very little good wilt thou let me reap of my son-in-lawship,"
says Hrapp, "but thou hast not so many men at thy back as to do
that speedily."

Up they rose, but he sprang out of doors.  They run after him,
but he got away to the wood, and they could not lay hold of him.

Then Gudbrand gathers people, and lets the wood be searched; but
they find him not, for the wood was great and thick.

Hrapp fares through the wood till he came to a clearing; there he
found a house, and saw a man outside cleaving wood.

He asked that man for his name, and he said his name was Tofi.

Tofi asked him for his name in turn, and Hrapp told him his true
name.

Hrapp asked why the householder had set up his abode so far from
other men?

"For that here," he says, "I think I am less likely to have
brawls with other men."

"It is strange how we beat about the bush in our talk," says
Hrapp, "but I will first tell thee who I am.  I have been with
Gudbrand of the Dale, but I ran away thence because I slew his
overseer; but now I know that we are both of us bad men; for thou
wouldst not have come hither away from other men unless thou wert
some man's outlaw.  And now I give thee two choices, either that
I will tell where thou art, or that we two have between us, share
and share alike, all that is here."

"This is even as thou sayest," said the householder; "I seized
and carried off this woman who is here with me, and many men have
sought for me."

Then he led Hrapp in with him; there was a small house there, but
well built.

The master of the house told his mistress that he had taken Hrapp
into his company.

"Most men will get ill luck from this man," she says; "but thou
wilt have thy way."

So Hrapp was there after that.  He was a great wanderer, and was
never at home.  He still brings about meetings with Gudruna; her
father and brother, Thrand and Gudbrand, lay in wait for him, but
they could never get nigh him, and so all that year passed away.

Gudbrand sent and told Earl Hacon what trouble he had had with
Hrapp, and the earl let him be made an outlaw, and laid a price
upon his head.  He said, too, that he would go himself to look
after him; but that passed off, and the earl thought it easy
enough for them to catch him when he went about so unwarily.




