90. THE QUARREL OF NJAL'S SONS WITH THRAIN SIGFUS' SON

Hrapp owned a farm at Hrappstede, but for all that he was always
at Gritwater, and he was thought to spoil everything there.
Thrain was good to him.

Once on a time it happened that Kettle of the Mark was at
Bergthorsknoll; then Njal's sons told him of their wrongs and
hardships, and said they had much to lay at Thrain Sigfus son's
door, whenever they chose to speak about it.

Njal said it would be best that Kettle should talk with his
brother Thrain about it, and he gave his word to do so.

So they gave Kettle breathing-time to talk to Thrain.

A little after they spoke of the matter again to Kettle, but he
said that he would repeat few of the words that had passed
between them, "For it was pretty plain that Thrain thought I set
too great store on being your brother-in-law."

Then they dropped talking about it, and thought they saw that
things looked ugly, and so they asked their father for his
counsel as to what was to be done, but they told him they would
not let things rest as they then stood.

"Such things," said Njal, "are not so strange.  It will be
thought that they are slain without a cause, if they are slain
now, and my counsel is, that as many men as may be should be
brought to talk with them about these things, and thus as many as
we can find may be ear-witnesses if they answer ill as to these
things.  Then Kari shall talk about them too, for he is just the
man with the right turn of mind for this; then the dislike
between you will grow and grow, for they will heap bad words on
bad words when men bring the matter forward, for they are foolish
men.  It may also well be that it may be said that my sons are
slow to take up a quarrel, but ye shall bear that for the sake of
gaining time, for there are two sides to everything that is done,
and ye can always pick a quarrel; but still ye shall let so much
of your purpose out, as to say that if any wrong be put upon you
that ye do mean something.  But if ye had taken counsel from me
at first, then these things should never have been spoken about
at all, and then ye would have gotten no disgrace from them; but
now ye have the greatest risk of it, and so it will go on ever
growing and growing with your disgrace, that ye will never get
rid of it until ye bring yourselves into a strait, and have to
fight your way out with weapons; but in that there is a long and
weary night in which ye will have to grope your way."

After that they ceased speaking about it; but the matter became
the daily talk of many men.

One day it happened that those brothers spoke to Kari and bade
him go to Gritwater.  Kari said he thought he might go
elsewhither on a better journey, but still he would go if that
were Njal's counsel.  So after that Kari fares to meet Thrain,
and then they talk over the matter, and they did not each look at
it in the same way.

Kari comes home, and Njal's sons ask how things had gone between
Thrain and him.  Kari said he would rather not repeat the words
that had passed, "But," he went on, "it is to be looked for that
the like words will be spoken when ye yourselves can hear them."

Thrain had fifteen house-carles trained to arms in his house, and
eight of them rode with him whithersoever he went.  Thrain was
very fond of show and dress, and always rode in a blue cloak, and
had on a gilded helm, and the spear -- the earl's gift -- in his
hand, and a fair shield, and a sword at his belt.  Along with him
always went Gunnar Lambi's son, and Lambi Sigurd's son, and Grani
Gunnar of Lithend's son.  But nearest of all to him went Killing-
Hrapp.  Lodinn was the name of his serving-man, he too went with
Thrain when he journeyed; Tjorvi was the name of Lodinn's
brother, and he too was one of Thrain's band.  The worst of all,
in their words against Njal's sons, were Hrapp and Grani; and it
was mostly their doing that no atonement was offered to them.

Njal's sons often spoke to Kari that he should ride with them;
and it came to that at last, for he said it would be well that
they heard Thrain's answer.

Then they busked them, four of Njal's sons, and Kari the fifth,
and so they fare to Gritwater.

There was a wide porch in the homestead there, so that many men
might stand in it side by side.  There was a woman out of doors,
and she saw their coming, and told Thrain of it; he bade them to
go out into the porch, and take their arms, and they did so.

Thrain stood in mid-door, but Killing-Hrapp and Grani Gunnar's
son stood on either hand of him; then next stood Gunnar Lambi's
son, then Lodinn and Tjorvi, then Lambi Sigurd's son; then each
of the others took his place right and left; for the house-carles
were all at home.

Skarphedinn and his men walk up from below, and he went first,
then Kari, then Hauskuld, then Grim, then Helgi.  But when they
had come up to the door, then not a word of welcome passed the
lips of those who stood before them.

"May we all be welcome here?" said Skarphedinn.

Hallgerda stood in the porch, and had been talking low to Hrapp,
then she spoke out loud: "None of those who are here will say
that ye are welcome."

Then Skarphedinn sang a song:

     "Prop of sea-waves' fire (1), thy fretting
     Cannot cast a weight on us,
     Warriors wight; yes, wolf and eagle
     Willingly I feed to-day;
     Carline thrust into the ingle,
     Or a tramping whore, art thou;
     Lord of skates that skim the sea-belt (2),
     Odin's mocking cup (3) I mix"

"Thy words," said Skarphedinn, "will not be worth much, for thou
art either a hag, only fit to sit in the ingle, or a harlot."

"These words of thine thou shalt pay for," she says, "ere thou
farest home."

"Thee am I come to see, Thrain," said Helgi, "and to know if thou
wilt make me any amends for those wrongs and hardships which
befell me for thy sake in Norway."

"I never knew," said Thrain, "that ye two brothers were wont to
measure your manhood by money; or, how long shall such a claim
for amends stand over?"

"Many will say," says Helgi, "that thou oughtest to offer us
atonement, since thy life was at stake."

Then Hrapp said, "'Twas just luck that swayed the balance, when
he got stripes who ought to bear them; and she dragged you under
disgrace and hardships, but us away from them."

"Little good luck was there in that," says Helgi, "to break faith
with the earl, and to take to thee instead."

"Thinkest thou not that thou hast some amends to seek from me,"
says Hrapp.  "I will atone thee in a way that, methinks, were
fitting."

"The only dealings we shall have," says Helgi, "will be those
which will not stand thee in good stead."

"Don't bandy words with Hrapp," said Skarphedinn, "but give him a
red skin for a grey." (4)

"Hold thy tongue, Skarphedinn," said Hrapp, "or I will not spare
to bring my axe on thy head."

"'Twill be proved soon enough, I dare say," says Skarphedinn,
"which of us is to scatter gravel over the other's head."

"Away with you home, ye `Dungbeardlings!'" says Hallgerda, "and
so we will call you always from this day forth; but your father
we will call `the Beardless Carle.'"

They did not fare home before all who were there had made
themselves guilty of uttering those words, save Thrain; he
forbade men to utter them.

Then Njal's sons went away, and fared till they came home, then
they told their father.

"Did ye call any men to witness of those words?" says Njal.

"We called none," says Skarphedinn; "we do not mean to follow
that suit up except on the battle-field."

"No one will now think," says Bergthora, "that ye have the heart
to lift your weapons."

"Spare thy tongue, mistress!" says Kari, "in egging on thy sons,
for they will be quite eager enough."

After that they all talk long in secret, Njal and his sons, and
Kari Solmund's son, their brother-in-law.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Prop of sea-waves' fire," a periphrasis for woman that
     bears gold on her arm.
(2)  "Skates that skim." etc.. a periphrasis for ships.
(3)  "Odin's mocking cup," mocking songs.
(4)  An allusion to the Beast Epic, where the cunning fox laughs
     at the flayed condition of his stupid foes, the wolf and
     bear.  We should say, "Don't stop to speak with him, but
     rather beat him black and blue."




