96. OF THE CHANGE OF FAITH

There had been a change of rulers in Norway, Earl Hacon was dead
and gone, but in his stead was come Olaf Tryggvi's son.  That was
the end of Earl Hacon, that Kark the thrall cut his throat at
Rimul in Gaulardale.

Along with that was heard that there had been a change of faith
in Norway; they had cast off the old faith, but King Olaf had
christened the western lands, Shetland, and the Orkneys, and the
Faroe Isles.

Then many men spoke so that Njal heard it, that it was a strange
and wicked thing to throw off the old faith.

Then Njal spoke and said, "It seems to me as though this new
faith must be much better, and he will be happy who follows this
rather than the other; and if those men come out hither who
preach this faith, then I will back them well."

He went often alone away from other men and muttered to himself.

That same harvest a ship came out into the firths east to
Berufirth, at a spot called Gautawick.  The captain's name was
Thangbrand.  He was a son of Willibald, a count of Saxony.
Thangbrand was sent out hither by King Olaf Tryggvi's son, to
preach the faith.  Along with him came that man of Iceland whose
name was Gudleif (1).  Gudleif was a great man-slayer, and one of
the strongest of men, and hardy and forward in everything.

Two brothers dwelt at Beruness; the name of the one was Thorleif,
but the other was Kettle.  They were sons of Holmstein, the son
of Auzur of Broaddale.  These brothers held a meeting and forbade
men to have any dealings with them.  This Hall of the Side heard.
He dwelt at Thvattwater in Alftafirth; he rode to the ship with
twenty-nine men, and he fares at once to find Thangbrand, and
spoke to him and asked him, "Trade is rather dull, is it not?"

He answered that so it was.

"Now will I say my errand," says Hall; "it is, that I wish to ask
you all to my house, and run the risk of my being able to get rid
of your wares for you."

Thangbrand thanked him, and fared to Thvattwater that harvest.

It so happened one morning that Thangbrand was out early and made
them pitch a tent on land, and sang mass in it, and took much
pains with it, for it was a great high day.

Hall spoke to Thangbrand and asked, "In memory of whom keepest
thou this day?"

"In memory of Michael the archangel," says Thangbrand.

"What follows that angel?" asks Hall.

"Much good," says Thangbrand. "He will weigh all the good that
thou doest, and he is so merciful, that whenever any one pleases
him, he makes his good deeds weigh more."

"I would like to have him for my friend," says Hall.

"That thou mayest well have," says Thangbrand, "only give thyself
over to him by God's help this very day."

"I only make this condition," says Hall, "that thou givest thy
word for him that he will then become my guardian angel."

"That I will promise," says Thangbrand.

Then Hall was baptized, and all his household.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  He was the son of Ari, the son of Mar, the son of Atli, the
     son of Wolf Squinteye, the son of Hogni the White, the son
     of Otryg, the son of Oblaud, the son of Hjorleif the lover
     of women, King of Hordaland.




