95. OF HALL OF THE SIDE

Hall was the name of a man who was called Hall of the Side.  He
was the son of Thorstein Baudvar's son (1).  Hall had to wife
Joreida, daughter of Thidrandi (2) the Wise.  Thorstein was the
name of Hall's brother, and he was nick-named Broad-paunch.  His
son was Kol, whom Kari slays in Wales.  The sons of Hall of the
Side were Thorstein and Egil, Thorwald and Ljot, and Thidrandi,
whom, it is said, the goddesses slew.

There was a man named Thorir, whose surname was Holt-Thorir; his
sons were these: -- Thorgeir Craggeir, and Thorleif Crow, from
whom the Wood-dwellers are come, and Thorgrim the Big.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Hall's mother's name was Thordisa, and she was a daughter of
     Auzur, the son of Hrodlaug, the son of Earl Rognvald of
     Maeren, the son of Eystein the Noisy.
(2)  Thidrandi was the son of Kettle Rumble, the son of Thorir,
     the son of Thidrandi of Verudale.  The brothers of Thidrandi
     were Kettle Rumble, in Njordwick, and Thorwald, the father
     of Helgi Droplaug's son.  Hallkatla was the sister of
     Joreida.  She was the mother of Thorkel Geiti's son, and
     Thidrandi.




96. OF THE CHANGE OF FAITH

There had been a change of rulers in Norway, Earl Hacon was dead
and gone, but in his stead was come Olaf Tryggvi's son.  That was
the end of Earl Hacon, that Kark the thrall cut his throat at
Rimul in Gaulardale.

Along with that was heard that there had been a change of faith
in Norway; they had cast off the old faith, but King Olaf had
christened the western lands, Shetland, and the Orkneys, and the
Faroe Isles.

Then many men spoke so that Njal heard it, that it was a strange
and wicked thing to throw off the old faith.

Then Njal spoke and said, "It seems to me as though this new
faith must be much better, and he will be happy who follows this
rather than the other; and if those men come out hither who
preach this faith, then I will back them well."

He went often alone away from other men and muttered to himself.

That same harvest a ship came out into the firths east to
Berufirth, at a spot called Gautawick.  The captain's name was
Thangbrand.  He was a son of Willibald, a count of Saxony.
Thangbrand was sent out hither by King Olaf Tryggvi's son, to
preach the faith.  Along with him came that man of Iceland whose
name was Gudleif (1).  Gudleif was a great man-slayer, and one of
the strongest of men, and hardy and forward in everything.

Two brothers dwelt at Beruness; the name of the one was Thorleif,
but the other was Kettle.  They were sons of Holmstein, the son
of Auzur of Broaddale.  These brothers held a meeting and forbade
men to have any dealings with them.  This Hall of the Side heard.
He dwelt at Thvattwater in Alftafirth; he rode to the ship with
twenty-nine men, and he fares at once to find Thangbrand, and
spoke to him and asked him, "Trade is rather dull, is it not?"

He answered that so it was.

"Now will I say my errand," says Hall; "it is, that I wish to ask
you all to my house, and run the risk of my being able to get rid
of your wares for you."

Thangbrand thanked him, and fared to Thvattwater that harvest.

It so happened one morning that Thangbrand was out early and made
them pitch a tent on land, and sang mass in it, and took much
pains with it, for it was a great high day.

Hall spoke to Thangbrand and asked, "In memory of whom keepest
thou this day?"

"In memory of Michael the archangel," says Thangbrand.

"What follows that angel?" asks Hall.

"Much good," says Thangbrand. "He will weigh all the good that
thou doest, and he is so merciful, that whenever any one pleases
him, he makes his good deeds weigh more."

"I would like to have him for my friend," says Hall.

"That thou mayest well have," says Thangbrand, "only give thyself
over to him by God's help this very day."

"I only make this condition," says Hall, "that thou givest thy
word for him that he will then become my guardian angel."

"That I will promise," says Thangbrand.

Then Hall was baptized, and all his household.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  He was the son of Ari, the son of Mar, the son of Atli, the
     son of Wolf Squinteye, the son of Hogni the White, the son
     of Otryg, the son of Oblaud, the son of Hjorleif the lover
     of women, King of Hordaland.




97. OF THANGBRAND'S JOURNEYS

The spring after Thangbrand set out to preach Christianity, and
Hall went with him.  But when they came west across Lonsheath to
Staffell, there they found a man dwelling named Thorkell.  He
spoke most against the faith, and challenged Thangbrand to single
combat.  Then Thangbrand bore a rood-cross (1) before his shield,
and the end of their combat was that Thangbrand won the day and
slew Thorkell.

Thence they fared to Hornfirth and turned in as guests at
Borgarhaven, west of Heinabergs sand.  There Hilldir the Old
dwelt (2), and then Hilldir and all his household took upon them
the new faith.

Thence they fared to Fellcombe, and went in as guests to
Calffell.  There dwelt Kol Thorstein's son, Hall's kinsman, and
he took upon him the faith and all his house.

Thence they fared to Swinefell, and Flosi only took the sign of
the cross, but gave his word to back them at the Thing.

Thence they fared west to Woodcombe, and went in as guests at
Kirkby.  There dwelt Surt Asbjorn's son, the son of Thorstein,
the son of Kettle the Foolish.  These had all of them been
Christians from father to son.

After that they fared out of Woodcombe on to Headbrink.  By that
time the story of their journey was spread far and wide.  There
was a man named Sorcerer-Hedinn who dwelt in Carlinedale.  There
heathen men made a bargain with him that he should put Thangbrand
to death with all his company.  He fared upon Arnstacksheath, and
there made a great sacrifice when Thangbrand was riding from the
east.  Then the earth burst asunder under his horse, but he
sprang off his horse and saved himself on the brink of the gulf,
but the earth swallowed up the horse and all his harness, and
they never saw him more.

Then Thangbrand praised God.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Rood-cross, a crucifix.
(2)  His son was Glum who fared to the burning with Flosi.




98. OF THANGBRAND AND GUDLEIF

Gudleif now searches for Sorcerer-Hedinn and finds him on the
heath, and chases him down into Carlinedale, and got within
spearshot of him, and shoots a spear at him and through him.

Thence they fared to Dyrholms and held a meeting there, and
preached the faith there, and there Ingialld, the son of
Thorsteinn Highbankawk, became a Christian.

Thence they fared to the Fleetlithe and preached the faith there.
There Weatherlid the Skald, and Ari his son, spoke most against
the faith, and for that they slew Weatherlid, and then this song
was sung about it --

     "He who proved his blade on bucklers,
     South went through the land to whet
     Brand that oft hath felled his foeman,
     'Gainst the forge which foams with song (1);
     Mighty wielder of war's sickle
     Made his sword's avenging edge
     Hard on hero's helm-prop rattle (2),
     Skull of Weatherlid the Skald."

Thence Thangbrand fared to Bergthorsknoll, and Njal took the
faith and all his house, but Mord and Valgard went much against
it, and thence they fared out across the rivers; so they went on
into Hawkdale and there they baptized Hall (3), and he was then
three winters old.

Thence Thangbrand fared to Grimsness, there Thorwald the Scurvy
gathered a band against him, and sent word to Wolf Uggi's son
that he must fare against Thangbrand and slay him, and made this
song on him --

     "To the wolf in Woden's harness,
     Uggi's worthy warlike son,
     I, steel's swinger dearly loving,
     This my dimple bidding send;
     That the wolf of Gods (4) he chaseth --
     Man who snaps at chink of gold --
     Wolf who base our Gods blasphemeth,
     I the other wolf (5) will crush."

Wolf sang another song in return:

     "Swarthy skarf from mouth that skimmeth
     Of the man who speaks in song
     Never will I catch, though surely
     Wealthy warrior it hath sent;
     Tender of the sea-horse snorting,
     E'en though ill deeds are on foot,
     Still to risk mine eyes are open;
     Harmful 'tis to snap at flies (6)."

"And," says he, "I don't mean to be made a catspaw by him, but
let him take heed lest his tongue twists a noose for his own
neck."

And after that the messenger fared back to Thorwald the Scurvy
and told him Wolf's words.  Thorwald had many men about him, and
gave it out that he would lie in wait for them on Bluewood-heath.

Now those two, Thangbrand and Gudleif, ride out of Hawkdale, and
there they came upon a man who rode to meet them.  That man asked
for Gudleif, and when he found him he said, "Thou shalt gain by
being the brother of Thorgil of Reykiahole, for I will let thee
know that they have set many ambushes, and this too, that
Thorwald the Scurvy is now with his band at Hestbeck on
Grimsness."

"We shall not the less for all that ride to meet him," says
Gudleif, and then they turned down to Hestbeck.  Thorwald was
then come across the brook, and Gudleif said to Thangbrand, "Here
is now Thorwald; let us rush on him now."

Thangbrand shot a spear through Thorwald, but Gudleif smote him
on the shoulder and hewed his arm off, and that was his death.

After that they ride up to the Thing, and it was a near thing
that the kinsmen of Thorwald had fallen on Thangbrand, but Njal
and the eastfirthers stood by Thangbrand.

Then Hjallti Skeggi's son sang this rhyme at the Hill of Laws:

     "Ever will I Gods blaspheme
     Freyja methinks a dog does seem,
     Freyja a dog?  Aye!  let them be
     Both dogs together Odin and she (7)."

Hjallti fared abroad that summer and Gizur the White with him,
but Thangbrand's ship was wrecked away east at Bulandsness, and
the ship's name was Bison.

Thangbrand and his messmate fared right through the west country,
and Steinvora, the mother of Ref the Skald, came against him; she
preached the heathen faith to Thangbrand and made him a long
speech.  Thangbrand held his peace while she spoke, but made a
long speech after her, and turned all that she had said the wrong
way against her.

"Hast thou heard," she said, "how Thor challenged Christ to
single combat, and how he did not dare to fight with Thor?"

"I have heard tell," says Thangbrand, "that Thor was naught but
dust and ashes, if God had not willed that he should live."

"Knowest thou," she says, "who it was that shattered thy ship?"

"What hast thou to say about that?" he asks.

"That I will tell thee," she says:

     "He that giant's offspring (8) slayeth
     Broke the mew-field's bison stout (9),
     Thus the Gods, bell's warder (10) grieving,
     Crushed the falcon of the strand (11);
     To the courser of the causeway (12)
     Little good was Christ I ween,
     When Thor shattered ships to pieces
     Gylfi's hart (13) no God could help."

And again she sung another song:

     "Thangbrand's vessel from her moorings,
     Sea-king's steed, Thor wrathful tore,
     Shook and shattered all her timbers,
     Hurled her broadside on the beach;
     Ne'er again shall Viking's snow-shoe (14),
     On the briny billows glide,
     For a storm by Thor awakened,
     Dashed the bark to splinters small."

After that Thangbrand and Steinvora parted, and they fared west
to Bardastrand.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Forge which foams with song," the poet's head, in which
     songs are forged, and gush forth like foaming mead.
(2)  "Hero's helm-prop," the hero's, man's, head which supports
     his helm.
(3)  It is needless to say that this Hall was not Hall of the
     Side.
(4)  "Wolf of Gods," the "caput lupinum," the outlaw of heaven,
     the outcast from Valhalla, Thangbrand.
(5)  "The other wolf," Gudleif.
(6)  "Swarthy skarf," the skarf, or "pelecanus carbo", the
     cormorant.  He compares the message of Thorwald to the
     cormorant skimming over the waves, and says he will never
     take it.  "Snap at flies," a very common Icelandic metaphor
     from fish rising to a fly.
(7)  Maurer thinks the allusion is here to some mythological
     legend on Odin's adventures which has not come down to us.
(8)  "He that giant's," etc., Thor.
(9)  "Mew-field's bison," the sea-going ship, which sails over
     the plain of the sea-mew.
(10) "Bell's warder," the Christian priest whose bell-ringing
     formed part of the rites of the new faith.
(11) "Falcon of the strand," ship.
(12) "Courser of the causeway," ship.
(13) "Gylfi's hart," ship.
(14) "Viking's snow-shoe," sea-king's ship.




99. OF GEST ODDLEIF'S SON

Gest Oddleif's son dwelt at Hagi on Bardastrand.  He was one of
the wisest of men, so that he foresaw the fates and fortunes of
men.  He made a feast for Thangbrand and his men.  They fared to
Hagi with sixty men.  Then it was said that there were two
hundred heathen men to meet them, and that a Baresark was looked
for to come thither, whose name was Otrygg, and all were afraid
of him.  Of him such great things as these were said, that he
feared neither fire nor sword, and the heathen men were sore
afraid at his coming.  Then Thangbrand asked if men were willing
to take the faith, but all the heathen men spoke against it.

"Well," says Thangbrand, "I will give you the means whereby ye
shall prove whether my faith is better.  We will hallow two
fires.  The heathen men shall hallow one and I the other, but a
third shall be unhallowed; and if the Baresark is afraid of the
one that I hallow, but treads both the others, then ye shall take
the faith."

"That is well spoken," says Gest, "and I will agree to this for
myself and my household."

And when Gest had so spoken, then many more agreed to it.

Then it was said that the Baresark was coming up to the
homestead, and then the fires were made and burnt strong.  Then
men took their arms and sprang up on the benches, and so
waited.

The Baresark rushed in with his weapons.  He comes into the room,
and treads at once the fire which the heathen men had hallowed,
and so comes to the fire that Thangbrand had hallowed, and dares
not to tread it, but said that he was on fire all over.  He hews
with his sword at the bench, but strikes a crossbeam as he
brandished the weapon aloft.  Thangbrand smote the arm of the
Baresark with his crucifix, and so mighty a token followed that
the sword fell from the Baresark's hand.

Then Thangbrand thrusts a sword into his breast, and Gudleif
smote him on the arm and hewed it off.  Then many went up and
slew the Baresark.

After that Thangbrand asked if they would take the faith now?

Gest said he had only spoken what he meant to keep to.

Then Thangbrand baptized Gest and all his house and many others.
Then Thangbrand took counsel with Gest whether he should go any
further west among the firths, but Gest set his face against
that, and said they were a hard race of men there, and ill to
deal with, "but if it be foredoomed that this faith shall make
its way, then it will be taken as law at the Althing, and then
all the chiefs out of the districts will be there."

"I did all that I could at the Thing," says Thangbrand, "and it
was very uphill work."

"Still thou hast done most of the work," says Gest, "though it
may be fated that others shall make Christianity law; but it is
here as the saying runs, `No tree falls at the first stroke.'"

After that Gest gave Thangbrand good gifts, and he fared back
south.  Thangbrand fared to the Southlander's Quarter, and so to
the Eastfirths.  He turned in as a guest at Bergthorsknoll, and
Njal gave him good gifts.  Thence he rode east to Alftafirth to
meet Hall of the Side.  He caused his ship to be mended, and
heathen men called it "Iron-basket."  On board that ship
Thangbrand fared abroad, and Gudleif with him.




100. OF GIZUR THE WHITE AND HJALLTI

That same summer Hjallti Skeggi's son was outlawed at the Thing
for blasphemy against the Gods.

Thangbrand told King Olaf of all the mischief that the Icelanders
had done to him, and said that they were such sorcerers there
that the earth burst asunder under his horse and swallowed up the
horse.

Then King Olaf was so wroth that he made them seize all the men
from Iceland and set them in dungeons, and meant to slay them.

Then they, Gizur the White and Hjallti, came up and offered to
lay themselves in pledge for those men, and fare out to Iceland
and preach the faith.  The king took this well, and they got them
all set free again.

Then Gizur and Hjallti busked their ship for Iceland, and were
soon "boun."  They made the land at Eyrar when ten weeks of
summer had passed; they got them horses at once, but left other
men to strip their ship.  Then they ride with thirty men to the
Thing, and sent word to the Christian men that they must be ready
to stand by them.

Hjallti stayed behind at Reydarmull, for he had heard that he had
been made an outlaw for blasphemy, but when they came to the
"Boiling Kettle" (1) down below the brink of the Rift (2), there
came Hjallti after them, and said he would not let the heathen
men see that he was afraid of them.

Then many Christian men rode to meet them, and they ride in
battle array to the Thing.  The heathen men had drawn up their
men in array to meet them, and it was a near thing that the whole
body of the Thing had come to blows, but still it did not go so
far.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  "Boiling kettle." This was a hyer, or hot spring.
(2)  This was the "Raven's Rift," opposite to the "Great Rift" on
     the other side of Thingfield.




101. OF THORGEIR OF LIGHTWATER

There was a man named Thorgeir who dwelt at Lightwater; he was
the son of Tjorfi, the son of Thorkel the Long, the son of Kettle
Longneck.  His mother's name was Thoruna, and she was the
daughter of Thorstein, the son of Sigmund, the son of Bard of the
Nip.  Gudrida was the name of his wife; she was a daughter of
Thorkel the Black of Hleidrargarth.  His brother was Worm Wallet-
back, the father of Hlenni the Old of Saurby (1).

The Christian men set up their booths, and Gizur the White and
Hjallti were in the booths of the men from Mossfell.  The day
after both sides went to the Hill of Laws, and each, the
Christian men as well as the heathen, took witness, and declared
themselves out of the other's laws, and then there was such an
uproar on the Hill of Laws that no man could hear the other's
voice.

After that men went away, and all thought things looked like the
greatest entanglement.  The Christian men chose as their Speaker
Hall of the Side, but Hall went to Thorgeir, the priest of
Lightwater, who was the old Speaker of the law, and gave him
three marks of silver (2) to utter what the law should be, but
still that was most hazardous counsel, since he was an heathen.

Thorgeir lay all that day on the ground, and spread a cloak over
his head, so that no man spoke with him; but the day after men
went to the Hill of Laws, and then Thorgeir bade them be silent
and listen, and spoke thus: "It seems to me as though our matters
were come to a dead lock, if we are not all to have one and the
same law; for if there be a sundering of the laws, then there
will be a sundering of the peace, and we shall never be able to
live in the land.  Now, I will ask both Christian men and heathen
whether they will hold to those laws which I utter?"

They all said they would.

He said he wished to take an oath of them, and pledges that they
would hold to them, and they all said "yea" to that, and so he
took pledges from them.

"This is the beginning of our laws," he said, "that all men shall
be Christian here in the land, and believe in one God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but leave off all idol-
worship, not expose children to perish, and not eat horseflesh.
It shall be outlawry if such things are proved openly against any
man; but if these things are done by stealth, then it shall be
blameless."

But all this heathendom was all done away with within a few
years' space, so that those things were not allowed to be done
either by stealth or openly.

Thorgeir then uttered the law as to keeping the Lord's day and
fast days, Yuletide and Easter, and all the greatest highdays and
holidays.

The heathen men thought they had been greatly cheated; but still
the true faith was brought into the law, and so all men became
Christian here in the land.

After that men fare home from the Thing.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Kettle and Thorkel were both sons of Thorir Tag, the son of
     Kettle the Seal, the son of Ornolf, the son of Bjornolf, the
     son of Grim Hairycheek, the son of Kettle Haeing, the son of
     Hallbjorn Halftroll of Ravensfood.
(2)  This was no bribe, but his lawful fee.




102. THE WEDDING OF HAUSKULD, THE PRIEST OF WHITENESS

Now we must take up the story, and say that Njal spoke thus to
Hauskuld, his foster-son, and said, "I would seek thee a match."

Hauskuld bade him settle the matter as he pleased, and asked
whether he was most likely to turn his eyes.

"There is a woman called Hildigunna," answers Njal, "and she is
the daughter of Starkad, the son of Thord Freyspriest.  She is
the best match I know of."

"See thou to it, foster-father," said Hauskuld; "that shall be my
choice which thou choosest."

"Then we will look thitherward," says Njal.

A little while after, Njal called on men to go along with him.
Then the sons of Sigfus, and Njal's sons, and Kari Solmund's son,
all of them fared with him and they rode east to Swinefell.

There they got a hearty welcome.

The day after, Njal and Flosi went to talk alone, and the speech
of Njal ended thus, that he said, "This is my errand here, that
we have set out on a wooing-journey, to ask for thy kinswoman
Hildigunna."

"At whose hand?" says Flosi.

"At the hand of Hauskuld, my foster-son," says Njal.

"Such things are well meant," says Flosi, "but still ye run each
of you great risk, the one from the other; but what hast thou to
say of Hauskuld?"

"Good I am able to say of him," says Njal; "and besides, I will
lay down as much money as will seem fitting to thy niece and
thyself, if thou wilt think of making this match."

"We will call her hither," says Flosi, "and know how she looks on
the man."

Then Hildigunna was called, and she came thither.

Flosi told her of the wooing, but she said she was a proudhearted
woman.

"And I know not how things will turn out between me and men of
like spirit; but this, too, is not the least of my dislike, that
this man has no priesthood or leadership over men, but thou hast
always said that thou wouldest not wed me to a man who had not
the priesthood."

"This is quite enough," says Flosi, "if thou wilt not be wedded
to Hauskuld, to make me take no more pains about the match."

"Nay!" she says, "I do not say that I will not be wedded to
Hauskuld if they can get him a priesthood or a leadership over
men; but otherwise I will have nothing to say to the match."

"Then," said Njal, "I will beg thee to let this match stand over
for three winters, that I may see what I can do."

Flosi said that so it should be.

"I will only bargain for this one thing," says Hildigunna, "if
this match comes to pass, that we shall stay here away east."

Njal said he would rather leave that to Hauskuld, but Hauskuld
said that he put faith in many men, but in none so much as his
foster-father.

Now they ride from the east.

Njal sought to get a priesthood and leadership for Hauskuld, but
no one was willing to sell his priesthood, and now the summer
passes away till the Althing.

There were great quarrels at the Thing that summer, and many a
man then did as was their wont, in faring to see Njal; but he
gave such counsel in men's lawsuits as was not thought at all
likely, so that both the pleadings and the defence came to
naught, and out of that great strife arose, when the lawsuits
could not be brought to an end, and men rode home from the Thing
unatoned.

Now things go on till another Thing comes.  Njal rode to the
Thing, and at first all is quiet until Njal says that it is high
time for men to give notice of their suits.

Then many said that they thought that came to little, when no man
could get his suit settled, even though the witnesses were
summoned to the Althing, "and so," say they, "we would rather
seek our rights with point and edge."

"So it must not be," says Njal, "for it will never do to have no
law in the land.  But yet ye have much to say on your side in
this matter, and it behoves us who know the law, and who are
bound to guide the law, to set men at one again, and to ensue
peace.  'Twere good counsel, then, methinks, that we call
together all the chiefs and talk the matter over."

Then they go to the Court of Laws, and Njal spoke and said,
"Thee, Skapti Thorod's son and you other chiefs, I call on, and
say, that methinks our lawsuits have come into a dead lock, if we
have to follow up our suits in the Quarter Courts, and they get
so entangled that they can neither be pleaded nor ended.
Methinks, it were wiser if we had a Fifth Court, and there
pleaded those suits which cannot be brought to an end in the
Quarter Courts."

"How," said Skapti, "wilt thou name a Fifth Court, when the
Quarter Court is named for the old priesthoods, three twelves in
each quarter?"

"I can see help for that," says Njal, "by setting up new
priesthoods, and filling them with the men who are best fitted in
each Quarter, and then let those men who are willing to agree to
it, declare themselves ready to join the new priest's Thing."

"Well," says Skapti, "we will take this choice; but what weighty
suits shall come before the court?"

"These matters shall come before it," says Njal, -- "all matters
of contempt of the Thing, such as if men bear false witness, or
utter a false finding; hither, too, shall come all those suits in
which the judges are divided in opinion in the Quarter Court;
then they shall be summoned to the Fifth Court; so, too, if men
offer bribes, or take them, for their help in suits.  In this
court all the oaths shall be of the strongest kind, and two men
shall follow every oath, who shall support on their words of
honour what the others swear.  So it shall be also, if the
pleadings on one side are right in form, and the other wrong,
that the judgment shall be given for those that are right in
form.  Every suit in this court shall be pleaded just as is now
done in the Quarter Court, save and except that when four twelves
are named in the Fifth Court, then the plaintiff shall name and
set aside six men out of the court, and the defendant other six;
but if he will not set them aside, then the plaintiff shall name
them and set them aside as he has done with his own six; but if
the plaintiff does not set them aside, then the suit comes to
naught, for three twelves shall utter judgment on all suits.  We
shall also have this arrangement in the Court of Laws, that those
only shall have the right to make or change laws who sit on the
middle bench, and to this bench those only shall be chosen who
are wisest and best.  There, too, shall the Fifth Court sit; but
if those who sit in the Court of Laws are not agreed as to what
they shall allow or bring in as law, then they shall clear the
court for a division, and the majority shall bind the rest; but
if any man who has a seat in the Court be outside the Court of
Laws and cannot get inside it, or thinks himself overborne in the
suit, then he shall forbid them by a protest, so that they can
hear it in the Court, and then he has made all their grants and
all their decisions void and of none effect, and stopped them by
his protest."

After that, Skapti Thorod's son brought the Fifth Court into the
law, and all that was spoken of before.  Then men went to the
Hill of Laws, and men set up new priesthoods: In the
Northlanders' Quarter were these new priesthoods.  The priesthood
of the Melmen in Midfirth, and the Laufesingers' priesthood in
the Eyjafirth.

Then Njal begged for a hearing, and spoke thus: "It is known to
many men what passed between my sons and the men of Gritwater
when they slew Thrain Sigfus' son.  But for all that we settled
the matter; and now I have taken Hauskuld into my house, and
planned a marriage for him if he can get a priesthood anywhere;
but no man will sell his priesthood, and so I will beg you to
give me leave to set up a new priesthood at Whiteness for
Hauskuld."

He got this leave from all, and after that he set up the new
priesthood for Hauskuld; and he was afterwards called Hauskuld,
the Priest of Whiteness.

After that, men ride home from the Thing, and Njal stayed but a
short time at home ere he rides east to Swinefell, and his sons
with him, and again stirs in the matter of the marriage with
Flosi; but Flosi said he was ready to keep faith with them in
everything.

Then Hildigunna was betrothed to Hauskuld, and the day for the
wedding feast was fixed, and so the matter ended.  They then ride
home, but they rode again shortly to the bridal, and Flosi paid
down all her goods and money after the wedding, and all went off
well.

They fared home to Bergthorsknoll, and were there the next year,
and all went well between Hildigunna and Bergthora.  But the next
spring Njal bought land in Ossaby, and hands it over to Hauskuld,
and thither he fares to his own abode.  Njal got him all his
household, and there was such love between them all, that none of
them thought anything that he said or did any worth unless the
others had a share in it.

Hauskuld dwelt long at Ossaby, and each backed the other's
honour, and Njal's sons were always in Hauskuld's company.  Their
friendship was so warm, that each house bade the other to a feast
every harvest, and gave each other great gifts; and so it goes on
for a long while.




103. THE SLAYING OF HAUSKULD NJAL'S SON

There was a man named Lyting; he dwelt at Samstede, and he had to
wife a woman named Steinvora; she was a daughter of Sigfus, and
Thrain's sister.  Lyting was tall of growth and a strong man,
wealthy in goods and ill to deal with.

It happened once that Lyting had a feast in his house at
Samstede, and he had bidden thither Hauskuld and the sons of
Sigfus, and they all came.  There, too, was Grani Gunnar's son,
and Gunnar Lambi's son, and Lambi Sigurd's son.

Hauskuld Njal's son and his mother had a farm at Holt, and he was
always riding to his farm from Bergthorsknoll, and his path lay
by the homestead at Samstede.  Hauskuld had a son called Amund;
he had been born blind, but for all that he was tall and strong.
Lyting had two brothers -- the one's name was Hallstein, and the
other's Hallgrim.  They were the most unruly of men, and they
were ever with their brother, for other men could not bear their
temper.

Lyting was out of doors most of that day, but every now and then
he went inside his house.  At last he had gone to his seat, when
in came a woman who had been out of doors, and she said, "You
were too far off to see outside how that proud fellow rode by the
farm-yard!"

"What proud fellow was that," says Lyting "of whom thou
speakest?"

"Hauskuld Njal's son rode here by the yard," she says.

"He rides often here by the farm-yard," said Lyting, "and I can't
say that it does not try my temper; and now I will make thee an
offer, Hauskuld, to go along with thee if thou wilt avenge thy
father and slay Hauskuld Njal's son."

"That I will not do," says Hauskuld, "for then I should repay
Njal, my foster-father, evil for good, and mayst thou and thy
feasts never thrive henceforth."

With that he sprang up away from the board, and made them catch
his horses, and rode home.

Then Lyting said to Grani Gunnar's son, "Thou wert by when Thrain
was slain, and that will still be in thy mind; and thou, too,
Gunnar Lambi's son, and thou, Lambi Sigurd's son.  Now, my will
is that we ride to meet him this evening, and slay him."

"No," says Grani, "I will not fall on Njal's son, and so break
the atonement which good men and true have made."

With like words spoke each man of them, and so, too, spoke all
the sons of Sigfus; and they took that counsel to ride away.

Then Lyting said, when they had gone away, "All men know that I
have taken no atonement for my brother-in-law Thrain, and I shall
never be content that no vengeance -- man for man -- shall be
taken for him."

After that he called on his two brothers to go with him, and
three house-carles as well.  They went on the way to meet
Hauskuld as he came back, and lay in wait for him north of the
farm-yard in a pit; and there they bided till it was about
mideven (1).  Then Hauskuld rode up to them.  They jump up all of
them with their arms, and fall on him.  Hauskuld guarded himself
well, so that for a long while they could not get the better of
him; but the end of it was at last that he wounded Lyting on the
arm, and slew two of his serving-men, and then fell himself.
They gave Hauskuld sixteen wounds, but they hewed not off the
head from his body.  They fared away into the wood east of
Rangriver, and hid themselves there.

That same evening, Rodny's shepherd found Hauskuld dead, and went
home and told Rodny of her son's slaying.

"Was he surely dead?" she asks; "was his head off?"

"It was not," he says.

"I shall know if I see," she says; "so take thou my horse and
driving gear."

He did so, and got all things ready, and then they went thither
where Hauskuld lay.

She looked at the wounds, and said, "'Tis even as I thought, that
he could not be quite dead, and Njal no doubt can cure greater
wounds."

After that they took the body and laid it on the sledge and drove
to Bergthorsknoll, and drew it into the sheepcote, and made him
sit upright against the wall.

Then they went both of them and knocked at the door, and a house-
carle went to the door.  She steals in by him at once, and goes
till she comes to Njal's bed.

She asked whether Njal were awake?  He said he had slept up to
that time, but was then awake.

"But why art thou come hither so early?"

"Rise thou up," said Rodny, "from thy bed by my rival's side, and
come out, and she too, and thy sons, to see thy son Hauskuld."

They rose and went out.

"Let us take our weapons," said Skarphedinn, "and have them
with us."

Njal said naught at that, and they ran in and came out again
armed.

She goes first till they come to the sheepcote; she goes in and
bade them follow her.  Then she lit a torch, and held it up and
said, "Here, Njal, is thy son Hauskuld, and he hath gotten many
wounds upon him, and now he will need leechcraft."

"I see death marks on him," said Njal, "but no signs of life; but
why hast thou not closed his eyes and nostrils?  see, his
nostrils are still open!"

"That duty I meant for Skarphedinn," she says.

Then Skarphedinn went to close his eyes and nostrils, and said to
his father, "Who, sayest thou, hath slain him?"

"Lyting of Samstede and his brothers must have slain him," says
Njal.

Then Rodny said, "Into thy hands, Skarphedinn, I leave it to take
vengeance for thy brother, and I ween that thou wilt take it
well, though he be not lawfully begotten, and that thou wilt not
be slow to take it."

"Wonderfully do ye men behave," said Bergthora, "when ye slay men
for small cause, but talk and tarry over such as this until no
vengeance at all is taken; and now of this will soon come to
Hauskuld, the Priest of Whiteness, and he will be offering you
atonement, and you will grant him that, but now is the time to
set about it, if ye seek for vengeance."

"Our mother eggs us on now with a just goading," said
Skarphedinn, and sang a song.

     "Well we know the warrior's temper (2),
     One and all, well, father thine,
     But atonement to the mother,
     Snake-land's stem (3) and thee were base;
     He that hoardeth ocean's fire (4)
     Hearing this will leave his home;
     Wound of weapon us hath smitten,
     Worse the lot of those that wait!"

After that they all ran out of the sheepcote, but Rodny went
indoors with Njal, and was there the rest of the night.


ENDNOTES:

(1)  Mideven, six o'clock p.m.
(2)  "Warrior's temper," the temper of Hauskuld of Whiteness.
(3)  "Snake-land's stem," a periphrasis for woman, Rodny.
(4)  "He that hoardeth ocean's fire," a periphrasis for man,
     Hauskuld of Whiteness.




104. THE SLAYING OF LYTING'S BROTHERS

Now we must speak of Skarphedinn and his brothers, how they bend
their course up to Rangriver.  Then Skarphedinn said, "Stand we
here and listen, and let us go stilly, for I hear the voices of
men up along the river's bank.  But will ye, Helgi and Grim, deal
with Lyting single-handed, or with both his brothers?"

They said they would sooner deal with Lyting alone.

"Still," says Skarphedinn, "there is more game in him, and
methinks it were ill if he gets away, but I trust myself best for
not letting him escape."

"We will take such steps," says Helgi, "if we get a chance at
him, that he shall not slip through our fingers."

Then they went thitherward, where they heard the voices of men,
and see where Lyting and his brothers are by a stream.

Skarphedinn leaps over the stream at once, and alights on the
sandy brink on the other side.  There upon it stands Hallgrim and
his brother.  Skarphedinn smites at Hallgrim's thigh, so that he
cut the leg clean off, but he grasps Hallstein with his left
hand.  Lyting thrust at Skarphedinn, but Helgi came up then and
threw his shield before the spear, and caught the blow on it.
Lyting took up a stone and hurled it at Skarphedinn, and he lost
his hold on Hallstein.  Hallstein sprang up the sandy bank, but
could get up it in no other way than by crawling on his hands and
knees.  Skarphedinn made a side blow at him with his axe, "the
ogress of war," and hews asunder his backbone.  Now Lyting turns
and flies, but Helgi and Grim both went after him, and each gave
him a wound, but still Lyting got across the river away from
them, and so to the horses, and gallops till he comes to Ossaby.

Hauskuld was at home, and meets him at once.  Lyting told him of
these deeds.

"Such things were to be looked for by thee," says Hauskuld.
"Thou hast behaved like a madman, and here the truth of the old
saw will be proved; `but a short while is hand fain of blow.'
Methinks what thou hast got to look to now is whether thou wilt
be able to save thy life or not."

"Sure enough," says Lyting, "I had hard work to get away, but
still I wish now that thou wouldest get me atoned with Njal and
his sons, so that I might keep my farm."

"So it shall be," says Hauskuld.

After that Hauskuld made them saddle his horse, and rode to
Bergthorsknoll with five men.  Njal's sons were then come home
and had laid them down to sleep.

Hauskuld went at once to see Njal, and they began to talk.

"Hither am I come," said Hauskuld to Njal, "to beg a boon on
behalf of Lyting, my uncle.  He has done great wickedness against
you and yours, broken his atonement and slain thy son."

"Lyting will perhaps think," said Njal, "that he has already paid
a heavy fine in the loss of his brothers, but if I grant him any
terms, I shall let him reap the good of my love for thee, and I
will tell thee before I utter the award of atonement, that
Lyting's brothers shall fall as outlaws.  Nor shall Lyting have
any atonement for his wounds, but on the other hand, he shall pay
the full blood-fine for Hauskuld."

"My wish," said Hauskuld, "is, that thou shouldest make thine own
terms."

"Well," says Njal, "then I will utter the award at once if thou
wilt."

"Wilt thou," says Hauskuld, "that thy sons should be by?"

"Then we should be no nearer an atonement than we were before,"
says Njal, "but they will keep to the atonement which I utter."

Then Hauskuld said, "Let us close the matter then, and handsel
him peace on behalf of thy sons."

"So it shall be," says Njal.  "My will then is, that he pays two
hundred in silver for the slaying of Hauskuld, but he may still
dwell at Samstede; and yet I think it were wiser if he sold his
land and changed his abode; but not for this quarrel; neither I
nor my sons will break our pledges of peace to him; but methinks
it may be that some one may rise up in this country against whom
he may have to be on his guard.  Yet, lest it should seem that I
make a man an outcast from his native place, I allow him to be
here in this neighbourhood, but in that case he alone is
answerable for what may happen."

After that Hauskuld fared home, and Njal's sons woke up as he
went and asked their father who had come, but he told them that
his foster-son Hauskuld had been there.

"He must have come to ask a boon for Lyting then," said
Skarphedinn.

"So it was," says Njal.

"Ill was it then," says Grim.

"Hauskuld could not have thrown his shield before him," says
Njal, "if thou hadst slain him, as it was meant thou shouldst."

"Let us throw no blame on our father," says Skarphedinn.

Now it is to be said that this atonement was kept between them
afterwards.




105. OF AMUND THE BLIND

That event happened three winters after at the Thingskala-Thing
that Amund the Blind was at the Thing; he was the son of Hauskuld
Njal's son.  He made men lead him about among the booths, and so
he came to the booth inside which was Lyting of Samstede.  He
made them lead him into the booth till he came before Lyting.

"Is Lyting of Samstede here?" he asked.

"What dost thou want?" says Lyting.

"I want to know," says Amund, "what atonement thou wilt pay me
for my father.  I am base-born, and I have touched no fine."

"I have atoned for the slaying of thy father," says Lyting, "with
a full price, and thy father's father and thy father's brothers
took the money; but my brothers fell without a price as outlaws;
and so it was that I had both done an ill deed, and paid dear for
it."

"I ask not," says Amund, "as to thy having paid an atonement to
them.  I know that ye two are now friends, but I ask this, what
atonement thou wilt pay to me?"

"None at all," says Lyting.

"I cannot see," says Amund, "how thou canst have right before
God, when thou hast stricken me so near the heart; but all I can
say is, that if I were blessed with the sight of both my eyes, I
would have either a money fine for my father, or revenge man for
man, and so may God judge between us."

After that he went out; but when he came to the door of the
booth, he turned short round towards the inside.  Then his eyes
were opened, and he said, "Praised be the Lord!  Now I see what
his will is."

With that he ran straight into the booth until he comes before
Lyting, and smites him with an axe on the head, so that it sunk
in up to the hammer, and gives the axe a pull towards him.

Lyting fell forwards and was dead at once.

Amund goes out to the door of the booth, and when he got to the
very same spot on which he had stood when his eyes were opened,
lo! they were shut again, and he was blind all his life after.

Then he made them lead him to Njal and his sons, and he told them
of Lyting's slaying.

"Thou mayest not be blamed for this," says Njal, "for such things
are settled by a higher power; but it is worth while to take
warning from such events, lest we cut any short who have such
near claims as Amund had."

After that Njal offered an atonement to Lyting's kinsmen.
Hauskuld the Priest of Whiteness had a share in bringing Lyting's
kinsmen to take the fine, and then the matter was put to an
award, and half the fines fell away for the sake of the claim
which he seemed to have on Lyting.

After that men came forward with pledges of peace and good faith,
and Lyting's kinsmen granted pledges to Amund.  Men rode home
from the Thing; and now all is quiet for a long while.




106. OF VALGARD THE GUILEFUL

Valgard the Guileful came back to Iceland that summer; he was
then still heathen.  He fared to Hof to his son Mord's house, and
was there the winter over.  He said to Mord, "Here I have ridden
far and wide all over the neighbourhood, and methinks I do not
know it for the same.  I came to Whiteness, and there I saw many
tofts of booths and much ground levelled for building.  I came to
Thingskala-Thing, and there I saw all our booths broken down.
What is the meaning of such strange things?"

"New priesthoods," answers Mord, "have been set up here, and a
law for a Fifth Court, and men have declared themselves out of my
Thing, and have gone over to Hauskuld's Thing."

"Ill hast thou repaid me," said Valgard, "for giving up to thee
my priesthood, when thou hast handled it so little like a man,
and now my wish is that thou shouldst pay them off by something
that will drag them all down to death; and this thou canst do by
setting them by the ears by talebearing, so that Njal's sons may
slay Hauskuld; but there are many who will have the blood-feud
after him, and so Njal's sons will be slain in that quarrel."

"I shall never be able to get that done," says Mord.

"I will give thee a plan," says Valgard; "thou shalt ask Njal's
sons to thy house, and send them away with gifts, but thou shalt
keep thy tale-bearing in the background until great friendship
has sprung up between you, and they trust thee no worse than
their own selves.  So wilt thou be able to avenge thyself on
Skarphedinn for that he took thy money from thee after Gunnar's
death; and in this wise, further on, thou wilt be able to seize
the leadership when they are all dead and gone."

This plan they settled between them should be brought to pass;
and Mord said, "I would, father, that thou wouldst take on thee
the new faith.  Thou art an old man."

"I will not do that," says Valgard.  "I would rather that thou
shouldst cast off the faith, and see what follows then."

Mord said he would not do that.  Valgard broke crosses before
Mord's face, and all holy tokens.  A little after Valgard took a
sickness and breathed his last, and he was laid in a cairn by
Hof.




