{"name": "act 3, Scene 5", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210410192112/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-duchess-of-malfi/study-guide/summary-act-3", "summary": "Scene Five takes place nearby Loretto, following the banishment. The Duchess and Antonio mourn their current state to Cariola, their children, and their last remaining servants. Bosola brings them a letter from Ferdinand, which asks for Antonio to be sent to him, using double-talk so as to threaten his murder while pretending to offer amity. The Duchess sees through his \"riddles\" easily, and so Antonio refuses to go. Bosola scorns his refusal and leaves. The Duchess, fearful of an ambush, pleads for Antonio to take their oldest son to Milan. He accepts, and they all say their farewells. After Antonio and the older son leave, Bosola and a troop of armed men approach to apprehend the Duchess and her remaining family. Bosola entreats her to forget her lowly husband, but she says that a man's actions, not his rank, are what matter. She and her family are taken back to her palace as prisoners.", "analysis": "The theme of class becomes most developed here in Act Three. Interestingly, it is first explicitly discussed between Bosola and the Duchess, both of whom are speaking disingenuously in an effort to hide something from the other. They each thus end up acting as the other's mouthpiece on the issue, as when Bosola berates the Duchess for saying of Antonio, \"But he was basely descended\" , in response to Bosola listing Antonio's virtues, for those virtues, he says, matter more than \"men's pedigrees\" . The ironic presentation does not mean that the opinions voiced are not honest considerations of the way people approach an individual's status. When, as a result of Bosola's protestations, the Duchess admits that she is married to Antonio, Bosola pretends to be filled with joy and admiration that the Duchess would look past rank and wealth to give a man his true due for his character alone. The audience knows not to trust his effusive praise, of course, but it is worth noting that the final tragedy for the Duchess and her family comes out of this very moment, when Bosola uses this praise of looking beyond rank to get her to admit who her husband is. Yet, as is often true with Bosola, it is impossible to know just how much truth is mixed in with his lies. Once he is alone again on stage, he expresses some reluctance to give his new information to Ferdinand, even though it's the very information he has been trying to get for about two years. This implies that there may have been some truth to his \"friendly speech\" , especially since his pervasive melancholy is centered on his own inability to improve his position, and now he sees, embodied in Antonio, that it is, in fact, possible to rise past what custom usually dictates. Though this contradiction may indicate that Bosola has some respect for the Duchess's choice in marrying Antonio, he does much to dispel such an interpretation later in the act. For once he has told Ferdinand about Antonio, and so can speak forthrightly without having to lie to try to ensnare the Duchess, he shows much more snobbery about class. For example, when Antonio refuses to act as Ferdinand, through Bosola, wants him to, Bosola says, \"This proclaims your breeding/Every small thing draws a base mind to fear\" . Ferdinand is an obviously dangerous figure, and his attempt to get Antonio to come to him has a double, threatening meaning which is barely even hidden. The Duchess, the embodiment of pedigree, is the first to notice this, and yet Bosola would have it that it is only Antonio's lack of breeding that makes him fearful of it. After the sad parting of Antonio and the oldest son with the Duchess and the rest of the children, Bosola comes to take the Duchess into custody. In this powerful scene, Bosola holds up Antonio's rank as reason enough for the Duchess to forget him completely--\"Forget this base, low fellow\" . This admonition is all the starker in juxtaposition to the sad leave-taking that preceded it, making Bosola's directive, and thus his blind judgment based on rank, seem absurd. When the Duchess responds angrily, he doesn't even bother to use a full sentence in his reply--\"One of no birth\" --as though his meaning is so obvious that he doesn't even need to declare it.  This leaves the Duchess an opportunity to stand up for Antonio, and for the unimportance of birth, and she does so beautifully, having the last word in the argument for the moment. Though she first defends him positively, explaining that since a man who is great for his own actions, not his birth, is happiest, then the reverse is also true--\"So, to great men, the moral may be stretched:/Men oft are valued high, when th'are most wretch'd\" . The fixation on Antonio's rank in the third act, then, becomes also related to question of Ferdinand and the Cardinal's evil. They have the birth, the power, and the standing that Antonio lacks, but they are the symbol of evil throughout the play. Act Three also further elucidates the stark differences between what the Duchess actually is, what Ferdinand believes her to be, and what he wants her to be. The image of the Duchess of a reproductive figure and mother that first came in Act Two is expanded here--one of the first things the audience learns in Act Three is that in what has been only moments in the time of the theater, the Duchess has had two more children--she has been an \"excellent/Feeder of pedigrees\" . In the next scene, the domestic bliss of the Duchess's marriage is made clear. The Duchess, Antonio, and Cariola tease each other kindly in the Duchess's bedroom while she prepares to go to bed. The simplicity and easy domestic happiness of this scene create a very different image than all of Ferdinand's imaginings of the Duchess two scenes earlier, when he sees \"her in the shameful act of sin\"  in his mind, \"Haply with some strong thighed bargeman,/Or one o'th' wood-yard, that can quoit the sledge\" . Ferdinand is incapable of imagining her in a loving relationship. If she has had a child, it must have been a product of her uncontrollable lust and resulting promiscuous behavior. The only other option he can imagine for her, that which he wants, is as a monumentalized figure, forever bowing chastely over her first husband's tomb, \"cased up, like a holy relic\" . The irony is of course that for someone so harshly moral about sex, he is most fixated upon it, again a contradiction that can be seen through a lens of repressed incestuous feelings for his twin. Antonio marks the distinction between this chaste, marble figure the Duchess's brothers would like her to be and the more earthly figure she actually is when talking to Cariola: O fie upon this single life. Forgo it.We read how Daphne, for her peevish flight,Became a fruitless bay-tree; Syrinx turned To the pale empty reed; Anaxarete  Was frozen into marble: whereas those Which married, or proved kind unto their friends, Were, by a gracious influence, transshaped Into the olive, pomegranate, mulberry. The women who remain single are \"fruitless,\" \"pale,\" \"empty,\" \"frozen,\" \"marble,\" while the married women become fruit-bearing trees, both beautiful and nourishing to the world around them. This is so preferable to the marble women that Ferdinand and the Cardinal would have, and so far from the lusty widow that they believe the Duchess to be, that their evil against her and her family becomes all the more pronounced. Finally, a word can be said about the inventive theatricality Webster employs to detail the Duchess and Antonio's banishment from Ancona.  Performed as a pantomime dumb-show under a sung hymn, the scene has a great theatrical power both for its economy of storytelling and the irony of pilgrims celebrating through song such a perverse, demented, self-interested line of action."}