

Since childhood days he had been haunted by a Wave.

It appeared with the very dawn of thought, and was his earliest
recollection of any vividness.  It was also his first experience of
nightmare: a wave of an odd, dun colour, almost tawny, that rose behind
him, advanced, curled over in the act of toppling, and then stood still.
It threatened, but it did not fall.  It paused, hovering in a position
contrary to nature; it waited.

Something prevented; it was not meant to fall; the right moment had not
yet arrived.

If only it would fall!  It swept across the skyline in a huge, long curve
far overhead, hanging dreadfully suspended.  Beneath his feet he felt the
roots of it withdrawing; he shuffled furiously and made violent efforts;
but the suction undermined him where he stood.  The ground yielded and
dropped away.  He only sank in deeper.  His entire weight became that of a
feather against the gigantic tension of the mass that any moment, it
seemed, must lift him in its rising curve, bend, break, and twist him,
then fling him crashing forward to his smothering fate.

Yet the moment never came.  The Wave hung balanced between him and the
sky, poised in mid-air.  It did not fall.  And the torture of that
infinite pause contained the essence of the nightmare.

The Wave invariably came up behind him, stealthily, from what seemed
interminable distance.  He never met it.  It overtook him from the rear.
The horizon hid it till it rose.

There were stages in its history, moreover, and in the effect it produced
upon his early mind.  Usually he woke up the moment he realised it was
there.  For it invariably announced its presence.  He heard no sound, but
knew that it was coming--there was a feeling in the atmosphere not unlike
the heavy brooding that precedes a thunderstorm, only so different from
anything he had yet known in life that his heart sank into his boots.
He looked up.  There, above his head was the huge, curved monster, hanging
in mid-air.  The mood had justified itself.  He called it the 'wavy
feeling.'  He was never wrong about it.

The second stage was reached when, instead of trying to escape shorewards,
where there were tufts of coarse grass upon a sandy bank, he turned and
faced the thing.  He looked straight into the main under-body of the
poised billow.  He saw the opaque mass out of which this line rose up and
curved.  He stared against the dull, dun-coloured parent body whence it
came--the sea.  Terrified yet fascinated, he examined it in detail, as a
man about to be executed might examine the grain of the wooden block close
against his eyes.  A little higher, some dozen feet above the level of his
head, it became transparent; sunlight shot through the glassy curve.
He saw what appeared to be streaks and bubbles and transverse lines of
foam that yet did not shine quite as water shines.  It moved suddenly;
it curled a little towards the crest; it was about to topple over, to
break--yet did not break.

About this time he noticed another thing: there was a curious faint
sweetness in the air beneath the bend of it, a delicate and indescribable
odour that was almost perfume.  It was sweet; it choked him.  He called
it, in his boyish way, a whiff.  The 'whiff' and the 'wavy feeling'
impressed themselves so vividly upon his mind that if ever he met them in
his ordinary life--out of dream, that is--he was sure that he would know
them.  In another sense he felt he knew them already.  They were familiar.

But another stage went further than all the others put together.
It amounted to a discovery.  He was perhaps ten years old at this time,
for he was still addressed as 'Tommy,' and it was not till the age
of fifteen that his solid type of character made 'Tom' seem more
appropriate. He had just told the dream to his mother for the hundredth
time, and she, after listening with sympathy, had made her ever-green
suggestion--'If you dream of water, Tommy, it means you're thirsty in
your sleep,'--when he turned and stared straight into her eyes with such
intentness that she gave an involuntary start.

'But, mother, it _isn't_ water!'

'Well, darling, if it isn't water, what is it, then?'  She asked the
question quietly enough, but she felt, apparently, something of the queer
dismay that her boy felt too.  It seemed the mother-sense was touched.
The instinct to protect her offspring stirred uneasily in her heart.
She repeated the question, interested in the old, familiar dream for the
first time since she heard it several years before: 'If it isn't water,
Tommy, what is it?  What can it be?'  His eyes, his voice, his manner--
something she could not properly name--had startled her.

But Tommy noticed her slight perturbation, and knowing that a boy of his
age did not frighten his mother without reason, or even with it, turned
his eyes aside and answered:

'I couldn't tell.  There wasn't time.  You see, I woke up then.'

'How curious, Tommy,' she rejoined.  'A wave is a wave, isn't it?'

And he answered thoughtfully: 'Yes, mother; but there are lots of things
besides water, aren't there?'

She assented with a nod, and a searching look at him which he purposely
avoided.  The subject dropped; no more was said; yet somehow from that
moment his mother knew that this idea of a wave, whether it was nightmare
or only dream, had to do with her boy's life in a way that touched the
protective thing in her, almost to the point of positive defence.
She could not explain it; she did not like it; instinct warned her--that
was all she knew.  And Tommy said no more.  The truth was, indeed, that he
did not know himself of what the Wave was composed.  He could not have
told his mother even had he considered it permissible.  He would have
loved to speculate and talk about it with her, but, having divined her
nervousness, he knew he must not feed it.  No boy should do such a thing.

Moreover, the interest he felt in the Wave was of such a deep, enormous
character--the adjectives were his own--that he could not talk about it
lightly.  Unless to some one who showed genuine interest, he could not
even mention it.  To his brothers and sister, both older and younger than
himself, he never spoke of it at all.  It had to do with something so
fundamental in him that it was sacred.  The realisation of it, moreover,
came and went, and often remained buried for weeks together; months passed
without a hint of it; the nightmare disappeared.  Then, suddenly, the
feeling would surge over him, perhaps just as he was getting into bed, or
saying his prayers, or thinking of quite other things.  In the middle of a
discussion with his brother about their air-guns and the water-rat they
hadn't hit--up would steal the 'wavy' feeling with its dim, familiar
menace.  It stole in across his brother's excited words about the size and
speed of the rat; interest in sport entirely vanished; he stared at Tim,
not hearing a word he said; he dived into bed; he had to be alone with the
great mood of wonder and terror that was rising.  The approach was
unmistakable; he cuddled beneath the sheets, fighting-angry if Tim tried
to win him back to the original interest.  The dream was coming; and, sure
enough, a little later in his sleep, it came.

For even at this stage of his development he recognised instinctively this
special quality about it--that it could not, was not meant to be avoided.
It was inevitable and right.  It hurt, yet he must face it.  It was as
necessary to his well-being as having a tooth out.  Nor did he ever seek
to dodge it.  His character was not the kind that flinched.  The one thing
he did ask was--to understand.  Some day, he felt, this full understanding
would come.

There arrived then a new and startling development in this curious
obsession, the very night, Tommy claims, that there had been the fuss
about the gun and water-rat, on the day before the conversation with his
mother.  His brother had plagued him to come out from beneath the sheets
and go on with the discussion, and Tommy, furious at being disturbed in
the 'wavy' mood he both loved and dreaded, had felt himself roused
uncommonly.  He silenced Tim easily enough with a smashing blow from a
pillow, then, with a more determined effort than usual, buried himself to
face the advent of the Wave.  He fell asleep in the attempt, but the
attempt bore fruit.  He felt the great thing coming up behind him; he
turned; he saw it with greater distinctness than ever before; almost he
discovered of what it was composed.

That it was _not_ water established itself finally in his mind; but more--
he got very close to deciding its exact composition.  He stared hard into
the threatening mass of it; there was a certain transparency about the
substance, yet this transparency was not clear enough for water: there
were particles, and these particles went drifting by the thousand, by the
million, through the mass of it.  They rose and fell, they swept along,
they were very minute indeed, they whirled.  They glistened, shimmered,
flashed.  He made a guess; he was just on the point of guessing right, in
fact, when he saw another thing that for the moment obliterated all his
faculties.  There was both cold and heat in the sensation, fear and
delight.  It transfixed him.  He saw eyes.

Steady, behind the millions of minute particles that whirled and drifted,
he distinctly saw a pair of eyes of light-blue colour, and hardly had he
registered this new discovery, when another pair, but of quite different
kind, became visible beyond the first pair--dark, with a fringe of long,
thick lashes.  They were--he decided afterwards--what is called Eastern
eyes, and they smiled into his own through half-closed lids.  He thinks he
made out a face that was dimly sketched behind them, but the whirling
particles glinted and shimmered in such a confusing way that he could not
swear to this.  Of one thing only, or rather of two, did he feel quite
positive: that the dark eyes were those of a woman, and that they were
kind and beautiful and true: but that the pale-blue eyes were false,
unkind, and treacherous, and that the face to which they belonged,
although he could not see it, was a man's.  Dimly his boyish heart was
aware of happiness and suffering.  The heat and cold he felt, the joy and
terror, were half explained.  He stared.  The whirling particles drifted
past and hid them.  He woke.

That day, however, the 'wavy' feeling hovered over him more or less
continuously.  The impression of the night held sway over all he did and
thought.  There was a kind of guidance in it somewhere.  He obeyed this
guidance as by an instinct he could not, dared not disregard, and towards
dusk it led him into the quiet room overlooking the small Gardens at the
back of the house, his father's study.  The room was empty; he approached
the big mahogany cupboard; he opened one of the deep drawers where he knew
his father kept gold and private things, and birthday or Christmas
presents.  But there was no dishonourable intention in him anywhere;
indeed, he hardly knew exactly why he did this thing.  The drawer, though
moving easily, was heavy; he pulled hard; it slid out with a rush; and at
that moment a stern voice sounded in the room behind him: 'What are you
doing at my Eastern drawer?'

Tommy, one hand still on the knob, turned as if he had been struck.
He gazed at his father, but without a trace of guilt upon his face.

'I wanted to see, Daddy.'

'I'll show you,' said the stern-faced man, yet with kindness and humour in
the tone.  'It's full of wonderful things.  I've nothing secret from you;
but another time you'd better ask first--Tommy.'

'I wanted to see,' faltered the boy.  'I don't know why I did it.  I just
had a feeling.  It's the first time--_really_.'

The man watched him searchingly a moment, but without appearing to do so.
A look of interest and understanding, wholly missed by the culprit, stole
into his fine grey eyes.  He smiled, then drew Tommy towards him, and gave
him a kiss on the top of his curly head.  He also smacked him playfully.
'Curiosity,' he said with pretended disapproval, 'is divine, and at your
age it is right that you should feel curiosity about everything in the
world.  But another time just ask me--and I'll show you all I possess.'
He lifted his son in his arms, so that for the first time the boy could
overlook the contents of the opened drawer.  'So you just had a feeling,
eh----?' he continued, when Tommy wriggled in his arms, uttered a curious
exclamation, and half collapsed.  He seemed upon the verge of tears.
An ordinary father must have held him guilty there and then.  The boy
cried out excitedly:

'The whiff!  Oh, Daddy, it's my whiff!'

The tears, no longer to be denied, came freely then; after them came
confession too, and confused though it was, the man made something
approaching sense out of the jumbled utterance.  It was not mere patient
kindness on his part, for an older person would have seen that genuine
interest lay behind the half-playful, half-serious cross-examination.
He watched the boy's eager, excited face out of the corner of his eyes;
he put discerning questions to him, he assisted his faltering replies, and
he obtained in the end the entire story of the dream--the eyes, the wavy
feeling, and the whiff.  How much coherent meaning he discovered in it all
is hard to say, or whether the story he managed to disentangle held
together.  There was this strange deep feeling in the boy, this strong
emotion, this odd conviction amounting to an obsession; and so far as
could be discovered, it was not traceable to any definite cause that Tommy
could name--a fright, a shock, a vivid impression of one kind or another
upon a sensitive young imagination.  It lay so deeply in his being that
its roots were utterly concealed; but it was real.

Dr. Kelverdon established the existence in his second boy of an
unalterable premonition, and, being a famous nerve specialist, and a
disciple of Freud into the bargain, he believed that a premonition has a
cause, however primitive, however carefully concealed that cause may be.
He put the boy to bed himself and tucked him up, told Tim that if he
teased his brother too much he would smack him with his best Burmese
slipper which had tiny nails in it, and then whispered into Tommy's ear as
he cuddled down, happy and comforted, among the blankets: 'Don't make a
special effort to dream, my boy; but if you do dream, try to remember it
next morning, and tell me exactly what you see and feel.'  He used the
Freudian method.

Then, going down to his study again, he looked at the open drawer and
sniffed the faint perfume of things--chiefly from Egypt--that lay inside
it.  But there was nothing of special interest in the drawer; indeed, it
was one he had not touched for years.

He went over one by one a few of the articles, collected from various
points of travel long ago.  There were bead necklaces from Memphis, some
trash from a mummy of doubtful authenticity, including several amulets and
a crumbling fragment of old papyrus, and, among all this, a tiny packet of
incense mixed from a recipe said to have been found in a Theban tomb.
All these, jumbled together in pieces of tissue-paper, had lain
undisturbed since the day he wrapped them up some dozen years before--
indeed he heard the dry rattle of the falling sand as he undid the
tissue-paper.  But a strong perfume rose from the parcel to his nostrils.
'That's what Tommy means by his whiff,' he said to himself.  'That's
Tommy's whiff beyond all question.  I wonder how he got it first?'

He remembered, then, that he had made a note of the story connected with
the incense, and after some rummaging he found the envelope and read the
account jotted down at the time.  He had meant to hand it over to a
literary friend--the tale was so poignantly human--then had forgotten all
about it.  The papyrus, dating over 3000 B.C., had many gaps.
The Egyptologist had admittedly filled in considerable blanks in the
afflicting story:--

    'A victorious Theban General, Prince of the blood, brought back a
     Syrian youth from one of his foreign conquests and presented him to
     his young wife who, first mothering him for his beauty, then made him
     her personal slave, and ended by caring deeply for him.  The slave,
     in return, loved her with passionate adoration he was unable to
     conceal.  As a Lady of the Court, her quasi-adoption of the youth
     caused comment.  Her husband ordered his dismissal.  But she still
     made his welfare her especial object, finding frequent reasons for
     their meeting.  One day, however, her husband caught them together,
     though their meeting was in innocence.  He half strangled the youth,
     till the blood poured down upon his own hands, then had him flogged
     and sent away to On, the City of the Sun.'

    'The Syrian found his way back again, vengeance in his fiery blood.
     The clandestine yet innocent meetings were renewed.  Rank was
     forgotten.  They met among the sand-dunes in the desert behind the
     city where a pleasure tent among a grove of palms provided shelter,
     and the slave losing his head, urged the Princess to fly with him.
     Yet the wife, true to her profligate and brutal husband, refused his
     plea, saying she could only give a mother's love, a mother's care.
     This he rejected bitterly, accusing her of trifling with him.
     He grew bolder and more insistent.  To divert her husband's violent
     suspicions she became purposely cruel, even ordering him punishments.
     But the slave misinterpreted.  Finally, warning him that if caught he
     would be killed, she devised a plan to convince him of her sincerity.
     Hiding him behind the curtains of her tent, she pleaded with her
     husband for the youth's recall, swearing that she meant no wrong.
     But the soldier, in his fury, abused and struck her, and the slave,
     unable to contain himself, rushed out of his hiding-place and stabbed
     him, though not mortally.  He was condemned to death by torture.
     She was to be chief witness against him.

    'Meanwhile, having extracted a promise from her husband that the
     torture should not be carried to the point of death, she conveyed
     word to the victim that he should endure bravely, knowing that he
     would not die.  She now realised that she loved.  She promised to fly
     with him.

    'The sentence was duly carried out, the slave only half believing in
     her truth.  It was a public holiday in Thebes.  She was compelled to
     see the punishment inflicted before the crowd.  There were a thousand
     drums.  A sand-storm hid the sun.

    'Seated beside her husband on a terrace above the Nile, she watched
     the torture--then knew she had been tricked.  But the Syrian did not
     know; he believed her false.  As he expired, casting his last glance
     of anguish and reproach at her, she rose, leaped the parapet, flung
     herself into the river, and was drowned.  The husband had their
     bodies thrown into the sea, unburied.  The same wave took them both.
     Later, however, they were recovered by influential friends;
     they were      embalmed, and secretly laid to rest in his ancestral
     Tomb in the Valley of the Kings among the Theban Hills.
     In due course the husband, unwittingly, was buried with them.

    'Nearly five thousand years later all three mummies were discovered
    lying side by side, their story inscribed upon a papyrus inside the
    great sarcophagus.'

Dr. Kelverdon glanced through the story he had forgotten,
then tore it into little pieces and threw them into the fireplace.
For a moment longer, however, he stood beside the open drawer
reflectingly.  Had he ever told the tale to Tommy?  No; it was hardly
likely; indeed it was impossible.  The boy was not born even when first he
heard it.  To his wife, then?  Less likely still.  He could not remember,
anyhow.  The faint suggestion in his mind--a story communicated
pre-natally--was not worth following up.  He dismissed the matter from his
thoughts.  He closed the drawer and turned away.  The little packet of
incense, however, taken from the Tomb, he did not destroy.  'I'll give it
to Tommy,' he decided.  'Its whiff may possibly stimulate him into
explanation!'


