

As a result of having told everything to his father, Tommy's nightmare,
however, largely ceased to trouble him.  He had found the relief of
expression, which is confession, and had laid upon the older mind the
burden of his terror.  Once a month, once a week, or even daily if he
wanted to, he could repeat the expression as the need for it accumulated,
and the load which decency forbade being laid upon his mother, the
stern-faced man could carry easily for him.

The comfortable sensation that forgiveness is the completion of confession
invaded his awakening mind, and had he been older this thin end of a
religious wedge might have persuaded him to join what his mother called
that 'vast conspiracy.'  But even at this early stage there was something
stalwart and self-reliant in his cast of character that resisted the
cunning sophistry; vicarious relief woke resentment in him; he meant to
face his troubles alone.  So far as he knew, he had not sinned, yet the
Wave, the Whiff, the Eyes were symptoms of some fate that threatened him,
a premonition of something coming that he must meet with his own strength,
something that he could only deal with effectively alone, since it was
deserved and just.  One day the Wave would fall; his father could not help
him then.  This instinct in him remained unassailable.  He even began to
look forward to the time when it should come--to have done with it and get
it over, conquering or conquered.

The premonition, that is, while remaining an obsession as before,
transferred itself from his inner to his outer life.  The nightmare,
therefore, ceased.  The menacing interest, however, held unchanged.
Though the name had not hitherto occurred to him, he became a fatalist.
'It's got to come; I've got to meet it.  I will.'

'Well, Tommy,' his father would ask from time to time, 'been dreaming
anything lately?'

'Nothing, Daddy.  It's all stopped.'

'Wave, eyes, and whiff all forgotten, eh?'

Tommy shook his head.  'They're still there,' he answered slowly,
'but----'  He seemed unable to complete the sentence.  His father helped
him at a venture.

'But they can't catch you--is that it?'

The boy looked up with a dogged expression in his big grey eyes.
'I'm ready for them,' he replied.  And his father laughed and said,
'Of course.  That's half the battle.'

He gave him a present then--one of the packets of tissue-paper--and Tommy
took it in triumph to his room.  He opened it in private, but the contents
seemed to him without especial interest.  Only the Whiff was, somehow,
sweet and precious; and he kept the packet in a drawer apart where the
fossils and catapult and air-gun ammunition could not interfere with it,
hiding the key so that Tim and the servants could not find it.  And on
rare occasions, when the rest of the household was asleep, he performed a
little ritual of his own that, for a boy of his years, was distinctly
singular.

When the room was dark, lit in winter by the dying fire, or in summer by
the stars, he would creep out of bed, make quite sure that Tim was asleep,
stand on a chair to reach the key from the top of the big cupboard, and
carefully unlock the drawer.  He had oiled the wood with butter, so that
it was silent.  The tissue-paper gleamed dimly pink; the Whiff came out to
meet him.  He lifted the packet, soft and crackling, and set it on the
window-sill; he did not open it; its contents had no interest for him, it
was the perfume he was after.  And the moment the perfume reached his
nostrils there came a trembling over him that he could not understand.
He both loved and dreaded it.  This manly, wholesome-minded, plucky little
boy, the basis of whose steady character was common sense, became the prey
of a strange, unreasonable fantasy.  A faintness stole upon him; he lost
the sense of kneeling on a solid chair; something immense and irresistible
came piling up behind him; there was nothing firm he could push against to
save himself; he began shuffling with his bare feet, struggling to escape
from something that was coming, something that would probably overwhelm
him yet must positively be faced and battled with.  The Wave was rising.
It was the wavy feeling.

He did not turn to look, because he knew quite well there was nothing in
the room but beds, a fender, furniture, vague shadows and his brother Tim.
That kind of childish fear had no place in what he felt.  But the Wave was
piled and curving over none the less; it hung between him and the shadowed
ceiling, above the roof of the house; it came from beyond the world, far
overhead against the crowding stars.  It would not break, for the time
had not yet come.  But it was there.  It waited.  He knelt beneath its
mighty shadow of advance; it was still arrested, poised above his eager
life, competent to engulf him when the time arrived.  The sweep of its
curved mass was mountainous.  He knelt inside this curve, small, helpless,
but not too afraid to fight.  The perfume stole about him.  The Whiff was
in his nostrils.  There was a strange, rich pain--oddly remote, yet oddly
poignant. . . .

And it was with this perfume that the ritual chiefly had to do.  He loved
the extraordinary sensations that came with it, and tried to probe their
meaning in his boyish way.  Meaning there was, but it escaped him.  The
sweetness clouded something in his brain, and made his muscles weak; it
robbed him of that resistance which is fighting strength.  It was this
battle that he loved, this sense of shoving against something that might
so easily crush and finish him.  There _was_ a way to beat it, a way to
win--could he but discover it.  As yet he could not.  Victory, he felt,
lay more in yielding and going-with than in violent resistance.

And, meanwhile, in an ecstasy of this half yielding, half resisting, he
lent himself fully to the overmastering tide.  He was conscious of
attraction and repulsion, something that enticed, yet thrust him
backwards.  Some final test of manhood, character, value, lay in the way
he faced it.  The strange, rich pain stole marvellously into his blood and
nerves.  His heart beat faster.  There was this exquisite seduction that
contained delicious danger.  It rose upon him out of some inner depth he
could not possibly get at.  He trembled with mingled terror and delight.
And it invariably ended with a kind of inexpressible yearning that choked
him, crumpled him inwardly, as he described it, brought the moisture, hot
and smarting, into his burning eyes, and--each time to his bitter shame--
left his cheeks wet with scalding tears.

He cried silently; there was no heaving, gulping, audible sobbing, just a
relieving gush of heartfelt tears that took away the strange, rich pain
and brought the singular ritual to a finish.  He replaced the
tissue-paper, blotted with his tears; locked the drawer carefully; hid the
key on the top of the cupboard again, and tumbled back into bed.

Downstairs, meanwhile, a conversation was in progress concerning the
welfare of the growing hero.

'I'm glad that dream has left him anyhow.  It used to frighten me rather.
I did _not_ like it,' observed his mother.

'He doesn't speak to you about it any more?' the father asked.

For months, she told him, Tommy had not mentioned it.  They went on to
discuss his future together.  The other children presented fewer problems,
but Tommy, apparently, felt no particular call to any profession.

'It will come with a jump,' the doctor inclined to think.  'He's been on
the level for some time now.  Suddenly he'll grow up and declare his
mighty mind.'

Father liked humour in the gravest talk; indeed the weightier the subject,
the more he valued a humorous light upon it.  The best judgment, he held,
was shaped by humour, sense of proportion lost without it.  His wife,
however, thought 'it a pity.'  Grave things she liked grave.

'There's something very deep in Tommy,' she observed, as though he were
developing a hidden malady.

'Hum,' agreed her husband.  'His subconscious content is unusual, both in
kind and quantity.'  His eyes twinkled.  'It's possible he may turn out an
artist, or a preacher.  If the former, I'll bet his output will be
original; and, as for the latter,'--he paused a second--'he's too logical
and too fearless to be orthodox.  Already he thinks things out for
himself.'

'I should like to see him in the Church, though,' said Mother.  'He would
do a lot of good.  But he _is_ uncompromising, rather.'

'His honesty certainly is against him,' sighed his father.  'What do you
think he asked me the other day?'

'I'm sure I don't know, John.' The answer completed itself with the
unspoken 'He never asks _me_ anything now.'

'He came straight up to me and said, 'Father, is it good to feel pain?
To let it come, I mean, or try to dodge it?''

'Had he hurt himself?' the woman asked quickly.  It seemed she winced.

'Not physically.  He had been feeling something inside.  He wanted to know
how 'a man' should meet the case.'

'And what did you tell him, dear?'

'That pain was usually a sign of growth, to be understood, accepted,
faced.  That most pain was cured in that way----'

'He didn't tell you what had hurt him?' she interrupted.

'Oh, I didn't ask him.  He'd have shut up like a clam.  Tommy likes to
deal with things alone in his own way.  He just wanted to know if his way
was--well, _my_ way.'

There fell a pause between them; then Mother, without looking up,
enquired: 'Have you noticed Lettice lately?  She's here a good deal now.'

But her husband only smiled, making no direct reply.  'Tommy will have a
hard time of it when he falls in love,' he remarked presently.
'He'll know the real thing and won't stand any nonsense--just as I did.'
Whereupon his wife informed him that if he was not careful he would simply
ruin the boy--and the brief conversation died away of its own accord.
As she was leaving the room a little later, unsatisfied but unaggressive,
he asked her: 'Have you left the picture books, my dear?' and she pointed
to an ominous heap upon the table in the window, with the remark that Jane
had 'unearthed every book that Tommy had set eyes upon since he was three.
You'll find everything that's ever interested him,' she added as she went
out, 'every picture, that is--and I suppose it is the pictures that you
want.'

For an hour and a half the great specialist turned pages without ceasing--
well-thumbed pages; torn, crumpled, blotted, painted pages.  It was easy
to discover the boy's favourite pictures; and all were commonplace enough,
the sort that any normal, adventure-loving boy would find delightful.
But nothing of special significance resulted from the search; nothing that
might account for the recurrent nightmare, nothing in the way of eyes or
wave.  He had already questioned Jane as to what stories she told him, and
which among them he liked best.  'Hunting or travel or collecting,' Jane
had answered, and it was about 'collecting that he asks most questions.
What kind of collecting, sir?  Oh, treasure or rare beetles mostly, and
sometimes--just bones.'

'Bones!  What kind of bones?'

'The villin's, sir,' explained the frightened Jane.  'He always likes the
villin to get lost, and for the jackals to pick his bones in the
desert----'

'Any particular desert?'

'No, sir; just desert.'

'Ah--just desert!  Any old desert, eh?'

'I think so, sir--as long as it _is_ desert.'

Dr. Kelverdon put the woman at her ease with the humorous smile that made
all the household love--and respect--him; then asked another question, as
if casually: Had she ever told him a story in which a wave or a pair of
eyes were in any way conspicuous?

'No, never, sir,' replied the honest Jane, after careful reflection.
'Nor I wouldn't,' she added, 'because my father he was drowned in a tidal
wave; and as for eyes, I know that's wrong for children, and I wouldn't
tell Master Tommy such a thing for all the world----'

'Because?' enquired the doctor kindly, seeing her hesitation.

'I'd be frightening myself, sir, and he'd make such fun of me,' she
finally confessed.

No, it was clear that the nurse was not responsible for the vivid
impression in Tommy's mind which bore fruit in so strange a complex of
emotions.  Nor were other lines of enquiry more successful.  There was a
cause, of course, but it would remain unascertainable unless some clue
offered itself by chance.  Both the doctor and the father in him were
pledged to a persistent search that was prolonged over several months, but
without result.  The most perplexing element in the problem seemed to him
the whiff.  The association of terror with a wave needed little
explanation; the introduction of the eyes, however, was puzzling, unless
some story of a drowning man was possibly the clue; but the addition of a
definite odour, an Eastern odour, moreover, with which the boy could
hardly have become yet acquainted,--this combination of the three
accounted for the peculiar interest in the doctor's mind.

Of one thing alone did he feel reasonably certain: the impression had been
printed upon the deepest part of Tommy's being, the very deepest; it arose
from those unplumbed profundities--though a scientist, he considered them
unfathomable--of character and temperament whence emerge the most
primitive of instincts,--the generative and creative instinct, choice of a
mate, natural likes and dislikes,--the bed-rock of the nature.  A girl was
in it somewhere, somehow. . . .

Midnight had sounded from the stable clock in the mews when he stole up
into the boys' room and cautiously approached the yellow iron bed where
Tommy lay.  The reflection of a street electric light just edged his face.
He was sound asleep--with tear-stains marked clearly on the cheek not
pressed into the pillow.  Dr. Kelverdon paused a moment, looked round the
room, shading the candle with one hand.  He saw no photograph, no pictures
anywhere.  Then he sniffed.  There was a faint and delicate perfume in the
air.  He recognised it.  He stood there, thinking deeply.

'Lettice Aylmer,' he said to himself presently as he went softly out again
to seek his own bed; 'I'll try Lettice.  It's just possible. . . . Next
time I see her I'll have a little talk.'  For he suddenly remembered that
Lettice Aylmer, his daughter's friend and playmate, had very large and
beautiful dark eyes.


