

Lettice Aylmer, daughter of the Irish Member of Parliament, did not
provide the little talk that he anticipated, however, because she went
back to her Finishing School abroad.  Dr. Kelverdon was sorry when he
heard it.  So was Tommy.  She was to be away a year at least.
'I must remember to have a word with her when she comes back,' thought the
father, and made a note of it in his diary twelve months ahead.
'Three hundred and sixty-five days,' thought Tommy, and made a private
calendar of his own.

It seemed an endless, zodiacal kind of period; he counted the days, a
sheet of foolscap paper for each month, and at the bottom of each sheet
two columns showing the balance of days gone and days to come.
Tuesday, when he had first seen her, was underlined, and each Tuesday had
a number attached to it, giving the total number of weeks since that
wonderful occasion.  But Saturdays were printed.  On Saturday Lettice had
spoken to him; she had smiled, and the words were, 'Don't forget me,
Tommy!'  And Tommy, looking straight into her great dark eyes, that seemed
to him more tender even than his mother's, had stammered a reply that he
meant with literal honesty: 'I won't--never . . .'; and she was gone . . .
to France . . . across the sea.

She took his soul away with her, leaving him behind to pore over his
father's big atlas and learn French sentences by heart.  It seemed the
only way.  Life had begun, and he must be prepared.  Also, his career was
chosen.  For Lettice had said another thing--one other thing.
When Mary, his sister, introduced him, 'This is Tommy,' Lettice looked
down and asked: 'Are you going to be an engineer?' adding proudly,
'My brother is.' Before he could answer she was scampering away with Mary,
the dark hair flying in a cloud, the bright bow upon it twinkling like a
star in heaven--and Tommy, hating his ridiculous boyish name with an
intense hatred, stood there trembling, but aware that the die was cast--he
was going to be an engineer.

Trembling, yes; for he felt dazed and helpless, caught in a mist of fire
and gold, the furniture whirling round him, and something singing wildly
in his heart.  Two things, each containing in them the essence of genuine
shock, had fallen upon him: shock, because there was impetus in them as of
a blow.  They had been coming; they had reached him.  There was no doubt
or question possible.  He staggered from the impact.  Joy and terror
touched him; at one and the same moment he felt the enticement and the
shrinking of his dream. . . .  He longed to seize her and prevent her ever
going away, yet also he wanted to push her from him as though she somehow
caused him pain.

For, on the two occasions when speech had taken place between himself and
Lettice, the dream had transferred itself boldly into his objective life--
yet not entirely.  Two characteristics only had been thus transferred.
When his sister first came into the hall with 'This is Tommy,' the wavy
feeling had already preceded her by a definite interval that was perhaps a
second by the watch.  He was aware of it behind him, curved and risen--not
curving, rising--from the open fireplace, but also from the woods behind
the house, from the whole of the country right back to the coast, from
across the world, it seemed, towering overhead against the wintry sky.
And when Lettice smiled and asked that question of childish admiration
about being an engineer, he was already shuffling furiously with his feet
upon the Indian rug.  She was gone again, luckily, he hoped, before the
ridiculous pantomime was noticeable.

He saw her once or twice.  He was invariably speechless when she came into
his presence, and his silence and awkwardness made him appear at great
disadvantage.  He seemed intentionally rude.  Nervous self-consciousness
caused him to bridle over nothing.  Even to answer her was a torture.
He dreaded a snub appallingly, and bridled in anticipation.  Furious with
himself for his inability to use each precious opportunity, he pretended
he didn't care.  The consequence was that when she once spoke to him
sweetly, he was too overpowered to respond as he might have done.
That she had not even noticed his anguished attitude never occurred to
him.

'We're always friends, aren't we, Tommy?'

'Rather,' he blurted, before he could regain his composure for a longer
sentence.

'And always will be, won't we?'

'Rather,' he repeated, cursing himself later for thinking of nothing
better to say.  Then, just as she flew off in that dancing way of hers, he
found his tongue.  Out of the jumbled mass of phrases in his head three
words got loose and offered themselves: 'We'll always be!' he flung at her
retreating figure of intolerable beauty.  And she turned her head over her
shoulder, waved her hand without stopping her career, and shouted
'Rather!'

That was the Tuesday in his calendar.  But on Saturday, the printed
Saturday following it, the second characteristic of his dream announced
itself: he recognised the Eyes.  Why he had not recognised them on the
Tuesday lay beyond explanation; he only knew it was so.  And afterwards,
when he tried to think it over, it struck him that she had scampered out
of the hall with peculiar speed and hurry; had made her escape without the
extra word or two the occasion naturally demanded--almost as though she,
too, felt something that uneasily surprised her.

Tommy wondered about it till his head spun round.  She, too, had received
an impact that was shock.  He was as thorough about it as an instinctive
scientist.  He also registered this further fact--that the dream-details
had not entirely reproduced themselves in the affair.  There was no trace
of the Whiff or of the other pair of Eyes.  Some day the three would come
together; but then. . . .

The main thing, however, undoubtedly was this: Lettice felt something too:
she was aware of feelings similar to his own.  He was too honest to assume
that she felt exactly what he felt; he only knew that her eyes betrayed
familiar intimacy when she said 'Don't forget me, Tommy,' and that when
she rushed out of the hall with that unnecessary abruptness it was
because--well, he could only transfer to her some degree of the 'wavy'
feeling in himself.

And he fell in love with abandonment and a delicious, infinite yearning.
From that moment he thought of himself as Tom instead of Tommy.

It was an entire, sweeping love that left no atom or corner of his being
untouched.  Lettice was real; she hid below the horizon of distant France,
yet could not, did not, hide from him.  She also waited.

He knew the difference between real and unreal people.  The latter wavered
about his life and were uncertain; sometimes he liked them, sometimes he
did not; but the former--remained fixed quantities: he could not alter
towards them.  Even at this stage he knew when a person came into his life
to stay, or merely to pass out again.  Lettice, though seen but twice,
belonged to this first category.  His feeling for her had the Wave in it;
it gathered weight and mass, it was irresistible.  From the dim, invisible
foundations of his life it came, out of the foundations of the world, out
of that inexhaustible sea-foundation that lay below everything.  It was
real; it was not to be avoided.  He knew.  He persuaded himself that she
knew too.

And it was then, realising for the first time the searching pain
of being separated from something that seemed part of his being by natural
right, he spoke to his father and asked if pain should be avoided.
This conversation has been already sufficiently recorded; but he asked
other things as well.  From being so long on the level he had made a
sudden jump that his father had foretold; he grew up; his mind began to
think; he had peered into certain books; he analysed.  Out of the nonsense
of his speculative reflections the doctor pounced on certain points that
puzzled him completely.  Probing for the repressed elements in the boy's
psychic life that caused the triple complex of Wave and Eyes and Whiff, he
only saw the cause receding further and further from his grasp until it
finally lost itself in ultimate obscurity.  The disciple of Freud was
baffled hopelessly. . . .

Tom, meanwhile, bathed in a sea of new sensations.  Distance held meaning
for him, separation was a kind of keen starvation.  He made discoveries--
watched the moon rise, heard the wind, and knew the stars shone over the
meadows below the house, things that before had been merely commonplace.
He pictured these details as they might occur in France, and once when he
saw a Swallow Tail butterfly, knowing that the few English specimens were
said to have crossed the Channel, he had a touch of ecstasy, as though the
proud insect brought him a message from the fields below the Finishing
School.  Also he read French books and found the language difficult but
exquisite.  All sweet and lovely things came from France, and at school he
attempted violent friendships with three French boys and the Foreign
Language masters, friendships that were not appreciated because they were
not understood.  But he made progress with the language, and it stood him
in good stead in his examinations.  He was aiming now at an Engineering
College.  He passed in--eventually--brilliantly enough.

Before that satisfactory moment, however, he knew difficult times.
His inner life was in a splendid tumult.  From the books he purloined he
read a good many facts concerning waves and wave-formation.  He learned,
among other things, that all sensory impressions reached the nerves by
impact of force in various wave-lengths; heat, light and sound broke upon
the skin and eyes and ears in vibrations of aether or air that advanced in
steady series of wavy formations which, though not quite similar to his
dream-wave, were akin to it.  Sensation, which is life, was thus linked on
to his deepest, earliest memory.

A wave, however, instantly rejoined the parent stock and formed again.
And perhaps it was the repetition of the wave--its forming again and
breaking again--that impressed him most.  For he imagined his impulses,
emotions, tendencies all taking this wave-form, sweeping his moods up to a
certain point, then dropping back into his centre--the Sea, he called it--
which held steady below all temporary fluctuations--only to form once more
and happen all over again.

With his moral and spiritual life it was similar: a wind came, wind of
desire, wind of yearning, wind of hope, and he felt his strength
accumulating, rising, bending with power upon the object that he had in
view.  To take that object exactly at the top of the wave was to achieve
success; to miss that moment was to act with a receding and diminishing
power, to dissipate himself in foam and spray before he could retire for
a second rise.  He saw existence as a wave.  Life itself was a wave that
rose, swept, curved, and finally--must break.

He merely visualised these feelings into pictures; he did not think them
out, nor get them into words.  The wave became symbolic to him of all
life's energies.  It was the way in which all sensation expressed itself.
Lettice was the high-water mark on shore he longed to reach and sweep back
into his own tumultuous being.  In that great underneath, the Sea, they
belonged eternally together. . . .

One thing, however, troubled him exceedingly: he read that a wave was a
segment of a circle, the perfect form, yet that it never completed itself.
The ground on which it broke prevented the achievement of the circle.
That, he felt, was a pity, and might be serious; there was always that
sinister retirement for another effort that yet never did, and never
could, result in complete achievement.  He watched the waves a good deal
on the shore, when occasion offered in the holidays--they came from
France!--and made a discovery on his own account that was not mentioned in
any of the books.  And it was this: that the top of the wave, owing to its
curve, was reflected in the under part.  Its end, that is, was foretold in
its beginning.

There was a want of scientific accuracy here, a confusion of time and
space, perhaps, yet he noticed the idea and registered the thrill.  At the
moment when the wave was poised to fall its crest shone reflected in the
base from which it rose.

But the more he watched the waves on the shore, the more puzzled he
became.  They seemed merely a movement of the sea itself.  They endlessly
repeated themselves.  They had no true, separate existence until they--
broke.  Nor could he determine whether the crest or the base was the
beginning, for the two ran along together, and what was above one minute
was below the minute after.  Which part started first he never could
decide.  The head kept chasing the tail in an effort to join up.
Only when a wave broke and fell was it really--a wave.  It had to 'happen'
to earn its name.

There were ripples too.  These indicated the direction of the parent wave
upon whose side they happened, but not its purpose.  Moods were ripples:
they varied the surface of life but did not influence its general
direction.

His own life followed a similar behaviour; he was full of ripples that
were for ever trying to complete themselves by happening in acts.
But the main Wave was the thing--end and beginning sweeping along
together, both at the same time somehow.  That is, he knew the end and
could foretell it.  It rose from the great 'beneath' which was the sea in
him.  It must topple over in the end and complete itself.  He knew it
would; he knew it would hurt; he knew also that he would not shirk it when
it came.  For it was a repetition somehow.

'I jolly well mean to enjoy the smash,' he felt.  'I know one pair of Eyes
already; there's only the Whiff and the other Eyes to come.  The moment I
find them, I'll go bang into it.'  He experienced a delicious shiver at
the prospect.

One thing, however, remained uncertain: the stuff the Wave was made of.
Once he discovered that, he would discover also--_where_ the smash would
come.


