

'Can a chap feel things coming?' he asked his father.  He was perhaps
fifteen or sixteen then.  'I mean, when you feel them coming, does that
mean they _must_ come?'

His father listened warily.  There had been many similar questions lately.

'You can feel ordinary things coming,' he replied; 'things due to
association of ideas.'

Tom looked up.  'Association?' he queried uncertainly.

'If you feel hungry,' explained the doctor, 'you know that dinner's
coming; you associate the hunger with the idea of eating.  You recognise
them because you've felt them both together before.'

'They _ought_ to come, then?'

'Dinner does come--ordinarily speaking.  You've learned to expect it from
the hunger.  You could, of course, prevent it coming,' he added dryly,
'only that would be bad for you.  You need it.'

Tom reflected a moment with a puckered face.  His father waited for him to
ask more, hoping he would.  The boy felt the sympathy and invitation.

'_Before_,' he repeated, picking out the word with sudden emphasis, his
mind evidently breaking against a problem.  'But if I felt hungry for
something I _hadn't_ had before----?'

'In that case you wouldn't call it hunger.  You wouldn't know what to call
it.  You'd feel a longing of some kind and would wonder what it meant.'

Tom's next words surprised him considerably.  They came promptly, but with
slow and thoughtful emphasis.

'So that if I know what I want, and call it dinner, or pain, or--love, or
something,' he exclaimed, 'it means that I've had it _before_?  And that's
why I know it.'  The last five words were not a question but a statement
of fact apparently.

The doctor pretended not to notice the variants of dinner.  At least he
did not draw attention to them.

'Not necessarily,' he answered.  'The things you feel you want may be the
things that everybody wants--things common to the race.  Such wants are
naturally in your blood; you feel them because your parents, your
grandparents, and all humanity in turn behind your own particular family
have always wanted them.'

'They come out of the sea, you mean?'

'That's very well expressed, Tom.  They come out of the sea of human
nature, which is everywhere the same, yes.'

The compliment seemed to annoy the boy.

'Of course,' he said bluntly.  'But--if it hurts?'  The words were sharply
emphasised.

'Association of ideas again.  Toothache suggests the pincers.  You want to
get rid of the pain, but the pain has to get worse before it can get
better.  You know that, so you face it gladly--to get it over.'

'You face it, yes,' said Tom.  'It makes you better in the end.'

It suddenly dawned upon him that his learned father knew nothing, nothing
at least that could help him.  He knew only what other people knew.
He turned then, and asked the ridiculous question that lay at the back of
his mind all the time.  It cost him an effort, for his father would
certainly deem it foolish.

'Can a thing happen before it really happens?'

Dr. Kelverdon may or may not have thought the question foolish; his face
was hidden a moment as he bent down to put the Indian rug straight with
his hand.  There was no impatience in the movement, nor was there mockery
in his expression, when he resumed his normal position.  He had gained an
appreciable interval of time--some fifteen seconds.  'Tom, you've got good
ideas in that head of yours,' he said calmly; 'but what is it that you
mean exactly?'

Tom was quite ready to amplify.  He knew what he meant:

'If I _know_ something is going to happen, doesn't that mean that it has
already happened--and that I remember it?'

'You're a psychologist as well as engineer, Tom,' was the approving reply.
'It's like this, you see: In emotion, with desire in it, can predict the
fulfilment of that desire.  In great hunger you imagine you're eating all
sorts of good things.'

'But that's looking forward,'; the boy pounced on the mistake.  'It's not
remembering.'

'That _is_ the difficulty,' explained his father; 'to decide whether
you're anticipating only--or actually remembering.'

'I see,' Tom said politely.

All this analysis concealed merely: it did not reveal.  The thing itself
dived deeper out of sight with every phrase.  _He_ knew quite well the
difference between anticipating and remembering.  With the latter there
was the sensation of having been through it.  Each time he remembered
seeing Lettice the sensation was the same, but when he looked forward to
seeing her _again_ the sensation varied with his mood.

'For instance, Tom--between ourselves this--we're going to send Mary to
that Finishing School in France where Lettice is.'  The doctor, it seemed,
spoke carelessly while he gathered his papers together with a view to
going out.  He did not look at the boy; he said it walking about the room.
'Mary will look forward to it and think about it so much that when she
gets there it will seem a little familiar to her, as if--almost as if she
remembered it.'

'Thank you, father; I see, yes,' murmured Tom.  But in his mind a voice
said so distinctly 'Rot!' that he was half afraid the word was audible.

'You see the difficulty, eh?  And the difference?'

'Rather,' exclaimed the boy with decision.

And thereupon, without the slightest warning, he looked out of the window
and asked certain other questions.  Evidently they cost him effort; his
will forced them out.  Since his back was turned he did not see his
father's understanding smile, but neither did the latter see the lad's
crimson cheeks, though possibly he divined them.

'Father--is Miss Aylmer older than me?'

'Ask Mary, Tom.  She'll know.  Or, stay--I'll ask her for you--if you
like.'

'Oh, that's all right.  I just wanted to know,' with an assumed
indifference that barely concealed the tremor in the voice.

'I suppose,' came a moment later, 'a Member of Parliament is a grander
thing than a doctor, is it?'

'That depends,' replied his father, 'upon the man himself.  Some M.P.'s
vote as they're told, and never open their mouths in the House.
Some doctors, again----'

But the boy interrupted him.  He quite understood the point.

'It's fine to be an engineer, though, isn't it?' he asked.  'It's a real
profession?'

'The world couldn't get along without them, or the Government either.
It's a most important profession indeed.'

Tom, playing idly with the swinging tassel of the window-blind, asked one
more question.  His voice and manner were admirably under control, but
there _was_ a gulp, and his father heard and noted it.

'Shall I have--shall I be rich enough--to marry--some day?'

Dr. Kelverdon crossed the room and put his hand on his son's shoulder, but
did not try to make him show his face.  'Yes,' he said quietly, 'you will,
my boy--when the time comes.'  He paused a moment, then added: 'But money
will not make you a distinguished man, whereas if you become a famous
engineer, you'll have money of your own and--any nice girl would be proud
to have you.'

'I see,' said Tom, tying the strings of the tassel into knots, then
untying them again with a visible excess of energy--and the conversation
came somewhat abruptly to an end.  He was aware of the invitation to talk
further about Lettice Aylmer, but he resisted and declined it.  What was
the use?  He knew his own mind already about _that_.

Yet, strictly speaking, Tom was not imaginative.  It was as if an instinct
taught him.  More and more, the Wave, with its accompanying details of
Eyes and Whiff, seemed to him the ghost of some dim memory that brought a
forgotten warning in its train--something missed, something to be
repeated, something to be faced and learned and--mastered. . . .



His father, meanwhile, went forth upon his rounds that day, much
preoccupied about the character of his eldest boy.  He felt a particular
interest in the peculiar obsession that he knew overshadowed the young,
growing life.  It puzzled him; he found no clue to it; in his thought he
was aware of a faint uneasiness, although he did not give it a definite
name--something akin to what the mother felt.  Admitting he was baffled,
he fell back, however, upon such generalities as prenatal influence,
ancestral, racial, and so eventually dismissed it from his active mind.

Tom, meanwhile, for his part, also went along his steep, predestined path.
The nightmare had entirely deserted him, he now rarely dreamed; and his
outer life shaped bravely, as with a boy of will, honesty, and healthy
ambition might be expected.  Neither Wavy feeling, Eyes, nor Whiff
obtruded themselves: they left him alone and waited: he never forgot them,
but he did not seek them out.  Things once firmly realised remained in his
consciousness; he knew that his life was rising like a wave, that all his
energies worked in the form of waves, his moods and wishes, his passions,
emotions, yearnings--all expressed themselves by means of this unalterable
formula, yet all contributed finally to the one big important Wave whose
climax would be reached only when it fell.  He distinguished between Wave
and Ripples.  He, therefore, did not trouble himself with imaginary
details; he did not search; he waited.  This steady strength was his.
His firm, square jaw and the fearless eyes of grey beneath the shock of
straight dark hair told plainly enough the kind of stuff behind them.
No one at school took unnecessary liberties with Tom Kelverdon.

But, having discovered one pair of Eyes, he did not let them go.
In his earnest, dull, inflexible way he loved their owner with a belief in
her truth and loyalty that admitted of no slightest question.
Had his mother divined the strength and value of his passion, she would
surely have asked herself with painful misgiving: 'Is she--_can_ she be--
worthy of my boy?'  But his mother guessed it as little as any one else;
even the doctor had forgotten those early signs of its existence; and Tom
was not the kind to make unnecessary confidences, nor to need sympathy in
any matter he was sure about.

There was down now upon his upper lip, for he was close upon seventeen and
the Entrance Examination was rising to the crest of its particular minor
wave, yet during the two years' interval nothing--no single fact--had
occurred to justify his faith or to confirm its amazing certainty within
his heart.  Mary, his sister, had not gone after all to the Finishing
School in France; other girl friends came to spend the holidays with her;
the Irish member of Parliament had either died or sunk into another kind
of oblivion; the paths of the Kelverdons and the Aylmer family had gone
apart; and the name of Lettice no longer thrilled the air across the
tea-table, nor chance reports of her doings filled the London house with
sudden light.

Yet for Tom she existed more potently than ever.  His yearning never
lessened; he was sure she remembered him as he remembered her; he
persuaded himself that she thought about him; she doubtless knew that he
was going to be an engineer.  He had cut a thread from the carpet in the
hall--from the exact spot her flying foot had touched that Tuesday when
she scampered off from him--and kept it in the drawer beside the Eastern
packet that enshrined the Whiff.  Occasionally he took it out and touched
it, fingered it, even caressed it; the thread and the perfume belonged
together; the ritual of the childish years altered a little--worship
raised it to a higher level.

He saw her with her hair done up now, long skirts, and a softer expression
in the tender, faithful eyes; the tomboy in her had disappeared; she gazed
at him with admiration.  The face was oddly real, it came very close to
his own; once or twice, indeed, their cheeks almost touched: 'almost,'
because he withdrew instantly, uneasily aware that he had gone too far--
not that the intimacy was unwelcome, but that it was somehow premature.
And the instant he drew back, a kind of lightning distance came between
them; he saw her eyes across an immense and curious interval, though
whether of time or space he could not tell.  There was strange heat and
radiance in it--as of some blazing atmosphere that was not England.

The eyes, moreover, held a new expression when this happened--pity.
And with this pity came also pain: the strange, rich pain broke over all
the other happier feelings in him and swamped them utterly. . . .

But at that point instinct failed him; he could not understand why she
should pity him, why pain should come to him through her, nor why it was
necessary for him to feel and face it.  He only felt sure of one thing--
that it was essential to the formation of the Wave which was his life.
The Wave must 'happen,' or he would miss an important object of his
being--and she would somehow miss it too.  The Wave would one day fall,
but when it fell she would be with him, by his side, under the mighty
curve, involved in the crash and tumult--with himself.


