

Then, without any warning, he received a second shock--it fell upon him
from the blue and came direct from Lettice.

The occasion was a tennis party in the garden by the sea where the family
had come to spend the summer holidays.  Tom was already at College, doing
brilliantly, and rapidly growing up.  The August afternoon was very hot;
no wind ruffled the quiet blue-green water; there were no waves; the
leaves of the privet hedge upon the side of the cliffs were motionless.
A couple of Chalk-Blues danced round and round each other as though a wire
connected them, and Tom, walking in to tea with his partner after a
victorious game, found himself watching the butterflies and making a
remark about them--a chance observation merely to fill an empty pause.
He felt as little interest in the insects as he did in his partner,
an uncommonly pretty, sunburned girl, whose bare arms and hatless light
hair became her admirably.  She, however, approved of the remark and by no
means despised the opportunity to linger a moment by the side of her
companion.  They stood together, perhaps a dozen seconds, watching the
capricious scraps of colour rise, float over the privet hedge on balanced
wings, dip abruptly down and vanish on the farther side below the cliff.
The girl said something--an intentional something that was meant to be
heard and answered: but no answer was forthcoming.  She repeated the
remark with emphasis; then, as still no answer came, she laughed brightly
to make his silence appear natural.

But Tom had no word to say.  He had not noticed the manoeuvre of the girl,
nor the manoeuvre of the two Chalk-Blues; neither had he heard the words,
although conscious that she spoke.  For in that brief instant when the
insects floated over the hedge, his eyes had wandered beyond them to the
sea, and on the sea, far off against the cloudless horizon, he had seen--
the Wave.

Thinking it over afterwards, however, he realised that it was not actually
a wave he saw, for the surface of the blue-green sea was smooth as the
tennis lawn itself: it was the sudden appearance of the 'wavy feeling'
that made him _think_ he saw the old, familiar outline of his early dream.
He had objectified his emotion.  His father perhaps would have called it
association of ideas.

Abruptly, out of nothing obvious, the feeling rose and mastered him: and,
after its quiescence--its absence--for so long an interval, this revival
without hint or warning of any kind was disconcerting.  The feeling was
vivid and unmistakable.  The joy and terror swept him as of old.
He braced himself.  Almost--he began shuffling with his feet. . . .

'Tea's waiting for you,'; his mother's voice floated to his ears across
the lawn, as he turned with an effort from the sea and made towards the
group about the tables.  The Wave, he knew, was coming up behind him,
growing, rising, curving high against the evening sky.  Beside him walked
the sunburned girl, wondering doubtless at his silence, but happy enough,
it seemed, in her own interpretation of its cause.  Scarcely aware of her
presence, however, Tom was searching almost fiercely in his thoughts,
searching for the clue.  He knew there was a clue, he felt sure of it; the
'wavy feeling' had not come with this overwhelming suddenness without a
reason.  Something had brought it back.  But what?  Was there any recent
factor in his life that might explain it?  He stole a swift glance at the
girl beside him: had she, perhaps, to do with it?  They had played tennis
together for the first time that afternoon: he had never seen her before,
was not even quite sure of her name; to him, so far, she was only 'a very
pretty girl who played a ripping game.'  Had this girl to do with it?

Feeling his questioning look, she glanced up at him and smiled.
'You're very absent-minded,' she observed with mischief in her manner.
'You took so many of my balls, it's tired you out!'  She had beautiful
blue eyes, and her voice, he noticed for the first time, was very
pleasant.  Her figure was slim, her ankles neat, she had nice, even teeth.
But, even as he registered the charming details, he knew quite well that
he registered them, one and all, as belonging merely to a member of the
sex, and not to this girl in particular.  For all he cared, she might
follow the two Chalk-Blues and disappear below the edge of the cliff into
the sea.  This 'pretty girl' left him as untroubled as she found him.
The wavy feeling was not brought by her.

He drank his tea, keeping his back to the sea, and as the talk was lively,
his silence was not noticed.  The Wave, meanwhile, he knew, had come up
closer.  It towered above him.  Its presence would shortly be explained.
Then, suddenly, in the middle of a discussion as to partners for the games
to follow, a further detail presented itself--also apparently out of
nothing.  He smelt the Whiff.  He knew then that the Wave was poised
immediately above his head, and that he stood underneath its threatening
great curve.  The clue, therefore, was at hand.

And at this moment his father came into view, moving across the lawn
towards them from the French window.  No one guessed how Tom welcomed the
slight diversion, for the movement was already in his legs and in another
moment must have set his feet upon that dreadful shuffling.  As from a
distance, he heard the formal talk and introductions, his father's
statement that he had won his round of golf with 'the Dean,' praise of the
weather, and something or other about the strange stillness of the sea--
but then, with a sudden, hollow crash against his very ear, the appalling
words: '. . . broke his mashie into splinters, yes.  And, by the by, the
Dean knows the Aylmers.  They were staying here earlier in the summer, he
told me.  Lettice, the girl,--Mary's friend, you remember--is going to be
married this week. . . .'

Tom clutched the back of the wicker-chair in front of him.  The sun went
out.  An icy air passed Up his spine.  The blood drained from his face.
The tennis courts, and the group of white figures moving towards them,
swung up into the sky.  He gripped the chair till the rods of wicker
pressed through the flesh into the bone.  For a moment he felt that the
sensation of actual sickness was more than he could master; his legs bent
like paper beneath his weight.

'_You_ remember Lettice, Tom, don't you?' his father was saying somewhere
in mid-air above him.

'Yes, rather.'  Apparently he said these words; the air at any rate went
through his teeth and lips, and the same minute, with a superhuman effort
that only just escaped a stagger, he moved away towards the tennis courts.
His feet carried him, that is, across the lawn, where some figures dressed
in white were calling his name loudly; his legs went automatically.
'Hold steady!' he remembers saying somewhere deep inside him.  'Don't make
an ass of yourself,'; whereupon another voice--or was it still his own?--
joined in quickly, 'She's gone from me, Lettice has gone.  She's dead.'
And the words, for the first time in his life, had meaning: for the first
time in his life, rather, he realised what their meaning was.  The Wave
had fallen.  Moreover--this also for the first time in the history of the
Wave--there was something audible.  He heard a Sound.

Shivering in the hot summer sunshine, as though icy water drenched him, he
knew the same instant that he was wrong about the falling: the Wave,
indeed, had curled lower over him than ever before, had even toppled--but
it had not broken.  As a whole, it had not broken.  It was a smaller wave,
upon the parent side, that had formed and fallen.  The sound he heard was
the soft crash of this lesser wave that grew out of the greater mass of
the original monster, broke upon the rising volume of it, and returned
into the greater body.  It was a ripple only.  The shock and terror he
felt were a foretaste of what the final smothering crash would be.
Yet the Sound he had heard was not the sound of water.  There was a sharp,
odd rattling in it that he had never consciously heard before.  And it
was--dry.

He reached the group of figures on the tennis-courts: he played: a violent
energy had replaced the sudden physical weakness.  His skill, it seemed,
astonished everybody; he drove and smashed and volleyed with a
recklessness that was always accurate: but when, at the end of the amazing
game, he heard voices praising him, as from a distance, he knew only that
there was a taste of gall and ashes in his mouth, and that he had but one
desire--to get to his room alone and open the drawer.  Even to himself he
would not admit that he wished for the relief of tears.  He put it,
rather, that he must see and feel the one real thing that still connected
him with Lettice--the thread of carpet she had trodden on.  That--and the
'whiff'--alone could comfort him.

The comedy, that is, of all big events lay in it; no one must see, no one
must know: no one must guess the existence of this sweet, rich pain that
ravaged the heart in him until from very numbness it ceased aching.
He double-locked the bedroom door.  He had waited till darkness folded
away the staring day, till the long dinner was over, and the drawn-out
evening afterwards.  None, fortunately, had noticed the change in his
demeanour, his silence, his absentmindedness when spoken to, his want of
appetite.  'She is going to be married . . . this week,' were the only
words he heard; they kept ringing in his brain. To his immense relief the
family had not referred to it again.

And at last he had said good-night and was in his room--alone.  The drawer
was open.  The morsel of green thread lay in his hand.  The faint eastern
perfume floated on the air.  'I am _not_ a sentimental ass,' he said to
himself aloud, but in a low, steady tone.  'She touched it, therefore it
has part of her life about it still.'  Three years and a half ago!
He examined the diary too; lived over in thought every detail of their
so-slight acquaintance together; they were few enough; he remembered every
one. . . . Prolonging the backward effort, he reviewed the history of the
Wave.  His mind stretched back to his earliest recollections of the
nightmare.  He faced the situation, tried to force its inner meaning from
it, but without success.

He did not linger uselessly upon any detail, nor did he return upon his
traces as a sentimental youth might do, prolonging the vanished sweetness
of recollection in order to taste the pain more vividly.  He merely 'read
up,' so to speak, the history of the Wave to get a bird's-eye view of it.
And in the end he obtained a certain satisfaction from the process--a
certain strength.  That is to say, he did not understand, but he accepted.
'Lettice has gone from me--but she hasn't gone for good.'  The deep
reflection of hours condensed itself into this.

Whatever might happen 'temporarily,' the girl was loyal and true: and she
was--his.  It never once occurred to him to blame or chide her.  All that
she did sincerely, she had a right to do.  They were in the 'underneath'
together for ever and ever.  They were in the sea.

The pain, nevertheless, was acute and agonising; the temporary separation
of 'France' was nothing compared to this temporary separation of her
marrying.  There were alternate intervals of numbness and of acute
sensation; for each time thought and feeling collapsed from the long
strain of their own tension, the relief that followed proved false and
vain.  Up sprang the aching pain again, the hungry longing, the dull,
sweet yearning--and the whole sensation started afresh as at the first,
yet with a vividness that increased with each new realisation of it.
'Wish I could cry it out,' he thought.  'I wouldn't be a bit ashamed to
cry.'  But he had no tears to spill. . . .

Midnight passed towards the small hours of the morning, and the small
hours slipped on towards the dawn before he put away the parcel of
tissue-paper, closed the drawer and locked it.  And when at length he
dropped exhausted into bed, the eastern sky was already tinged with the
crimson of another summer's day.  He dreaded it, and closed his eyes.
It had tennis parties and engagements in its wearisome, long hours of heat
and utter emptiness. . . .

Just before actual sleep took him, however, he was aware of one other
singular reflection.  It rose of its own accord out of that moment's calm
when thought and feeling sank away and deliberate effort ceased: the fact
namely that, with the arrival of the Sound, all his five senses had been
now affected.  His entire being, through the only channels of perception
it possessed, had responded to the existence of the Wave and all it might
portend.  Here was no case of a single sense being tricked by some
illusion: all five supported each other, taste being, of course,
a modification of smell.

And the strange reflection brought to his aching mind and weary body a
measure of relief.  The Wave was real: being real, it was also well worth
facing when it--fell.


