

Between twenty and thirty a man rises through years reckless of power and
spendthrift of easy promises.  The wave of life is rising, and every force
tends upwards in a steady rush.  At thirty comes a pause upon the level,
but with thirty-five there are signs of the droop downhill.  Age is first
realised when, instead of looking forward only, he surprises thought in
the act of looking--behind.

Of the physical, at any rate, this is true; for the mental and emotional
wave is still ripening towards its higher curve, while the spiritual crest
hangs hiding in the sky far overhead, beckoning beyond towards unvistaed
reaches.

Tom Kelverdon climbed through these crowded years with the usual scars and
bruises, but steadily, and without the shame of any considerable disaster.
His father's influence having procured him an opening in an engineering
firm of the first importance, his own talent and application maintained
the original momentum bravely.  He justified his choice of a profession.
Also, staring eagerly into life's marvellous shop-window, he entered, hand
in pocket, and made the customary purchases of the enchantress behind the
counter.  If worthless, well,--everybody bought them; the things had been
consummately advertised; he paid his money, found out their value, threw
them away or kept them accordingly.  A certain good taste made his choice
not too foolish: and there was this wholesome soundness in him, that he
rarely repeated a purchase that had furnished him cheap goods.  Slowly he
began to find himself.

From learning what it meant to be well thrashed by a boy he loathed, and
to apply a similar treatment himself--he passed on to the pleasure of
being told he had nice eyes, that his voice was pleasant, his presence
interesting.  He fell in love--and out again.  But he went straight.
Moreover, beyond a given point in any affair of the heart he seemed unable
to advance: some secret, inner tension held him back.  While believing he
loved various adorable girls the years offered him, he found it impossible
to open his lips and tell them so.  And the mysterious instinct invariably
justified itself: they faded, one and all, soon after separation.  There
was no wave in them; they were ripples only. . . .

And, meanwhile, as the years rushed up towards the crest of thirty, he did
well in his profession, worked for the firm in many lands, obtained the
confidence of his principals, and proved his steady judgment if not his
brilliance.  He became, too, a good, if generous, judge of other men,
seeing all sorts, both good and bad, and in every kind of situation that
proves character.  His nature found excuses too easily, perhaps, for the
unworthy ones.  It is not a bad plan, wiser companions hinted, to realise
that a man has dark behaviour in him, while yet believing that he need not
necessarily prove it.  The other view has something childlike in it;
Tom Kelverdon kept, possibly, this simpler attitude alive in him, trusting
overmuch, because suspicion was abhorrent to his soul.  The man of ideals
had never become the man of the world.  Some high, gentle instinct had
preserved him from the infliction that so often results in this
regrettable conversion.  Slow to dislike, he saw the best in everybody.
'Not a bad fellow,' he would say of some one quite obviously detestable.
'I admit his face and voice and manner are against him; but that's not his
fault exactly.  He didn't make himself, you know.'



The idea of a tide in the affairs of men is obvious, familiar enough.
Nations rise and fall, equally with the fortunes of a family.  History
repeats itself, so does the tree, the rose: and if a man live long enough
he recovers the state of early childhood.  There is repetition everywhere.
But while some think evolution moves in a straight line forward, others
speculate fancifully that it has a spiral twist upwards.  At any given
moment, that is, the soul looks down upon a passage made before--but from
a point a little higher.  Without living through events already
experienced, it literally lives them over; it sees them mapped out below,
and with the bird's-eye view it understands them.

And in regard to his memory of Lettice Aylmer--the fact that he was still
waiting for her and she for him--this was somewhat the fanciful conception
that lodged itself, subconsciously perhaps, in the mind of Tom Kelverdon,
grown now to man's estate.  He was dimly aware of a curious familiarity
with his present situation, a sense of repetition--yet with a difference.
Something he had experienced before was coming to him again.  It was
waiting for him.  Its wave was rising.  When it happened before it had not
happened properly somehow--had left a sense of defeat, of dissatisfaction
behind.  He had taken it, perhaps, at the period of receding momentum, and
so had failed towards it.  This time he meant to face it.  His own phrase,
as has been seen, was simple: 'I'll let it all come.'  It was something
his character needed.  Deep down within him hid this attitude, and with
the passage of the years it remained--though remained an attitude merely.

But the attitude, being subconscious in him, developed into a definite
point of view that came, more and more, to influence the way he felt
towards life in general.  Life was too active to allow of much
introspection, yet whenever pauses came--pauses in thought and feeling,
still backwaters in which he lay without positive direction--there, banked
up, unchanging in the background, stood the enduring thing: his love for
Lettice Aylmer.  And this background was 'the sea' of his boyhood days,
the 'underneath' in which they remained unalterably together.  There, too,
hid the four signs that haunted his impressionable youth: the Wave, the
other Eyes, the Whiff, the Sound.  In due course, and at their appointed
time, they would combine and 'happen' in his outward life.  The Wave
would--fall.

Meanwhile his sense of humour had long ago persuaded him that, so far as
any claim upon the girl existed, or that she reciprocated his own deep
passion, his love-dream was of questionable security.  The man in him that
built bridges and cut tunnels laughed at it; the man that devised these
first in imagination, however, believed in it, and waited.  Behind thought
and reason, suspected of none with whom he daily came in contact, and
surprised only by himself when he floated in these silent, tideless
backwaters--it persisted with an amazing conviction that seemed deathless.
In these calm deeps of his being, securely anchored, hid what he called
the 'spiral' attitude.  The thing that was coming, a tragedy whereof that
childish nightmare was both a memory and a premonition, clung and haunted
still with its sense of dim familiarity.  Something he had known before
would eventually repeat itself.  But--with a difference; that he would see
it from above--from a higher curve of the ascending spiral.

There lay the enticing wonder of the situation.  With his present English
temperament, stolid rather, he would meet it differently, treat it
otherwise, learn and understand.  He would see it from another--higher--
point of view.  He would know great pain, yet some part of him would look
on, compare, accept the pain--and smile.  The words that offered
themselves were that he had 'suffered blindly,' but suffered with fierce
and bitter resentment, savagely, even with murder in his heart; suffered,
moreover, somehow or other, at the hands of Lettice Aylmer.

Lettice, of course,--he clung to it absurdly still--was true and loyal to
him, though married to another.  Her name was changed.  But Lettice Aylmer
was not changed.  And this mad assurance, though he kept it deliberately
from his conscious thoughts, persisted with the rest of the curious
business, for nothing, apparently, could destroy it in him.  It was part
of the situation, as he called it, part of the 'sea,' out of which would
rise eventually--the Wave.

Outwardly, meanwhile, much had happened to him, each experience
contributing its modifying touch to the character as he realised it,
instead of merely knowing that it came to others.  His sister married;
Tim, following his father's trade, became a doctor with a provincial
practice, buried in the country.  His father died suddenly while he was
away in Canada, busy with a prairie railway across the wheat fields of
Assiniboia.  He met the usual disillusions in a series, savoured and
mastered them more or less in turn.

He was in England when his mother died; and, while his other experiences
were ripples only, her going had the wave in it.  The enormous mother-tie
came also out of the 'sea'; its dislocation was a shock of fundamental
kind, and he felt it in the foundations of his life.  It was one of the
things he could not quite realise.  He still felt her always close and
near.  He had just been made a junior partner in the firm; the love and
pride in her eyes, before they faded from the world of partnerships, were
unmistakable: 'Of course,' she murmured, her thin hand clinging to his
own, 'they had to do it . . . if only your father knew . . .' and she was
gone.  The wave of her life sank back into the sea whence it arose.
And her going somehow strengthened him, added to his own foundations, as
though her wave had merged in his.

With her departure, he felt vaguely the desire to settle down, to marry.
Unconsciously he caught himself thinking of women in a new light,
appraising them as possible wives.  It was a dangerous attitude rather;
for a man then seeks to persuade himself that such and such a woman may
do, instead of awaiting the inevitable draw of love which alone can
justify a life-long union.

In Tom's case, however, as with the smaller fires of his younger days, he
never came to a decision, much less to a positive confession.  His immense
idealism concerning women preserved him from being caught by mere outward
beauty.  While aware that Lettice was an impossible dream of boyhood, he
yet clung to an ideal she somehow foreshadowed and typified.  He never
relinquished this standard of his dream; a mysterious woman waited for him
somewhere, a woman with all the fairy qualities he had built about her
personality; a woman he could not possibly mistake when at last he met
her.  Only he did not meet her.  He waited.

And so it was, as time passed onwards, that he found himself standing upon
the little level platform of his life at a stage nearer to thirty-five
than thirty, conscious that a pause surrounded him.  There was a lull.
The rush of the years slowed down.  He looked about him.  He looked--back.


