

The particular moment when this happened, suitable, too, in a chance, odd
way, was upon a mountain ridge in winter, a level platform of icy snow to
which he had climbed with some hotel acquaintances on a ski-ing
expedition.  It was on the Polish side of the Hohe Tatra.

Why, at this special moment, pausing for breath and admiring the immense
wintry scene about him, he should have realised that he reached a similar
position in his life, is hard to say.  There is always a particular moment
when big changes claim attention.  They have been coming slowly; but at a
given moment they announce themselves.  Tom associated that icy ridge
above Zakopane with a pause in the rushing of the years: 'I'm getting on
towards middle age; the first swift climb--impetuous youth--lies now
behind me.'  The physical parallel doubtless suggested it; he had felt his
legs and wind a trifle less willing, perhaps; there was still a steep,
laborious slope of snow beyond; he discovered that he was no longer
twenty-five.

He drew breath and watched the rest of the party as they slowly came
nearer in the track he had made through the deep snow below.  Each man
made this track in his turn, it was hard work, his share was done.
'Nagorsky will tackle the next bit,' he thought with relief, watching a
young Pole of twenty-three in the ascending line, and glancing at the
summit beyond where the run home was to begin.  And then the wonder of the
white silent scene invaded him, the exhilarating thrill of the vast wintry
heights swept over him, he forgot the toil, he regained his wind and felt
his muscles taut and vigorous once more.  It was pleasant, standing upon
this level ridge, to inspect the long ascent below, and to know the heavy
yet enjoyable exertion was nearly over.

But he had felt--older.  That ridge remained in his memory as the occasion
of its first realisation; a door opened behind him; he looked back.
He envied the other's twenty-three years.  It is curious that, about
thirty, a man feels he is getting old, whereas at forty he feels himself
young again.  At thirty he judges by the standard of eighteen, at the
later age by that of sixty.  But this particular occasion remained vivid
for another reason--it was accompanied by a strange sensation he had
almost forgotten; and so long an interval had elapsed since its last
manifestation that for a moment a kind of confusion dropped upon him, as
from the cloudless sky.  Something was gathering behind him, something was
about to fall.  He recognised the familiar feeling that he knew of old,
the subterranean thrill, the rich, sweet pain, the power, the reality.
It was the wavy feeling.

Balanced on his ski, the sealskin strips gripping the icy ridge securely,
he turned instinctively to seek the reason, if any were visible, of the
abrupt revival.  His mind, helped by the stimulating air and sunshine,
worked swiftly.  The odd confusion clouded his faculties still, as in a
dream state, but he pierced it in several directions simultaneously.

Was it that, envying another's youth, he had re-entered imaginatively his
own youthful feelings?  He looked down at the rest of the party climbing
towards him.  And doing so, he picked out the slim figure of Nagorsky's
sister, a girl whose winter costume became her marvellously, and whom the
happy intimacy of the hotel life had made so desirable that an expedition
without her seemed a lost, blank day.  Unless she was of the party there
was no sunshine.  He watched her now, looking adorable in her big gauntlet
gloves, her short skirt, her tasselled cap of black and gold, a fairy
figure on the big snowfield, filling the world with sunshine--and knew
abruptly that she meant to him just exactly--nothing.  The intensity of
the wavy feeling reduced her to an unreality.

It was not she who brought the great emotion.

The confusion in him deepened.  Another scale of measurement appeared.
The crowded intervening years now seemed but a pause, a brief delay; he
had run down a side track and returned.  _He_ had not grown older.
Seen by the grand scale to which the Wave and 'sea' belonged, he had
scarcely moved from the old starting-point, where, far away in some
unassailable recess of life, still waiting for him, stood--Lettice Aylmer.

Turning his eyes, then, from the approaching climbers, he glanced at the
steep slope above him, and saw--as once before on the English coast--
something that took his breath away and made his muscles weak.  He stared
up at it.  It looked down at him.

Five hundred feet above, outlined against the sky of crystal clearness,
ran a colossal wave of solid snow.  At the highest point it was, of
course, a cornice, but towards the east, whence came the prevailing
weather, the wind had so manipulated the mass that it formed a curling
billow, twenty or thirty feet in depth, leaping over in the very act of
breaking, yet arrested just before it fell.  It hung waiting in mid-air,
perfectly moulded, a wave--but a wave of snow.

It swung along the ridge for half a mile and more: it seemed to fill the
sky; it rose out of the sea of eternal snow below it, poised between the
earth and heavens.  In the hollow beneath its curve lay purple shadows the
eye could not pierce.  And the similarity to the earlier episode struck
him vividly; in each case Nature assisted with a visible wave as by way of
counterpart; each time, too, there was a girl--as though some significance
of sex hid in the 'wavy feeling.' He was profoundly puzzled.

The same second, in this wintry world where movement, sound, and perfume
have no place, there stole to his nostrils across the desolate ranges
another detail.  It was more intimate in its appeal even than the wavy
feeling, yet was part of it.  He recognised the Whiff.  And the joint
attack, both by its suddenness and by its intensity, overwhelmed him.
Only the Sound was lacking, but that, too, he felt, was on the way.
Already a sharp instinctive movement was running down his legs.  He began
to shuffle on his ski. . . .

A chorus of voices, as from far away, broke round him, disturbing the
intense stillness; and he knew that the others had reached the ridge.
With a violent effort he mastered the ridiculous movement of his
disobedient legs, but what really saved him from embarrassing notice was
the breathless state of his companions, and the fact that his action
looked after all quite natural--he seemed merely rubbing his ski along the
snow to clean their under-surface.

Exclamations in French, English, Polish rose on all sides, as the view
into the deep opposing valley caught the eye, and a shower of questions
all delivered at once, drew attention from himself.  What scenery, what a
sky, what masses of untrodden snow!  Should they lunch on the ridge or
continue to the summit?  What were the names of all these peaks, and was
the Danube visible?  How lucky there was no wind, and how they pitied the
people who stayed behind in the hotels!  Sweaters and woollen waistcoats
emerged from half a dozen knapsacks, cooking apparatus was produced, one
chose a spot to make a fire, while another broke the dead branches from a
stunted pine, and in five minutes had made a blaze behind a little wall of
piled-up snow.  The Polish girl came up and asked Tom for his Zeiss
glasses, examined the soaring slope beyond, then obediently put on the
extra sweater he held out for her.  He hardly saw her face, and certainly
did not notice the expression in her eyes.  All took off their ski and
plunged them upright in the nearest drift.  The sun blazed everywhere, the
snow crystals sparkled.  They settled down for lunch, a small dark clot of
busy life upon the vast expanse of desolate snow . . . and anything
unusual about Tom Kelverdon, muffled to the throat against the freezing
cold, his eyes, moreover, concealed by green snow-spectacles, was
certainly not noticed.

Another party, besides, was discovered climbing upwards along their own
laborious track: in the absorbing business of satisfying big appetites,
tending the fire, and speculating who these other skiers might be, Tom's
silence caused no comment.  His self-control, for the rest, was soon
recovered.  But his interest in the expedition had oddly waned; he was
still searching furiously in his thoughts for an explanation of the
unexpected 'attack,' waiting for the Sound, but chiefly wondering why his
boyhood's nightmare had never revealed that the Wave was of snow instead
of water--and, at the same time, oddly convinced that he had moved but
_one_ stage nearer to its final elucidation.  That it was solid he had
already discovered, but that it was actually of snow left a curious doubt
in him.

Of all this he was thinking as he devoured his eggs and sandwiches,
something still trembling in him, nerves keenly sensitive, but not _quite_
persuaded that this wave of snow was the sufficient cause of what he had
just experienced--when at length the other climbers, moving swiftly, came
close enough to be inspected.  The customary remarks and criticisms passed
from mouth to mouth, with warnings to lower voices since sound carried too
easily in the rarefied air.  One of the party was soon recognised as the
hotel doctor, and the other, first set down as a Norwegian owing to his
light hair, shining hatless in the sunlight, proved on closer approach to
be an Englishman--both men evidently experienced and accomplished
'runners.'

In any other place the two parties would hardly have spoken, settling down
into opposing camps of hostile silence; but in the lonely winter mountains
human relationship becomes more natural; the time of day was quickly
passed, and details of the route exchanged; the doctor and his friend
mingled easily with the first arrivals; all agreed spontaneously to take
the run home together; and finally, when names were produced with laughing
introductions, the Englishman--by one of those coincidences people pretend
to think strange, but that actually ought to occur more often than they
do--turned out to be known to Tom, and after considerable explanations was
proved to be more than that--a cousin.

Welcoming the diversion, making the most of it in fact, Kelverdon
presented Anthony Winslowe to his Polish companions with a certain zeal to
which the new arrival responded with equal pleasure.  The light-haired
blue-eyed Englishman, young and skilful on his ski, formed a distinct
addition to the party.  He was tall, with a slight stoop about the
shoulders that suggested study; he was gay and very easy-going too.
It was 'Tom' and 'Tony' before lunch was over; they recalled their private
school, a fight, an eternal friendship vowed after it, and the twenty
intervening years melted as though they had not been.

'Of course,' Tom said, proud of his new-found cousin, 'and I've read your
bird books, what's more.  By Jove, you're quite an authority on natural
history, aren't you?'

The other modestly denied any notoriety, but the girls, especially
Nagorsky's sister, piqued by Tom's want of notice, pressed for details in
their pretty broken English.  It became a merry and familiar party, as the
way is with easy foreigners, particularly when they meet in such wild and
unconventional surroundings.  Winslowe had lantern slides in his trunk:
that night he promised to show them: they chattered and paid compliments
and laughed, Tony explaining that he was on his way to Egypt to study the
bird-life along the Nile.  Natural history was his passion; he talked
delightfully; he made the bird and animal life seem real and interesting;
there was imagination, humour, lightness in him.  There was a fascination,
too, not due to looks alone.  It was in his atmosphere, what is currently,
perhaps, called magnetism.

'No animals _here_ for you,' said a girl, pointing to the world of white
death about them.

'There's something better,' he said quickly in quite decent Polish.
'We're all in the animal kingdom, you know.'  And he glanced with a bow of
admiration at the speaker, whom the others instantly began to tease.
It was Irena, Nagorsky's sister; she flushed and laughed.  'We thought,'
she said, 'you were Norwegian, because of your light hair, and the way you
moved on your ski.'

'A great compliment,' he rejoined, 'but I saw _you_ long ago on the ridge,
and I knew at once that you were--Polish.'

The girl returned his bow.  'The largest compliment,' she answered gaily,
'I had ever in my life.'

Tom had only arrived two days before, bringing a letter of introduction to
the doctor, and that night he changed his hotel, joining his new friends
and his cousin at the Grand.  An obvious flirtation, possibly something
more, sprung up spontaneously between him and the Polish girl, but
Kelverdon welcomed it and felt no jealousy.  'Not trespassing, old chap,
am I?' Tony asked jokingly, having divined on the mountains that the girl
was piqued.  'On the contrary,' was the honest assurance given frankly,
'I'm relieved.  A delightful girl, though, isn't she?  And fascinatingly
pretty!'

For the existence of Nagorsky's sister had become suddenly to him of no
importance whatsoever.  It was strange enough, but the vivid recurrence of
long-forgotten symbols that afternoon upon the heights had restored to him
something he had curiously forgotten, something he had shamefully
neglected, almost, it seemed, had been in danger of losing altogether.
It came back upon him now.  He clung desperately to it as to a real, a
vital, a necessary thing.  It was a genuine relief that the relationship
between him and the girl might be ended thus.  In any case, he reflected,
it would have 'ended thus' a little later--like all the others.  No trace
or sign of envy stayed in him.  Irena and Tony, anyhow, seemed admirably
suited to one another; he noticed on the long run home how naturally they
came together.  And even his own indifference would not bring her back to
him.  He felt quite pleased and satisfied.  He had a long talk with Tony
before going to bed.  He felt drawn to him.  There was a spontaneous
innate sympathy between them.

They had many other talks together, and Tom liked his interesting,
brilliant cousin.  A week passed; dances, ski-ing trips, skating, and the
usual programme of wintry enjoyments filled the time too quickly;
companionship became intimacy; all sat at the same table: Tony became a
general favourite.  He had just that combination of reserve and abandon
which--provided something genuine lies behind--attracts the majority of
people who, being dull, have neither.  Most are reserved, through
emptiness, or else abandoned--also through emptiness.  Tony Winslowe, full
of experience and ideas, vivid experience and original ideas, combined the
two in rarest equipoise.  It was spontaneous, and not calculated in him.
There was a stimulating quality in his personality.  Like those tiny,
exciting Japanese tales that lead to the edge of a precipice, then end
with unexpected abruptness that is their purpose, he led all who liked him
to the brink of a delightful revelation--then paused, stopped, vanished.
And all did like him.  He was light and gay, for all the depth in him.
Something of the child peeped out.  He won Tom Kelverdon's confidence
without an effort.  He also won the affectionate confidence of the Polish
girl.

'You're not married, Tony, are you?' Tom asked him.

'Married!' Tony answered with a flush--he flushed so easily when teased--
'I love my wild life and animals far too much.'  He stammered slightly.
Then he looked up quickly into his cousin's eyes with frankness.
Tom, without knowing why, almost felt ashamed of having asked it.  'I--I
never can go beyond a certain point,' he said, 'with girls.  Something
always holds me back.  Odd--isn't it?'  He hesitated.  Then this flashed
from him: 'Bees never sip the last, the sweetest drop of honey from the
rose, you know.  The sunset always leaves one golden cloud adrift--eh?'
So there was poetry in him too!

And Tom, simpler, as well as more rigidly moulded, felt a curious touch of
passionate sympathy as he heard it.  His heart went out to the other
suddenly with a burst of confidence.  Some barrier melted in him and
disappeared.  For the first time in his life he knew the inclination, even
the desire, to speak of things hidden deep within his heart.  His cousin
would understand.

And Tony's sudden, wistful silence invited the confession.  They had
already been talking of their forgotten youthful days together.
The ground was well prepared.  They had even talked of his sister, Mary,
and her marriage.  Tony remembered her distinctly.  He spoke of it,
leaning forward and putting a hand on his cousin's knee.  Tom noticed
vaguely the size of the palm, the wrist, the fingers--they seemed
disproportionate.  They were ugly hands.  But it was subconscious notice.
His mind was on another thing.

'I say,' Tom began with a sudden plunge, 'you know a lot about birds and
natural history--biology too, I suppose.  Have you ever heard of the
spiral movement?'

'Spinal, did you say?' queried the other, turning the stem of his glass
and looking up.

'No--_spiral_,'  Tom repeated, laughing dryly in spite of himself.
'I mean the idea--that evolution, whether individually in men and animals,
or with nations--historically, that is--is not in a straight line ahead,
but moves upwards--in a spiral?'


'It's in the air,' replied Tony vaguely, yet somehow as if he knew a great
deal more about it.  'The movement of the race, you mean?'

'And of the individual too.  We're here, I mean, for the purpose of
development--whatever one's particular belief may be--and that this
development, instead of going forwards in a straight line, has a kind of--
spiral movement--upwards?'

Tony looked wonderfully wise.  'I've heard of it,' he said.  'The spiral
movement, as you say, is full of suggestion.  It's common among plants.
But I don't think science--biology, at any rate--takes much account of
it.'

Tom interrupted eagerly, and with a certain grave enthusiasm that
evidently intrigued his companion.  'I mean--a movement that is always
upwards, always getting higher, and always looking down upon what has gone
before.  That, if it's true, a soul can look back--look down upon what it
has been through before, but from a higher point--do you see?'

Tony emptied his glass and then lit a cigarette.  'I see right enough,' he
said at length, quick and facile to appropriate any and every idea he came
across, yet obviously astonished by his companion's sudden seriousness.
'Only the other day I read that humanity, for instance, is just now above
the superstitious period--of the Middle Ages, say--going over it again--
but that the recrudescence everywhere of psychic interests--
fortune-telling, palmistry, magic, and the rest--has become
quasi-scientific.  It's going through the same period, but seeks to
explain and understand.  It's above it--one stage or so.  Is that what you
mean, perhaps?'

Tom drew in his horns, though for the life of him he could not say why.
Tony appropriated his own idea too easily somehow--had almost read his
thoughts.  Vaguely he resented it.  Tony had stolen from him--offended
against some schoolboy _meum_ and _tuum_ standard.

'That's it--the idea, at any rate,' he said, wondering why confidence had
frozen in him.  'Interesting, rather, isn't it?'

And then abruptly he found that he was staring at his cousin's hands,
spread on the table palm downwards.  He had been staring at them for some
time, but unconsciously.  Now he saw them.  And there was something about
them that he did not like.  Absurd as it seemed, his change of mood had to
do with those big, ungainly hands, tanned a deep brown-black by the sun.
A faint shiver ran through him.  He looked away.

'Extraordinary,' Tony went chattering on.  'It explains these new wild
dances perhaps.  Anything more spiral and twisty than these modern
gyrations I never saw!'  He turned it off in his light amusing way, yet as
though quite familiar with the deeper aspects of the question--if he
cared.  'And what the body does,' he added, 'the mind has already done a
little time before!'

He laughed, but whether he was in earnest, or merely playing with the
idea, was uncertain.  What had stopped Tom was, perhaps, that they were
not in the same key together; Tom had used a word he rarely cared to use--
soul--it had cost him a certain effort--but his cousin had not responded.
That, and the hands, explained his change of mood.  For the first time it
occurred to his honest, simple mind that Tony was of other stuff, perhaps,
than he had thought.  That remark about the bees and sunset jarred a
little.  The lightness suggested insincerity almost.

He shook the notion off, for it was disagreeable, ungenerous as well.
This was holiday-time, and serious discussion was out of place.  The airy
lightness in his cousin was just suited to the conditions of a
winter-sport hotel; it was what made him so attractive to all and sundry,
so easy to get on with.  Yet Tom would have liked to confide in him, to
have told him more, asked further questions and heard the answers;
stranger still, he would have liked to lead from the spiral to the wave,
to his own wavy feeling, and, further even--almost to speak of Lettice and
his boyhood nightmare.  He had never met a man in regard to whom he felt
so forthcoming in this way.  Tony surely had seriousness and depth in him;
this irresponsibility was on the surface only. . . . There was a queer
confusion in his mind--several incongruous things trying to combine. . . .

'I knew a princess once--the widow of a Russian,' Tony was saying.
He had been talking on, gaily, lightly, for some time, but Tom, busy with
these reflections, had not listened properly.  He now looked up sharply,
something suddenly alert in him.  'They're all princes in Russia,' Tony
laughed; 'it means less than Count in France or _von_  in Germany.'
He stopped and drained his glass.  'But you know,' he went on, his
thoughts half elsewhere, it seemed, 'it's bad for a country when titles
are too common, it lowers the aristocratic ideal.  In the Caucasus--
Batoum, for instance--every Georgian is a noble, your hotel porter a
prince.'  He broke off abruptly as though reminded of something.
'Of course!' he exclaimed, 'I was going to tell you about the Russian
woman I knew who had something of that idea of yours.'  He stopped as his
eye caught his cousin's empty glass.  'Let's have another,' he said,
beckoning to the waitress, 'it's very light stuff, this beer.  These long
ski-trips give one an endless thirst, don't they?'  Tom didn't know
whether he said yes or no.  'What idea?' he asked quickly.  'What do you
mean exactly?'  A curious feeling of familiarity stirred in him.
This conversation had happened before.

'Eh?' Tony glanced up as though he had again forgotten what he was going
to say.  'Oh yes,' he went on, 'the Russian woman, the Princess I met in
Egypt.  She talked a bit like that once . . .  I remember now.'

'Like what?'  Tom felt a sudden, breathless curiosity in him: he was
afraid the other would change his mind, or pass to something else, or
forget what he was going to say.  It would prove another Japanese tale--
disappear before it satisfied.

But Tony went on at last, noticing, perhaps, his cousin's interest.

'I was up at Edfu after birds,' he said, 'and she had a _dahabieh_ on the
river.  Some friends took me there to tea, or something.  It was nothing
particular.  Only it occurred to me just now when you talked of spirals
and things.'

'_You_ talked about the spiral?' Tom asked.  'Talked with _her_ about it,
I mean?'  He was slow, almost stupid compared to the other, who seemed to
flash lightly and quickly over a dozen ideas at once.  But there was this
real, natural sympathy between them both again.  It seemed he knew exactly
what his cousin was going to say.

Tony, blowing the foam off his beer glass, proceeded to quench his
wholesome thirst.  'Not exactly,' he said at length, 'but we talked, I
remember, along that line.  I was explaining about the flight of birds--
that all wild animal life moves in a spontaneous sort of natural rhythm--
with an unconscious grace, I mean, we've lost because we think too much.
Birds in particular rise and fall with a swoop, the simplest, freest
movement in the world--like a wave----'

'Yes?' interrupted Tom, leaning over the table a little and nearly
upsetting his untouched glass.  'I like that idea.  It's true.'

'And--oh, that all the forces known to science move in a similar way--by
wave-form, don't you see?  Something like that it was.'  He took another
draught of the nectar his day's exertions had certainly earned.

'_She_ said that?' asked Tom, watching his cousin's face buried in the
enormous mug.

Tony set it down with a sigh of intense satisfaction, '_I_ said it,' he
exclaimed with a frank egoism.  'You're too tired after all your falls
this afternoon to listen properly.  _I_ was the teacher on that occasion,
she the adoring listener!  But if you want to know what _she_ said too,
I'll tell you.'

Tom waited; he raised his glass, pretending to drink; if he showed too
much interest, the other might swerve off again to something else.
He knew what was coming, yet could not have actually foretold it.
He recognised it only the instant afterwards.

'She talked about water,' Tony went on, as though he had difficulty in
recalling what she really had said, 'and I think she had water on the
brain,' he added lightly.  'The Nile had bewitched her probably; it
affects most of 'em out there--the women, that is.  She said life moved
in a stream--that she moved down a stream, or something, and that only
things going down the stream with her were real.  Anything on the banks--
stationary, that is--was not real.  Oh, she said a lot.  I've really
forgotten now--it was a year or two ago--but I remember her mentioning
shells and the spiral twist of shells.  In fact,' he added, as if there
was no more to tell, 'I suppose that's what made me think of her just
now--your mentioning the spiral movement.'

The door of the room, half _cafe_ and half bar, where the peasants sat at
wooden tables about them, opened, and the pretty head of Irena Nagorsky
appeared.  A burst of music came in with her.  'We dance,' she said, a
note of reproach as well as invitation in her voice--then vanished.
Tony, leaving his beer unfinished, laughed at his cousin and went after
her.  'My last night,' he said cheerily.  'Must be gay and jolly.  I'm off
to Trieste tomorrow for Alexandria.  See you later, Tom--unless you're
coming to dance too.'

But, though they saw each other many a time again that evening, there was
no further conversation.  Next day the party broke up, Tom returning to
the Water Works his firm was constructing outside Warsaw, and Tony taking
the train for Budapesth _en route_ for Trieste and Egypt.  He urged Tom to
follow him as soon as his work was finished, gave the Turf Club, Cairo, as
his permanent address where letters would always reach him sooner or
later, waved his hat to the assembled group upon the platform, and was
gone.  The last detail of him visible was the hand that held the waving
hat.  It looked bigger, darker, thought Tom, than ever.  It was almost
disfiguring.  It stirred a hint of dislike in him.  He turned his eyes
away.

But Tom Kelverdon remembered that last night in the hotel for another
reason too.  In the small hours of the morning he woke up, hearing a sound
close beside him in the room.  He listened a moment, then turned on the
light above the bed.  The sound, of an unusual and peculiar character,
continued faintly.  But it was not actually in the room as he first
supposed.  It was outside.

More than ten years had passed since he had heard that sound.  He had
expected it that day on the mountains when the wavy feeling and the Whiff
had come to him.  Sooner or later he felt positive he would hear it.
He heard it now.  It had merely been delayed, postponed.  Something
gathering slowly and steadily behind his life was drawing nearer--had come
already very close.  He heard the dry, rattling Sound that was associated
with the Wave and with the Whiff.  In it, too, was a vague familiarity.

And then he realised that the wind was rising.  A frozen pine-branch,
stiff with little icicles, was rattling and scraping faintly outside the
wooden framework of the double windows.  It was the icy branch that made
the dry, rattling sound.  He listened intently; the sound was repeated at
certain intervals, then ceased as the wind died down.  And he turned over
and fell asleep again, aware that what he had heard was an imitation only,
but an imitation strangely accurate--of a reality.  Similarly, the wave of
snow was but an imitation of a reality to come.  This reality lay waiting
still beyond him.  One day--one day soon--he would know it face to face.
The Wave, he felt, was rising behind his life, and his life was rising
with it towards a climax.  On the little level platform where the years
had landed him for a temporary pause, he began to shuffle with his feet in
dream.  And something deeper than his mind--looked back. . . .

The instinct, or by whatever name he called that positive, interior
affirmation, proved curiously right.  Life rose with the sweep and power
of a wave, bearing him with it towards various climaxes.  His powers, such
as they were, seemed all in the ascendant.  He passed from that level
platform as with an upward rush, all his enterprises, all his energies,
all that he wanted and tried to do, surging forward towards the crest of
successful accomplishment.

And a dozen times at least he caught himself asking mentally for his
cousin Tony; wishing he had confided in him more, revealed more of this
curious business to him, exchanged sympathies with him about it all.
A kind of yearning rose in him for his vanished friend.  Almost he had
missed an opportunity.  Tony would have understood and helped to clear
things up; to no other man of his acquaintance could he have felt
similarly.  But Tony was now out of reach in Egypt, chasing his birds
among the temples of the haunted Nile, already, doubtless, the centre of a
circle of new friends and acquaintances who found him as attractive and
fascinating as the little Zakopane group had found him.  Tony must keep.

Tom Kelverdon meanwhile, his brief holiday over, returned to his work at
Warsaw, and brought it to a successful conclusion with a rapidity no one
had foreseen, and he himself had least of all expected.  The power of the
rising wave was in all he did.  He could not fail.  Out of the success
grew other contracts highly profitable to his firm.  Some energy that
overcame all obstacles, some clarity of judgment that selected unerringly
the best ways and means, some skill and wisdom in him that made all his
powers work in unison till they became irresistible, declared themselves,
yet naturally and without adventitious aid.  He seemed to have found
himself anew.  He felt pleased and satisfied with himself: always
self-confident, as a man of ability ought to be, he now felt proud; and,
though conceit had never been his failing, this new-born assurance moved
distinctly towards pride.  In a moment of impulsive pleasure he wrote to
Tony, at the Turf Club, Cairo, and told him of his success. . . .
The senior partner, his father's old friend, wrote and asked his advice
upon certain new proposals the firm had in view; it was a question of big
docks to be constructed at Salonica, and something to do with a barrage on
the Nile as well--there were several juicy contracts to choose between,
it seemed,--and Sir William proposed a meeting in Switzerland, on his way
out to the Near East; he would break the journey before crossing the
Simplon for Milan and Trieste.  The final telegram said Montreux, and
Kelverdon hurried to Vienna and caught the night express to Lausanne by
way of Bale.

And at Montreux further evidence that the wave of life was rising then
declared itself, when Sir William, having discussed the various
propositions with him, listening with attention, even with deference, to
Kelverdon's opinion, told him quietly that his brother's retirement left a
vacancy in the firm which--he and his co-directors hoped confidently--
Kelverdon might fill with benefit to all concerned.  A senior partnership
was offered to him before he was thirty-five!  Sir William left the same
night for his steamer, and Tom was to wait at Montreux, perhaps a month,
perhaps six weeks, until a personal inspection of the several sites
enabled the final decision to be made; he was then to follow and take
charge of the work itself.

Tom was immensely pleased.  He wrote to his married sister in her Surrey
vicarage, told her the news with a modesty he did not really feel, and
sent her a handsome cheque by way of atonement for his bursting pride.

For simple natures, devoid of a saving introspection and self-criticism,
upon becoming unexpectedly successful easily develop an honest yet none
the less corroding pride.  Tom felt himself rather a desirable person
suddenly; by no means negligible at any rate; pleased and satisfied with
himself, if not yet overweeningly so.  His native confidence took this
exaggerated turn and twist.  His star was in the ascendant, a man to be
counted with. . . .

The hidden weakness rose--as all else in him was rising--with the Wave.
But he did not call it pride, because he did not recognise it.  It was
akin, perhaps, to that fatuous complacency of the bigoted religionist who,
thinking he has discovered absolute truth, looks down from his narrow cell
upon the rest of the world with a contemptuous pity that in itself is but
the ignorance of crass self-delusion.  Tom felt very sure of himself.
For a rising wave drags up with it the mud and rubbish that have hitherto
lain hidden out of sight in the ground below.  Only with the fall do these
undesirable elements return to their proper place again--where they belong
and are of value.  Sense of proportion is recovered only with perspective,
and Tom Kelverdon, rising too rapidly, began to see himself in
disproportionate relation to the rest of life.  In his solid, perhaps
stolid, way he considered himself a Personality--indispensable to no small
portion of the world about him.



PART II


