

It was towards the end of March, and spring was flowing down almost
visibly from the heights behind the town.  April stood on tiptoe in the
woods, finger on lip, ready to dance out between the sunshine and the
rain.

Above four thousand feet the snows of winter still clung thickly, but the
lower slopes were clear, men and women already working busily among the
dull brown vineyards.  The early mist cleared off by ten o'clock, letting
through floods of sunshine that drenched the world, sparkled above the
streets crowded with foreigners from many lands, and lay basking with an
appearance of July upon the still, blue lake.  The clear brilliance of the
light had a quality of crystal.  Sea-gulls fluttered along the shores,
tame as ducks and eager to be fed.  They lent to this inland lake an
atmosphere of the sea, and Kelverdon found himself thinking of some
southern port, Marseilles, Trieste, Toulon.

In the morning he watched the graceful fishing-boats set forth, and at
night, when only the glitter of the lamps painted the gleaming water for a
little distance, he saw the swans, their heads tucked back impossibly into
the centre of their backs, scarcely moving on the unruffled surface as
they slept into the night.  The first sounds he heard soon after dawn
through his wide-opened windows were the whanging strokes of their
powerful wings flying low across the misty water; they flew in twos and
threes, coming from their nests now building in the marshes beyond
Villeneuve.  This, and the screaming of the gulls, usually woke him.
The summits of Savoy, on the southern shore, wore pink and gold upon their
heavy snows; the sharp air nipped; far in the west a few stars peeped
before they faded; and in the distance he heard the faint, drum-like
mutter of a paddle-steamer, reminding him that he was in a tourist centre
after all, and that this was busy, little, organised Switzerland.

But sometimes it was the beating strokes of the invisible paddle-steamer
that woke him, for it seemed somehow a continuation of dreams he could
never properly remember.  That he had been dreaming busily every night of
late he knew as surely as that he instantly forgot these dreams.
That muffled, drum-like thud, coming nearer and nearer towards him out of
the quiet distance, had some connection--undecipherable as yet--with the
curious, dry, rattling sound belonging to the Wave.  The two were so
dissimilar, however, that he was unable to discover any theory that could
harmonise them.  Nor, for that matter, did he seek it.  He merely
registered a mental note, as it were, in passing.  The beating and the
rattling were associated.

He chose a small and quiet hotel, as his liking was, and made himself
comfortable, for he might have six weeks to wait for Sir William's
telegram, or even longer, if, as seemed likely, the summons came by post.
And Montreux was a pleasant place in early spring, before the heat and
glare of summer scorched the people out of it towards the heights.
He took long walks towards the snow-line beyond Les Avants and Les
Pleiades, where presently the carpets of narcissus would smother the
fields with white as though winter had returned to fling, instead of
crystal flakes, a hundred showers of white feathers upon the ground.
He discovered paths that led into the whispering woods of pine and
chestnut.  The young larches wore feathery green upon their crests,
primroses shone on slopes where the grass was still pale and dead,
snowdrops peeped out beside the wooden fences, and here and there, shining
out of the brown decay of last year's leaves and thick ground-ivy, he
found hepaticas.  He had never felt the spring so marvellous before; it
rose in a wave of colour out of the sweet brown earth.

Though outwardly nothing of moment seemed to fill his days, inwardly he
was aware of big events--maturing.  There was this sense of approach, of
preparation, of gathering.  How insipid external events were after all,
compared to the mass, the importance of interior changes!  A change of
heart, an altered point of view, a decision taken--these were the big
events of life.

Yet it was a pleasant thing to be a senior partner.  Here by the quiet
lake, stroking himself complacently, he felt that life was very active,
very significant, as he wondered what the choice would be.  He rather
hoped for Egypt, on the whole.  He could look up Tony and the birds.
They could go after duck and snipe together along the Nile.  He would,
moreover, be quite an important man out there.  Pride and vanity rose in
him, but unobserved.  For the Wave was in this too.

One afternoon, late, he returned from a long scramble among icy rocks
about the Dent de Jaman, changed his clothes, and sat with a cigarette
beside the open window, watching the throng of people underneath.
In a steady stream they moved along the front of the lake, their voices
rising through the air, their feet producing a dull murmur as of water.
The lake was still as glass; gulls asleep on it in patches, and here and
there a swan, looking like a bundle of dry white paper, floated idly.
Off-shore lay several fishing-boats, becalmed; and far beyond them, a
rowing-skiff broke the surface into two lines of widening ripples.
They seemed floating in mid-air against the evening glow.  The Savoy Alps
formed a deep blue rampart, and the serrated battlements of the Dent du
Midi, full in the blaze of sunset, blocked the Rhone Valley far away with
its formidable barricade.

He watched the glow of approaching sunset with keen enjoyment; he sat
back, listening to the people's voices, the gentle lap of the little
waves; and the pleasant lassitude that follows upon hard physical exertion
combined with the even pleasanter stimulus of the tea to produce a state
of absolute contentment with the world. . . .

Through the murmur of feet and voices, then, and from far across the
water, stole out another sound that introduced into his peaceful mood an
element of vague disquiet.  He moved nearer to the window and looked out.
The steamer, however, was invisible; the sea of shining haze towards
Geneva hid it still; he could not see its outline.  But he heard the
echoless mutter of the paddle-wheels, and he knew that it was coming
nearer.  Yet at first it did not disturb him so much as that, for a
moment, he heard no other sound: the voices, the tread of feet, the
screaming of the gulls all died away, leaving this single, distant beating
audible alone--as though the entire scenery combined to utter it.
And, though no ordinary echo answered it, there seemed--or did he fancy
it?--a faint, interior response within himself.  The blood in his veins
went pulsing in rhythmic unison with this remote hammering upon the water.

He leaned forward in his chair, watching the people, listening intently,
almost as though he expected something to happen, when immediately below
him chance left a temporary gap in the stream of pedestrians, and in this
gap--for a second merely--a figure stood sharply defined, cut off from the
throng, set by itself, alone.  His eyes fixed instantly upon its
appearance, movements, attitude.  Before he could think or reason he heard
himself exclaim aloud:

'Why--it's----'

He stopped.  The rest of the sentence remained unspoken.  The words rushed
down again.  He swallowed, and with a gulp he ended--as though the other
pedestrians all were men--'----a woman!'

The next thing he knew was that the cigarette was burning his fingers--had
been burning them for several seconds.  The figure melted back into the
crowd.  The throng closed round her.  His eyes searched uselessly; no
space, no gap was visible; the stream of people was continuous once more.
Almost, it seemed, he had not really seen her--had merely thought her--up
against the background of his mind.

For ten minutes, longer perhaps, he sat by that open window with eyes
fastened on the moving crowd.  His heart was beating oddly; his breath
came rapidly.  'She'll pass by presently again,' he thought; 'she'll come
back!'  He looked alternately to the right and to the left, until,
finally, the sinking sun blazed too directly in his eyes for him to see at
all.  The glare blurred everybody into a smudged line of golden colour,
and the faces became a series of artificial suns that mocked him.

He did, then, an unusual thing--out of rhythm with his normal self,--he
acted on impulse.  Kicking his slippers off, he quickly put on a pair of
boots, took his hat and stick, and went downstairs.  There was no
reflection in him; he did not pause and ask himself a single question; he
ran to join the throng of people, moved up and down with them, in and out,
passing and re-passing the same groups over and over again, but seeing no
sign of the particular figure he sought so eagerly.  She was dressed in
black, he knew, with a black fur boa round her neck; she was slim and
rather tall; more than that he could not say.  But the poise and attitude,
the way the head sat on the shoulders, the tilt upwards of the chin--he
was as positive of recognising these as if he had seen her close instead
of a hundred yards away.

The sun was down behind the Jura Mountains before he gave up the search.
Sunset slipped insensibly into dusk.  The throng thinned out quickly at
the first sign of chill.  A dozen times he experienced the thrill--his
heart suddenly arrested--of seeing her, but on each occasion it proved to
be some one else.  Every second woman seemed to be dressed in black that
afternoon, a loose black boa round the neck.  His eyes ached with the
strain, the change of focus, the question that burned behind and in them,
the joy--the strange rich pain.

But half, at least, of these dull people, he renumbered, were birds of
passage only; to-morrow or the next day they would take the train.
He said to himself a dozen times, 'Once more to the end and back again!'
For she, too, might be a bird of passage, leaving to-morrow or the next
day, leaving that very night, perhaps.  The thought afflicted, goaded him.
And on getting back to the hotel he searched the _Liste des Etrangers_ as
eagerly as he had searched the crowded front--and as uselessly, since he
did not even know what name he hoped to find.

But later that evening a change came over him.  He surprised some sense of
humour: catching it in the act, he also surprised himself a little--
smiling at himself.  The laughter, however, was significant.  For it was
just that restless interval after dinner when he knew not what to do with
the hours until bedtime: whether to sit in his room and think and read, or
to visit the principal hotels in the hope of chance discovery.  He was
even considering this wild-goose chase to himself, when suddenly he
realised that his course of procedure was entirely the wrong one.

This thing was going to happen anyhow, it was inevitable; but--it would
happen in its own time and way, and nothing he might do could hurry it.
To hunt in this violent manner was to delay its coming.  To behave as
usual was the proper way.  It was then he smiled.

He crossed the hall instead, and put his head in at the door of the little
Lounge.  Some Polish people, with whom he had a bowing acquaintance, were
in there smoking.  He had seen them enter, and the Lounge was so small
that he could hardly sit in their presence without some effort at
conversation.  And, feeling in no mood for this, he put his head past the
edge of the glass door, glanced round carelessly as though looking for
some one--then drew sharply back.  For his heart stopped dead an instant,
then beat furiously, like a piston suddenly released.  On the sofa,
talking calmly to the Polish people, was--the figure.  He recognised her
instantly.

Her back was turned; he did not see her face.  There was a vast excitement
in him that seemed beyond control.  He seemed unable to make up his mind.
He walked round and round the little hall examining intently the notices
upon the walls.  The excitement grew into tumult, as though the meeting
involved something of immense importance to his inmost self--his soul.
It was difficult to account for.  Then a voice behind him said, 'There is
a concert to-night.  Radwan is playing Chopin.  There are tickets in the
Bureau still--if Monsieur cares to go.'  He thanked the speaker without
turning to show his face: while another voice said passionately within
him, 'I was wrong; she is slim, but she is not so tall as I thought.'
And a minute later, without remembering how he got there, he was in his
room upstairs, the door shut safely after him, standing before the mirror
and staring into his own eyes.  Apparently the instinct to see what he
looked like operated automatically.  For he now remembered--realised--
another thing.  Facing the door of the Lounge was a mirror, and their eyes
had met.  He had gazed for an instant straight into the kind and beautiful
Eyes he had first seen twenty years ago--in the Wave.

His behaviour then became more normal.  He did the little, obvious things
that any man would do.  He took a clothes-brush and brushed his coat; he
pulled his waistcoat down, straightened his black tie, and smoothed his
hair, poked his hanging watch-chain back into its pocket.  Then, drawing a
deep breath and compressing his lips, he opened the door and went
downstairs.  He even remembered to turn off the electric light according
to hotel instructions.  'It's perfectly all right,' he thought, as he
reached the top of the stairs.  'Why shouldn't I?  There's nothing unusual
about it.'  He did not take the lift, he preferred action.  Reaching the
_salon_ floor, he heard voices in the hall below.  She was already leaving
therefore, the brief visit over.  He quickened his pace.  There was not
the slightest notion in him what he meant to say.  It merely struck him
that--idiotically--he had stayed longer in his bedroom than he realised;
too long; he might have missed his chance.  The thought urged him forward
more rapidly again.

In the hall--he seemed to be there without any interval of time--he saw
her going out; the swinging doors were closing just behind her.
The Polish friends, having said good-bye, were already rising past him in
the lift.  A minute later he was in the street.  He realised that, because
he felt the cool night air upon his cheeks.  He was beside her--looking
down into her face.

'May I see you back--home--to your hotel?' he heard himself saying.
And then the queer voice--it must have been his own--added abruptly, as
though it was all he really had to say: 'You haven't forgotten me really.
I'm Tommy--Tom Kelverdon.'

Her reply, her gesture, what she did and showed of herself in a word, was
as queer as in a dream, yet so natural that it simply could not have been
otherwise: 'Tom Kelverdon!  So it is!  Fancy--_you_ being here!'
Then: 'Thank you very much.  And suppose we walk; it's only a few
minutes--and quite dry.'

How trivial and commonplace, yet how wonderful!

He remembers that she said something to a coachman who immediately drove
off, that she moved beside him on this Montreux pavement, that they went
up-hill a little, and that, very soon, a brilliant door of glass blazed in
front of them, that she had said, 'How strange that we should meet again
like this.  Do come and see me--any day--just telephone.  I'm staying some
weeks probably,'--and he found himself standing in the middle of the road,
then walking wildly at a rapid pace downhill, he knew not whither, that he
was hot and breathless, that stars were shining, and swans, like bundles
of white newspaper, were asleep on the lake, and--that he had found her.

He had walked and talked with Lettice.  He bumped into more than one
irate pedestrian before he realised it; they knew it better than he did,
apparently.  'It was Lettice Aylmer, Lettice . . .' he kept saying to
himself.  'I've found her.  She shook hands with me.  That was her voice,
her touch, her perfume.  She's here--here in little Montreux--for several
weeks.  After all these years!  Can it be true--really true at last?
She said I might telephone--might go and see her.  She's glad to see me--
again.'

How often he paced the entire length of the deserted front beside the lake
he did not count: it must have been many times, for the hotel door, which
closed at midnight, was locked and the night-porter let him in.  He went
to bed--if there was rose in the eastern sky and upon the summits of the
Dent du Midi, he did not notice it.  He dropped into a half-sleep in which
thought continued but not wearingly.  The excitement of his nerves
relaxed, soothed and mothered by something far greater than his senses,
stronger than his rushing blood.  This greater Rhythm took charge of him
most comfortably.  He fell back into the mighty arms of something that was
rising irresistibly--something inevitable and--half-familiar.  It had long
been gathering; there was no need to ask a thousand questions, no need to
fight it anywhere.  From the moment when he glanced idly into the Lounge
he had been aware of it.  It had driven him downstairs without reflection,
as it had driven him also uphill till the blazing door was reached.
He smelt it, heard it, saw it, touched it.  It was the Wave.

Time certainly proved its unreality that night; the hours seemed both
endless and absurdly brief.  His mind flew round and round in a circle,
lingering over every detail of the short interview with a tumultuous
pleasure that hid pain very thinly.  He felt afraid, felt himself on the
brink of plunging headlong into a gigantic whirlpool.  Yet he wanted to
plunge. . . .  He would. . . .  He had to. . . .  It was irresistible.

He reviewed the scene, holding each detail forcibly still, until the last
delight had been sucked out of it.  At first he remembered next to
nothing--a blur, a haze, the houses flying past him, no feeling of
pavement under his feet, but only her voice saying nothing in particular,
her touch, as he sometimes drew involuntarily against her arm, her eyes
shining up at him.  For her eyes remained the chief impression perhaps--so
kind, so true, so very sweet and frank--soft Irish eyes with something
mysterious and semi-eastern in them.  The conversation seemed to have
entirely escaped recovery.

Then, one by one, he remembered things that she had said.  Sentences
offered themselves of their own accord.  He flung himself upon them,
trying to keep tight hold of their first meaning--before he filled them
with significance of his own.  It was a desperate business altogether;
emotion distorted her simple words so quickly.  'I was thinking of you
only to-day.  I had the feeling you were here.  Curious, wasn't it?'
He distinctly remembered her saying this.  And then another sentence:
'I should have known you anywhere; though, of course, you've changed a
lot.  But I knew your eyes.  Eyes don't change much, do they?'
The meanings he read into these simple phrases filled an hour at least; he
lost entirely their simple first significance.  But this last remark
brought up another in its train.  As the tram went past them she had
raised her voice a little and looked up into his face--it was just then
they had cannonaded.  People who like one another always cannonade, he
reflected.  And her remark--'Ah, it comes back to me.  You're so very like
your sister Mary.  I've seen her several times since the days in Cavendish
Square.  There's a strong family likeness.'

He disliked the last part of the sentence.  Mary, besides, had mentioned
nothing; her rare letters made no reference to it.  The schooldays'
friendship had evaporated perhaps.  This sent his thoughts back upon the
early trail of those distant months when Lettice was at a Finishing School
in France and he had kept that tragic Calendar. . . .

Another sentence interrupted them: 'I had, oddly enough, been thinking of
you this very afternoon.  I knew you the moment you put your head in at
the door, but, for the life of me, I couldn't get the name.  All I got was
'Tommy'!'  And only his sense of humour prevented the obvious rejoinder,
'I wish you would always call me that.'  It struck him sharply.  Such talk
could have no part in a meeting of this kind; the idea of flirtation was
impossible, not even thought of.  Yet twice she had said, 'I was thinking
of you only to-day!'

But other things came back as well.  It was strange how much they had
really said to each other in those few brief minutes.  Next day he
retraced the way and discovered that, even walking quickly, it took him a
good half hour; yet they had walked slowly, even leisurely.  But, try as
he would, he was unable to force deeper meanings into these other remarks
that he recalled.  She was evidently pleased to see him, that at least was
certain, for she had asked him to come and see her, and she meant it.
He remembered his reply, 'I'll come to-morrow--may I?' and then abruptly
realised for the first time that the plunge was taken.  He felt himself
committed, sink or swim.  The Wave already had lifted him off his feet.

And it was on this his whirling thoughts came down to rest at last, and
sleep crept over him--just as dawn was breaking.  He felt himself in the
'sea' with Lettice, there was nothing he could do, no course to choose, no
decision to be made.  Though married, she was somehow free--he felt it in
her attitude.  That sense of fatalism known in boyhood took charge of him.
The Wave was rising towards the moment when it must invariably break and
fall, and every impulse in him rising in it without a shade of denial or
resistance.  It would hurt--the fall and break would cause atrocious pain.
But it was somewhere necessary to him.  No atom of him held back or
hesitated.  For there was joy beyond it somehow--an intense and lasting
joy, like the joy that belongs to growth and development after accepted
suffering.

Vaguely--not put into definite words--it was this he felt, when at length
sleep took him.  Yet just before he slept he remembered two other little
details, and smiled to himself as they rose before his sleepy mind, yet
not understanding exactly why he smiled: for he did not yet know her
name--and there was, of course, a husband.


