

This resumption of a childhood's acquaintance that, by one at least, had
been imaginatively coaxed into a relationship of ideal character, at once
took on a standing of its own.  It started as from a new beginning.

Tom Kelverdon did not forget the childhood part, but he neglected it at
first.  It was as if he met now for the first time--a woman who charmed
him beyond anything known before; he longed for her; that he had longed
for her subconsciously these twenty years slipped somehow or other out of
memory.  With it slipped also those strange corroborative details that
imagination had clung to so tenaciously during the interval.  The Whiff,
the Sound, the other pair of Eyes, the shuffling feet, the joy that
cloaked the singular prophecy of pain--all these, if not entirely
forgotten, ceased to intrude themselves.  Even when looking into her
clear, dark eyes, he no longer quite realised them as the 'eastern eyes'
of his dim, dim dream; they belonged to a woman, and a married woman, whom
he desired with body, heart and soul.  Calm introspection was impossible,
he could only feel, and feel intensely.  He could not fuse this girl and
woman into one continuous picture: each was a fragment of some much older,
larger picture.  But this larger canvas he could never visualise
successfully.  It was coloured, radiant, gorgeous; it blazed as with gold,
a gold of sun and stars.  But the strain of effort caused rupture
instantly.  The vaster memory escaped him.  He was conscious of reserve.

The comedy of telephoning to a name he did not know was obviated next
morning by the arrival of a note: 'Dear Tom Kelverdon,' it began, and was
signed 'Yours, Lettice Jaretzka.'  It invited him to come up for
_dejeuner_ in her hotel.  He went.  The luncheon led naturally to a walk
together afterwards, and then to other luncheons and other walks, to
evening rows upon the lake, and to excursions into the surrounding
country. . . .  They had tea together in the lower mountain inns, picked
flowers, photographed one another, laughed, talked and sat side by side at
concerts or in the little Montreux cinema theatre.  It was all as easy and
natural as any innocent companionship well could be--because it was so
deep.  The foundations were of such solid strength that nothing on the
surface trembled. . . .  Madame de Jaretzka was well known in the hotel--
she came annually, it seemed, about this time and made a lengthy stay,--
but no breath of anything untoward could ever be connected with her.
He, too, was accepted by one and all, no glances came their way.
He was her friend: that was apparently enough.  And though he desired her,
body, heart and soul, he was quick to realise that the first named in the
trio had no role to play.  Something in her, something of attitude and
atmosphere, rendered it inconceivable.  The reserve he was conscious of
lay very deep in him; it lay in her too.  There was a fence, a barrier he
must not, could not pass--both recognised it.  Being a man, romance for
him drew some tendril doubtless from the creative physical, but the shade
of passing disappointment, if it existed, was renounced as instantly as
recognised.  Yet he was not aware at first of any incompleteness in her.
He felt only a bigger thing.  There seemed something in this simple woman
that bore him to the stars.

For simple she undoubtedly was, not in the way of shallowness, but because
her nature seemed at harmony with itself: uncomplex, natural, frank and
open, and with an unconventional carelessness that did no evil for the
reason that she thought and meant none.  She could do things that must
have made an ordinary worldly woman the centre of incessant talk and
scandal.  There was, indeed, an extraordinary innocence about her that
perturbed the judgment, somewhat baffling it.  Whereas with many women it
might have roused the suspicion of being a pose, an affectation, with her,
Tom felt, it was a genuine innocence, beyond words delightful and
refreshing.  And it arose, he soon discovered, from the fact that, being
good and true herself, she thought everybody else was also good and true.
This he realised before two days' intercourse had made it seem as if they
had been together always and were made for one another.  Something bigger
and higher than he had ever felt before stirred in him for this woman,
whom he thought of now invariably as Madame de Jaretzka, rather than as
Lettice of his younger dream.  If she woke something nobler in him that
had slept, he did not label it as such: nor, if a portion of his younger
dream was fulfilling itself before his eyes, in a finer set of terms, did
he think it out and set it down in definite words.  There _was_ this
intense and intimate familiarity between them both, but somehow he did not
call it by these names.  He just thought her wonderful--and longed for
her.  The reserve began to trouble him. . . .

'It's sweet,' she said, 'when real people come together--find each other.'

'Again,' he added.  'You left that out.  For _I've_ never forgotten--all
these years.'

She laughed.  'Well, I'll tell you the truth,' she confessed frankly.
'I hadn't forgotten either; I often thought of you and wondered----'

'What I was like now?'

'What you were doing, where you were,' she said.  'I always knew what you
were like.  But I often wondered how far on you had got.'

'You had no news of me?'

'None.  But I always believed you'd do something big in the world.'

Something in her voice or manner made it wholly natural for him to tell
her of his boyhood love.  He mentioned the Wave and wavy feeling, the
nightmare too, but when he tried to go beyond that, something checked him;
he felt a sudden shyness.  It 'sounds so silly,' was his thought.
'But I always know a real person,' he said aloud, 'anybody who's going to
be real in my life; they always arrive on a wave, as it were.  My wavy
feeling announces them.'  And the interest with which she responded
prevented his regretting having made his confession.

'It's an instinct, I think,' she agreed, 'and instincts are meant to be
listened to.  I've had something similar, though with me it's not a wave.'
Her voice grew slower, she made a pause; when he looked up--her eyes were
gazing across the lake as though in a moment of sudden absent-mindedness.
. . . 'And what's yours?' he asked, wondering why his heart was beating as
though something painful was to be disclosed.

'I see a stream,' she went on slowly, still gazing away from him across
the expanse of shining water, 'a flowing stream--with faces on it.  They
float down with the current.  And when I see one I know it's somebody
real--real to me.  The unreal faces are always on the bank.  I pass them
by.'

'You've seen mine?' he asked, unable to hide the eagerness.  'My face?'

'Often, yes,' she told him simply.  'I dream it usually, I think: but it's
quite vivid.'

'And is that all?  You just see the faces floating down with the current?'

'There's one other thing,' she answered, 'if you'll promise not to laugh.'

'Oh, I won't laugh,' he assured her.  'I'm awfully interested.  It's no
funnier than my Wave, anyhow.'

'They're faces I have to save,' she said.  'Somehow I'm meant to rescue
them.'  In what way she did not know.  'Just keep them above water, I
suppose!'  And the smile in her face gave place to a graver look.
The stream of faces was real to her in the way his Wave was real.
There was meaning in it.  'Only three weeks ago,' she added, 'I saw _you_
like that.'  He asked where it was, and she told him Warsaw.  They
compared notes; they had been in the town together, it turned out.
Their outer paths had been converging for some time, then.

'Why--did you leave?' he asked suddenly.  He wanted to ask why she was
there at all, but something stopped him.

'I usually come here,' she said quietly, 'about this time.  It's restful.
There's peace in these quiet hills above the town, and the lake is
soothing.  I get strength and courage here.'

He glanced at her with astonishment a moment.  Behind the simple language
another meaning flashed.  There was a look in the eyes, a hint in the
voice that betrayed her. . . .  He waited, but she said no more.  Not that
she wished to conceal, but that she did not wish to speak of something.
Warsaw meant pain for her, she came here to rest, to recuperate after a
time of stress and struggle, he felt.  And looking at the face he
recognised for the first time that behind its quiet strength there lay
deep pain and sadness, yet accepted pain and sadness conquered, a
suffering she had turned to sweetness.  Without a particle of proof, he
yet felt sure of this.  And an immense respect woke in him.  He saw her
saving, rescuing others, regardless of herself: he felt the floating faces
real; the stream was life--her life. . . .  And, side by side with the
deep respect, the bigger, higher impulse stirred in him again.  Name it he
could not: it just came: it stole into him like some rare and exquisite
new fragrance, and it came from her. . . .  He saw her far above him,
stooping down from a higher level to reach him with her little hand. . . .
He knew a yearning to climb up to her--a sudden and searching yearning in
his soul.  'She's come back to fetch me,' ran across his mind before he
realised it; and suddenly his heart became so light that he thought he had
never felt such happiness before.  Then, before he realised it, he heard
himself saying aloud--from his heart:

'You do me an awful lot of good--really you do.  I feel better and happier
when I'm with you.  I feel--'  He broke off, aware that he was talking
rather foolishly.  Yet the boyish utterance was honest; she did not think
it foolish apparently.  For she replied at once, and without a sign of
lightness:

'Do I?  Then I mustn't leave you, Tom!'

'Never!' he exclaimed impetuously.

'Until I've saved you.'  And this time she did not laugh.

She was still looking away from him across the water, and the tone was
quiet and unaccented.  But the words rang like a clarion in his mind.
He turned; she turned too: their eyes met in a brief but penetrating gaze.
And for an instant he caught an expression that frightened him, though he
could not understand its meaning.  Her beauty struck him like a sheet of
fire--all over.  He saw gold about her like the soft fire of the southern
stars.  With any other woman, at any other time, he would--but the thought
utterly denied itself before it was half completed even.  It sank back as
though ashamed.  There was something in her that made it ugly, out of
rhythm, undesirable, and undesired.  She would not respond--she would not
understand.

In its place another blazed up with that strange, big yearning at the back
of it, and though he gazed at her as a man gazes at a woman he needs and
asks for, her quiet eyes did not lower or turn aside.  The cheaper feeling
'I'm not worthy of you,' took in his case a stronger form: 'I'll be
better, bigger, for you.'  And then, so gently it might have been a
mother's action, she put her hand on his with firm pressure, and left it
lying there a moment before she withdrew it again.  Her long white glove,
still fastened about the wrist, was flung back so that it left the palm
and fingers bare, and the touch of the soft skin upon his own was
marvellous; yet he did not attempt to seize it, he made no movement in
return.  He kept control of himself in a way he did not understand.
He just sat and looked into her face.  There was an entire absence of
response from her--in one sense.  Something poured from her eyes into his
very soul, but something beautiful, uplifting.  This new yearning emotion
rose through him like a wave, bearing him upwards. . . .  At the same time
he was vaguely aware of a lack as well . . .  of something incomplete and
unawakened. . . .

'Thank you--for saying that,' he was murmuring; 'I shall never forget it,';
and though the suppressed passion changed the tone and made it tremble
even, he held himself as rigid as a statue.  It was she who moved.
She leaned nearer to him.  Like a flower the wind bends on its graceful
stalk, her face floated very softly against his own.  She kissed him.
It was all very swift and sudden.  But, though exquisite, it was not a
woman's kiss. . . .  The same instant she was sitting straight again,
gazing across the blue lake below her.

'You're still a boy,' she said, with a little innocent laugh, 'still a
wonderful, big boy.'

'Your boy,' he returned.  'I always have been.'

There was deep, deep joy in his heart, it lifted him above the world--with
her.  Yet with the joy there was this faint touch of disappointment too.

'But, I say--isn't it awfully strange?' he went on, words failing him
absurdly.  'It's very wonderful, this friendship.  It's so natural.'
Then he began to flush and stammer.

In an even tone of voice she answered: 'It's wonderful, Tom, but it's not
strange.'  And again he was vaguely aware that something which might
have made her words yet more convincing was not there.

'But I've got that curious feeling--I could swear it's all happened
before.'  He moved closer as he spoke; her dress was actually against his
coat, but he could not touch her.  Something made it impossible, wrong,
a false, even a petty thing.  It would have taken away the kiss.
'Have _you_?' he asked abruptly, with an intensity that seemed to startle
her, 'have _you_ got that feeling of familiarity too?'

And for a moment in the middle of their talk they both, for some reason,
grew very thoughtful. . . .

'It had to be--perhaps,' she answered simply a little later.  'We are both
real, so I suppose--yes, it _has_ to be.'

There was the definite feeling that both spoke of a bigger thing that
neither quite understood.  Their eyes searched, but their hearts searched
too.  There was a gap in her that somehow must be filled, Tom felt. . . .
They stared long at one another.  He was close upon the missing thing--
when suddenly she withdrew her eyes.  And with that, as though a wave had
swept them together and passed on, the conversation abruptly changed its
key.  They fell to talking of other things.  The man in him was again
aware of disappointment.

The change was quite natural, nothing forced or awkward about it.
The significance had gone its way, but the results remained.  They were in
the 'sea' together.  It 'had to be.'  As from the beginning of the world
they belonged to one another, each for the other--real.  There was nothing
about it of a text-book 'love affair,' absolutely nothing.  Deeper far
than a passional relationship, guiltless of any fruit of mere propinquity,
the foundations of the sudden intimacy were as ancient as immovable.
The inevitable touch lay in it.  And Tom knew this partly confirmed, at
any rate, by the emotion in him when she said 'my boy,' for the term woke
no annoyance, conveyed no lightness.  Yet there was a flavour of
disappointment in it somewhere--something of necessary value that he
missed in her. . . .  To a man in love it must have sounded superior,
contemptuous: whereas to him it sounded merely true.  He was her boy.
This mother-touch was in her.  To care, to cherish, somehow even to
rescue, she had come to find him out--again.  She had come _back_. . . .
It was thus, at first, he felt it.  From somewhere above, beyond the place
where he now stood in life, she had 'come back, come down, to fetch him.'
She was further on than he was.  He longed to stand beside her.  Until he
did so . . . this gap in her must prevent absolute union.  On both sides
it was not entirely natural as yet. . . .  Thought grew confused in him.

And, though he could not understand, he accepted it as inevitable.
The joy, moreover, was so urgent and uprising, that it smothered a
delicate whisper that yet came with it--that the process involved also--
pain.  Though aware, from time to time, of this vague uneasiness, he
easily brushed it aside.  It was the merest gossamer-thread of warning
that with each recurrent appearance became more tenuous, until finally it
ceased to make its presence felt at all. . . .

In the entire affair of this sudden intercourse he felt the Wave, yet the
Wave, though steadily rising, ceased to make its presence too consciously
known; the Whiff, the Sound, the Eyes seemed equally forgotten: that is,
he did not realise them.  He was living now, and introspection was a waste
of time, living too intensely to reflect or analyse.  He felt swept
onwards upon a tide that was greater than he could manage, for instead of
swimming consciously, he was borne and carried with it.  There was
certainly no attempt to stem.  Life was rising.  It rushed him forwards
too deliciously to think. . . .

He began asking himself the old eternal question: 'Do I love?  Am I in
love--at last, then?' . . .  Some time passed, however, before he realised
that he loved, and it was in a sudden, curious way that this realisation
came.  Two little words conveyed the truth--some days later, as they were
at tea on the verandah of her hotel, watching the sunset behind the blue
line of the Jura Mountains.  He had been talking about himself, his
engineering prospects--rather proudly--his partnership and the letter he
expected daily from Sir William.  'I hope it will be Assouan,' he said,
'I've never been in Egypt.  I'm awfully keen to see it.'  She said she
hoped so too.  She knew Egypt well: it enchanted, even enthralled her:
'familiar as though I'd lived there all my life.  A change comes over me,
I become a different person--and a much older one; not physically,' she
explained with a curious shy gaze at him, 'but in the sense that I feel a
longer pedigree behind me.'  She gave the little laugh that so often
accompanied her significant remarks.  'I always think of the Nile as the
'stream' where I see the floating faces.'

They went on chatting for some minutes about it.  Tom asked if she had met
his cousin out there; yes, she remembered vaguely a Mr. Winslowe coming to
tea on her _dahabieh_ once, but it was only when he described Tony more
closely that she recalled him positively.  'He interested me,' she said
then: 'he talked wildly, but rather picturesquely, about what he called
the 'spiral movement of life,' or something.'  'He goes after birds,' Tom
mentioned.  'Of course,' she replied, 'I remember distinctly now.  It was
something about the flight of birds that introduced the spiral part of it.
He had a good deal in him, that man,' she added, 'but he hid it behind a
lot of nonsense--almost purposely, I felt.'

'That's Tony all over,' Tom assented, 'but he's a rare good sort and I'm
awfully fond of him.  He's 'real' in our sense too, I think.'

She said then very slowly, as though her thoughts were far away in Egypt
at the moment: 'Yes, I think he is.  I've seen _his_ face too.'

'Floating down, you mean--or on the bank?'

'Floating,' she answered.  'I'm sure I have.'

Tom laughed happily.  'Then you've got him to rescue too,' he said.
'But, remember, if we're both drowning, I come first.'

She looked into his face and smiled her answer, touching his fingers with
her hand.  And again it was not a woman's touch.

'He was in Warsaw, too, a few weeks ago,' Tom went on, 'so we were all
three there together.  Rather odd, you know.  He was ski-ing with me in
the Carpathians,'; and he described their meeting at Zakopane after the
long interval since boyhood.  'He told me about you in Egypt, too, now I
come to think of it.  He mentioned the _dahabieh_, but called you a
Russian--yes, I remember now,--and a Russian Princess into the bargain.
Evidently you made less impression on Tony than----'

It was then he stopped as though he had been struck.  The idle
conversation changed.  He heard her interrupting words from a curious
distance.  They fell like particles of ice upon his heart.

'Polish, of course, not Russian,' she mentioned casually, 'but the rest is
right, though I never use the title.  My husband, in his own country, is a
Prince, you see.'

Something reeled in him, then instantly righted itself.  For a moment he
felt as though the freedom of their intercourse had received a shock that
blighted it.  The words, 'my husband,' struck chill and ominous into his
heart.  The recovery, however,--almost simultaneous--showed him that both
the freedom and the intercourse were right and unashamed.  She gave him
nothing that belonged to any other: she was loyal and true to that other
as she was loyal and true to himself.  Their relationship was high above
mere passional intrigue; it could exist--in the way she knew it, felt it--
side by side with that other one, before that other one's very eyes, if
need be. . . .  He saw it true: he saw it innocent as daylight. . . .
For what he felt was somehow this: the woman in her was not his, but more
than that--it was not any one's.  It still lay dormant. . . .

If there was a momentary confusion in his own mind, there was none, he
felt positive, in hers.  The two words that struck him such a blow, she
uttered as lightly, innocently, as the rest of the talk between them.
Indeed, had that other--even in thought Tom preferred the paraphrase--been
present, she would have introduced them to each other then and there.
He heard her saying the little phrases even: 'My husband,' and, 'This is
Tom Kelverdon whom I've loved since childhood.'

Nothing brought more home to him the high innocence, the purity and
sweetness of this woman than the reflections that flung after one another
in his mind as he realised that his hope of her being a widow was not
justified, and at the same moment that he desired exclusive possession of
her--that he was definitely in love.

That she was unaware of any discovery, even if she divined the storm in
him at all, was clear from the way she went on speaking.  For, while all
this flashed through his mind, she added quietly: 'He is in Warsaw now.
He--lives there.  I go to him for part of every year.'  To which Tom heard
his voice reply something as natural and commonplace as 'Yes--I see.'

Of the hundred pregnant questions that presented themselves, he did not
ask a single one: not that he lacked the courage so much as that he felt
the right was--not yet--his.  Moreover, behind her quiet words he divined
a tragedy.  The suffering that had become sweetness in her face was half
explained, but the full revelation of it belonged to 'that other' and to
herself alone.  It had been their secret, he remembered, for at least
fifteen years.


