

Yet, knowing himself in love, he was able to set his house in order.
Confusion disappeared.  With the method and thoroughness of his character
he looked things in the face and put them where they belonged.
Even to wake up to an untidy room was an affliction.  He might arrive in a
hotel at midnight, but he could not sleep until his trunks were empty and
everything in its place.  In such outer details the intensity of his
nature showed itself: it was the intensity, indeed, that compelled the
orderliness.

And the morning after this conversation, he woke up to an ordered mind--
thoughts and emotions in their proper places where he could see and lay
his hand upon them.  The strength and weakness of his temperament betrayed
themselves plainly here, for the security that pedantic order brought
precluded the perspective of a larger vision.  This careful labelling
enclosed him within somewhat rigid fences.  To insist upon this precise
ticketing had its perilous corollary; the entire view--perspective,
proportion, vision--was lost sight of.

'I'm in love: she's beautiful, body, mind and soul.  She's high above me,
but I'll climb up to where she is.'  This was his morning thought, and the
thought that accompanied him all day long and every day until the moment
came to separate again. . . .  'She's a married woman, but her husband has
no claim on her.'  Somehow he was positive of that; the husband had
forfeited all claim to her; details he did not know; but she was free; she
did no wrong.

In imagination he furnished plausible details from sensational experiences
life had shown him.  These may have been right or wrong; possibly the
husband had ill-treated, then deserted her; they were separated possibly,
though--she had told him this--there were no children to complicate the
situation.  He made his guesses. . . .  There was a duty, however, that
she would not, did not neglect: in fulfilment of its claim she went to
Warsaw every year.  What it was, of course, he did not know; but this
thought and the emotions caused by it, he put away into their proper
places; he asked no questions of her; the matter did not concern him
really.  The shock experienced the day before was the shock of realising
that--he loved.  Those two significant words had suddenly shown it to him.
The order of his life was changed.  'She is essential to me; I am
essential to her.'  But 'She's all the world to me,' involved equally
'I'm all the world to her.'  The sense of his own importance was
enormously increased.  The Wave surged upwards with a sudden leap. . . .

There was one thing lacking in this love, perhaps, though he hardly
noticed it--the element of surprise.  Ever since childhood he had
suspected this would happen.  The love was predestined, and in so far
seemed a deliberate affair, pedestrian, almost calm.  This sense of the
inevitable robbed it of that amazing unearthly glamour which steals upon
those who love for the first time, taking them deliciously by surprise.
He saw her beautiful, and probably she was, but her beauty was familiar to
him.  He had come up with the childhood dream, and in coming up with it he
recognised it.  It seemed thus somewhat. . . .  But her mind and soul were
beautiful too, only these were more beautiful than he had dreamed.
In that lay surprise and wonder too.  There was genuine magic here,
discovery and exhilarating novelty.  He had not caught up with _that_.
The love as a whole, however, was expected, natural.  It was inevitable.
The familiarity alone remained strange, a flavour of the uncanny about it
almost--yet certainly real.

And these things also he tried to face and label, though with less
success.  To bring order into them was beyond his powers.  She had
outstripped him somehow in her soul, but had come back to fetch him--also
to get something for herself she lacked.  The rest was oddly familiar: it
had happened before.  It was about to happen now again, but on a higher
level; only before it could happen completely he must overtake her.
The spiral idea lay in it somewhere.  But the Wave contained and drove
it. . . .  His mind was not supple; analogy, that spiritual solvent, did
not help him.  Yet the fact remained that he somehow visualised the thing
in picture form; a rising wave bore them charging up the spiral curve to a
point whence they both looked down upon a passage they had made before.
She was always a little in front of him, beyond him.  But when the Wave
finally broke they would rush together--become one . . .  there would be
pain, but joy would follow.

And during all their subsequent happy days of companionship this one thing
alone marred his supreme contentment--this sense of elusiveness, that
while he held her she yet slipped between his fingers and escaped.
He loved; but whereas to most men love brings a feeling of finality and
rest, as of a search divinely ended, to Tom came the feeling that his
search was merely resumed, or, indeed, had only just begun.  He had not
come into full possession of this woman: he had only found her. . . .
She was deep; her deceptive simplicity hid surprises from him; much--and
it was the greater part--he could not understand.  Only when he came up
with that would possession be complete.  Not that she said or did a single
thing that suggested this; she was not elusive of set purpose; she was
entirely guiltless of any desire to hold back a fraction of herself, and
to conceal was as foreign to her nature as to play with him; but that
some part of her hung high above his reach, and that he, knowing this,
admitted a subtle pain behind the joy.  'I can't get at her--quite,' he
put it to himself.  'Some part of her is not mine yet--doesn't belong to
me.'

He thought chiefly, that is, of his own possible disabilities rather than
of hers.

'I often wonder why we've come together like this,' he said once, as they
lay in the shade of a larch wood above Corvaux and looked towards the
snowy summits of Savoy.  'What brought us together, I mean?  There's
something mysterious about it to me----'

'God,' she said quietly.  'You needed me.  You've been lonely.  But you'll
never be lonely again.'

Her introduction of the Deity into a conversation did not displease.
Fate, or any similar word, could have taken its place; she merely conveyed
her sense that their coming together was right and inevitable.
Moreover, now that she said it, he recognised the fact of loneliness--that
he always had been lonely, but that it was no longer possible.  He felt
like a boy and spoke like a boy.  She had come to look after, care for
him.  She asked nothing for herself.  The thought gave him a sharp and
sudden pang.

'But my love means a lot to you, doesn't it?' he asked tenderly.
'I mean, you need me too?'

'Everything, Tom,' she told him softly.  He was conscious of the mother in
her, as though the mother overshadowed the woman.  But while he loved it,
the tinge of resentment still remained.

'You couldn't do without me, could you?'  He took the hand she placed upon
his knee and looked up into her quiet eyes.  'You'd be lonely too if--I
went?'

For a moment she gazed down at him and did not answer; he was aware of
both the pain and sweetness in her face; an interval of thoughtfulness
again descended on them both: then a great tenderness came welling up into
her eyes as she answered slowly: 'You couldn't go, Tom.  You couldn't
leave me ever.'

Her hand was on his shoulder, almost about his neck as she said it, and he
came in closer, and before he knew what he was doing his face was buried
in her lap.  Her hand stroked his hair.  Twenty-five years dropped from
him--he was a child again, a little boy, and she, in some divine,
half-impersonal sense he could not understand, was mothering him.
No foolish feeling of shame came with it; the mood was too sudden for
analysis, it passed away swiftly too; but he knew, for a brief second, all
the sensations of a restless and dissatisfied boy who needed above all
else--comfort: the comfort that only an inexhaustible mother-love could
give. . . .  And this love poured from her in a flood.  Till now he had
never known it, nor known the need of it.  And because it had been
curiously lacking he suddenly wondered how he had done without it.
A strange sense of tears rose in his heart.  He felt pain and tragedy
somewhere.  For there was another thing he wanted from her too. . . .
Through the sparkle of his joy peeped out that familiar, strange, rich
pain, but so swiftly he hardly recognised it.  It withdrew again.
It vanished.

'But _you_ couldn't leave me either, could you?' he asked, sitting erect
again.  He made a movement as though to draw her head down upon his
shoulder in the protective way of a man who loves, but--he could not do
it.  It was curious.  She did nothing to prevent, only somehow the
position would be a false one.  She did not need him in that way.  He was
not yet big enough to protect.  It was she who protected him.  And when
she answered the same second, the familiar sentence flashed across his
mind again: 'She has come back to fetch me.'

'I shall never, never leave you, Tom.  We're together for always.  I know
it absolutely.'  The girl of seventeen, the unawakened woman who was
desired, the mother who thought not of herself,--all three spoke in those
quiet words; but with them, too, he was aware of this elusive other thing
he could not name.  Perhaps her eyes conveyed it, perhaps the pain and
sweetness in the little face so close above his own.  She was bending over
him.  He looked up.  And over his heart rushed again that intolerable
yearning--the yearning to stand where she stood, far, far beyond him, yet
with it the certainty that pain must attend the effort.  Until that pain,
that effort were accomplished, she could not entirely belong to him.
He had to win her yet.  Yet also he had to teach _her_ something. . . .
Meanwhile, in the act of protecting, mothering him she must use pain, as
to a learning child.  Their love would gain completeness only thus.

Yet in words he could not approach it; he knew not how to.

'It's a strange relationship,' he stammered, concealing, as he thought,
the deep emotions that perplexed him.  'The world would misunderstand it
utterly.'  She smiled, nodding her head.  'I wish----' he added, 'I mean
it comes to me sometimes--that you don't need me quite as I need you.
You're my whole life, you know--now.'

'You're growing imaginative, Tom,' she teased him smilingly.
Then, catching the earnest expression in his face, she added: 'My life has
been very full, you see, and I've always had to stand alone.  There's been
so much for me to do that I've had no time to feel loneliness perhaps.'

'Rescuing the other floating faces!'

A slight tinge of a new emotion slipped through his mind, something he had
never felt before, yet so faint he could not even recapture it, much less
wonder whether it were jealousy or envy.  It rose from the depths; it
vanished into him again. . . .  Besides, he saw that she was smiling; the
teasing mood that so often baffled him was upon her; he heard her give
that passing laugh that almost 'kept him guessing,' as the Americans say,
whether she was in play or earnest.

'It's worth doing, anyhow--rescuing the floating faces,' she said: 'worth
living for.'  And she half closed her eyes so that he saw her as a girl
again.  He saw her as she had been even before he knew her, as he used to
see her in his dream.  It was the dream-eyes that peered at him through
long, thick lashes.  They looked down at him.  He felt caught away to some
remote, strange place and time.  He was aware of gold, of colour, of a
hotter blood, a fiercer sunlight. . . .

And the sense of familiarity became suddenly very real; he knew what she
was going to say, how he would answer, why they had come together.  It all
flashed near, yet still just beyond his reach.  He almost understood.
They had been side by side like this before, not in this actual place, but
somewhere--somewhere that he knew intimately.  Her eyes had looked down
into his own precisely so, long, long ago, yet at the same time strangely
near.  There was a perfume, a little ghostly perfume--it was the Whiff.
It was gone instantly, but he had tasted it. . . .  A veil drew up. . . .
He saw, he knew, he remembered--_almost_. . . .  Another second and he
would capture the meaning of it all.  Another moment and it would reveal
itself--then, suddenly, the whole sensation vanished.  He had missed it by
the minutest fraction in the world, yet missed it utterly.  It left him
confused and baffled.

The veil was down again, and he was talking with Madame Jaretzka, the
Lettice Aylmer of his boyhood days.  Such moments of the _deja-vu_ leave
bewilderment behind them, like the effect of sudden change of focus in the
eye; and with the bewilderment a sense of insecurity as well.

'Yes,' he said half dreamily, 'and you've rescued a lot already, haven't
you?' as though he still followed in speech the direction of the vanished
emotion.

'You know that, Tom?' she enquired, raising her eyelids, thus finally
restoring the normal.

He stammered rather: 'I have the feeling--that you're always doing good to
some one somewhere.  There's something,'--he searched for a word--
'impersonal about you--almost.'  And he knew the word was nearly right,
though found by chance.  It included 'un-physical,' the word he did not
like to use.  He did not want an angel's love; the spiritual, to him, rose
from the physical, and was not apart from it.  He was not in heaven yet,
and had no wish to be.  He was on earth; and everything of value--love,
above all--must spring from earth, or else remain incomplete, insecure,
ineffective even.

And again a tiny dart of pain shot through him.  Yet he was glad he said
it, for it was true.  He liked to face what hurt him.  To face it was to
get it over. . . .

But she was laughing again gently to herself, though certainly not at him.
'What were you thinking about so long?' she asked.  'You've been silent
for several minutes and your thoughts were far away.'  And as he did not
reply immediately, she went on: 'If you go to Assouan you mustn't fall
into reveries like that or you'll leave holes in the dam, or whatever your
engineering work is--_Tom_!'

She spoke the name with a sudden emphasis that startled him.  It was a
call.

'Yes,' he said, looking up at her.  He was emerging from a dream.

'Come back to me.  I don't like your going away in that strange way--
forgetting me.'

'Ah, I like that.  Say it again,' he returned, a deeper note in his voice.

'You _were_ away--weren't you?'

'Perhaps,' he said slowly.  'I can't say quite.  I was thinking of you,
wherever I was.'  He went on, holding her eyes with a steady gaze:
'A curious feeling came over me like--like heat and light.  You seemed so
familiar to me all of a sudden that I felt I had known you ages and ages.
I was trying to make out where--it was----'

She dropped her eyelids again and peered at him, but no longer smiling.
There was a sterner expression in her face.  The lips curved a moment in a
new strange way.  The air seemed to waver an instant between them.
She peered down at him as through a mist. . . .

'There--like that!' he exclaimed passionately.  'Only I wish you wouldn't.
There's something I don't like about it.  It hurts,'--and the same minute
felt ashamed, as though he had said a foolish thing.  It had come out in
spite of himself.

'Then I won't, Tom--if you'll promise not to go away again.  I was
thinking of Egypt for a second--I don't know why.'

But he did not laugh with her; his face kept the graver expression still.

'It changes you--rather oddly,' he said quietly, 'that lowering of the
eyelids.  I can't say why exactly, but it makes you look----Eastern.'
Again he had said a foolish thing.  A kind of spell seemed over him.

'Irish eyes!' he heard her saying.  'They sometimes look like that, I'm
told.  But you promise, don't you?'

'Of course I promise,' he answered bluntly enough, because he meant it.
'I can never go away from you because,'--he turned and looked very hard at
her a moment--'because there's something in you I need in my very soul,'
he went on earnestly, 'yet that always escapes me.  I can't get hold of--
all of you.'

And though she refused his very earnest mood, she answered with obvious
sincerity at once.  'That's as it should be, Tom.  A man tires of a woman
the moment he gets to the end of her.'  She gave her little laugh and
touched his hand.  'Perhaps that's what I'm meant to teach you.  When you
know all of me----'

'I shall never know all of you,' said Tom.

'You never will,' she replied with meaning, 'for I don't even know it all
myself.'  And as she said it, he thought he had never seen anything so
beautiful in all the world before, for the breeze caught her long gauzy
veil of blue and tossed it across her face so that the eyes seemed gazing
at him from a distance, but a distance that had height in it.  He felt her
above him, beyond him, on this height, a height he must climb before he
could know complete possession.

'By Jove!' he thought, 'isn't it rising just!'  For the Wave was under
them tremendously.



April meanwhile had slipped into May, and their daily companionship had
become the most natural thing in the world, when the telegram arrived that
threatened to interrupt the delightful intercourse.  But it was not the
telegram Tom expected.  Neither Greece nor Egypt claimed his talents yet,
for the contracts both at Assouan and Salonica were postponed until the
autumn, and the routine of a senior partner's life in London was to be his
immediate fate.  He brought her the news at once: they discussed it
together in all its details and as intimately as though it affected their
joint lives similarly.  His first thought was to run and talk it over with
her; hers, how the change might influence their intercourse, their present
and their future.  Their relationship was now established in this solid,
natural way.  He told her everything as a son might tell his mother: she
asked questions, counselled, made suggestions as a woman whose loving care
considered his welfare and his happiness before all else.

However, it brought no threatened interruption after all--involved,
indeed, less of separation than if he had been called away as they
expected: for though he must go to London that same week, she would
shortly follow him.  'And if you go to Egypt in the autumn, Tom,'--she
smiled at the way they influenced the future nearer to the heart's
desire--'I may go with you.  I could make my arrangements accordingly--
take my holiday out there earlier instead of here as usual in the spring.'

The days passed quickly.  Her first duty was to return to Warsaw; she
would then follow him to London and help him with his flat.  No man could
choose furniture and carpets and curtains properly.  They discussed the
details with the enthusiasm of children: she would come up several times a
week from her bungalow in Kent and make sure that his wall-papers did not
clash with the general scheme.  Brown was his colour, he told her, and
always had been.  It was the dominant shade of her eyes as well.  He made
her promise to stand in the rooms with her eyes opened very wide so that
there could be no mistake, and they laughed over the picture happily.

She came to the train, and although he declared vehemently that he
disliked 'being seen off,' he was secretly delighted.  'One says such
silly things merely because one feels one must say something.  And those
silly things remain in the memory out of all proportion to their value.'
But she insisted.  'Good-byes are always serious to me, Tom.  One never
knows.  I want to see you to the very last minute.'  She had this way of
making him feel little things significant with Fate.  But another little
thing also was in store for him.  As the train moved slowly out he noticed
some letters in her hand; and one of them was addressed to Warsaw.
The name leaped up and stung him--Jaretzka.  A spasm of pain shot through
him.  She was leaving in the morning, he knew. . . .

'Write to me from Warsaw,' he said.  'Take care!  We're moving!'

'I'll write every day, my dearest Tom, my boy.  You won't forget me.
I shall see you in a fortnight.'

He let go the little hand he held till the last possible minute.
The bells drowned her final words.  She stood there waving her hand with
the unposted letters in them, till the station pillars intervened and hid
her from him.

And this time no 'silly last things' had been said that could 'stay in the
memory out of all proportion to their value.'  It was something he had
noticed on the envelope that stayed--not the husband's name, but a word in
the address, a peculiar Polish word he happened to know:--'Tworki'--the
name of the principal _maison de sante_ that stood just outside the city
of Warsaw. . . .

Half an hour, perhaps an hour, he sat smoking in his narrow sleeping
compartment, thinking with a kind of intense confusion out of which no
order came. . . .  At Pontarlier he had to get out for the Customs
formalities.  It was midnight.  The stars were bright.  The keen spring
air from the wooded Jura Mountains had a curious effect, for he returned
to his carriage feeling sleepy, the throng of pictures drowned into
calmness by one master-thought that reduced their confusion into order.
He looked back over the past weeks and realised their intensity.
He had lived.  There was a change in him, the change of growth,
development.  He loved.  There was now a woman who was his entire world,
essential to him.  He was essential to her too.  And the importance of
this ousted all lesser things, even the senior partnership.  This was the
master-thought--that he now lived for her.  He was 'real' even as she was
'real,' each to the other _real_.  The Wave had lifted him to a level
never reached before.  And it was rising still. . . .

He fell asleep on this, to dream of a mighty stream that swept them
together irresistibly towards some climax that he never could quite see.
She floated near to save him.  She floated down.  Her little hands were
stretched.  It was a gorgeous and stupendous dream--a dream of rising life
itself--rising till it would curve and break and fall, and the inevitable
thing would happen that would bring her finally into his hungry arms,
complete, mother and woman, a spiritual love securely founded on the sweet
and wholesome earth. . . .


