

During the brief separation of a fortnight Tom was too busy in London to
allow himself much reflection.  Absence, once the first keen sense of loss
is over, is apt to bring reaction.  The self makes an automatic effort to
regain the normal life it led before the new emotion dislocated the
long-accustomed routine.  It tries to run back again along the line of
least resistance that habit has made smooth and easy.  If the reaction
continues to assert its claim, the new emotion is proved thereby a
delusion.  The test lies there.

In Tom's case, however, the reaction was a feeble reminder merely that he
had once lived--without her.  It took the form of regret for all the best
years of his life he had endured--how, he could not think--without this
tender, loving woman at his side.  That is, he recognised that his love
was real and had changed his outlook fundamentally.  He could never do
without her from this moment onwards.  She equally needed him.  He would
never leave her. . . .  Further than that, for the present, he did not
allow himself to think.  Having divined something of her tragedy, he
accepted the definite limitations.  Speculations concerning another he
looked on as beside the point.  As far as possible he denied himself the
indulgence in them.  But another thing he felt as well--the right to claim
her, whether he exercised that right or not.

Concerning his relationship with her, however, he did not deny
speculation, though somehow this time the perspective was too vast for him
to manage quite.  There was a strange distance in it: he lost himself in
remoteness.  In either direction it ran into mists that were interminable,
as though veils and curtains lifted endlessly, melting into shadowy
reaches beyond that baffled all enquiry.  The horizons of his life had
grown so huge.  This woman had introduced him to a scale of living that he
could only gaze at with wondering amazement and delight, too large as yet
to conform to the order that his nature sought.  He could not properly
find himself.

'It feels almost as if I've loved her before like this--yet somehow not
enough.  That's what I've got to learn,' was the kind of thought that came
to him, at odd moments only.  The situation seemed so curiously familiar,
yet only half familiar.  They were certainly made for one another, and the
tie between them had this deep touch of the inevitable about it that
refused to go.  That notion of the soul's advance in a spiral cropped up
in his mind again.  He saw her both coming nearer and retreating--as a
moving figure against high light leaves the spectator uncertain whether it
is advancing or retiring.  He would have liked to talk to Tony all about
it, for Tony would be sympathetic.  He wanted a confidant and turned
instinctively to his cousin. . . .  _She_ already understood more than he
did, though perhaps not consciously, and therein lay the secret of her odd
elusiveness.  Yet, in another sense, his possession was incomplete because
a part of her still lay unawakened.  'I must love her more and more and
more,' he told himself.  But, at the same time, he took it for granted
that he was indispensable to her, as she was to him.

These flashes of perception, deeper than anything he had experienced in
life hitherto, came occasionally while he waited in London for her return;
and though puzzled--his straightforward nature disliked all mystery--he
noted them with uncommon interest.  Nothing, however, could prevent the
rise upwards of the Wave that bore the situation on its breast.
The affair swept him onwards; it was not to be checked or hindered.
He resigned direction to its elemental tide.

The faint uneasiness, also, recurred from time to time, especially now
that he was alone again.  He attributed it to the unsatisfied desire in
his heart, the knowledge that as yet he had no exclusive possession, and
did not really own her; the sense of insecurity unsettled him, the feeling
that she was open to capture by any one--'who understands and appreciates
her better than I do,' was the way he phrased it sometimes.  He was
troubled and uneasy because so much of her lay unresponsive to his touch--
not needing him.  While he was climbing up to reach her, another, with a
stronger claim, might step in--step back--and seize her.

It made him smile a little even while he thought of it, for her truth and
constancy were beyond all question.  And then, suddenly, he traced the
uneasiness to its source.  There _was_ 'another' who had first claim upon
her--who had it once, at any rate.  Though at present some cloud obscured
and negatived that claim, the cloud might lift, the situation change, the
claim become paramount again, as once it surely had been paramount.
And, disquieting though the possibility was, Tom was pleased with
himself--he was so naive and simple towards life--for having discerned it
clearly.  He recognised the risk and thus felt half prepared in
advance. . . .  In another way it satisfied him too.  With this dream-like
suggestion that it all had happened before, he had always felt that a
further detail was lacking to complete the scene he half remembered.
Something, as yet, was wanting.  And this item needed to make the strange
repetition of the scene fulfil itself seemed, precisely, the presence of
'another.'

Their intercourse, meanwhile, proved beyond words delightful during the
following weeks, when, after her return from Warsaw, she kept her word and
helped him in the prosaic business of furnishing his flat and settling
down, as in a hundred other details of his daily life as well.  All that
they did and said together confirmed their dear relationship and
established it beyond reproach.  There was no question of anything false,
illicit, requiring concealment: nothing to hide and no one to evade.
In their own minds their innocence was so sure, indeed, that it was not
once alluded to between them.  It was impossible to look at her and doubt:
nor could the most cynical suspect Tom Kelverdon of an undesirable
intrigue with the wife of another man.  His acquaintance, moreover, were
not of the kind that harboured the usual 'worldly' thoughts; he went
little into society, whereas the comparatively few Londoners she knew were
almost entirely--he discovered it by degrees--people whose welfare in one
way or another she had earnestly at heart.  It was a marvel to him,
indeed, how she never wearied of helping ungrateful folk, for the wish to
be of service seemed ingrained in her.  Her first thought on making new
acquaintances was always what she could do for them, not with money
necessarily, but by 'seeing' them in their proper _milieu_ and planning to
bring about the conditions they needed in order to realise themselves
fully.  Failure, discontent, unhappiness were due to wrong conditions more
than to radical fault in the people themselves; once they 'found
themselves,' the rest would follow.  It amounted to a genius in her.

It seemed the artist instinct that sought this unselfish end rather than
any religious tendency.  She felt it ugly to see people at issue with
their surroundings.  Her religion was humanity, and had no dogmas.
Even Tony Winslowe, now in England again, came in for his share of this
sweet fashioning energy in her; much to his own bewilderment and to Tom's
amusement. . . .

The summer passed towards early autumn and London emptied, but it made no
difference to them.  Tom had urgent work to do and was absorbed in it,
never forgetting for a moment that he was now a Partner in the Firm.
He spent frequent week-ends at Madame Jaretzka's Kentish bungalow, where
she had for companion at the moment an Irish cousin who, as Tom easily
guessed, was also a dependant.  This cousin had been invited with her
child, Molly, for the summer holidays, and these summer holidays had run
on into three months at least.

A tall, thin, angular woman, of uncertain manners and capricious
temperament, Mrs. Haughstone had perhaps lived so long upon another's
bounty that she had come to take her good fortune for granted, and
permitted herself freely two cardinal indulgences--grumbling and
jealousy.  Having married unwisely, in order to better herself rather than
because she loved, her shiftless husband had disgraced himself with an
adventuress governess, leaving her with three children and something below
150 pounds a year.  Madame Jaretzka had stepped in to bring them together
again: she provided schooling abroad, holidays, doctors, clothes, and all
she could devise by way of helping them 'find themselves' again, and so
turning their broken lives to good account.  With the husband, sly, lazy,
devoid of both pride and honesty, she could do little, and she was quite
aware that he and his wife put their heads together to increase the flow
of 'necessaries' she generously supplied.

It was a sordid, commonplace story, sordidly treated by the soured and
vindictive wife, whose eventual aims upon her saviour's purse were too
obvious to be mistaken.  Even Tom perceived the fact without delay.
He also perceived, behind the flattering tongue, an acid and suspicious
jealousy that regarded new friends with ill-disguised alarm.
Mrs. Haughstone thought of herself and her children before all else.
She mistook the impersonal attitude of her benefactress for credulous
weakness.  A new friend was hostile to her shameless ambitions and
disliked accordingly. . . .  Tom scented an enemy the first time he met
her.  To him she expressed her disapproval of Tony, and _vice versa_,
while to her hostess she professed she liked them both--'but': the 'but'
implying that men were selfish and ambitious creatures who thought only of
their own advantage.

His country visits, therefore, were not made happier by the presence in
the cottage of this woman and her child, but the manner in which the
benefactress met the situation justified the respect he had felt first
months before.  It increased his love and admiration.  Madame Jaretzka
behaved unusually.  That she grasped the position there could be no doubt,
but her manner of dealing with it was unique.  For when Mrs. Haughstone
grumbled, Madame Jaretzka gave her more, and when Mrs. Haughstone yielded
to jealousy, Madame Jaretzka smiled and said no word.  She won her
victories with further generosity.

'Another face that has to be rescued?' Tom permitted himself to say once,
after an unfortunate scene in which his hostess had been subtly accused of
favouritism to another child in the house.  He could hardly suppress the
annoyance and impatience that he felt.

'Oh, I never thought about it in that way,' she answered with her little
laugh, quite unruffled by what had happened.  'The best way is to help
them to--see themselves.  Then they try to cure themselves.'  She laughed
again, as though she had said a childish thing instead of something
distinctly wise.  'I can't _cure_ them,' she added.  'I can only help.'

Tom looked at her.  'Help others to see themselves--as they are,'
he repeated slowly.  'So that's how you do it, is it?'  He reflected a
moment.  'That's being impersonal.  You rouse no opposition that way.
It's good.'

'Is it?' she replied, as though guiltless of any conscious plan.
'It seems the natural thing to do.'  Then, as he was evidently preparing
for discussion in his honest and laborious way, she stopped him with a
look, smiling, sighing, and holding up her little finger warningly.
He understood.  Analysis and argument she avoided always; they obscured
the essential thing; here was the intuitive method of grasping the
solution the instant the problem was stated.  Detailed examination
exhausted her merely.  And Tom obeyed that look, that threatening finger.
In little things he invariably yielded, while in big things he remained
firm, even obstinate, though without realising it.

Her head inclined gracefully, acknowledging her victory.  'That's one
reason I love you, Tom,' she told him as reward; 'you're a boy on the
surface and a man inside.'

Tom saw beauty flash about her as she said it; emotion rose through him in
a sudden tumult; he would have seized her, kissed her, crumpled her little
self against his heart and held her there, but for the tantalising truth
that the thing he wanted would have escaped him in the very act.
The loveliness he yearned for, craved, was not open to physical attack; it
was a loveliness of the spirit, a bird, a star, a wild flower on some high
pinnacle near the snow: to obtain it he must climb to where it soared
above the earth--rise up to her.

He laughed and took her little finger in both hands.  He felt awkward, big
and clumsy, a giant trying to catch an elusive butterfly.  'You turn us
all round _that_!' he declared.  'You turn her,' nodding towards the door,
'and me,' kissing the tip quickly, 'and Tony too.  Only she and Tony don't
know you twiddle them--and I do.'

She let him kiss her hand, but when he drew nearer, trying to set his lips
upon the arm her summer dress left bare, she put up her face instead and
kissed him lightly on the cheek.  Her free hand made a caressing gesture
across his neck and shoulder, as she stood on tiptoe to reach him.
The mother in her, not the woman, caressed him dearly.  It was wonderful;
but the surge of mingled emotions clouded something in his brain, and a
string of words came tumbling out in a fire of joy and pain.  'You're a
queen and a conqueror,' he said, longing to seize her, yet holding himself
back strongly.  'Somewhere I'm your helpless slave, but somewhere I'm your
master.'  The protective sense came up in him.  'It's too delicious!
I'm in a dream! Lettice,' he whispered, 'it's my Wave!  The Wave is behind
it!  It's behind us both!'

For an instant she half closed her eyelids in the way she knew both
pleased and frightened him.  Invariably this gave her the advantage.
He felt her above him when she looked like this, he kneeling with hands
outstretched, yearning to be raised to where she stood.  'You're a baby, a
poet, and a man rolled into a dear big boy,' she said quickly, moving
towards the door away from him.  'And now I must go and get my garden hat,
for it's time to meet Tony and Moyra at the train, and as you have so much
surplus energy to-day we'll walk through the woods instead of going in the
motor.'  She waved her hand and vanished behind the door.  He heard the
patter of her feet as she ran upstairs.

He went to the open window, lit his pipe, leaned out with his head among
the climbing roses, and thought of many things.  Great joy was in him, but
behind it, far down where he could not reach it quite, hid a gnawing pain
that was obscure uneasiness.  Pictures came floating across his mind,
rising and falling, sometimes rushing hurriedly; he saw things and faces
mixed, his own and hers chief among them.  Her little finger pointed to a
star.  He sighed, he wondered, he half prayed.  Would he ever understand,
rise to her level, possess her for his very own?  She seemed so far beyond
him.  It was only part of her he touched.

The faces fluttered and looked into his own, one among them an imagined
face--the husband's.  It was a face with light blue eyes, moreover.
He saw Tony's too, frank, laughing, irresponsible, and the face of the
Irish girl who was Tony's latest passion.  Tony could settle down to no
one for long.  Tom remembered suddenly his remark at Zakopane months ago,
that the bee never sipped the last drop of honey from the flower. . . .
His thoughts tumbled and flew in many directions, yet all at once.
Life seemed very full and marvellous; it had never seemed so intense
before; it bore him onwards, upwards, forwards, with a rush beyond all
possible control and guidance.  He acknowledged a rather delicious sense
of helplessness.  The Wave was everywhere behind and under him.  It was
sweeping him along.

Then thought returned to Tony and the Irish girl who were coming down for
the Sunday, and he smiled to himself as he recalled his cousin's ardent
admiration at a theatre party a few nights ago in town.  Tony had
something that naturally attracted women, dominating them too easily.
Was he heartless a little in the business?  Would he never, like Tom,
settle down with one?  His thought passed to the latest capture: there
were signs, indeed, that here Tony was caught at last.

For Tom, Tony, and Madame Jaretzka formed an understanding trio, and there
were few expeditions, town or country, of which the lively bird-enthusiast
did not form an active member.  Tony took it all very lightly, unaware of
any serious intention behind the pleasant invitations.  Tom was amused by
it.  He looked forward to his cousin's visit now.  He was feeling the need
of a confidant, and Tony might so admirably fill the role.  It was
curious, a little: Tom often felt that he wanted to confide in Tony, yet
somehow or other the confidences were never actually made.  There was
something in Tony that invited that free, purging confidence which is a
need of every human being.  It was so easy to tell things, difficult
things, to this careless, sympathetic being; yet Tom never passed the
frontier into definite revelation.  At the last moment he invariably held
back.

Thought passed to his hostess, already manoeuvring to help Tony 'find
himself.' It amused Tom, even while he gave his willing assistance; for
Tony was of evasive, slippery material, like a fluid that, pressed in one
given direction, resists and runs away into several others.  'He scatters
himself too much,' she remarked, 'and it's a pity; there's waste.'
Tom laughed, thinking of his episodic love affairs.  'I didn't mean that,'
she added, smiling with him; 'I meant generally.  He's full of talent and
knowledge.  His power over women is natural, but it comes of mere
brilliance.  If all that were concentrated instead, he would do something
real; he might be extraordinarily effective in life.  Yes, Tom, I mean
it.'  But Tom, though he smiled, agreed with her, feeling rather flattered
that she liked his cousin.

'But he breaks too many hearts,' he said lightly, thinking of his last
conquest, and then added, hardly knowing why he said it, 'By the by, did
you ever notice his hands?'

The way she quickly looked up at him proved that she divined his meaning.
But the glance had a flash of something that escaped him.

'You're very observant, Tommy,' she said evasively.  It seemed impossible
for her to say a disparaging thing of anybody.  She invariably picked out
and emphasised the best.  'You don't admire them?'

'Do _you_, Lettice?'

She paused for an imperceptible second, then smiled.  'I rather like big
rough hands in a man--perhaps,' she said without any particular interest,
'though--in a way--they frighten me sometimes.  Tony's are ugly, but
there's power in them.'  And she placed her own small gloved hand upon his
arm.  'He's rather irresponsible, I know,' she added gently, 'but he'll
grow out of that in time.  He's beginning to improve already.'

'You see, he's got no mother,' Tom observed.

'No wife either--yet,' she added with a laugh.

'Or work,' put in Tom, with a touch of self-praise, and thinking of his
own position in the world.  Her interest in Tony had the effect of making
himself seem worthier, more important.  This fine woman, who judged people
from so high a standpoint, had picked out--himself!  He had an absurd yet
delightful feeling as though Tony was their child, and the perfectly
natural way she took him under her mothering wing stirred an admiring pity
in him.

Then as they walked together through the fragrant pine-woods to the
station, an incident at a recent theatre party rose before his memory.
Tony and his Amanda had been with them.  The incident in question had left
a singular impression on his mind, though why it emerged now, as they
wandered through the quiet wood, he could not tell.  It had occurred a
week or two ago.  He now saw it again--in a tenth of the time it takes to
tell.



The scene was laid in ancient Egypt, and while the play was commonplace,
the elaborate production--scenery, dresses, atmosphere--was good.
But Tom, unable to feel interest in the trivial and badly acted story, had
felt interest in another thing he could not name.  There was a subtle
charm, a delicate glamour about it as of immensely old romance, but some
lost romance of very far away.  Yet, whether this charm was due to the
stage effects or to themselves, sitting there in the stalls together,
escaped him.  For in some singular way the party, his hostess certainly,
seemed to interpenetrate the play itself.  She, above all, and Tony
vaguely, seemed inseparable from what he gazed at, heard, and felt.

Continually he caught himself thinking how delightful it was to know
himself next to Madame Jaretzka, so close that he shared her atmosphere,
her perfume, touched her even; that their minds were engaged intimately
together watching the same scene; and also, that on her other side, sat
Tony, affectionate, whimsical, fascinating Tony, whom they were trying to
help 'find himself'; and that he, again, was next to a girl he liked.
The harmonious feeling of the four was pleasurable to Tom.  He felt
himself, moreover, an important and indispensable item in its composition.
It was vague; he did not attempt to analyse it as self-flattery, as
vanity, as pride--he was aware, merely, that he felt very pleased with
himself and so with everybody else.  It was gratifying to sit at the head
of the group; everybody could see how beautiful _she_ was; the dream of
exclusive ownership stole over him more definitely than ever before.
'She's chosen _me_!  She needs me--a woman like that!'

The audience, the lights, the colour, the music influenced him.  It seemed
he caught something from the crude human passion that was being ranted on
the stage and transferred it unconsciously into his relations with the
party he belonged to, but, above all, into his relationship with her--and
with another.  But he refused to let his mind dwell upon that other.
He found himself thinking instead of the divine tenderness that was in
her, yet at the same time of her elusiveness and the curious pain it
caused him.  Whence came, he wondered, the sweet and cruel flavour?
It seemed like a memory of something suffered long ago, the sweetness in
it true and exquisite, the cruelty an error on his own part somehow.
The old hint of uneasiness, the strange, rich pain he had known in
boyhood, stole faintly over him; its first and immediate effect
heightening the sense of dim, old-world romance already present. . . .

And he had turned cautiously to look at her.  She was leaning forward a
little as though the play absorbed her, and the attitude startled him.
It caused him almost a definite shock.  The face had pain in it.

She was not aware that he stared; her attention was fastened upon the
stage; but the eyes were fixed, the little mouth was fixed as well, the
lips compressed; and all her features wore this expression of curious
pain.  There was sternness in them, something almost hard.  He watched her
for some minutes, surprised and fascinated.  It came over him that he
almost knew what that was in her mind.  Another moment and he would
discover it--when, past her profile, he caught his cousin's eyes peering
across at him.  Tony had felt the direction of his glance and had looked
round: and Tony--mischievously--winked!

The spell was broken.  In that instant, however, through the heated air of
the crowded stalls already weighted with sickly artificial perfumes, there
reached him faintly, as from very far away, another and a subtler perfume,
something of elusive fragrance in it.  It was very poignant, instinct as
with forgotten associations.  It was the Whiff.  It came, it went; but it
was unmistakable.  And he connected it, as by some instantaneous
certitude, with the play--with Egypt.

'What do you think of it, Lettice?' he had whispered, nodding towards the
stage.

She turned with a start.  She came back.  The expression of pain flashed
instantly away.  She had evidently not been thinking of the performance.
'It's not much, Tom, is it?  But I like the scenery.  It makes me feel
strange somewhere--the change that comes over me in Egypt.  We'll be there
together--some day.'  She leaned over with her lips against his ear.

And there was significance in the commonplace words, he thought--a
significance her whisper did not realise, and certainly did not intend.

'All three of us,' he rejoined before he knew what he meant exactly.

And she nodded hurriedly.  Either she agreed, or else she had not heard
him.  He did not insist, he did not repeat, he sat there wondering why on
earth he said the thing.  A touch of pain pricked him like an insect's
sting, but a pain he could not account for.  His blood, at the same time,
leaped as she bent her face so near to his own.  He felt his heart swell
as he looked into her eyes.  Her beauty astonished him; in this twilight
of the theatre it glowed and burned like a veiled star.  He fancied--it
was the trick of the half-light, of course--she had grown darker and that
a dusky flush lay on her cheeks.

'What were you thinking about?' he whispered lower again, changing the
sentence slightly.  And, as he asked it, he saw Tony still watching him,
two seats away.  It annoyed him; he drew his head back a little so that
her face concealed him.

'I don't know,' she whispered back; 'nothing in particular.'  She put her
gloved hand stealthily towards him and touched his knee.  The gesture, he
felt, was intended to supplement the words.  For the first time in his
life he did not quite believe her.  The thought was odious, but not to be
denied.  It merely flashed across him, however.  He forgot it instantly.

'Seems oddly familiar somehow,' he said, 'doesn't it?'

Again she nodded, smiling, as she gazed for a moment first into one eye,
then into the other, then turned away to watch the stage.  And abruptly,
as she did so, the entire feeling vanished, the mood evaporated, her
expression was normal once more, and he fixed his attention on the stupid
play.

He turned his interest into other channels; he would take his party on to
supper.  He did so.  Yet an impression remained--the impression that the
Wave had come nearer, higher, that it was rising and gaining impetus,
accumulating mass, momentum, power.  The gay supper could not dissipate
that, nor could the happy ten minutes in a taxi, when he drove her to her
door, decrease or weaken it.  She was very tired.  They spoke little, he
remembered; she gave him a gentle touch as the cab drew up, and the few
things she said had entirely to do with his comfort in his flat.  He felt
in that touch and in those tender questions the mother only.  The woman,
it suddenly occurred to him, had gone elsewhere.  He had never had it,
never even claimed it.  A deep sense of loneliness touched him for a
moment.  His heart beat rapidly.  He dreamed. . . .



Why the scene came back to him now as they walked slowly through the
summery pine-wood he knew not.  He caught himself thinking vividly of
Egypt suddenly, of being in Egypt with her--and with another.  But on that
other he refused to let thought linger.  Of set purpose he chose Tony in
that other's place.  He saw it in a picture: he and she together helping
Tony, she and Tony equally helping him.  It passed before him merely, a
glowing coloured picture set in high light against the heavy background of
these English fir-woods and the Kentish sky.  Whether it came towards him
or retreated, he could not say.  It was very brief, instantaneous almost.
The memory of the play, with its numerous attendant correlations, rose up,
then vanished.

'Give me your arm, Tom, you mighty giant: these pine-needles are so
slippery.'  He felt her hand creep in and rest upon his muscles, and a
glow of boyish pride came with it.  In her summer dress of white, her big
garden hat and flowing violet veil, she looked adorable.  He liked the
long white gauntlet gloves.  The shadows of the trees became her well:
against the thick dark trunks she seemed slim and dainty as a flower that
the breeze bent over towards him.  'You're so horribly big and strong,'
she said, and her eyes, full of expression, glanced up at him.  He watched
her little feet in the neat white shoes peep out in turn as they walked
along; her fingers pressed his arm.  He tried to take her parasol, but she
prevented him, saying it was her only weapon of defence against a giant,
'and there _is_ a giant in this forest, though only a baby one perhaps!'
He felt the mother in her pour over him in a flood of tenderness that
blessed and soothed and comforted.  It was as if a divine and healing
power streamed from her into him.

'And what _were_ you thinking about, Tom?' she enquired teasingly.
'You haven't said a word for a whole five minutes!'

'I was thinking of Egypt,' he answered with truth.

She looked up quickly.

'I'm to go out in December,' he went on.  'I told you.  It was decided at
our last Board Meeting.'

She said she remembered.  'But it's funny,' she added, 'because I was
thinking of Egypt too just then--thinking of the Nile, my river with the
floating faces.'



The week-end visit was typical of many others; Mrs. Haughstone, seeing
safety in numbers possibly, was pleasant on the surface, Molly deflecting
most of her poisoned darts towards herself; while Tom and Tony shared the
society of their unconventional hostess with boyish enjoyment.
Tom modified the air of ownership he indulged when alone with her, and
no one need have noticed that there was anything more between them than a
hearty, understanding friendship.  Tony, for instance, may have guessed
the true situation, or, again, he may not; for he said no word, nor showed
the smallest hint by word, by gesture, or by silence--most significant
betrayal of all--that he was aware of any special tie.  Though a keen
observer, he gave no sign.  'She's an interesting woman, Tom,' he remarked
lightly yet with enthusiasm once, 'and a rare good hostess--a woman in a
thousand, I declare.  We make a famous trio.  As you've got that Assouan
job we'll have some fun next winter in Egypt, eh?'

And Tom, pleased and secretly flattered by the admiration, tried to make
his confidences.  Unless Tony had liked her this would have been
impossible.  But they formed such a natural, happy trio together, giving
the lie to the hoary proverb, that Tom felt it was permissible to speak of
her to his sympathetic cousin.  Already they had laughingly discussed the
half-forgotten acquaintanceship begun in the _dahabieh_ on the Nile, Tony
making a neat apology by declaring to her, 'Beautiful women blind me so,
Madame Jaretzka, that I invariably forget all lesser details.  And that's
why I told Tom you were a Russian.'

On this particular occasion, too, it was made easier because Tony had
asked his cousin's opinion about the Irish girl, invited for his special
benefit.  'I was never so disappointed in my life,' he said in his
convincing yet airy way.  'She looked so wonderful the other night.
It was the evening dress, I suppose.  You should always see a girl first
in the daytime; the daylight self is the real self.'  And Tom, amused by
the irresponsible attitude towards the sex, replied that the right woman
looked herself in any dress because it was as much a part of her as her
own skin.  'Yes,' said Tony, 'it's the thing inside the skin that counts,
of course; you're right; the rest is only a passing glamour.  But
friendship with a woman is the best of all, for friendship grows
insensibly into the best kind of love.  It's a delightful feeling,' he
added sympathetically, 'that kind of friendship.  Independent of what they
wear!'

He enjoyed his pun and laughed.  'I say, Tom,' he went on suddenly with a
certain inconsequence, 'have you ever met the Prince--Madame Jaretzka's
husband--by the way?  I wonder what he's like.'  He looked up carelessly
and raised his eyebrows.

'No,' replied Tom in a quiet tone, 'but I--exp--hope to some day.'

'I think he ran away and left her, or something,' continued the other.
'He's dead, anyhow, to all intents and purposes.  But I've been wondering
lately.  I'll be bound there was ill-treatment.  She looks so sad
sometimes.  The other night at the theatre I was watching her----'

'That Egyptian play?' broke in Tom.

'Yes; it was bad enough to make any one look sad, wasn't it?  But it was
curious all the same----'

'I didn't mean the badness.'

'Nor did I.  It was odd.  There was atmosphere in spite of everything.'

'I thought you were too occupied to notice the performance,' Tom hinted.

Tony laughed good-naturedly.  'I was a bit taken up, I admit,' he said.
'But there was something curious all the same.  I kept seeing you and our
hostess on the stage----'

'In Egypt!'

'In a way, yes.'  He hesitated.

'Odd,' said his cousin briefly.

'Very.  It seemed--there was some one else who ought to have been there as
well as you two.  Only he never came on.'

Tom made no comment.  Was this thought-transference, he wondered?

The natural sympathy between them furnished the requisite conditions
certainly.

'He never came on,' continued Tony, 'and I had the queer feeling that he
was being kept off on purpose, that he was busy with something else, but
that the moment he came on the play would get good and interesting--real.
Something would happen.  And it was then I noticed Madame Jaretzka----'

'And me, too, I suppose,' Tom put in, half amused, half serious.
There was an excited yet uneasy feeling in him.

'Chiefly her, I think.  And she looked so sad,--it struck me suddenly.
D'you know, Tom,' he went on more earnestly, 'it was really quite curious.
I got the feeling that we three were watching that play together from
above it somewhere, looking down on it--sort of from a height above----'

'Above,' exclaimed his cousin.  There was surprise in him--surprise at
himself.  That faint uneasiness increased.  He realised that to confide in
Tony was impossible.  But why?

'H'm,' Tony went on in a reflective way as if half to himself.  'I may
have seen it before and forgotten it.'  Then he looked up at his cousin.
'And what's more--that we three, as we watched it, knew the same thing
together--knew that we were waiting for another chap to come on, and that
when he came the silly piece would turn suddenly interesting, dramatic in
a true sense, only tragedy instead of comedy.  Did _you_, Tom?' he asked
abruptly, screwing up his eyes and looking quite serious a moment.

Tom had no answer ready, but his cousin left no time for answering.

'And the fact is,' he continued, lowering his voice, 'I had the feeling
the other chap we were waiting for was _him_.'

Tom was too interested to smile at the grammar.  'You mean--her husband?'
he said quietly.  He did not like the turn the talk had taken; it pleased
him to talk of her, but he disliked to bring the absent husband in.
There was trouble in him as he listened.

'Possibly it was,' he added a trifle stiffly.  Then, ashamed of his
feeling towards his imaginative cousin, he changed his manner quickly.
He went up and stood behind him by the open window.  'Tony, old boy, we're
together somehow in this thing,' he began impulsively; 'I'm sure of it.'
Then the words stuck.  'If ever I want your help----'

'Rather, Tom,' said the other with enthusiasm, yet puzzled, turning with
an earnest expression in his frank blue eyes.  In another moment, like two
boys swearing eternal friendship, they would have shaken hands.  Tom again
felt the impulse to make the confidences that desire for sympathy
prompted, and again realised that it was difficult, yet that he would
accomplish it.  Indeed, he was on the point of doing so, relieving his
mind of the childhood story, the accumulated details of Wave and Whiff and
Sound and Eyes, the singular Montreux meeting, the strange medley of joy
and uneasiness as well, all in fact without reserve--when a voice from the
lawn came floating into the room and broke the spell.  It lifted him
sharply to another plane.  He felt glad suddenly that he had not spoken--
afterwards, he felt very glad.  It was not right in regard to her, he
realised.

'You're never ready, you boys,' their hostess was saying, 'and Miss
Monnigan declares that men always wait to be fetched.  The lunch-baskets
are all in, and the motor's waiting.'

'We didn't want to be in the way,' cried Tony gaily, ever ready with an
answer first.  'We're both so big and clumsy.  But we'll make the fire in
the woods and do the work that requires mere strength without skill all
right.'  He leaped out of the window to join them, while Tom went by the
door to fetch his cap and overcoat.  Turning an instant he saw the three
figures on the lawn standing in the sunlight, Madame Jaretzka with a
loose, rough motor-coat over her white dress, a rose at her throat and the
long blue veil he loved wound round her hair and face.  He saw her eyes
look up at Tony and heard her chiding him.  'You've been talking mischief
in there together,' she was saying laughingly, giving him a searching
glance in play, though the tone had meaning in it.  'We were talking of
you,' swore Tony, 'and you,' he added, turning by way of polite
after-thought to the girl.  And one of his big hands he laid for a moment
upon Madame Jaretzka's arm.

Tom turned sharply and hurried on into the hall.  The first thought in his
mind was how tender and gentle Madame Jaretzka looked standing in the
sunshine, her eyes turned up at Tony.  His second thought was vaguer: he
felt glad that Tony admired and liked her so.  The third was vaguer still:
Tony didn't really care for the girl a bit and was only amusing himself
with her, but Madame Jaretzka would protect her and see that no harm came
of it.  She could protect the whole world.  That was her genius.

In a moment these three thoughts flashed through him, but while the last
two vanished as quickly as they came, the first lingered like sunlight in
him.  It remained and grew and filled his heart, and all that day it kept
close by him--her love, her comfort, her mothering compassion.

And Tom felt glad for some reason that his confidences to Tony after all
had been interrupted and prevented.  They remained thus interrupted and
prevented until the end, even when the 'other' came upon the scene, and
above all while that 'other' stayed.  It all seemed curiously inevitable.


