

The last few weeks of September they were much alone together, for Mrs.
Haughstone had gone back to her husband's tiny house at Kew, Molly to the
Dresden school, and Tony somewhere into space--northern Russia, he said,
to watch the birds beginning to leave.

Meanwhile, with deepening of friendship, and experiences whose
ordinariness was raised into significance because this woman shared them
with him, Tom saw the summer fade in England and usher in the longer
evenings.  Light and heat waned from the sighing year; winds, charged with
the memory of roses, took the paling skies; the swallows whispered
together of the southern tour.  New stars swam into their autumnal places,
and the Milky Way came majestically to its own.  He watched the curve of
it on moonless nights, pouring its grand river across the heavens.  And in
the heart of its soft brilliance he saw Cygnus, cruciform and shining,
immersed in the white foam of the arching wave.

He noticed these things now, as once long ago in early boyhood, because a
time of separation was at hand.  His yearning now was akin to his yearning
then--it left a chasm in his soul that beauty alone could help to fill.
At fifteen he was thirty-five, as now at thirty-five he was fifteen again.

Lettice was not, indeed, at a Finishing School across the Channel, but she
was shortly going to Warsaw to spend October with her husband, and in
November she was to sail for Egypt from Trieste.  Tom was to follow in
December, so a separation of three months was close at hand.  'But a
necessary separation,' she said one evening as they motored home beneath
the stars, 'is always bearable and strengthening; we shall both be
occupied with things that must--I mean, things we ought to do.  It's the
needless separations that are hard to bear.'  He replied that it would be
wonderful meeting again and pretending they were strangers.  He tried to
share her mood, her point of view with honesty.  'Yes,' she answered,
'only that wouldn't be quite true, because you and I can never be
separated--really.  The curve of the earth may hide us from each other's
sight like that,'--and she pointed to the sinking moon--'but we feel the
pull just the same.'

They leaned back among the cushions, sharing the mysterious beauty of the
night-sky in their hearts.  They lowered their voices as though the hush
upon the world demanded it.  The little things they said seemed suddenly
to possess a significance they could not account for quite and yet
admitted.

He told her that the Milky Way was at its best these coming months, and
that Cygnus would be always visible on clear nights.  'We'll look at that
and remember,' he said half playfully.  'The astronomers say the Milky Way
is the very ground-plan of the Universe.  So we all come out of it.
And you're Cygnus.'  She called him sentimental, and he admitted that
perhaps he was.  'I don't like this separation,' he said bluntly.  In his
mind he was thinking that the Milky Way had his wave in it, and that its
wondrous arch, like his life and hers, rose out of the 'sea' below the
world.  In that sea no separation was possible.

'But it's not that that makes you suddenly poetic, Tom.  It's something
else.'

'Is it?' he answered.  A whisper of pain went past him across the night.
He felt something coming; he was convinced she felt it too.  But he could
not name it.

'The Milky Way is a stream as well as a wave.  You say it rises in the
autumn----?'  She leaned nearer to him a little.

'But it's seen at its best a little later--in the winter, I believe.'

'We shall be in Egypt then,' she mentioned.  He could have sworn she would
say those very words.

'Egypt,' he repeated slowly.  'Yes--in Egypt.'

And a little shiver came over him, so slight, so quickly gone again, that
he hoped it was imperceptible.  Yet she had noticed it.

'Why, Tom, don't you like the idea?'

'I wonder--' he began, then changed the sentence--'I wonder what it will
be like.  I have a curious desire to see it--I know that.'

He heard her laugh under her breath a little.  What came over them both in
that moment he couldn't say.  There was a sense of tumult in him
somewhere, a hint of pain, of menace too.  Her laughter, slight as it was,
jarred upon him.  She was not feeling quite what he felt--this flashed,
then vanished.

'You don't sound enthusiastic,' she said calmly.

'I am, though.  Only--I had a feeling----'  He broke off.  The truth was
he couldn't describe that feeling even to himself.

'Tom, dear, my dear one--' she began, then stopped.  She also stopped an
impulsive movement towards him.  She drew back her sentence and her arms.
And Tom, aware of a rising passion in him he might be unable to control,
turned his face away a moment.  Something clutched at his heart as with
cruel pincers.  A chill followed close upon the shiver.  He felt a moment
of keen shame, yet knew not exactly why he felt it.

'I am a sentimental ass!' he exclaimed abruptly with a natural laugh.
His voice was tender.  He turned again to her.  'I believe I've never
properly grown up.'  And before he could restrain himself he drew her
towards him, seized her hand and kissed it like a boy.  It was that kiss,
combined with her blocked sentence and uncompleted gesture, rather than
any more passionate expression of their love for one another, that he
remembered throughout the empty months to follow.

But there was another reason, too, why he remembered it.  For she wore a
silk dress, and the arm against his ear produced a momentary rustling that
brought back the noise in the Zakopane bedroom when the frozen branch had
scraped the outside wall.  And with the Sound, absent now so long, the old
strange uneasiness revived acutely.  For that caressing gesture, that
kiss, that phrase of love that blocked its own final utterance brought
back the strange rich pain.

In the act of giving them, even while he felt her touch and held her
within his arms--she evaded him and went far away into another place where
he could not follow her.  And he knew for the first time a singular
emotion that seemed like a faint, distant jealousy that stirred in him,
yet a spiritual jealousy . . . as of some one he had never even seen.

They lingered a moment in the garden to enjoy the quiet stars and see the
moon go down below the pine-wood.  The tense mood of half an hour ago in
the motor-car had evaporated of its own accord apparently.

A conversation that followed emphasised this elusive emotion in him,
because it somehow increased the remoteness of the part of her he could
not claim.  She mentioned that she was taking Mrs. Haughstone with her to
Egypt in November; it again exasperated him; such unselfishness he could
not understand.  The invitation came, moreover, upon what Tom felt was a
climax of shameless behaviour.  For Madame Jaretzka had helped the family
with money that, to save their pride, was to be considered lent.
The husband had written gushing letters of thanks and promises that--Tom
had seen these letters--could hardly have deceived a schoolgirl.
Yet a recent legacy, which rendered a part repayment possible, had been
purposely concealed, with the result that yet more money had been 'lent'
to tide them over non-existent or invented difficulties.

And now, on the top of this, Madame Jaretzka not only refused to divulge
that the legacy was known to her, but even proposed an expensive two
months' holiday to the woman who was tricking her.

Tom objected strongly for two reasons; he thought it foolish kindness, and
he did not want her.

'You're too good to the woman, far too good,' he said.  But his annoyance
was only increased by the firmness of the attitude that met him.
'No, Tom; you're wrong.  They'll find out in time that I know, and see
themselves as they are.'

'You forgive everything to everybody,' he observed critically.  'It's too
much.'

She turned round upon him.  Her attitude was a rebuke, and feeling rebuked
he did not like it.  For though she did not quote 'until seventy times
seven,' she lived it.

'When she sees herself sly and treacherous like that, she'll understand,'
came the answer, 'she'll get her own forgiveness.'

'Her own forgiveness!'

'The only real kind.  If I forgive, it doesn't alter her.  But if she
understands and feels shame and makes up her mind not to repeat--that's
forgiving herself.  She really changes then.'

Tom gasped inwardly.  This was a level of behaviour where he found the air
somewhat rarified.  He saw the truth of it, but had no answer ready.

'Remorse and regret,' she went on, 'only make one ineffective in the
present.  It's looking backwards, instead of looking forwards.'

He felt something very big in her as she said it, holding his eyes firmly
with her own.  To have the love of such a woman was, indeed, a joy and
wonder.  It was a keen happiness to feel that he, Tom Kelverdon, had
obtained it.  His admiration for himself, and his deep, admiring love for
her rose side by side.  He did not recognise the flattery of self in this
attitude.  The simplicity in her baffled him.

'I could forgive _you_ anything, Lettice!' he cried.

'Could you?' she said gently.  'If so, you really love me.'

It was not the doubt in her voice that overwhelmed him then; she never
indulged in hints.  It was a doubt in himself, not that he loved her, but
that his love was not yet big enough, unselfish enough, sufficiently large
and deep to be worthy of this exquisite soul beside him.  Perhaps it was
realising he could not yet possess her spirit that made him seize the
precious little body that contained it.  Nothing could stop him.  He took
her in his arms and held her till she became breathless.  The passionate
moment expressed real spiritual yearning.  And she knew it.  She did not
struggle, yet neither did she respond.  They stood upon different levels
somehow.

'There'll be nothing left to love,' she gasped, 'if you do that often!'
She released herself quietly, tidying her hair and putting her hat
straight while she smiled at him.  Her dark veil had caught in his
tie-pin.  She disentangled it, her hands touching his mouth as she did so.
He kissed them gently, bending his head down with an air of repentance.

'My God, Lettice--you're precious to me!' he stammered.

But even as he said it, even while he still felt her soft cheeks against
his lips, her frail unresisting figure within his arms, there came this
pang of sudden pain that was so acute it frightened him.  There was
something impersonal in her attitude that alarmed him.  What was it?
He was helpless to understand it.  The excitement in his blood obscured
inner perception. . . .  Such tempestuous moments were rare enough between
them, and when they came he felt that she endured them rather than
responded.  He was aware of a touch of shame in himself.  But this
pain----?  Even while he held her it seemed again that she escaped him
because of the heights she lived on, yet partly, too, because of the
innocence which had not yet eaten of the tree of knowledge. . . .  Was
that, then, the lack in her?  Had she yet to learn that the spiritual dare
not be divorced wholly from the physical and that the divine blending of
the two in purity of heart alone brings safety?

She slipped from his encircling arms and--rose.  He struggled after her.
But that air he could not breathe.  She was too far above him.  She had to
stoop to meet the passionate man in him that sought to seize and hold her.
She had--the earlier phrase returned--come back to fetch him.  He did not
really love yet as he ought to love.  He loved himself--in her; selfishly
somehow, somewhere.  But this thought he did not capture wholly.  It cast
a shadow merely and was gone.

Somewhere, too, there was jealous resentment in him.  He could not feel
himself indispensable to a woman who occupied a pinnacle.

His cocksureness wavered a little before the sharp attack.  Pang after
pang stung him shrewdly, stung his pride, his confidence, his vanity,
shaking the platform on which he stood till each separate plank trembled
and the sense of security grew less.

But the confusion in his heart and mind bewildered him.  It was all so
strange and incomprehensible; he could not understand it.  He knew she was
true and loyal, her purity beyond reproach, her elusiveness not calculated
or intended, yet that somewhere, somehow she could do without him, and
that if he left her she--almost--would have neither remorse nor regret.
She would just accept it and--forgive. . . .

And he thought suddenly with an intense bitterness that amazed him--of the
husband.  The thought of that 'other' who had yet to come afflicted him
desperately.  When he met those light-blue eyes of the Wave he would
surely know them . . .!  He felt again the desire to seek counsel and
advice from another, some one of his own sex, a sympathetic and
understanding soul like Tony.

The turmoil in him was beyond elucidation: thoughts and emotions of
nameless kind combined to produce a fluid state of insecurity he could not
explain.  As usual, however, there emerged finally the solid fact which
seemed now the keynote of his character; at least, he invariably fell back
upon it for support against these occasional storms: 'She has singled me
out; she can't really do without me; we're necessary to each other; I'm
safe.'  The rest he dismissed as half realised only and therefore not
quite real.  His position with her was unique, of course, something the
world could not possibly understand, and, while resenting what he called
the 'impersonal' attitude in her, he yet knew that it was precisely this
impersonal attitude that justified their love.  Their love, in fine, was
proved spiritual thereby.  They were in the 'sea' together.  Invariably in
the end he blamed himself.

The rising Wave, it seemed, was bringing up from day to day new,
unexpected qualities from the depths within him, just as it brings up mud
and gravel from the ground-bed of the shore.  He felt it driving him
forward with increasing speed and power.  With an irresistible momentum
that left him helpless, it was hurrying him along towards the moment when
it would lower its crest again towards the earth--and break.

He knew now where the smothering crash would come, where he would finally
meet the singular details of his boyhood's premonition face to face,--the
Sound, the Whiff, the other pair of Eyes.  They awaited him--in Egypt.
In Egypt, at last, he would find the entire series, recognise each item.
He would also discover the nature of the wave that was neither of water
nor of snow. . . .

Yet, strange to say, when he actually met the pair of light-blue eyes, he
did not recognise them.  He encountered the face to which they belonged,
but was not warned.  While fulfilling its prophecy, the premonition
failed, of course, to operate.

For premonitions are a delicate matter, losing their power in the act of
justifying themselves.  To prevent their fulfilment were to stultify their
existence.  Between a spiritual warning and its material consummation
there is but a friable and gossamer alliance.  Had he recognised, he might
possibly have prevented; whereas the deeper part of him unconsciously
invited and said, Come.

And so, not recognising the arrival of the other pair of eyes, Tom, when
he met them, knew himself attracted instead of repelled.  Far from being
warned, he knew himself drawn towards their owner by natural sympathy, as
towards some one whose deep intrusion into his inner life was necessary to
its fuller realisation--the tumultuous breaking of the rapidly
accumulating Wave.



PART III


