

With Tony as guide they took their fill of wonder.  The principal
expeditions were made alone, introducing Tom to the marvels of
ancient Egypt which they already knew.  On the sturdiest donkey
Thebes could furnish, he raced his cousin across the burning sands,
Madame Jaretzka following in a sand-cart, her blue veil streaming in
the cool north wind.  They played like children, defying the tide of
mystery that this haunted land pours against the modern human soul,
while yet the wonder and the mystery added to their enjoyment,
deepening their happiness by contrast.

They ate their _al fresco_ luncheons gaily, seated by hoary tombs
that opened into the desolate hills; kings, priests, princesses, dead
six thousand years, listening in caverns underground to their
careless talk.  Yet their gaiety had a hush in it, a significance
behind the sentences; for even their lightest moments touched ever
upon the borders of an awfulness that was sublime, and all that they
said or did gained this hint of deeper value--that it was set against
a background of the infinite, the deathless.

It was impossible to forget that this was Egypt, the deposit of
immemorial secrets, the store-house of stupendous vanished dreams.

'There was a majesty, after all, about their strange old gods,' said
Tony one afternoon as they emerged from the stifling darkness of a
forgotten kingly tomb into the sunlight.  'They seem to thunder
still--below the ground--subconsciously.'  He was ever ready with the
latest modern catchword.  He flung himself down upon the sand, shaded
from the glare by a recumbent column of granite exquisitely carved,
then abandoned of the ages.  'They touch something in one even
to-day--something superb.  Human worship hasn't changed so
fundamentally after all.'

'A sort of ghostly deathlessness,' agreed Lettice, making a bed of
sand beside him.  'I think that's what one feels.'

Tony looked up.  He glanced alertly at her.  A question flashed a
moment in his eyes, then passed unspoken.

'Perhaps,' Tony went on in a more flippant tone, 'even the dullest
has to acknowledge the sublime in their conceptions.  Isis!  Why, the
very name is a poem in a single word.  Anubis, Nepthys, Horus--
there's poetry in them all.  They seem to sing themselves into the
heart, as Petrie might have said--but didn't.'

'The names _are_ rather splendid,' Tom put in, as he unpacked the
kettle and spirit-lamp for tea.  'One can't forget them either.'

There was a moment's silence, then Tony spoke again.  He had lost his
flippant tone.  He addressed his remark to Lettice.  Tom was aware
that she was somehow waiting for it.

'Their deathlessness!  Yes, you're right.'  He turned an instant to
look at the colossal structure behind them, whence the imposing
figures of a broken Pharaoh and his Queen stared to the east cross
the shoulder of some granite Deity that had refused to crumble for
three thousand years.  'Their deathlessness,' he repeated, lowering
his voice, 'it's really startling.'

He looked about him.  It was amazing how his little words, his
gesture, his very atmosphere created a spontaneous expectancy--as
though Thoth might stride sublimely up across the sand, or even Ra
himself come blazing with extended wings and awful disk of fire.

Tom felt the touch of the unearthly as he watched and listened.
Lettice--he was certain of it--shivered.  He moved nearer and spread
a rug across her feet.

'Don't, Tom, please!  I'm hot enough already.'  Her tone had a
childish exasperation in it--as though he interrupted some mood that
gave her pleasure.  She turned her eyes to Tony, but Tony was busily
opening sandwich packets with hands that--Tom thought--shared one
quality at least of the stone effigies they had been discussing--
size.  And he laughed.  The spell was broken.  They fell hungrily
upon their desert meal. . . .

Yet, it was odd how Tony had expressed precisely what Tom had himself
been vaguely feeling, though unable to find the language for his
fancy--odd, too, that apparently all three of them had felt the same
dim thing.  No one among them was 'religious,' nor, strictly
speaking, imaginative; poetical least of all in the regenerative,
creative sense.  Not one of the trio, that is, could have seized
imaginatively the conception of an alien deity and made it live.
Yet Tony's idle mood or idler words had done this very thing--and all
three acknowledged it in their various ways.  The flavour of a remote
familiarity was manifest in each one of them--collectively as well.

Another time they sat by night in ruined Karnak, watching the silver
moonlight bring out another world among the mighty pylons.
It painted the empty and enormous aisles with crowding processions of
lost ages.  Speaking in whispers, they saw the stars peep down
between the soaring forest of old stone; the cold desert wind brought
with it a sadness, a mournful retrospect too vast to realise, the
tragedy that such splendour left but a lifeless skeleton behind, a
gigantic, soulless ruin.  That such great prophecies remained
unfulfilled was somewhere both terrible and melancholy.  The immortal
strength of these Egyptian stones conveyed a grandeur almost
sinister.  The huge dumb beauty seemed menacing, even ominous; they
sat closer; they felt dwarfed uncomfortably, their selves reduced to
insignificance, almost threatened.  Even Tony sobered as they talked
in lowered voices, seated in the shadow of the towering columns,
their feet resting on the sand.

'I'm sure we've sat here before just like this, the three of us,' he
said in a lowered voice; 'it all seems like a dream to me.'

Madame Jaretzka, who was between them, made no answer, and Tom,
leaning forward, caught his cousin's eye beyond her. . . .  The scene
in the London theatre flashed across his mind.  He felt very happy,
very close to them both, extraordinarily at one with them, the woman
he loved best in all the world, the man who was his greatest friend.
He felt truth, not foolishness, in Tony's otherwise commonplace
remarks that followed: 'I could swear I'd known you both before--here
in Egypt.'

Madame Jaretzka moved a little, shuffling farther back so that she
could lean against the great curved pillar.  It brought them closer
together still.  She said no word, however.

'There's certainly a curious sympathy between the three of us,'
murmured Tom, who usually felt out of his depth in similar talks,
leaving his companions to carry it further while he listened merely.
'It's hard to believe that we meet for the first time now.'

He sat close to her, fingering her gauzy veil that brushed his face.
There was a pause, and then Madame Jaretzka said, turning to Tony:
'We met here first anyhow, didn't we?  Two winters ago, before I met
Tom----'

But Tony said he meant something far older than that, much longer
ago.  'You and Tom knew each other as children, you told me once.
Tom and I were boys together too . . . but . . .'

His voice died away in Tom's ears; her answers also were inaudible as
she kept her head turned towards Tony: his thoughts, besides, were
caught away a moment to the days in Montreux and in London. . . .
He fell into a reverie that lasted possibly a minute, possibly
several minutes.  The conversation between them left him somehow out
of it; he had little to contribute; they had an understanding, as it
were, on certain subjects that neglected him.  His mind accordingly
left them.  He followed his own thoughts dreamily . . . far away
 . . . past the deep black shadows and out into the soft blaze of
moonlight that showered upon the distant Theban hills. . . .  He
remembered the curious emotions that had marked his entry into Egypt.
He thought of a change in Lettice, at present still undefined.
He wondered what it was about her now that lent to her gentle spirit
a touch of authority, of worldly authority almost, that he dared not
fail to recognise--as though she had the right to it.  The flavour of
uneasiness stole back.  It occurred to him suddenly that he felt no
longer quite at home with her _alone_ as of old.  Some one watched
him: some one watched them both. . . .

It was as though for the first time he realised distance--a new
distance creeping in upon their relationship somewhere. . . .

A slight shiver brought him back.  The wind came moaning down the
monstrous, yawning aisles against them.  The overpowering effect of
so much grandeur had become intolerable.  'Ugh!  I'm cold,' he
exclaimed abruptly.  'I vote we move a bit.  I think--_I_'ll move
anyhow.'

Madame Jaretzka turned to him with a definite start; she straightened
herself against the huge sandstone column.  The moonlight touched
her; it clothed her in gold and silver, the gold of the sand, the
silver of the moon.  She looked ethereal, ghostly, a figure of air
and distance.  She seemed to belong to her surroundings--another
person somehow--faintly Egyptian almost.

'I thought you were asleep, Tom,' she said softly.  She had been in
the middle of an animated, though whispered, talk with Tony.
She peered at him with a little smile that lifted her lip oddly.

'I was far away somewhere,' he returned, peering at her closely.
'I forgot all about you both.  I thought, for a moment, I was quite--
alone.'

He saw her start again.  A significance he hardly intended had crept
into his tone.  Her face moved back into the shadow quickly beside
Tony.

She teased Tom for his want of manners, then fell to caring for his
comfort.  'It's icy,' she said, 'and you're in flannels.  The sudden
chill of these Egyptian nights is really treacherous,' and she took
the rug from her lap and put it round his shoulders.  As she did so,
the strange appearance he had noted increased about her.

And Tom got up abruptly.  'No, Lettice dear, thank you; I think I'll
move a bit.'  He had said 'Lettice dear' without realising it, and
before his cousin too.  'I'll take a turn and then come back for you.
You stay here with Tony,' and he moved off somewhat briskly.

Then, instantly, the other two rose up like one person, following him
to where the carriage waited. . . .

'They're frightening rather, don't you think--these ancient places?'
she said presently, as they drove along past palms and the
flat-topped houses of the felaheen.  'There's something watching and
listening all the time.'

Tom made no answer.  He felt suddenly unsure of something--almost
unsure of himself, it seemed.

'One feels a bit lost,' he said slowly after a bit, 'and lonely.
It's the size, I think.'

'Perhaps,' she rejoined, peering at him with half-lowered eyelids,
'and the silence.'  She broke off, then added, 'You can hear your
thoughts too clearly.'

Tom was sitting back amid a bundle of rugs she had wrapped him in;
Tony, beside her, on the front seat, seemed in a gentle doze.
They drove the rest of the way in silence, dropping Tony first at the
Savoy, then going on to Tom's hotel.  She insisted, although her own
house was in the opposite direction.  'And you're to take a hot
whisky when you get into bed, remember, and don't get up to-morrow if
you feel a chill.'  She gave him orders for his health and comfort as
though he were her son.  Tom noticed it, told her she was divinely
precious to him, and promised faithfully to obey.

'What do you think about Tony?' he asked suddenly, when they had
driven alone for several minutes.  'I mean, what impression does he
make on you?  How do you _feel_ him?'

'He's enjoying himself immensely with his numerous friends,' she
replied at once.  'He grows on one rather.  He's a dear, I think.'
She looked at him, then turned away again.  'Don't you, Tom?'

'Oh, rather.  I've always thought so.  I told you first long ago,
didn't I?'  He made no reference to the exaggeration about the
friends.  'And I think it's wonderful how well we--what a perfect
trio we are.'

'Yes, isn't it?'

They both became thoughtful then.  There fell a pause between them,
when Tom broke in abruptly once again:

'But--what do _you_ feel?  Because _I_ think he's half in love with
you, if you want to know.'  He leaned over and whispered in her ear.
The words tumbled out as though they were in a hurry.  'It pleases me
immensely, Lettice; it makes me feel so proud of you and happy.
It'll do him a world of good, too, if he loves a woman like you.
You'll teach him something.'  She smiled shyly and said, 'I wonder,
Tom.  Do you really think so?  He certainly seems fond of me, but I
hadn't thought quite that.  You think everybody must fall in love
with me.'  She pushed him away with a gentle yet impatient pressure
of her arm, indicating the Arab coachman with a nod of her head.
'Take care of him, Lettice: he's a dear fellow; don't let him break
his heart.'

Tom began to flirt outrageously; his arm crept round her, he leaned
over and stole a kiss--and to his amazement she did not try to stop
him.  She did not seem to notice it.  She sat very still--a stone
statue in the moonlight.

Then, suddenly, he realised that she had not replied to his question.
He promptly repeated it therefore.  'You put me off with what _he_
feels, but I want to know what _you_ feel,' he said with emphasis.

'But, Tom, I'm not putting you off, as you call it--with anything,'
and there was a touch of annoyance in her tone and manner.

'Tell me, Lettice; it interests me.  You're such a puzzle, d'you
know, out here.'  His tone unconsciously grew more earnest as he
spoke.

Madame Jaretzka broke into a little laugh.  'You boy!' she exclaimed
teasingly, 'you're trying to heighten his value so as to increase
your own by contrast.  The more people you can find in love with me,
the more you'll be able to flatter yourself.'

Tom laughed with her, though he did not quite understand.  He had
never heard her say such a thing before.  He accepted the cleverness
she gave him credit for, however.  'Of course, and why shouldn't I?'
And he was just going to put his original question in another form--
had already begun it, in fact--when she interrupted him, putting her
hand playfully over his mouth for a second: 'I do think Tony's a
happy entertaining sort of man,' she told him, 'even fascinating in a
certain kind of way.  He's very stimulating to me.  And I feel--don't
you, Tom?'--a slight change--was it softness?--crept into her tone--
'a sort of beauty in him somewhere?'

'Yes, p'raps I do,' he assented briefly; 'but, I say, Lettice
darling, you mischievous Egyptian princess.'

'Be quiet, Tom, and take your arm away.  Here's the hotel in sight.'
And yet, somehow, he fancied that she preferred his action to the
talk.

'Tell me this first,' he went on, obeying her peremptory tone:
'do you think it's true that we three have been together before like
that--as Tony said, I mean?  It's a funny thing, but I swear it
sounded true when he said it.'  His tone was earnest again.
'It gave me the creeps a bit, and, d'you know, you looked so queer,
so wonderful in the moonlight--you looked un-English, foreign--like
one of those Egyptian figures come to life.  That's what made me
cold, I think.'  His laughter died away.  He was grave suddenly.
He sighed a little and moved closer to her.  'That's--what made me
get up and leave you,' he added abruptly.

'Oh, he's always saying that kind of thing,' she answered quickly,
moving the rugs for him to get out as the carriage slowed up before
the brilliantly lit hotel. She made no reference to his other words.
'There's a lot of poetry in Tony too--out here.'

'Said it before, has he?' exclaimed Tom with genuine astonishment.
'All three of us or--or just you and him?  Am _I_ in the business
too?'  He was now bubbling over with laughter again for some reason;
it all seemed comical, almost.  Yet it was a sudden, an emotional
laughter.  His emotion--his excitement surprised him even at the
time.

'All three of us--I think,' she said, as he held her hand a moment,
saying good-bye.  'Yes, all three of us, of course.  Now good-night,
you inquisitive and impertinent boy, and if you have to stay in bed
to-morrow we'll come over and nurse you all day long.'  He answered
that he would certainly stay in bed in that case--and watched her
waving her hand over the back of the carriage as she drove away into
the moonlight like a fading dream of stars and mystery and beauty.
Then he took his telegrams and letters from the Arab porter with the
face of expressionless bronze, and went up to bed.

'What a strange and wonderful woman!' he thought as the lift rushed
him up: 'out here she seems another being, and a thousand times more
fascinating.'  He felt almost that he would like to win her all over
again from the beginning.  'She's different to what she was in
England.  Tony's different too.  And so am I, I do believe!' he
exclaimed in his bedroom, looking at his sunburned face in the glass
a moment.  'We're all different!'  He felt singularly happy,
hilarious, stimulated--a deep and curious excitement was in him.
Above all there was high pride that she belonged to him so
absolutely.  But the analysis he had indulged in England vanished
here.  He forgot it all. . . .  He was in Egypt with her . . .  now.

He read his letters and telegrams, only half realising at first that
they called him back to Assouan.  'What a bore,' he thought;
'I simply shan't go.  A week's delay won't matter.  I can telephone.'

He laid them down upon the table beside him and walked out on to his
balcony.  Responsibility seemed less in him.  He felt a little
reckless.  His position was quite secure.  He was his own master.
He meant to enjoy himself. . . .  But another, deeper voice was
sounding in him too.  He heard it, but at first refused to recognise
it.  It whispered.  One word it whispered: 'Stay . . .!'



There was no sleep in him; with an overcoat thrown across his
shoulders he watched the calm Egyptian night, the soft army of the
stars, the river gleaming in a broad band of silver.  Hitherto
Lettice had monopolised his energies; he had neglected Egypt, whose
indecipherable meaning now came floating in upon him with a strange
insistence.  Lettice came with it too.  The two beauties were
indistinguishable. . . .

A flock of boats lay motionless, their black masts hanging in
mid-air; all was still and silent, no voices, no footsteps, no
movements anywhere.  In the distance the desolate rocky hills rolled
like a solid wave along the horizon.  Gaunt and mysterious, they
loomed upon the night.  They were pierced by myriad tombs, those
solemn hills; the stately dead lay there in hundreds--he imagined
them looking forth a moment like himself across the peace and silence
of the moonlit desert.  They focussed upon Thebes, upon the white
hotel, upon a modern world they could not recognise--upon his very
windows.  It seemed to him for a moment that their ancient eyes met
his own across the sand, across the silvery river, and, as they met,
a shadowy gleam of recognition passed between them and himself.
At the same time he also saw the eyes he loved.  They gazed through
half-closed eyelids . . . the Eastern eyes of his early boyhood's
dream.  He remembered again the strange emotion of the day he first
arrived in Egypt, weeks ago. . . .

And then he suddenly thought of Tony, and of Tony's careless remark
as they sat in ruined Karnak together: 'I feel as if we three had all
been here before.'

Why it returned to him just now he did not know: for some reason
unexplained the phrase revived in him.  Perhaps he felt an
instinctive sympathy towards the poet's idea that he and _she_ were
lovers of such long standing, of such ancient lineage.  It flattered
his pride, while at the same time it disturbed him.  A sense of vague
disquiet grew stronger in him.  In any case, he did not dismiss it
and forget--his natural way of treating fancies.  'Perhaps,' he
murmured, 'the bodies she and I once occupied lie there now--lie
under the very stars their eyes--_our_ own--once looked upon.'

It was strange the fancy took such root in him. . . .  He stood a
long time gazing at the vast, lonely necropolis among the mountains.
There was an extraordinary stillness over that western bank, where
the dead lay in their ancient tombs.  The silence was eloquent, but
the whole sky whispered to his soul.  And again he felt that Egypt
welcomed him; he was curiously at home here.  It moved the deeps in
him, brought him out; it changed him; it brought out Lettice too--
brought out a certain power in her.  She was more of a woman here, a
woman of the world.  She was more wilful, and more human.  Values had
subtly altered.  Tony himself was altered. . . .  Egypt affected them
all three. . . .

The vague uneasiness persisted.  His mood changed a little, the
excitement gradually subsided; thought shifted to a minor key,
subdued by the beauty of the southern night.  The world lay in a
mysterious glow, the hush was exquisite.  Yet there was expectancy:
that glow, that hush were ready to burst into flame and language.
They covered secrets.  Something was watching him.  He was dimly
aware of a thousand old forgotten things. . . .

He no longer thought, but felt.  The calm, the peace, the silence
laid soothing fingers against the running of his blood; the turbulent
condition settled down.  Then, through the quieting surface of his
reverie, stole up a yet deeper mood that seemed evoked partly by the
mysterious glamour of the scene, yet partly by his will to let it
come.  It had been a long time in him; he now let it up to breathe.
It came, moreover, with ease, and quickly.

For a gentle sadness rose upon him, a sadness deeply hidden that he
suddenly laid bare as of set deliberation.  The recent play and
laughter, above all his own excitement, had purposely concealed it--
from others possibly, but certainly from himself.  The excitement had
been a mask assumed by something deeper in him he had wished--and
tried--to hide.  Gently it came at first, this sadness, then with
increasing authority and speed.  It rose about him like a cloud that
hid the stars and dimmed the sinking moon.  It spread a veil between
him and the rocky cemetery on those mournful hills beyond the Nile.
In a sense it seemed, indeed, to issue thence.  It emanated from
their silence and their ancient tombs.  It sank into him.  It was
penetrating--it was familiar--it was deathless.

But it was no mood of common sadness; there lay no physical tinge in
it, but rather a deep, unfathomable sadness of the spirit: an inner
loneliness.  From his inmost soul it issued outwards, meeting
half-way some sense of similar loneliness that breathed towards him
from these tragic Theban hills. . . .

And Tom, not understanding it, tried to shake himself free again;
he called up cheerful things to balance it; he thought of his firm
position in the world, of his proud partnership, of his security with
her he loved, of his zest in life, of the happy prospect immediately
in front of him.  But, in spite of all, the mood crept upwards like a
rising wave, swamping his best resistance, drowning all appeal to joy
and confidence.  He recognised an unwelcome revival of that earlier
nightmare dread connected with his boyhood, things he had decided to
forget, and had forgotten as he thought.  The mood took him gravely,
with the deepest melancholy he had ever known.  It had begun so
delicately; it became in a little while so determined, it threatened
to overmaster him.  He turned then and faced it, so to speak.
He looked hard at it and asked of himself its meaning.  Thought and
emotion in him shuffled with their shadowy feet.

And then he realised that, in germ at any rate, the mood had lain
actually a long time in him, deeply concealed--the surface excitement
merely froth.  He had hidden it from himself.  It had been
accumulating, gaining strength and impetus, pausing upon direction
only.  All the hours just spent at Karnak it had been there, drawing
nearer to the surface; this very night, but a little while ago,
during the drive home as well; before that even--during all the talks
and out-door meals and expeditions; he traced its existence suddenly,
and with tiny darts of piercing, unintelligible pain, as far back as
Alexandria and the day of his arrival.  It seemed to justify the
vivid emotions that had marked his entry into Egypt.  It became
sharply clear now--this had been in him subconsciously since the
moment when he read the little letter of welcome Lettice sent to meet
him at the steamer, a letter he discovered afterwards was curiously
empty.  This disappointment, this underlying sadness he had kept
hidden from himself: he now laid it bare and recognised it.  He faced
it.  With a further flash he traced it finally to the journey in the
Geneva train when he had read over the Warsaw and the Egyptian
letters.

And he felt startled: something at the roots of his life was
trembling.  He tried to think.  But Tom was slow; he could feel, but
he could not dissect and analyse.  Introspection with him invariably
darkened vision, led to distortion and bewilderment.  The effort to
examine closely confused him.  Instead of dissipating the emotion he
intensified it.  The sense of loneliness grew inexplicably--a great,
deep loneliness, a loneliness of the spirit, a loneliness, moreover,
that it seemed to him he had experienced before, though when, under
what conditions, he could not anywhere remember.

His former happiness was gone, the false excitement with it.
This freezing loneliness stole in and took their places.
Its explanation lay hopelessly beyond him, though he felt sure it had
to do with this haunted and mysterious land where he now found
himself, and in a measure with her, even with Tony too. . . .

The hint Egypt dropped into him upon his arrival was a true one--he
had slipped over an edge, slipped into something underneath, below
him--something past.  But slipped _with her_.  She had come back to
fetch him.  They had come back to fetch--each other . . . through
pain. . . .

And a shadow from those sombre Theban mountains crept, as it were,
upon his life.  He knew a sinking of the heart, a solemn, dark
presentiment that murmured in his blood the syllables of 'tragedy.'
To his complete amazement--at first he refused to believe it indeed--
there came a lump into his throat, as though tears must follow to
relieve the strain; and a moment later there was moisture, a
perceptible moisture, in his eyes.  The sadness had so swiftly passed
into foreboding, with a sense of menacing tragedy that oppressed him
without cause or explanation.  Joy and confidence collapsed before it
like a paper platform beneath the pressure of a wind.  His feet and
hands were cold.  He shivered. . . .

Then gradually, as he stood there watching the calm procession of the
stars, he felt the ominous emotion draw down again, retreat.
Deep down inside him whence it came, it retired into a kind of
interior remoteness that lay beyond his reach.  It was incredible and
strange.  The intensity had made it seem so real. . . .  For, while
it lasted, he had felt himself bereft, lonely beyond all telling,
outcast, lost, forgotten, wrapped in a cold and desolate misery that
frightened him past all belief.  The hand that lit his pipe still
trembled.  But the mood had passed as mysteriously as it came.
It left him curiously shaken in his heart.  'Perhaps this too,'--
thought murmured from some depth in him he could neither control nor
understand--'perhaps this too is--Egypt.'

He went to bed, emotion all smoothed out again, yet wondering a good
deal at himself.  For the odd upheaval was a new experience.  Such an
attack had never come to him before; he laughed at it, called it
hysteria, and decided that its cause was physical; he persuaded
himself that it had a very banal cause--a chill, even a violent
chill, incipient fever and over-fatigue at the back of it.  He smiled
at himself, while obeying the loving orders he had received, and
brewing the comforting hot mixture with his spirit-lamp.

Then drinking it, he looked round the room with satisfaction at the
various evidences of precious motherly care.  This mother-love
restored his happiness by degrees.  His more normal, stolid,
unimaginative self climbed back into its place again--yet with a
touch of awkwardness and difficulty.  Something in him was changed,
or changing; he had surprised it in the act.

The nature of the change escaped him, however.  It seemed, perhaps--
this was the nearest he could get to it--that something in him had
weakened, some sense of security, of confidence, of self-complacency
given way a little.  Only it was not his certainty of the mother-love
in her: that remained safe from all possible attack.  A tinge of
uneasiness still lay like a shadow on his mind--until the fiery
spirit chased it away, and a heavy sleep came over him that lasted
without a break until he woke two hours after sunrise.


