

He slept through the hot hours of the afternoon. In the cool of the
evening, as he strolled along the river bank, he read the few lines
Lettice had written to him at Assouan. For the porter had handed him
half-a-dozen letters as he left the hotel. Tony's he put for the moment
aside; the one from Lettice was all he cared about, quite forgetting he
had promised to tear it up unread. It was short but tender--anxious about
his comfort and well-being in a strange hotel 'when I am not there to take
care of you.'  It ended on a complaint that she was 'tired rather and
spending my time at full length on a deck-chair in the garden.'
She promised to write 'at greater length to-morrow.'

'Instead of which,' thought Tom with a boy's delight, 'I surprised her and
we talked face to face.'  But for the Arab touts who ran beside him,
offering glass beads made in Birmingham, he could have kissed the letter
there and then.

The resplendent gold on the river blinded him, he was glad to enter the
darker street and shake off the children who pestered him for bakshish.
Passing the Savoy Hotel, he hesitated a moment, then went on. 'No, I won't
call in for Tony; I'll find her alone, and we'll have a cosy little talk
together before the others come.'  He quickened his pace, entered the
shady garden, discovered her instantly, and threw himself down upon the
cushions beside her deck-chair.  'Just what I hoped,' he said, with
pleasure and admiration in his eyes, 'alone at last.  That is good luck--
isn't it, Lettice?'

'Of course,' she agreed, and smiled lazily, though some might have thought
indifferently, as she watched him arranging the cushions.
He flung himself back and gazed at her. She wore a dress of palest yellow,
and the broad-brimmed hat with the little roses.  She seemed part of the
flaming sunset and the tawny desert.

'Well,' he grumbled playfully, 'it is true, isn't it?  Our not being alone
often, I mean?'  He watched her without knowing that he did so.

'In a way--yes,' she said.  'But we can't have everything at once, can we,
Tom?'  Her voice was colourless perhaps. A tiny frown settled for an
instant between her eyes, then vanished. Tom did not notice it.
She sighed. 'You baby, Tom. I spoil you dreadfully, and you know I do.'

He liked her in this quiet, teasing mood; it was often the prelude to
more delightful spoiling.  He was in high spirits.  'You look as fresh as
a girl of sixteen, Lettice,' he declared.  'I believe you're only this
instant out of your bath and bed.  D'you know, I slept like a baby too--
the whole afternoon----'

He interrupted himself, for at that moment a cigarette-case on the sand
beside him caught his eye.  He picked it up--he recognised it.  'Yes--I
wish you'd smoke,' she said the same instant, brushing a fly quickly from
her cheek.

'Tony's,' he exclaimed, examining the case.

He noticed at the same time several burnt matches between his cushions and
her chair.

'But he'd love you to smoke them: I'll take the responsibility.'
She laughed quietly.  'I'm sure they're good--better than yours; he's
wickedly extravagant.'  She watched him as he took one out, examining the
label critically, then lighting it slowly and inhaling the smoke to taste
it.  There was a faint perfume that clung to the case and its contents.
'Ambra,' said Lettice, a kind of watchful amusement in her eyes.
'You don't like it!'

Tom looked up sharply.

'Is that it?  I didn't know.'

She nodded.  'It's Tony's smell; haven't you noticed it?  He always has
it about him.  No, no,' she laughed, noticing his expression of
disapproval, 'he doesn't use it.  It's just in his atmosphere, I mean.'

'Oh, is it?' said Tom.

'I rather like it,' she went on idly, 'but I never can make out where it
comes from.  We call it ambra--the fragrance that hangs about the bazaars:
I believe they used it for the mummies; but the desert perfume is in it
too.  It's rather wonderful--it suits him--don't you think?  Penetrating,
and so delicate.'

What a lot she had to say about it!  He made no reply.  He was looking
down to see what caused him that sudden, inexplicable pain--and discovered
that the lighted match had burned his fingers.  The next minute he looked
up again--straight into her eyes.

But, somehow, he did not say exactly what he meant to say.  He said, in
fact, something that occurred to him on the spur of the moment.  His mind
was simple, possibly, yet imps occasionally made use of it.  An imp just
then reminded him: 'Her letter made no mention of the picnic, of Tony's
sudden change of plan, yet it was written yesterday morning when both were
being arranged.'

So Tom did not refer to the ambra perfume, nor to the fact that Tony had
spent the afternoon with her.  He said quite another thing--said it rather
bluntly too: 'I've just got your letter from Assouan, Lettice, and I clean
forgot my promise that I wouldn't read it.'  He paused a second.
'You said nothing about the picnic in it.'

'I thought you'd be disappointed if you knew,' she replied at once.
'That's why I didn't want you to read it.'  And she fell to scolding him
in the way he usually loved,--but at the moment found less stimulating for
some reason.  He smoked his stolen cigarette with energy for a measurable
period.

'You're the spoilt child, not I,' he said at length, still looking at her.
'You said you were tired and meant to rest, and then you go for an
exhausting expedition instead.'

The tiny frown reappeared between her eyes, lingered a trifle longer than
before, and vanished. She made a quick gesture.  'You're in a very nagging
mood, Tom; bivouacs don't agree with you.'  She spoke lightly, easily, in
excellent good temper really.  'It was Tony persuaded me, if you want to
know the truth. He found himself free unexpectedly; he was so persistent;
it's impossible to resist him when he's like that--the only thing is to
give in and go.'

'Of course.'  Tom's face was like a mask. He thought so, at least, as he
laughed and agreed with her, saying Tony was an unscrupulous rascal at the
best of times.  Apparently there was a struggle in him; he seemed in two
minds.  'Was he here this afternoon?' he asked.  He learned that Tony had
come at four o'clock and had tea with her alone.  'We didn't telephone
because he said it would only spoil your sleep, and that a man who works
as well as plays must sleep--longer than a younger man.'  Then, as Tom
said nothing, she added, 'Tony _is_ such a boy, isn't he?'

There were several emotions in Tom just then.  He hardly knew which was
the true, or at least, the dominant one.  He was thinking of several
things at once too: of her letter, of that faint peculiar odour, of Tony's
coming to tea, but chiefly, perhaps, of the fact that Lettice had not
mentioned it,--but that he had found it out. . . . His heart sank.
It struck him suddenly that the mother in her sought to protect him from
the pain the woman gave.

'Is he--yes,' he said absent-mindedly.  And she repeated quietly,
'Oh, I think so.'

The brief eastern twilight had meanwhile fallen, and the rapidly cooling
air sighed through the foliage.  It grew darker in their shady corner.
The western sky was still a blaze of riotous colour, however, that
filtered through the trees and shed a luminous glow upon their faces.
It was a bewitching light--there was something bewitching about Lettice as
she lay there.  Tom himself felt a touch of that deep Egyptian
enchantment.  It stole in among his thoughts and feelings, colouring
motives, lifting into view, as from far away, moods that he hardly
understood and yet obeyed because they were familiar.

This evasive sense of familiarity, both welcome and unwelcome, swept in,
dropped a fleeting whisper, and was gone again.  He felt himself for an
instant--some one else: one Tom felt and spoke, while another Tom looked
on and watched, a calm, outside spectator.  And upon his heart came a
touch of that strange, rich pain that was never very far away in Egypt.

'I say, Lettice,' he began suddenly, as though he came to an abrupt
decision.  'This is an awful place for talk--these Luxor hotels----'
He stuck.  'Isn't it?  You know what I mean.'  His laborious manner
betrayed intensity, yet he meant to speak lightly, easily, and thought his
voice was merely natural. He stared hard at the glowing tip of his
cigarette.

Lettice looked across at him without speaking for a moment.  Her eyelids
were half closed.  He felt her gaze and raised his own.  He saw the smile
steal down towards her lips.

'Tom, why are you glaring at me?'

He started.  He tried to smile, but there was no smile in him.

'Was I, Lettice?  Forgive me.'  The talk that was coming would hurt him,
yet somehow he desired it.  He would give his little warning and take the
consequences.  'I was devouring your beauty, as the _Family Herald_ says.'
He heard himself utter a dry and unconvincing laugh.  Something was rising
through him; it was beyond control; it had to come.  He felt stupid,
awkward, and was angry with himself for being so.  For, somehow, at the
same time he felt powerless too.

She came to the point with a directness that disconcerted him.
'Who has been talking about me?' she enquired, her voice hardening a
little; 'and what does it matter if they have?'

Tom swallowed.  There was something about her beauty in that moment that
set him on fire from head to foot.  He knew a fierce desire to seize her
in his arms, hold her for ever and ever--lest she should escape him.

But he was unable to give expression in any way to what was in him.
All he did was to shift his cushions slightly farther from her side.

'It's always wiser--safer--not to be seen about too much with the same
man--alone,' he fumbled, recalling Mrs. Haughstone's words, 'in a place
like this, I mean,' he qualified it.  It sounded foolish, but he could
evolve no cleverer way of phrasing it.  He went on quicker, a touch of
nervousness in his voice he tried to smother: 'No one can mistake _our_
relationship, or think there's anything wrong in it.'  He stopped a
second, as she gazed at him in silence, waiting for him to finish.
'But Tony,' he concluded, with a gulp he prayed she did not notice, 'Tony
is a little----'

'Well?' she helped him, 'a little what?'

'A little different, isn't he?'

Tom realised that he was producing the reverse of what he intended.
Somehow the choice of words seemed forced upon him.  He was aware of his
own helplessness; he felt almost like a boy scolding his own wise,
affectionate mother.  The thought stung him into pain, and with the pain
rose, too, a first distant hint of anger.  The turmoil of feeling confused
him.  He was aware--by her silence chiefly--of the new distance between
them, a distance the mention of Tony had emphasised.  Instinctively he
tried to hide both pain and anger--it could only increase this distance
that was already there.  At the same time he saw red. . . .  Her answer,
then, so gently given, baffled him absurdly.  He felt out of his depth.

'I'll be more careful, Tom, dear--you wise, experienced chaperone.'

The words, the manner, stung him. Another emotion, wounded vanity, came
into play.  To laugh at himself was natural and right, but to be laughed
at by a woman, a woman whom he loved, whom he regarded as exclusively his
own, against whom, moreover, he had an accumulating grievance--it hurt him
acutely, although he seemed powerless to prevent it.  He felt his own
stupidity increase.

'It's just as well, I think, Lettice.'  It was the wrong, the hopeless
thing to say, but the words seemed, in a sense, pushed quickly out of his
mouth lest he should find better ones.  He anticipated, too, her
exasperation before her answer proved it: 'But, really, Tom, you know, I
can look after myself rather well as a rule--don't you think?'

He interrupted her then, a mixture of several feelings in him--shame, the
pain of frustrate yearning, perversity too.  For, in spite of himself, he
wanted to hear how she would speak of Tony.  He meant to punish himself by
hearing her praise him.  He, too, meant to speak well of his cousin.

'He's a bit careless, though,' he blurted, 'irresponsible, in a way--where
women are concerned.  I'm sure  he means no harm, of course, but----'
He paused in confusion, he was no longer afraid that harm might come to
Tony; he was afraid for her, but now also for himself as well.

'Tom, I do believe you're jealous!'

He laughed boisterously when he heard it.  It was really comical, absurdly
comical, of course.  It sounded, too, the way she said it--ugly, mean,
contemptible.  The touch of shame came back.

'Lettice!  But what an idea!'  He gasped, turning round upon his other
elbow, closer to her.  But the sinking of his heart increased; he felt an
inner cold.  And a moment of deep silence followed the empty laughter.
The rustle of the foliage alone was audible.

Lettice looked down sideways at him through half-closed eyelids; propped
on his cushions beside her, this was natural: yet he felt it mental as
well as physical.  There was pity in her attitude, a concealed
exasperation, almost contempt.  At the same time he realised that she had
never seemed so adorably lovely, so exquisite, so out of his reach.
He had never felt her so seductively desirable.  He made an impetuous
gesture towards her before he knew it.

'Don't, Tom; you'll upset my papers and everything,' she said calmly, yet
with the merest suspicion of annoyance in her tone.  She was very gentle,
she was also very cold--cold as ice, he felt her, while he was burning as
with fire.  He was aware of this unbridgeable distance between his passion
and her indifference; and a dreadful thought leaped up in him with
stabbing pain: 'Her answer to Tony would have been quite otherwise.'

'I'm sorry, Lettice--so sorry,' he said brusquely, to hide his
mortification.  'I'm awfully clumsy.'  She was putting her papers tidy
again with calm fingers, while his own were almost cramped with the energy
of suppressed desire.  'But, seriously,' he went on, refusing the rebuff
by pretending it was play on his part, 'it isn't very wise to be seen
about so much alone with Tony.  Believe me, it isn't.'  For the first
time, he noticed, it was difficult to use the familiar and affectionate
name.  But for a sense of humour he could have said 'Anthony.'

'I do believe you, Tom.  I'll be more careful.'  Her eyes were very soft,
her manner quiet, her gentle tone untinged with any emotion.  Yet Tom
detected, he felt sure, a certain eagerness behind the show of apparent
indifference.  She liked to talk--to go on talking--about Tony.  'Do you
_really_ think so, really mean it?' he heard her asking, and thus knew his
thought confirmed.  She invited more.  And, with open eyes, with a curious
welcome even to the pain involved, Tom deliberately stepped into the cruel
little trap.  But he almost felt that something pushed him in.  He talked
exactly like a boy: 'He--he's got a peculiar power with women,' he said.
'I can't make it out quite.  He's not good-looking--exactly--is he?'
It was impossible to conceal his eagerness to know exactly what she did
feel.

'There's a touch of genius in him,' she answered.  'I don't think looks
matter so much--I mean, with women.'  She spoke with a certain restraint,
not deliberately saying less than she thought, but yet keeping back the
entire truth.  He suddenly realised a relationship between her and Tony
into which he was not admitted.  The distance between them increased
visibly before his very eyes.

And again, out of a hundred things he wanted to say, he said--as though
compelled to--another thing.

'Rather!' he burst out honestly.  'I should hate it if--you hadn't liked
him.'  But a week ago he would have phrased this differently--'If _he_ had
not liked you.'

There were perceptible pauses between their sentences now, pauses that for
him seemed breaking with a suspense that was painful, almost cruel.
He knew worse was coming.  He both longed for it yet dreaded it.  He felt
at her mercy, in her power somehow.

'It's odd,' she went on slowly, 'but in England I thought him stupid
rather, whereas out here he's changed into another person.'

'I think we've all changed--somehow,' Tom filled the pause, and was going
to say more when she interrupted.

She kept the conversation upon Tony.  'I shall never forget the day he
walked in here first.  It was the week I arrived.  You'll laugh, Tom, when
I tell you----'  She hesitated--almost it seemed on purpose.

'How was it?  How did he look?'  The forced indifference of the tone
betrayed his anxiety.

'Well, he's not impressive exactly--is he?--as a rule.  That little
stoop--and so on.  But I saw his figure coming up the path before I
recognised who it was, and I thought suddenly of an Egyptian, almost an
old Pharaoh, walking.'

She broke off with that little significant laugh Tom knew so well.
But, comical though the picture might have been--Tony walking like a
king,--Tom did not laugh.  It was not ludicrous, for it was somewhere
true.  He remembered the singular inner mental picture he had seen above
the desert fire, and the pain within him seemed the forerunner of some
tragedy that watched too close upon his life.  But, for another and more
obvious reason, he could not laugh; for he heard the admiration in her
voice, and it was upon that his mind fastened instantly.  His observation
was so mercilessly sharp.  He hated it.  Where was his usual slowness
gone?  Why was his blood so quickly apprehensive?

She kept her eyes fixed steadily on his, saying what followed gently,
calmly, yet as though another woman spoke the words.  She stabbed him,
noting the effect upon him with a detached interest that seemed
indifferent to his pain.  Something remote and ancient stirred in her,
something that was not of herself To-day, something half primitive, half
barbaric.

'It may have been the blazing light,' she went on, 'the half-savage effect
of these amazing sunsets--I cannot say,--but I saw him in a sheet of gold.
There was gold about him, I mean, as though he wore it--and when he came
close there was that odd, faint perfume, half of the open desert and half
of ambra, as we call it----'  Again she broke off and hesitated, leaving
the impression there was more to tell, but that she could not say it.
She kept back much.  Into the distance now established between them Tom
felt a creeping sense of cold, as of the chill desert wind that follows
hard upon the sunset.  Her eyes still held him steadily.  He seemed more
and more aware of something merciless in her.

He sat and gazed at her--at a woman he loved, a woman who loved him, but a
woman who now caused him pain deliberately because something beyond
herself compelled. Her tenderness lay inactive, though surely not
forgotten.  She, too, felt the pain.  Yet with her it was in some odd
way--impersonal. . . . Tom, hopelessly out of his depth, swept onward by
this mighty wave behind all three of them, sat still and watched her--
fascinated, even terrified.  Her eyelids were half closed again.
Another look stole up into her face, driving away the modern beauty,
replacing its softness, tenderness with another expression he could not
fathom.  Yet this new expression was somehow, too, half recognisable.
It was difficult to describe--a little sterner, a little wilder, a faint
emphasis of the barbaric peering through it.  It was darker.  She looked
eastern.  Almost, he saw her visibly change--here in the twilight of the
little Luxor garden by his side.  Distance increased remorselessly between
them.  She was far away, yet ever close at the same time.  He could not
tell whether she was going away from him or coming nearer.  The shadow of
tragedy fell on him from the empty sky. . . .

In his bewilderment he tried to hold steady and watch, but the soul in him
rushed backwards.  He felt, but could not think.  The wave surged under
him.  Various impulses urged him into a pouring flood of words; yet he
gave expression to none of them.  He laughed a little dry, short laugh.
He heard himself saying lightly, though with apparent lack of interest:
'How curious, Lettice, how very odd!  What made him look like that?'

But he knew her answer would mean pain.  It came just as he expected:

'He _is_ wonderful--out here--quite different----'  Another minute and she
would have added 'I'm different, too.'  But Tom interrupted hurriedly:

'Do you always see him--like that--now?  In a sheet of gold--with beauty?'
His tongue was so hot and dry against his lips that he almost stammered.

She nodded, her eyelids still half closed.  She lay very quiet, peering
down at him.  'It lasts?' he insisted, turning the knife himself.

'You'll laugh when I tell you something more,' she went on, making a
slight gesture of assent, 'but I felt such joy in myself--so wild and
reckless--that when I got to my room that night I danced--danced alone
with all my clothes off.'

'Lettice!'

'The spontaneous happiness was like a child's--a sort of freedom feeling.
I _had_ to shake my clothes off simply.  I wanted to shake off the walls
and ceiling too, and get out into the open desert.  Tom--I felt out of
myself in a way--as though I'd escaped--into--into quite different
conditions----'

She gave details of the singular mood that had come upon her with the
arrival of Tony, but Tom hardly heard her.  Only too well he knew the
explanation.  The touch of ecstasy was no new thing, although its
manifestation may have been peculiar.  He had known it himself in his own
lesser love affairs.  But that she could calmly tell him about it, that
she could deliberately describe this effect upon her of another man--!
It baffled him beyond all thoughts or words. . . . Was the self-revelation
an unconscious one?  Did she realise the meaning of what she told him?
The Lettice he had known could surely not say this thing.  In her he felt
again, more distinctly than before, another person--division, conflict.
Her hesitations, her face, her gestures, her very language proved it.
He shrank, as from some one who inflicted pain as a child, unwittingly, to
see what the effect would be. . . .  He remembered the incident of the
insect in the sand. . . .

'And I feel--even now--I could do it again,' her voice pierced in across
his moment of hidden anguish.  The knife she had thrust again into his
breast was twisted then.

It was time that he said something, and a sentence offered itself in time
to save him.  The desire to hide his pain from her was too strong to be
disobeyed.  He wanted to know, yet not, somehow, to prevent.  He seized
upon the sentence, keeping his voice steady with an effort that cut his
very flesh: 'There's nothing impersonal exactly in _that_, Lettice!' he
exclaimed with an exaggerated lightness.

'Oh no,' she agreed.  'But it's only in England, perhaps, that I'm
impersonal, as you call it.  I suppose, out here, I've changed.
The beauty, the mystery,--this fierce sunshine or something--stir----'
She hesitated for a fraction of a second.

'The woman in you,' he put in, turning the knife this time with his own
fingers deliberately.  The words seemed driven out by their own impetus;
he did not choose them.  A faint ghastly hope was in him--that she would
shake her head and contradict him.

She waited a moment, then turned her eyes aside.  'Perhaps, Tom.
I wonder. . . .!'

And as she said it, Tom knew suddenly another thing as well.  It stood out
clearly, as with big printed letters that violent advertisements use upon
the hoardings.  Her new joy and excitement, her gaiety and zest for life--
all had been caused, not by himself, but by another.  Heavens! how blind
he had been!  He understood at last, and a flood of freezing water
drenched him.  His heart stopped beating for a moment.  He gasped.
He could not get his breath.  His accumulating doubts hitherto
unexpressed, almost unacknowledged even, were now confirmed.

He got up stiffly, awkwardly, from his cushions, and moved a few steps
towards the house, for there stole upon her altered face just then the
very expression of excitement, of radiant and spontaneous joy, he had
believed until this moment were caused by himself.  Tony was coming up the
darkened drive.  He was exactly in her line of sight.  And a severe,
embittered struggle then took place in a heart that seemed strangely
divided against itself.  He felt as though a second Tom, yet still
himself, battled against the first, exchanging thrusts of indescribable
torture.  The complexity of emotions in his heart was devastating beyond
anything he had ever known in his thirty-five years of satisfied,
self-centred life.  Two voices spoke in clear, sharp sentences, one
against the other:

'Your suspicions are unworthy, shameful.  Trust her.  She's as loyal and
true and faithful as yourself!' cried the first.

And the second:

'Blind!  Can't you see what's going on between them?  It has happened to
other men, why not to you?  She is playing with you; she has outgrown your
love.'  It was the older voice that used the words.

'Impossible, ridiculous!' the first voice cried.  'There's something wrong
with me that I can have such wretched thoughts.  It's merely innocence and
joy of life.  No one can take _my_ place.'

To which, again, the second Tom made bitter answer.  'You are too old for
her, too dull, too ordinary!  You hold the loving mother still, but a
younger man has waked the woman in her.  And you must let it come.
You dare not blame.  Nor have you the right to interfere.'

So acute, so violent was the perplexity in him that he knew not what to
say or do at first.  Unable to come to a decision, he stood there, waving
his hand to Tony with a cry of welcome.  His first vehement desire to be
alone, to make an excuse, to get to his room and think, had passed:
a second, a maturer attitude, conquered it: to take whatever came, to face
it, in a word to know the worst. . . .  And the extraordinary pain he hid
by an exuberance of high spirits that surprised himself.  It was, of
course, the suppressed emotional energy finding another outlet.  A similar
state had occurred that 'Karnak night' of a long ten days ago, though he
had not understood it then.  Behind it lay the misery of loneliness that
he knew in his very bones was coming.

'Tony!  So it is.  I was afraid he'd change his mind and leave us in the
lurch.'

Tom heard the laugh of happiness as she said it; he heard the voice
distinctly--the change of tone in it, the softness, the half-caressing
tenderness that crept unconsciously in, the faint thrill of womanly
passion.  Unconsciously, yes! he was sure, at least, of that.  She did not
know quite yet, she did not realise what had happened.  Honest to the
core, he felt her.  His love surged up tumultuously.  He could face pain,
loss, death--or, as he put it, 'almost anything,' if it meant happiness to
her.  The thought, at any rate, came to him thus. . . .  And Tom believed
it.

At the same moment he heard her voice, close behind him this time.
She had left her chair, meaning to go indoors and prepare for supper
before Tony actually arrived.  'Tom, dear boy,' her hand upon his shoulder
a moment as she passed, 'you're tired or something.  I can see it.
I believe you're worrying.  There's something you haven't told me--isn't
there now?'  She gave him a loving glance that was of purest gold.
'You shall tell me all about it when we're alone.  You must tell me
everything.'

The pain and joy in him were equal then.  He was a boy of eighteen, aching
over his first love affair; and she was divinely mothering him. It was
extraordinary; it was past belief; another minute, had they been alone, he
could almost have laid his head upon her breast, complaining in anguish to
the mother in her that the woman he loved was gone: 'I feel you're
slipping from me!  I'm losing you . . .!'

Instead he stammered some commonplace unreality about his work at Assouan
and heard her agree with him that he certainly must not neglect it--and
she was gone into the house.  The swinging curtains of dried grasses hid
her a few feet beyond, but between them, he felt, stretched five thousand
years and half a dozen continents as well.



'Tom, old chap, did you get my letter?  You promised to read it.  Is it
all right, I mean?  I wouldn't for all the world let anything----'

Tom stopped him abruptly. He wished to read the letter for himself without
foreknowledge of its contents.

'Eh?  No--that is, I got it,' he said confusedly, 'but I haven't read it
yet.  I slept all the afternoon.'

An expression of anxiety in Tony's face came and vanished.  'You can tell
me to-morrow--frank as you like, mind,' he replied, to which Tom said
quite eagerly, 'Rather, Tony: of course. I'll read your old letter the
moment I get back to-night.'  And Tony, merry as a sandboy, changed the
subject, declaring that he had only one desire in life just then, and that
was--food.


