

Yes, she was always 'tired' now, though the 'always' meant but three days
at most.  It was the starving sense of loneliness, the aching sense of
loss, the yearning and the vain desire that made it seem so long.
Lettice evaded him with laughter in her eyes, or with a tired smile.
But the laughter was for another.  It was merciless and terrible--so
slightly, faintly indicated, yet so overwhelmingly convincing.

The talk between them rarely touched reality, as though a barrier deadened
their very voices.  Even her mothering became exasperating; it was so
unforced and natural; it seemed still so right that she should show
solicitude for his physical welfare.  And therein lay the anguish and the
poignancy.  Yet, while he resented fiercely, knowing this was all she had
to offer now, he struggled at the same time to accept.  One moment he
resisted, the next accepted.  One hour he believed in her, the next he
disbelieved.  Hope and fear alternately made tragic sport of him.

Two personalities fought for possession of his soul, and he could not
always keep back the lower of the two.  They interpenetrated--as,
at Dehr-el-Bahri, two scenes had interpenetrated, something very, very old
projected upon a modern screen.

Lettice too--he was convinced of it--was undergoing a similar experience
in herself.  Only in her case just now it was the lower, the primitive,
the physical aspect that was uppermost.  She clung to Tony, yet struggled
to keep Tom.  She could not help herself.  And he himself, knowing he must
shortly go, still clung and hesitated, hoping against hope.  More and more
now, until the end, he was aware that he stood outside his present-day
self, and above it.  He looked back--looked down--upon former emotions and
activities; and hence the confusing alternating of jealousy and
forgiveness.

There were revealing little incidents from time to time.  On the following
afternoon he found her, for instance, radiant with that exuberant
happiness he had learned now to distrust.  And for a moment he half
believed again that the menace had lifted and the happiness was for him.
She held out both hands towards him, while she described a plan for going
to Edfu and Abou Simbel.  His heart beat wildly for a second.

'But Tony?' he asked, almost before he knew it.  'We can't leave him out!'

'Oh, but I've had a letter.'  And as she said it his eye caught sight of a
bulky envelope lying in the sand beside her chair.

'Good,' he said quietly, 'and when is he coming back?  I haven't heard
from him.'  The solid ground moved beneath his feet.  He shivered, even in
the blazing heat.

'To-morrow.  He sends you all sorts of messages and says that something
you wrote made him very happy.  I wonder what it was, Tom?'

Behind her voice he heard the north wind rattling in the palms; he heard
the soft rustle of the acacia leaves as well; there was the crashing of
little waves upon the river; but a deep, deep shadow fell upon the sky and
blotted out the sunshine.  The glory vanished from the day, leaving in its
place a painful glare that hurt the eyes.  The soul in him was darkened.

'Ah!' he exclaimed with assumed playfulness, 'but that's my secret!'
Men do smile, he remembered, as they are led to execution.

She laughed excitedly.  'I shall find it out----'

'You will,' he burst out significantly, 'in the end.'

Then, as she passed him to go into the house, he lost control a moment.
He whispered suddenly:

'Love has no secrets, Lettice, anywhere.  We're in the Sea together.
I shall _never_ let you go.'  The intensity in his manner betrayed him; he
adored her; he could not hide it.

She turned an instant, standing two steps above him; the sidelong downward
glance lent to her face a touch of royalty, half pitying, half imperious.
Her exquisite, frail beauty held a strength that mocked the worship in his
eyes and voice.  Almost--she challenged him:

'Soothsayer!' she whispered back contemptuously.  'Do your worst!'--and
was gone into the house.

Desire surged wildly in him at that moment; impatience, scorn, fury even,
raised their heads; he felt a savage impulse to seize her with violence,
force her to confess, to have it out and end it one way or the other.
He loathed himself for submitting to her cruelty, for it was intentional
cruelty--she made him writhe and suffer of set purpose.  And something
barbaric in his blood leaped up in answer to the savagery in her
own . . . when at that instant he heard her calling very softly:

'Tom!  Come indoors to me a moment; I want to show you something!'

But with it another sentence sprang across him and was gone.  Like a
meteor it streaked the screen of memory.  Seize it he could not.  It had
to do with death--his death.  There was a thought of blood.  Outwardly
what he heard, however, was the playful little sentence of to-day.
'Come, I want to show you something.'

At the sound of her voice so softly calling all violence was forgotten;
love poured back in a flood upon him; he would go through fire and water
to possess her in the end.  In this strange drama she played her
inevitable part, even as he did; there must be no loss of self-control
that might frustrate the coming climax.  There must be no thwarting.
If he felt jealousy, he must hide it; anger, scorn, desire must veil their
faces.

He crossed the passage and stood before her in the darkened room, afraid
and humble, full of a burning love that the centuries had not lessened,
and that no conceivable cruelty of pain could ever change.  Almost he
knelt before her.  Even if terrible, she was utterly adorable.

For he believed she was about to make a disclosure that would lay him
bleeding in the dust; singularly at her mercy he felt, his heart laid bare
to receive the final thrust that should make him outcast.  Her little foot
would crush him. . . .

The long green blinds kept out the glare of the sunshine; and at first he
saw the room but dimly.  Then, slowly, the white form emerged, the
broad-brimmed hat, the hanging violet veil, the yellow jacket of soft,
clinging silk, the long white gauntlet gloves.  He saw her dear face
peering through the dimness at him, the eyes burning like two dark
precious stones.  A table stood between them.  There was a square white
object on it.  A moment's bewilderment stole over him.  Why had she
called him in?  What was she going to say?  Why did she choose this
moment?  Was it the threat of Tony's near arrival that made her
confession--and his dismissal--at last inevitable?

Then, suddenly, that night in the London theatre flashed back across his
mind--her strange absorption in the play, the look of pain in her face,
the little conversation, the sense of familiarity that hung about it all.
He remembered Tony's words later: that another actor was expected with
whose entry the piece would turn more real--turn tragic.

He waited.  The dimness of the room was like the dimness of that theatre.
The lights were lowered.  They played their little parts.  The audience
watched and listened.

'Tom, dear,' her voice came floating tenderly across the air.  'I didn't
like to give it you before the others.  They wouldn't understand--they'd
laugh at us.'

He did not understand.  Surely he had heard indistinctly.  He waited,
saying nothing.  The tenderness in her voice amazed him.  He had expected
very different words.  Yet this was surely Lettice speaking, the Lettice
of his spring-time in the mountains beside the calm blue lake.  He stared
hard.  For the voice _was_ Lettice, but the eyes and figure were
another's.  He was again aware of two persons there--of perplexing and
bewildering struggle.  But Lettice, for the moment, dominated as it
seemed.

'So I put it here,' she went on in a low gentle tone, 'here, Tommy, on the
table for you.  And all my love is in it--my first, deep, fond love--our
childhood love.'  She leaned down and forward, her face in her hands, her
elbows on the dark cloth; she pushed the square, white packet across to
him.  'God bless you,' floated to him with her breath.

The struggle in her seemed very patent then.  Yet in spite of that other,
older self within her, it was still the voice of Lettice. . . .

There was a moment's silence while her whisper hung, as it were, upon the
air.  His entire body seemed a single heart.  Exactly what he felt he
hardly knew.  There was a simultaneous collapse of several huge emotions
in him. . . .  But he trusted her. . . .  He clung to that beloved voice.
For she called him 'Tommy'; she was his mother; love, tenderness, and pity
emanated from her like a cloud of perfume.  He heard the faint rustle of
her dress as she bent forward, but outside he heard the dry, harsh rattle
of the palm trees in the northern wind.  And in that--was terror.

'What--what is it, Lettice?'  The voice sounded like a boy's.  It was
outrageous.  He swallowed--with an effort.

'Tommy, you--don't mind?  You _will_ take it, won't you?'  And it was as
if he heard her saying 'Help me . . .' once again, 'Trust me as I trust
you. . . .'

Mechanically he put his hand out and drew the object towards him.  He knew
then what it was and what was in it.  He was glad of the darkness, for
there was a ridiculous moisture in his eyes now.  A lump _was_ in his
throat!

'I've been neglecting you.  You haven't had a thing for ages.  You'll take
it, Tommy, won't you--dear?'

The little foolish words, so sweetly commonplace, fell like balm upon an
open wound.  He already held the small white packet in his hand.
He looked up at her.  God alone knows the strain upon his will in that
moment.  Somehow he mastered himself.  It seemed as if he swallowed blood.
For behind the mothering words lurked, he knew, the other self that any
minute would return.

'Thank you, Lettice, very much,' he said with a strange calmness, and his
voice was firm.  Whatever happened he must not prevent the delivery of
what had to be.  Above all, that was clear.  The pain must come in full
before the promised joy.

Was it, perhaps, this strength in him that drew her?  Was it his moment of
iron self-mastery that brought her with outstretched, clinging arms
towards him?  Was it the unshakable love in him that threatened the
temporary ascendancy of that other in her who gladly tortured him that joy
might come in a morning yet to break?

For she stood beside him, though he had not seen her move.  She was close
against his shoulder, nestling as of old.  It was surely a stage effect.
A trap-door had opened in the floor of his consciousness; his first, early
love sheltered in his aching heart again.  The entire structure of the
drama they played together threatened to collapse.

'Tom . . . you love me less?'

He held her to him, but he did not kiss the face she turned up to his.
Nor did he speak.

'You've changed somewhere?' she whispered.  'You, too, have changed?'

There was a pause before he found words that he could utter.  He dared not
yield.  To do so would be vain in any case.

'N--no, Lettice.  But I can't say what it is.  There is pain. . . .
It has turned some part of me numb . . . killed something, brought
something else to life.  You will come back to me . . . but not quite
yet.'

In spite of the darkness, he saw her face clearly then.  For a moment--it
seemed so easy--he could have caught her in his arms, kissed her, known
the end of his present agony of heart and mind.  She would have come back
to him, Tony's claim obliterated from her life.  The driving power that
forced an older self upon her had weakened before the steadfast love he
bore her.  She was ready to capitulate.  The little, childish present in
his hands was offered as of old. . . .  Tears rose behind his eyes.

How he resisted he never understood.  Some thoroughness in him triumphed.
If he shirked the pain to-day, it would have to be faced to-morrow--that
alone was clear in his breaking heart.  To be worthy of the greater love,
the completer joy to follow, they must accept the present pain and see it
through--experience it--exhaust it once for all.  To refuse it now was
only to postpone it.  She must go her way, while he went his. . . .

Gently he pushed her from him, released his hold; the little face slipped
from his shoulder as though it sank into the sea.  He felt that she
understood.  He heard himself speaking, though how he chose the words he
never knew.  Out of new depths in himself the phrases rose--a regenerated
Tom uprising, though not yet sure of himself:

'You are not wholly mine.  I must first--oh, Lettice!--learn to do without
you.  It is you who say it.'

Her voice, as she answered, seemed already changed, a shade of something
harder and less yielding in it:

'That which you can do without is added to you.'

'A new thing . . . beginning,' he whispered, feeling it both belief and
prophecy.  His whisper broke in spite of himself.  He saw her across the
room, the table between them again.  Already she looked different,
'Lettice' fading from her eyes and mouth.

She said a marvellous, sweet thing before that other self usurped her
then:

'One day, Tom, we shall find each other in a crowd. . . .'

There was a yearning cry in him he did not utter.  It seemed she faded
from the atmosphere as the dimness closed about her.  He saw a darker
figure with burning eyes upon a darker face; there was a gleam of gold; a
faint perfume as of ambra hung about the air, and outside the palm leaves
rattled in the northern wind.  He had heard awful words, it seemed, that
sealed his fate.  He was forsaken, lonely, outcast.  It was a sentence of
death, for she was set in power over him. . . .



A flood of dazzling sunshine poured into the room from a lifted blind, as
the others looked in from the verandah to say that they were going and
wanted to say good-bye.  A moment later all were discussing plans in the
garden, Tom as loudly and eagerly as any of them.  He held his square
white packet.  But he did not open it till he reached his room a little
later, and then arranged the different articles in a row upon his table:
the favourite cigarettes, the soap, the pair of white tennis socks with
his initial neatly sewn on, the tie in the shade of blue that suited him
best . . . the writing-pad and the dates!

A letter from Tony next caught his eye and he opened it, slowly, calmly,
almost without interest, knowing exactly what it would say:

     ' . . . I was delighted, old chap, to get your note,' he read.
     'I felt sure it would be all right, for I felt somehow that I _had_
     exaggerated your feeling towards her.  As you say, what one has to
     think of with a woman in so delicate a position is her happiness more
     than one's own.  But I wouldn't do anything to offend you or cause
     you pain for worlds, and I'm awfully glad to know the way is clear.
     To tell you the truth, I went away on purpose, for I felt uneasy.
     I wanted to be quite sure first that I was not trespassing.  She made
     me feel I was doing you no wrong, but I wanted your assurance
     too. . . .'

There was a good deal more in similar vein--he laid the burden upon
_her_--ending with a word to say he was coming back to Luxor immediately.
He would arrive the following day.

As a matter of fact Tony was already then in the train that left Cairo
that evening and reached Luxor at eight o'clock next morning.  Tom, who
had counted upon another twenty-four hours' respite, did not know this;
nor did he know till later that another telegram had been carried by a
ghostly little Arab boy, with the result that Tony and Lettice enjoyed
their hot rolls and coffee alone together in the shady garden where the
cool northern wind rattled among the palm trees.  Mrs. Haughstone
mentioned it in due course, however, having watched the _tete-a-tete_
from her bedroom window, unobserved.


