

And next day there was one more revealing incident that helped, yet also
hindered him, as he moved along his _via dolorosa_.  For every step he
took away from her seemed also to bring him nearer.  They followed
opposing curves of a circle.  They separated ever more widely, back to
back, yet were approaching each other at the same time.  They would meet
face to face. . . .

He found her at the piano, practising the song that now ran ever in his
blood; the score, he noticed, was in Tony's writing.

'Unwelcome!' he exclaimed, reading out the title over her shoulder.

'Tom!  How you startled me!  I was trying to learn it.'  She turned to
him; her eyes were shining.  He was aware of a singular impression--
struggle, effort barely manageable.  Her beauty seemed fresh made; he
thought of a wild rose washed by the dew and sparkling in the sunlight.

'I thought you knew it already,' he observed.

She laughed significantly, looking up into his face so close he could have
kissed her lips by merely bending his head a few inches.  'Not quite--
yet,' she answered.  'Will you give me a lesson, Tom?'

'Unpaid?' he asked.

She looked reproachfully at him.  'The best services are unpaid always.'

'I'm afraid I have neither the patience nor the knowledge,' he replied.

Her next words stirred happiness in him for a moment; the divine trust he
fought to keep stole from his heart into his eyes: 'But you would never,
never give up, Tom, no matter how difficult and obstinate the pupil.
You would always understand.  _That_ I know.'

He moved away.  Such double-edged talk, even in play, was dangerous.
A deep weariness was in him, weakening self-control.  Sensitive to the
slightest touch just then, he dared not let her torture him too much.
He felt in her a strength far, far beyond his own; he was powerless before
her.  Had Tony been present he could not have played his part at all.
Somehow he had a curious feeling, moreover, that his cousin was not very
far away.

'Tony will be here later, I think,' she said, as she followed him outside.
'But, if not, he's sure to come to dinner.'

'Good,' he replied, thinking that the train arrived in time to dress, and
in no way surprised that she divined his thoughts.  'We can decide our
plans then.'  He added that he might be obliged to go back to Assouan, but
she made no comment.  Speech died away between them, as they sat down in
the old familiar corner above the Nile.  Tom, for the life of him, could
think of nothing to say.  Lettice, on the other hand, wanted to say
nothing.  He felt that she _had_ nothing to say.  Behind, below the
numbness in him, meanwhile, her silence stabbed him without ceasing.
The intense yearning in his heart threatened any minute to burst forth in
vehement speech, almost in action.  It lay accumulating in him
dangerously, ready to leap out at the least sign--the pin-prick of a look,
a word, a gesture on her part, and he would smash the barrier down between
them and--ruin all.  The sight of Tony, for instance, just then must have
been as a red rag to a bull.

He traced figures in the sand with his heel, he listened to the wind above
them, he never ceased to watch her motionless, indifferent figure
stretched above him on the long deck-chair.  A book peeped out from behind
the cushion where her head rested.  Tom put his hand across and took it
suddenly, partly for something to do, partly from curiosity as well.
She made a quick, restraining gesture, then changed her mind.  And again
he was conscious of battle in her, as if two beings fought.

'The Mary Coleridge Poems,' she said carelessly.  'Tony gave it me.
You'll find the song he put to music.'

Tom vigorously turned the leaves.  He had already glanced at the
title-page with the small inscription in one corner: 'To L. J., from
A. W.'  There was a pencil mark against a poem half-way through.

'He's going to write music for some of the others too,' she added,
watching him; 'the ones he has marked.'  Her voice, he fancied, wavered
slightly.

Tom nodded his head.  'I see,' he murmured, noticing a cross in pencil.
A sullen defiance rose in his blood, but he forced it out of sight.
He read the words in a low voice to himself.  It was astonishing how the
powers behind the scenes forced a contribution from the commonest
incidents:

     The sum of loss I have not reckoned yet,
        I cannot tell.
     For ever it was morning when we met,
        Night when we bade farewell.

Perhaps the words let loose the emotion, though of different kinds, pent
up behind their silence.  The strain, at any rate, between them tightened
first, then seemed to split.  He kept his eyes upon the page before him;
Lettice, too, remained still as before; only her lips moved as she spoke:

'Tom. . . .'  The voice plunged into his heart like iron.

'Yes,' he said quietly, without looking up.

'Tom,' she repeated, 'what are you thinking about so hard?'

He found no answer.

'And all to yourself?'

The blood rushed to his face; her voice was so soft.

He met her eyes and smiled.  'The same as usual, I suppose,' he said.

For a moment she made no reply, then, glancing at the book lying in his
hand, she said in a lower voice: 'That woman had suffered deeply.
There's truth and passion in every word she writes; there's a marvellous
restraint as well.  Tom,' she added, gazing hard at him, 'you feel it,
don't you?  You understand her?'  For an instant she knit her brows as if
in perplexity or misgiving.

'The truth, yes,' he replied after a moment's hesitation; 'the restraint
as well.'

'And the passion?'

He nodded curtly by way of agreement.  He turned the pages over very
rapidly.  His fingers were as thick and clumsy as rigid bits of wood.
He fumbled.

'Will you read it once again?' she asked.  He did so . . . in a low voice.
With difficulty he reached the end.  There was a mist before his eyes and
his voice seemed confused.  He dared not look up.

'There's a deep spiritual beauty,' he went on slowly, making an enormous
effort, 'that's what I feel strongest, I think.  There's renunciation,
sacrifice----'

He was going to say more, for he felt the words surge up in his throat.
This talk, he knew, was a mere safety valve to both of them; they used
words as people attacked by laughter out of due season seize upon
anything, however far-fetched, that may furnish excuse for it.  The flood
of language and emotion, too long suppressed, again rose to his very
lips--when a slight sound stopped his utterance.  He turned.  Amazement
caught him.  Her frozen immobility, her dead indifference, her boredom
possibly--all these, passing suddenly, had melted in a flood of tears.
Her face was covered by her hands.  She lay there sobbing within a foot of
his hungry arms, sobbing as though her heart must break.  He saw the drops
between her little fingers, trickling.

It was so sudden, so unexpected, that Tom felt unable to speak or act at
first.  Numbness seized him.  His faculties were arrested.  He watched
her, saw the little body heave down its entire length, noted the small
convulsive movements of it.  He saw all this, yet he could not do the
natural thing.  It was very ghastly. . . .  He could not move a muscle,
he could not say a single word, he could not comfort her--because he knew
those tears were the tears of pity only.  It was for himself she sobbed.
The tenderness in her--in 'Lettice'--broke down before his weight of pain,
the weight of pain she herself laid upon him.  Nothing that _he_ might do
or say could comfort her.  Divining what the immediate future held in
store for him, she wept these burning tears of pity.  In that poignant
moment of self-revelation Tom's cumbersome machinery of intuition did not
fail him.  He understood.  It was a confession--the last perhaps.  He saw
ahead with vivid and merciless clarity of vision.  Only another could
comfort her. . . .  Yet he could help.  Yes--he could help--by going.
There was no other way.  He must slip out.

And, as if prophetically just then, she murmured between her
tight-pressed fingers: 'Leave me, Tom, for a moment . . . please go
away . . .  I'm so mortified . . . this idiotic scene. . . .  Leave me a
little, then come back.  I shall be myself again presently. . . .  It's
Egypt--this awful Egypt. . . .'

Tom obeyed.  He got up and left her, moving without feeling in his legs,
as though he walked in his sleep, as though he dreamed, as though he
were--dead.  He did not notice the direction.  He walked mechanically.
It felt to him that he simply walked straight out of her life into a world
of emptiness and ice and shadows. . . .

The river lay below him in a flood of light.  He saw the Theban Hills
rolling their dark, menacing wave along the far horizon.  In the
blistering heat the desert lay sun-drenched, basking, silent.  Its faint
sweet perfume reached him in the northern wind, that pungent odour of the
sand, which is the odour of this sun-baked land etherealised.

A fiery intensity of light lay over it, as though any moment it must burst
into sheets of flame.  So intense was the light that it seemed to let
sight through to--to what?  To a more distant vision, infinitely remote.
It was not a mirror, but a transparency.  The eyes slipped through it
marvellously.

He stood on the steps of worn-out sandstone, listening, staring, feeling
nothing . . . and then a little song came floating across the air towards
him, sung by a boatman in mid-stream.  It was a native melody, but it had
the strange, monotonous lilt of Tony's old-Egyptian melody. . . .  And
feeling stole back upon him, alternately burning and freezing the currents
of his blood.  The childhood nightmare touch crept into him: he saw the
wave-like outline of the gloomy hills, he heard the wind rattling in the
leaves behind him, to his nostrils came the strange, penetrating perfume
of the tawny desert that encircles ancient Thebes, and in the air before
him hung two pairs of eyes, dark, faithful eyes, cruel and at the same
time tender, true yet merciless, and the others--treacherous, false, light
blue in colour. . . .  He began to shuffle furiously with his feet. . . .
The soul in him went under. . . .  He turned to face the menace coming up
behind . . . the falling Wave. . . .

'Tom!' he heard--and turned back towards her.  And when he reached her
side, she had so entirely regained composure that he could hardly believe
it was the same person.  Fresh and radiant she looked once more, no sign
of tears, no traces of her recent emotion anywhere.  Perhaps the interval
had been longer than he guessed, but, in any case, the change was swift
and half unaccountable.  In himself, equally, was a calmness that seemed
unnatural.  He heard himself speaking in an even tone about the view, the
river, the gold of the coming sunset.  He wished to spare her, he talked
as though nothing had happened, he mentioned the deep purple colour of the
hills--when she broke out with sudden vehemence.

'Oh, don't speak of those hills, those awful hills,' she cried.  'I dread
the sight of them.  Last night I dreamed again--they crushed me down into
the sand.  I felt buried beneath them, deep, deep down--_buried_.'
She whispered the last word as though to herself.  She hid her face.

The words amazed him.  He caught the passing shiver in her voice.

'"Again"?' he asked.  'You've dreamed of them before?'  He stood close,
looking down at her.  The sense of his own identity returned slowly, yet
he still felt two persons in him.

'Often and often,' she said in a lowered tone, 'since Tony came.  I dream
that we all three lie buried somewhere in that forbidding valley.
It terrifies me more and more each time.'

'Strange,' he said.  'For they draw me too.  I feel them somehow known--
familiar.'  He paused.  'I believe Tony was right, you know, when he
said that we three----'

How she stopped him he never quite understood.  At first he thought the
curious movement on her face portended tears again, but the next second he
saw that instead of tears a slow strange smile was stealing upon her--
upwards from the mouth.  It lay upon her features for a second only, but
long enough to alter them.  A thin, diaphanous mask, transparent, swiftly
fleeting, passed over her, and through it another woman, yet herself,
peered up at him with a penetrating yet somehow distant gaze.  A shudder
ran down his spine; there was a sensation of inner cold against his heart;
he trembled, but he could not look away. . . .  He saw in that brief
instant the face of the woman who tortured him.  The same second, so
swiftly was it gone again, he saw Lettice watching him through half-closed
eyelids.  He heard her saying something.  She was completing the sentence
that had interrupted him:

'We're too imaginative, Tom.  Believe me, Egypt is no place to let
imagination loose, and I don't like it.'  She sighed: there was exhaustion
in her.  'It's stimulating enough without _our_ help.  Besides--' she used
a curious adjective--'it's dangerous too.'

Tom willingly let the subject drop; his own desire was to appear natural,
to protect her, to save her pain.  He thought no longer of himself.
Drawing upon all his strength, forcing himself almost to breaking-point,
he talked quietly of obvious things, while longing secretly to get away to
his own room where he could be alone.  He craved to hide himself; like a
stricken animal his instinct was to withdraw from observation.

The arrival of the tea-tray helped him, and, while they drank, the sky let
down the emblazoned curtain of a hundred colours lest Night should bring
her diamonds unnoticed, unannounced.  There is no dusk in Egypt; the sun
draws on his opal hood; there is a rush of soft white stars: the desert
cools, and the wind turns icy.  Night, high on her spangled throne,
watches the sun dip down behind the Libyan sands.

Tom felt this coming of Night as he sat there, so close to Lettice that he
could touch her fingers, feel her breath, catch the lightest rustle of her
thin white dress.  He felt night creeping in upon his heart.  Swiftly the
shadows piled.  His soul seemed draped in blackness, drained of its
shining gold, hidden below the horizon of the years.  It sank out of
sight, cold, lost, forgotten.  His day was past and over. . . .

They had been sitting silent for some minutes when a voice became audible,
singing in the distance.  It came nearer.  Tom recognised the
tune--'We were young, we were merry, we were very, very wise,'; and
Lettice sat up suddenly to listen.  But Tom then thought of one thing
only--that it was beyond his power just now to meet his cousin.
He knew his control was not equal to the task; he would betray himself;
the role was too exacting.  He rose abruptly.

'That must be Tony coming,' Lettice said.  'His tea will be all cold!'
Each word was a caress, each syllable alive with interest, sympathy,
excited anticipation.  She had become suddenly alive.  Tom saw her eyes
shining as she gazed past him down the darkening drive.  He made his
absurd excuse.  'I'm going home to rest a bit, Lettice.  I played tennis
too hard.  The sun's given me a headache.  We'll meet later.  You'll keep
Tony for dinner?'  His mind had begun to work, too; the evening train from
Cairo, he remembered, was not due for an hour or more yet.  A hideous
suspicion rushed like fire through him.

But he asked no question.  He knew they wished to be alone together.
Yet also he had a wild, secret hope that she would be disappointed.
He was speedily undeceived.

'All right, Tom,' she answered, hardly looking at him.  'And mind you're
not late.  Eight o'clock sharp.  I'll make Tony stay.'

He was gone.  He chose the path along the river bank instead of going by
the drive.  He did not look back once.  It was when he entered the road a
little later that he met Mrs. Haughstone coming home from a visit to some
friends in his hotel.  It was then she told him. . . .

'What a surprise you must have had,' Tom believes he said in reply.
He said something, at any rate, that he hoped sounded natural and right.

'Oh, no,' Mrs. Haughstone explained.  'We were quite prepared.  Lettice
had a telegram, you see, to let her know.'

She told him other things as well. . . .



PART IV


