

Tony had come back.  The Play turned very real.

The situation _a trois_ thenceforward became, for Tom, an acutely
afflicting one.  He found no permanent resting-place for heart or mind.
He analysed, asked himself questions without end, but a final decisive
judgment evaded him.  He wrote letters and tore them up again.
He hid himself in Assouan with belief for a companion, he came back and
found that companion had been but a masquerader--disbelief.
Suspicion grew confirmed into conviction.  Vanity persuaded him against
the weight of evidence, then left him naked with his facts.  He wanted to
kill, first others, then himself.  He laughed, but the same minute he
could have cried.  Such complicated tangles of emotion were beyond his
solving--it amazed him; such prolonged and incessant torture, so
delicately applied--he marvelled that a human heart could bear it without
breaking.  For the affection and sympathy he felt for his cousin refused
to die, while his worship and passion towards an unresponsive woman
increasingly consumed him.

He no longer recognised himself, his cousin, Lettice; all three, indeed,
were singularly changed.  Each duplicated into a double role.
Towards their former selves he kept his former attitude--of affection,
love, belief; towards the usurping selves he felt--he knew not what.
Therefore he drifted. . . .  Strange, mysterious, tender, unfathomable
Woman!  Vain, primitive, self-sufficing, confident Man!  In him the
masculine tried to reason and analyse to the very end; in her the feminine
interpreted intuitively: the male and female attitudes, that is, held true
throughout.  The Wave swept him forward irresistibly, his very soul, it
seemed, went shuffling to find solid ground. . . .

Meanwhile, however, no one broke the rules--rules that apparently had made
themselves: subtle and delicate, it took place mostly out of sight, as it
were, inside the heart.  Below the mask of ordinary surface-conduct all
agreed to wear, the deeper, inevitable intercourse proceeded, a Play
within a Play, a tragedy concealed thinly by general consent under the
most commonplace comedy imaginable.  All acted out their parts, rehearsed,
it seemed, of long ago.  For, more and more, it came to Tom that the one
thing he must never lose, whatever happened, was his trust in her.
He must cling to that though it cost him all--trust in her love and truth
and constancy.  This singular burden seemed laid upon his soul.
If he lost that trust and that belief, the Wave could never break,
she could never justify that trust and that belief.

This 'enchantment' that tortured him, straining his whole being, was
somehow a test indeed of his final worthiness to win her.
Somehow, somewhence, he owed her this. . . .  He dared not fail.
For if he failed the Wave that should sweep her back into the 'sea' with
him would not break--he would merely go on shuffling with his feet to the
end of life.  Tony and Lettice conquered him till he lay bleeding in the
sand; Tom played the role of loss--obediently almost; the feeling that
they were set in power over him persisted strangely.  It dominated, at any
rate, the resistance he would otherwise have offered.  He must learn to do
without her in order that she might in the end be added to him.  Thus, and
thus alone, could he find himself, and reach the level where she lived.
He took his fate from her gentle, merciless hands, well knowing that it
had to be.  In some marvellous, sweet way the sacrifice would bring her
back again at last, but bring her back completed--and to a Tom worthy of
her love.  The self-centred, confident man in him that deemed itself
indispensable must crumble.  To find regeneration he must risk
destruction.

Events--yet always inner events--moved with such rapidity then that he
lost count of time.  The barrier never lowered again.  He played his
ghastly part in silence--always inner silence.  Out of sight, below the
surface, the deep wordless Play continued.  With Tony's return the drama
hurried.  The actor all had been waiting for came on, and took the centre
of the stage, and stayed until the curtain fell--a few weeks, all told, of
their short Egyptian winter.

In the crowded rush of action Tom felt the Wave--bend, break, and smash
him.  At its highest moment he saw the stars, at its lowest the crunch of
shifting gravel filled his ears, the mud blinded sight, the rubbish choked
his breath.  Yet he had seen those distant stars. . . .  Into the
mothering sea, as he sank back, the memory of the light went with him.
It was a kind of incredible performance, half on earth and half in the
air: it rushed with such impetuous momentum.

Amid the intensity of his human emotions, meanwhile, he lost sight of any
subtler hints, if indeed they offered: he saw no veiled eastern visions
any more, divined no psychic warnings.  His agony of blinding pain,
alternating with briefest intervals of shining hope when he recovered
belief in her and called himself the worst names he could think of--this
seething warfare of cruder feelings left no part of him sensitive to the
delicate promptings of finer forces, least of all to the tracery of
fancied memories.  He only gasped for breath--sufficient to keep himself
afloat and cry, as he had promised he would cry, even to the bitter end:
'I'll face it . . . I'll stick it out . . . I'll trust. . . .!'

The setting of the Play was perfect; in Egypt alone was its production
possible.  The brilliant lighting, the fathomless, soft shadows, deep
covering of blue by day, clear stars by night, the solemn hills, and the
slow, eternal river--all these, against the huge background of the Desert,
silent, golden, lonely, formed the adequate and true environment.
In no other country, in England least of all, could the presentation have
been real.  Tony, himself, and Lettice belonged, one and all, it seemed,
to Egypt--yet, somehow, not wholly to the Egypt of the tourist hordes and
dragoman, and big hotels.  The Onlooker in him, who stood aloof and held a
watching brief, looked down upon an ancient land unvexed by railways,
graciously clothed and coloured gorgeously, mapped burningly mid fiercer
passions, eager for life, contemptuous of death.  He did not understand,
but that it was thus, not otherwise, he knew. . . .

Her beauty, too, both physical and spiritual, became for him strangely
heightened.  He shifted between moods of worship that were alternately
physical and spiritual.  In the former he pictured her with darker
colouring, half barbaric, eastern, her slender figure flitting through a
grove of palms beyond a river too wide for him to cross; gold bands
gleamed upon her arms, bare to the shoulder; he could not reach her;
she was with another--it was torturing; she and that other disappeared
into the covering shadows. . . .  In the latter, however, there was no
unworthy thought, no faintest desire of the blood; he saw her high among
the little stars, gazing with tender, pitying eyes upon him, calling
softly, praying for him, loving him, yet remote in some spiritual
isolation where she must wait until he soared to join her.

Both physically and spiritually, that is, he idealised her--saw her
divinely naked.  She did not move.  She hung there like a star, waiting
for him, while he was carried past her, swept along helplessly by a tide,
a flood, a wave, though a wave that was somehow rising up to where she
dwelt above him. . . .

It was a marvellous experience.  In the physical moods he felt the fires
of jealousy burn his flesh away to the bare nerves--resentment, rage, a
bitterness that could kill; in the alternate state he felt the uplifting
joy and comfort of ultimate sacrifice, sweet as heaven, the bliss of
complete renunciation--for her happiness.  If she loved another who could
give her greater joy, he had no right to interfere.

It was this last that gradually increased in strength, the first that
slowly, surely died.  Unsatisfied yearnings hunted his soul across the
empty desert that now seemed life.  The self he had been so pleased with,
had admired so proudly with calm complacence, thinking it indispensable--
this was tortured, stabbed and mercilessly starved to death by slow
degrees, while something else appeared shyly, gently, as yet unaware of
itself, but already clearer and stronger.  In the depths of his being,
below an immense horizon, shone joy, luring him onward and brightening as
it did so.

Love, he realised, was independent of the will--no one can will to love:
she was not anywhere to blame, a stronger claim had come into life and
changed her.  She could not live untruth, pretending otherwise.
He, rather, was to blame if he sought to hold her to a smaller love she
had outgrown.  She had the inalienable right to obey the bigger claim, if
such it proved to be.  Personal freedom was the basis of their contract.
It would have been easier for him if she could have told him frankly,
shared it with him; but, since that seemed beyond her, then it was for him
to slip away.  He must subtract himself from an inharmonious three,
leaving a perfect two.  He must make it easier for _her_.



The days of golden sunshine passed along their appointed way as before,
leaving him still without a final decision.  Outwardly the little party _a
trois_ seemed harmonious, a coherent unit, while inwardly the accumulation
of suppressed emotion crept nearer and nearer to the final breaking point.
They lived upon a crater, playing their comedy within sight and hearing of
destruction: even Mrs. Haughstone, ever waiting in the wings for her cue,
came on effectively and filled her role, insignificant yet necessary.
Its meanness was its truth.

'Mr. Winslowe excites my cousin too much; I'm sure it isn't good for her--
in England, yes, but not out here in this strong, dangerous climate.'

Tom understood, but invariably opposed her:

'If it makes her happy for a little while, I see no harm in it; life has
not been too kind to her, remember.'

Sometimes, however, the hint was barbed as well: 'Your cousin _is_ a
delightful being, but he can talk nonsense when he wants to.
He's actually been trying to persuade me that you're jealous of him.
He said you were only waiting a suitable moment to catch him alone in the
Desert and shoot him!'

Tom countered her with an assumption of portentous gravity: 'Sound travels
too easily in this still air,' he reminded her; 'the Nile would be the
simplest way.'  After which, confused by ridicule, she renounced the hint
direct, indulging instead in facial expression, glances, and innuendo
conveyed by gesture.

That there was some truth, however, behind this betrayal of her hostess
and her fellow-guest, Tom felt certain; it lied more by exaggeration than
by sheer invention: he listened while he hated it; ashamed of himself, he
yet invited the ever-ready warnings, though he invariably defended the
object of them--and himself.

Alternating thus, he knew no minute of happiness; a single day, a single
hour contained both moods, trust ousted suspicion, and suspicion turned
out trust.  Lettice led him on, then abruptly turned to ice.  In the
morning he was first and Tony nowhere, the same afternoon this was
reversed precisely--yet the balance growing steadily in his cousin's
favour, the evidence accumulating against himself.  It was not purposely
contrived, it was in automatic obedience to deeper impulses than she knew.
Tom never lost sight of this amazing duality in her, the struggle of one
self against another older self to which cruelty was no stranger--or, as
he put it, the newly awakened Woman against the Mother in her.

He could not fail to note the different effects he and his cousin produced
in her--the ghastly difference.  With himself she was captious, easily
exasperated; her relations with Tony, above all, a sensitive spot on which
she could bear no slightest pressure without annoyance; while behind this
attitude, hid always the faithful motherly care that could not see him in
distress.  That touch of comedy lay in it dreadfully:--wet feet, cold,
hungry, tired, and she flew to his consoling!  Towards Tony this side of
her remained unresponsive; he might drink unfiltered water for all she
cared, tire himself to death, or sit in a draught for hours.  It could
have been comic almost but for its significance: that from Tony she
_received_, instead of gave.  The woman in her asked, claimed even--of the
man in him.  The pain for Tom lay there.

His cousin amused, stimulated her beyond anything Tom could offer; she
sought protection from him, leant upon him.  In his presence she blossomed
out, her eyes shone the moment he arrived, her voice altered, her spirits
became exuberant.  The wholesome physical was awakened by him.  He could
not hope to equal Tony's address, his fascination.  He never forgot that
she once danced for happiness. . . .  Helplessness grew upon him--he had
no right to feel angry even, he could not justly blame herself or his
cousin.  The woman in her was open to capture by another; so far it had
never belonged to him.  In vain he argued that the mother was the larger
part; it was the woman that he wanted with it.  Having separated the two
aspects of her in this way, the division, once made, remained.

And every day that passed this difference in her towards himself and Tony
grew more mercilessly marked.  The woman in her responded to another touch
than his.  Though neither lust nor passion, he knew, dwelt in her pure
being anywhere, there were yet a thousand delicate unconscious ways by
which a woman betrayed her attraction to a being of the opposite sex; they
could not be challenged, but equally they could not be misinterpreted.
Like the colour and perfume of a rose, they emanated from her inmost
being. . . .  In this sense, she was sexually indifferent to Tom, and
while passion consumed his soul, he felt her, dearly mothering, yet cold
as ice.  The soft winds of Egypt bent the full-blossomed rose into
another's hand, towards another's lips. . . .  Tony had entered the garden
of her secret life.


