

And so the fires of jealousy burned him.  He struggled hard, smothering
all outward expression of his pain, with the sole result that the
suppression increased the fury of the heat within.  For every day the
tiniest details fed its fierceness.  It was inextinguishable.  He lost his
appetite, his sleep, he lost all sense of what is called proportion.
There was no rest in him, day and night he lived in the consuming flame.

His cousin's irresponsibility now assumed a sinister form that shocked
him.  He recognised the libertine in his careless play with members of the
other sex who had pleased him for moments, then been tossed aside.
He became aware of grossness in his eyes and lips and bearing.
He understood, above all, his--hands.

Against the fiery screen of his emotions jealousy threw violent pictures
which he mistook for thought . . ., and there burst through this screen,
then, scattering all lesser feelings, the flame of a vindictive anger that
he believed was the protective righteous anger of an outraged man.
'If Tony did her wrong,' he told himself, 'I would kill him.'

Always, at this extravagant moment, however, he reached a climax, then
calmed down again.  A sense of humour rose incongruously to check loss of
self-restraint.  The memory of her daily tenderness swept over him; and
shame sent a blush into his cheeks.  He felt mortified, ungenerous, a
foolish figure even.  While the reaction lasted he forgave, felt her above
reproach, cursed his wretched thoughts that had tried to soil her, and
lost the violent vindictiveness that had betrayed him.  His affection for
his cousin, always real, and the sympathy between them, always genuine,
returned to complete his own discomfiture.  His mood swayed back to the
first, happy days when the three of them had laughed and played together.

And to punish himself while this reaction lasted, he would seek her out
and see that she inflicted the punishment itself.  He would hear from her
own lips how fond she was of Tony, fighting to convince himself, while he
listened, that she was above suspicion, and that his pain was due solely
to unworthy jealousy.  He would be specially nice to Tony, making things
easier for him, even urging him, as it were, into her very arms.

These moments of generous reaction, however, seemed to puzzle her.
The exalted state of emotion was confined, perhaps, to himself.
At any rate, he produced results the very reverse of what he intended;
Tony became more cautious, Lettice looked at himself with half-questioning
eyes. . . .  There was falseness in his attitude, something unnatural.
It was not the part he was cast for in the Play.  He could not keep it up.
He fell back once more to watching, listening, playing his proper role of
a slave who was forced to observe the happiness of others set somehow over
him, while suffering in silence.  The inner fires were fed anew thereby.
He knew himself flung back, bruised and bleeding, upon his original fear
and jealousy, convinced more than ever before that this cruelty and
torture had to be, and that his pain was justified.  To resist was only to
delay the perfect dawn.

     The sum of loss I have not reckoned yet,
        I cannot tell
     For ever it was morning when we met,
        Night when we bade farewell.

He changed the pronouns in the last two lines, for always it was morning
when _they_ met, night when _they_ bade farewell.

Mrs. Haughstone, meanwhile, neglected no opportunity of dotting the vowel
for his benefit; she crossed each _t_ that the writing of the stars
dropped fluttering across her path.  'Mr. Winslowe has emotions,' she
mentioned once, 'but he has no heart.  If he ever marries and settles
down, his wife will find it out.'

'My cousin is not the kind to marry,' Tom replied.  'He's too changeable,
and he knows it.'

'He's young,' she said, 'he hasn't found the right woman yet.  He will
improve--a woman older than himself with the mother strong in her might
hold him.  He needs the mother too.  Most men do, I think; they're all
children really.'

Tom laughed.  'Tony as father of a family--I can't imagine it.'

'Once he had children of his own,' she suggested, 'he would steady
wonderfully.  Those men often make the best husbands--don't you think?'

'Perhaps,' Tom replied briefly.  'Provided there's real heart beneath.'

'In the woman, yes,' returned the other quietly.  'Too much heart in the
man can so easily cloy.  A real man is always half a savage; that's why
the woman likes him.  It's the woman who guards the family.'

Tom, knowing that her words veiled other meanings, pretended not to
notice.  He no longer rose to the bait she offered.  He detected the
nonsense, the insincerity as well, but he could not argue successfully,
and generalisations were equally beyond him.  Too polite to strike back,
he always waited till she had talked herself out; besides he often
acquired information thus, information he both longed for yet disliked
intensely.  Such information rarely failed: it was, indeed, the desire to
impart it with an air of naturalness that caused the conversation almost
invariably.  It appeared now.  It was pregnant information, too.
She conveyed it in a lowered tone: there was news from Warsaw.
The end, it seemed, was expected by the doctors; a few months at most.
Lettice had been warned, however, that her appearance could do no good;
the sufferer mistook her for a relative who came to persecute him.
Her presence would only hasten the end.  She had cabled, none the less, to
say that she would come.  This was a week ago; the answer was expected in
a day or two.

And Tom had not been informed of this.

'Mr. Winslowe thinks she ought to go at once.  I'm sure his advice is
wise.  Even if her presence can do no good, it might be an unceasing
regret if she was not there. . . .'

'Your cousin alone can judge,' he interrupted coldly.  'I'd rather not
discuss it, if you don't mind,' he added, noticing her eagerness to
continue the conversation.

'Oh, certainly, Mr. Kelverdon--just as you feel.  But in case she asks
your advice as well--I only thought you'd like to know--to be prepared,
I mean.'

Only long afterwards did it occur to him that Tony's informant was
possibly this jealous parasite herself, who now deliberately put the
matter in another light, hoping to sow discord to her own eventual
benefit.  All he realised at the moment was the intolerable pain that
Lettice should tell him nothing.  She looked to Tony for help, advice,
possibly for consolation too.

There were moments of another kind, however, when it seemed quite easy to
talk plainly.  His position was absurd, undignified, unmanly.  It was for
him to state his case and abide by the result.  Hearts rarely break in
two, for all that poets and women might protest.

These moments, however, he did not use.  It was not that he shrank from
hearing his sentence plainly spoken, nor that he decided he must not
prevent something that had to be.  The reason lay deeper still:--it was
impossible.  In her presence he became tongue-tied, helpless.  His own
stupidity overwhelmed him.  Silence took him.  He felt at a hopeless
disadvantage, ashamed even.  No words of his could reach her through the
distance, across the barrier, that lay between them now.  He made no
single attempt.  His aching heart, filled with an immeasurable love,
remained without the relief of utterance.  He had lost her.  But he loved
now something in her place beyond the possibility of loss--an
indestructible ideal.

Words, therefore, were not only impossible, they were vain.  And when the
final moment came they were still more useless.  He could go, but he could
not tell her he was going.  Before that moment came, however, another
searching experience was his: he saw Tony jealous--jealous of himself!
He actually came to feel sympathy with his cousin who was his rival!
It was his faithful love that made that possible too.

He realised this suddenly one day at Assouan.

He had been thinking about the long conversations Tony and Lettice enjoyed
together, wondering what they found to discuss at such interminable
length.  From that his mind slipped easily into another question--how she
could be so insensible to the pain she caused him?--when, all in a flash,
he realised the distance she had travelled from him on the road of love
towards Tony.  The moment of perspective made it abruptly clear.  She now
talked with Tony as once, at Montreux and elsewhere, she had talked with
himself.  He saw his former place completely occupied.  As an accomplished
fact he saw it.

The belief that Tony's influence would weaken deserted him from that
instant.  It had been but a false hope created by desire and yearning.

There was a crash.  He reached the bottom of despair.  That same evening,
on returning to his hotel from the Works, he found a telegram.  It had
been arranged that Lettice, Tony, Miss de Lorne and her brother should
join him in Assouan.  The telegram stated briefly that it was not possible
after all:--she sent an excuse.

The sleepless night was no new thing to him, but the acuteness of new
suffering was a revelation.  Jealousy unmasked her amazing powers of
poisonous and devastating energy. . . .  He visualised in detail.
He saw Lettice and his cousin together in the very situations he had
hitherto reserved imaginatively for himself, both sweets hoped for and
delights experienced, but raised now a hundredfold in actuality.
Like pictures of flame they rose before his inner eye; they seared and
scorched him; his blood turned acid; the dregs of agony were his to drink.
The happiness he had planned for himself, down to the smallest minutiae of
each precious incident, he now saw transferred in this appalling way--to
another.  Not deliberately summoned, not morbidly evoked--the pictures
rose of their own accord against the background of his mind, yet so
instinct with actuality, that it seemed he had surely lived them, too,
himself with her, somewhere, somehow . . . before.  There was that same
haunting touch of familiarity about them.

In the long hours of this particular night he reached, perhaps, the acme
of his pain; imagination, whipped by jealousy, stoked the furnace to a
heat he had not known as yet.  He had been clinging to a visionary hope.
'I've lost her . . . lost her . . . lost her,' he repeated to himself,
as though with each repetition the meaning of the phrase grew clearer.
Numbness followed upon misery; there were long intervals when he felt
nothing at all, periods when he thought he hated her, when pride and anger
whispered he could do without her. . . .  A state of negative
insensibility followed. . . .  On the heels of it came a red and violent
vindictiveness; next--resignation, complete acceptance, almost peace.
Then acute sensitiveness returned again--he felt the whole series of
emotions over and over without one omission.  This numbness and
sensitiveness alternated with a kind of rhythmic succession. . . .
He reviewed the entire episode from beginning to end, recalled every word
she had uttered, traced the gradual influence of Tony on her, from its
first faint origin to its present climax.  He saw her struggles and her
tears . . . the mysterious duality working to possess her soul.  It was
all plain as daylight.  No justification for any further hope was left to
him.  He must go. . . .  It was the thunder, surely, of the falling Wave.

For Tony, he realised at last, had not merely usurped his own place, but
had discovered a new Lettice to herself, and setting her thus in a new, a
larger world, had taught her a new relationship.  He had achieved--perhaps
innocently enough so far as his conscience was concerned?--a new result,
and a bigger one than Tom, with his lesser powers, could possibly have
effected.

There was no falseness, no duplicity in her.  'She still loves me as
before, the mother still gives me what she always gave,' Tom put it to
himself, 'but Tony has ploughed deeper--reached the woman in her.
He loves a Lettice I have never realised.  It is this new Lettice that
loves him in return. . . .  What right have I, with my smaller claim, to
stand in her way a single moment? . . . I must slip out.'

He had lost the dream that Tony but tended a blossom, the fruit of which
would come sweetly to his plucking afterwards.  The intense suffering
concealed all prophecy, as the jealousy killed all hope.  He spent that
final night of awful pain on his balcony, remembering how weeks before in
Luxor the first menacing presentiment had come to him.  He stared out into
the Egyptian wonder of outer darkness.  The stillness held a final menace
as of death.  He recalled a Polish proverb: 'In the still marshes there
are devils.'  The world spread dark and empty like his life; the Theban
Hills seemed to have crept after him, here to Assouan; the stars,
incredibly distant, had no warmth or comfort in them; the river roared
with a dull and lonely sound; he heard the palm trees rattling in the
wind.  The pain in him was almost physical. . . .



Dawn found him in the same position--yet with a change.  Perhaps the
prolonged agony had killed the ache of ceaseless personal craving, or
perhaps the fierceness of the fire had burned it out.  Tom could not say;
nor did he ask the questions.  A change was there, and that was all he
knew.  He had come at last to a decision, made a final choice.  He had
somehow fought his battle out with a courage he did not know was courage.
Here at Assouan, he turned upon the Wave and faced it.  He saw _her_
happiness only, fixed all his hope and energy on that.  A new and loftier
strength woke in him.  There was no shuffling now.

He would give her up.  In his heart she would always remain his dream and
his ideal--but outwardly he would no longer need her.  He would do without
her.  He forgave--if there was anything to forgive--forgave them
both. . . .

Something in him had broken.

He could not explain it, though he felt it.  Yet it was not her that he
had given up--it was himself.

The first effect of this, however, was to think that life lay in ruins
round him, that, literally, the life in him was smothered by the breaking
wave. . . .



And yet he did not break--he did not drown.

For, as though to show that his decision was the right, inevitable one,
small outward details came to his assistance.  Fate evidently approved.
For Fate just then furnished relief by providing another outlet for his
energies: the Works went seriously wrong: Tom could think of nothing else
but how he could put things right again.  Reflection, introspection,
brooding over mental and spiritual pain became impossible.

The lieutenants he trusted had played him false; sub-contracts of an
outrageous kind, flavoured by bribery, had been entered into; the cost of
certain necessaries had been raised absurdly, with the result that the
profits of the entire undertaking to the Firm must be lowered
correspondingly.  And the blame, the responsibility was his own; he had
unwisely delegated his powers to underlings whose ambitions for money
exceeded their sense of honour.  But Tom's honour was involved as well.
He had delegated his powers in writing.  He now had to pay the price of
his prolonged neglect of duty.

The position was irremediable; Tom's neglect and inefficiency were
established beyond question.  He had failed in a position of high trust.
And to make the situation still less pleasant, Sir William, the Chairman
of the Company--Tom's chief, the man to whom he owed his partnership and
post of trust--telegraphed that he was on the way at last from Salonika.
One way alone offered--to break the disastrous contracts by payments made
down without delay.  Tom made these payments out of his own pocket; they
were large; his private resources disappeared in a single day. . . .
But, even so, the delay and bungling at the Works were not to be
concealed.  Sir William, shrewd, experienced man of business, stern of
heart as well as hard of head, could not be deceived.  Within half an hour
of his arrival, Tom Kelverdon's glaring incompetency--worse, his
unreliability, to use no harsher word--were all laid bare.  His position
in the Firm, even his partnership, perhaps, became untenable.  Resignation
stared him in the face.

He saw his life go down in ruins before his very eyes; the roof had fallen
long ago.  The pillars now collapsed.  The Wave, indeed, had turned him
upside down; its smothering crash left no corner of his being above water;
heart, mind, and character were flung in a broken tangle against the cruel
bottom as it fell to earth.

But, at any rate, the new outlet for his immediate energies was offered.
He seized it vigorously.  He gave up his room at Luxor, and sent a man
down to bring his luggage up.  He did not write to Lettice.  He faced the
practical situation with a courage and thoroughness which, though too
late, were admirable.  Moreover, he found a curious relief in the new
disaster, a certain comfort even.  There was compensation in it
somewhere.  Everything was going to smash--the sooner, then, the better!
This recklessness was in him.  He had lost Lettice, so what else mattered?
His attitude was somewhat devil-may-care, his grip on life itself seemed
slipping.

This mood could not last, however, with a character like his.  It seized
him, but retained no hold.  It was the last cry of despair when he touched
bottom, the moment when weaker temperaments think of the emergency exit,
realise their final worthlessness--proving themselves worthless, indeed,
thereby.

Tom met the blow in other fashion.  He saw himself unworthy, but by no
means worthless.  Suicide, whether of death or of final collapse, did not
enter his mind even.  He faced the Wave, he did not shuffle now.  He sent
a telegram to Lettice to say he was detained; he wrote to Tony that he had
given up his room in the Luxor hotel, an affectionate, generous note,
telling him to take good care of Lettice.  It was only right and fair that
Tony should think the path for himself was clear.  Since he had decided to
'slip out' this attitude towards his cousin was necessarily involved.
It must not appear that he had retired, beaten and unhappy.  He must do no
single thing that might offer resistance to the inevitable fate, least of
all leave Tony with the sense of having injured him.  True sacrifice
forbade; renunciation, if real, was also silent--the smiling face, the
cheerful, natural manner!

Tom, therefore, fixed his heart more firmly than ever upon one single
point: her happiness.  He fought to think of that alone.  If he knew her
happy, he could live.  He found life in her joy.  He lived in that.
By 'slipping out,' no word of reproach, complaint, or censure uttered, he
would actually contribute to her happiness.  Thus, vicariously, he almost
helped to cause it.  In this faint, self-excluding bliss, he could live--
even live on--until the end.  That seemed true forgiveness.

Meanwhile, not easily nor immediately, did he defy the anguish that,
day and night, kept gnawing at his heart.  His one desire was to hide
it, and--if the huge achievement might lie within his powers--
to change it sweetly into a source of strength that should redeem him.
The 'sum of loss,' indeed, he had not 'reckoned yet,' but he was
beginning to add the figures up.  Full measurement lay in the long, long
awful years ahead.  He had this strange comfort, however--that he now
loved something he could never lose because it could not change.
He loved an ideal.  In that sense, he and Lettice were in the 'sea'
together.  His belief and trust in her were not lost, but heightened.
And a hint of mothering contentment stole sweetly over him behind this
shadowy yet genuine consolation.

The childhood nightmare was both presentiment and memory.  The crest of
the falling Wave was reflected in its base.


