

Tom took his passage home; he also told Sir William that his resignation,
whether the Board accepted it or not, was final.  His reputation, so far
as the Firm was concerned, he knew was lost.  His own self-respect had
dwindled dangerously too.  He had the feeling that he wanted to begin all
over again from the very bottom.  It seemed the only way.  The prospect,
at his age, was daunting.  He faced it.

At the very moment in life when he had fancied himself most secure, most
satisfied mentally, spiritually, materially--the entire structure on which
self-confidence rested had given way.  Even the means of material support
had vanished too.  The crash was absolute.  This brief Egyptian winter
had, indeed, proved the winter of his loss.  The Wave had fallen at last.

During the interval at Assouan--ten days that seemed a month!--he heard
occasionally from Lettice.  'To-day I miss you,' one letter opened.
Another said: 'We wonder when you will return.  We _all_ miss you very
much: it's not the same here without you, Tom.'  And all were signed
'Your ever loving Lettice.'  But if hope for some strange reason refused
to die completely, he did not allow himself to be deceived.  His task--no
easy one--was to transmute emotion into the higher, self-less, ideal love
that was now--oh, he knew it well enough--his only hope and safety.
In the desolate emptiness of desert that yawned ahead, he saw this single
tree that blossomed, and offered shade.  Beauty and comfort both were
there.  He believed in her truth and somehow in her faithfulness as well.



Tom sent his heavy luggage to Port Said, and took the train to Luxor.
He had decided to keep his sailing secret.  He could mention honestly that
he was going to Cairo.  He would write a line from there or, better still,
from the steamer itself.

And the instinct that led to this decision was sound and wise.  The act
was not as boyish as it seemed.  For he feared a reaction on her part that
yet could be momentary only.  His leaving so suddenly would be a shock, it
might summon the earlier Lettice to the surface, there might be a painful
scene for both of them.  She would realise, to some extent at any rate,
the immediate sense of loss; for she would surely divine that he was
going, not to England merely, but out of her life.  And she would suffer;
she might even try to keep him--the only result being a revival of pain
already almost conquered, and of distress for her.

For such reaction, he divined, could not be permanent.  The Play was over;
it must not, could not be prolonged.  He must go out.  There must be no
lingering when the curtain fell.  A curtain that halts in its descent upon
the actors endangers the effect of the entire Play.

He wired to Cairo for a room.  He wired to her too: 'Arrive to-morrow,
_en route_ Cairo.  Leave same night.'  He braced himself.  The strain
would be cruelly exacting, but the worst had been lived out already; the
jealousy was dead; the new love was established beyond all reach of
change.  These last few hours should be natural, careless, gay, no hint
betraying him, flying no signals of distress.  He could just hold out.
The strength was in him.  And there was time before he caught the evening
train for a reply to come: 'All delighted; expect you breakfast.
Arranging picnic expedition.--Lettice.'

And that one word 'all' helped him unexpectedly to greater steadiness.
It eliminated the personal touch even in a telegram.



In the train he slept but little; the heat was suffocating; there was a
Khamsin blowing and the fine sand crept in everywhere.  At Luxor, however,
the wind remained so high up that the lower regions of the sky were calm
and still.  The sand hung in fog-like clouds shrouding the sun, dimming
the usual brilliance.  But the heat was intense, and the occasional stray
puffs of air that touched the creeping Nile or passed along the sweltering
street, seemed to issue from the mouth of some vast furnace in the
heavens.  They dropped, then ceased abruptly; there was no relief in them.
The natives sat listlessly in their doorways, the tourists kept their
rooms or idled complainingly in the hotel halls and corridors.
The ominous touch was everywhere.  He felt it in his heart as well--the
heart he thought broken beyond repair.

Tom bathed and changed his clothes, then drove down to the shady garden
beside the river as of old.  He felt the gritty sand between his teeth, it
was in his mouth and eyes, it was on his tongue. . . .  He met Lettice
without a tremor, astonished at his own coolness and self-control; he
watched her beauty as the beauty of a picture, something that was no
longer his, yet watched it without envy and, in an odd sense, almost
without pain.  He loved the fairness of it for itself, for her, and for
another who was not himself.  Almost he loved their happiness to come--for
_her_ sake.  Her eyes, too, followed him, he fancied, like a picture's
eyes.  She looked young and fresh, yet something mysterious in the
following eyes.  The usual excited happiness was less obvious, he thought,
than usual, the mercurial gaiety wholly absent.  He fancied a cloud upon
her spirit somewhere.  He imagined tiny, uncertain signs of questioning
distress.  He wondered. . . .  This torture of a last uncertainty was also
his.

Yet, obviously, she was glad to see him; her welcome was genuine; she came
down the drive to meet him, both hands extended.  Apparently, too, she was
alone, Mrs. Haughstone still asleep, and Tony not yet arrived.  It was
still early morning.

'Well, and how did you get on without me--all of you?' he asked, adding
the last three words with emphasis.

'I thought you were never coming back, Tom; I had the feeling you were
bored here at Luxor and meant to leave us.'  She looked him up and down
with a curious look--of admiration almost, an admiration he believed he
had now learned to do without.  'How lean and brown and well you look!'
she went on, 'but thin, Tom.  You've grown thinner.'  She shook her finger
at him.  Her voice was perilously soft and kind, a sweet tenderness in her
manner, too.  'You've been over-working and not eating enough.  You've not
had me to look after you.'

He flushed.  'I'm awfully fit,' he said, smiling a little shyly.
'I may be thinner.  That's the heat, I suppose.  Assouan's a blazing
place--you feel you're in Africa.'  He said the banal thing as usual.

'But was there no one there to look after you?'  She gave him a quick
glance.  'No one at all?'

Tom noticed the repeated question, wondering a little.  But there was no
play in him; in place of it was something stern, unyielding as iron,
though not tested yet.

'The Chairman of my Company, nine hundred noisy tourists, and about a
thousand Arabs at the Works,' he told her.  'There was hardly a soul I
knew besides.'

She said no more; she gave a scarcely audible sigh; she seemed unsatisfied
somewhere.  To his surprise, then, he noticed that the familiar little
table was only laid for two.

'Where's Tony?' he asked.  'And, by the by, how is he?'

He thought she hesitated a moment.  'Tony's not coming till later,' she
told him.  'He guessed we should have a lot to talk about together, so he
stayed away.  Nice of him, wasn't it?'

Behind the commonplace sentences, the hidden wordless Play also drew on
towards its Curtain.

'Well, it is my turn rather for a chat, perhaps,' he returned presently
with a laugh, taking his cup of steaming coffee from her hand.  'I can see
him later in the day.  You've arranged something, I'm sure.  Your wire
spoke of a picnic, but perhaps this heat--this beastly Khamsin----'

'It's passing,' she mentioned.  'They say it blows for three days, for six
days, or for nine, but as a matter of fact, it does nothing of the sort.
It's going to clear.  I thought we might take our tea into the Desert.'

She went on talking rapidly, almost nervously, it seemed to Tom.  Her mind
was upon something else.  Thoughts of another kind lay unexpressed behind
her speech.  His own mind was busy too--Tony, Warsaw, the long long
interval he had been away, what had happened during his absence, and so
forth?  Had no cable come?  What would she feel this time to-morrow when
she knew?--these and a hundred others seethed below his quiet manner and
careless talk.  He noticed then that she was exquisitely dressed; she
wore, in fact, the very things he most admired--and wore them purposely:
the orange-coloured jacket, the violet veil, the hat with the little roses
on the brim.  It was his turn to look her up and down.

She caught his eye.  Uncannily, she caught his thought as well.
Tom steeled himself.

'I put these on especially for you, you truant boy,' she said deliciously
across the table at him.  'I hope you're sensible of the honour done you.'

'Rather, Lettice!  I should think I am, indeed!'

'I got up half an hour earlier on purpose too.  Think what that means to a
woman like me.'  She handed him a grape-fruit she had opened and prepared
herself.

'My favourite hat, and my favourite fruit!  I wish I were worthy of them!'
He stammered slightly as he said the stupid thing: the blood rushed up to
his very forehead, but she gave no sign of noticing either words or blush.
The strong sunburn hid the latter doubtless.  There was a desperate
shyness in him that he could not manage quite.  He wished to heaven the
talk would shift into another key.  He could not keep this up for long;
it was too dangerous.  Her attitude, it seemed, had gone back to that of
weeks ago; there was more than the mother in it, he felt: it was almost
the earlier Lettice--and yet not quite.  Something was added, but
something too was missing.  He wondered more and more . . . he asked
himself odd questions. . . .  It seemed to him suddenly that her mood was
assumed, not wholly natural.  The flash came to him that disappointment
lay behind it, yet that the disappointment was not with--himself.

'You're wearing a new tie, Tom,' her voice broke in upon his moment's
reverie.  'That's not the one _I_ gave you.'

It was so unexpected, so absurd.  It startled him.  He laughed with
genuine amusement, explaining that he had bought it in Assouan in a moment
of extravagance--'the nearest shade I could find to the blue you gave me.
How observant you are!'  Lettice laughed with him.  'I always notice
little things like that,' she said.  'It's what you call the mother in me,
I suppose.'  She examined the tie across the table, while they smoked
their cigarettes.  He looked aside.  'I hope it was admired.  It suits
you.'  She fingered it.  Her hand touched his chin.

'Does it?  It's your taste, you know.'

'But _was_ it admired?' she insisted almost sharply.

'That's really more than I can say, Lettice.  You see, I didn't ask Sir
William what he thought, and the natives are poor judges because they
don't wear ties.'  He was about to say more, talking the first nonsense
that came into his head, when she did a thing that took his breath away,
and made him tremble where he sat.  Regardless of lurking Arab servants,
careless of Mrs.  Haughstone's windows not far behind them, she rose
suddenly, tripped round the little table, kissed him on his cheek--and was
back again in her chair, smoking innocently as before.  It was a
repetition of an earlier act, yet with a difference somewhere.

The world seemed unreal just then; things like this did not happen in real
life, at least not quite like this; nor did two persons in their
respective positions talk exactly thus, using such banal language, such
insignificant phrases half of banter, half of surface foolishness.
The kiss amazed him--for a moment.  Tom felt in a dream.  And yet this
very sense of dream, this idle exchange of trivial conversation cloaked
something that was a cruel, an indubitable reality.  It was not a dream
shot through with reality, it was a reality shot through with dream.
But the dream itself, though old as the desert, dim as those grim Theban
Hills now draped with flying sand, was also true and actual.

The hidden Play had broken through, merging for an instant with the upper
surface-life.  He was almost persuaded that this last, strange action had
not happened, that Lettice had never really left her chair.  So still and
silent she sat there now.  She had not stirred from her place.  It was the
burning wind that touched his cheek, a waft of heated atmosphere, lightly
moving, that left the disquieting trail of perfume in the air.
The glowing heavens, luminous athwart the clouds of fine, suspended sand,
laid this ominous hint of dream upon the entire day. . . .  The recent act
became a mere picture in the mind.

Yet some little cell of innermost memory, stirring out of sleep, had
surely given up its dead. . . .  For a second it seemed to him this heavy,
darkened air was in the recesses of the earth, beneath the burden of
massive cliffs the centuries had piled.  It was underground.  In some
cavern of those mournful Theban Hills, some one--had kissed him!  For over
his head shone painted stars against a painted blue, and in his nostrils
hung a faint sweetness as of ambra. . . .

He recovered his balance quickly.  They resumed their curious masquerade,
the screen of idle talk between significance and emptiness, like sounds of
reality between dream and waking.

And the rest of that long day of stifling heat was similarly a dream shot
through with incongruous touches of reality, yet also a reality shot
through with the glamour of some incredibly ancient dream.  Not till he
stood later upon the steamer deck, the sea-wind in his face and the salt
spray on his lips, did he awake fully and distinguish the dream from the
reality--or the reality from the dream.  Nor even then was the deep,
strange confusion wholly dissipated.  To the end of life, indeed, it
remained an unsolved mystery, labelled a Premonition Fulfilled, without
adequate explanation. . . .



The time passed listlessly enough, to the accompaniment of similar idle
talk, careless, it seemed to Tom, with the ghastly sense of the final
minutes slipping remorselessly away, so swiftly, so poignantly unused.
For each moment was gigantic, brimmed full with the distilled essence, as
it were, of intensest value, value that yet was not his to seize.
He never lost the point of view that he watched a picture that belonged to
some one else.  His own position was clear; he had already leaped from a
height; he counted, as he fell, the blades of grass, the pebbles far
below; slipping over Niagara's awful edge, he noted the bubbles in the
whirlpools underneath.  They talked of the weather. . . .!

'It's clearing,' said Lettice.  'There'll be sand in our tea and thin
bread and butter.  But anything's better than sitting and stifling here.'

Tom readily agreed.  'You and I and Tony, then?'

'I thought so.  We don't want too many, do we?'

'Not for our la--not for a day like this.'  He corrected himself just in
time.  'Tony will be here for lunch?' he asked.

She nodded.  'He said so, at any rate, only one never quite knows with
Tony.'  And though Tom plainly heard, he made no comment.  He was puzzled.

Most of the morning they remained alone together.  Tom had never felt so
close to her before; it seemed to him their spirits touched; there was no
barrier now.  But there was distance.  He could not explain the paradox.
A vague sweet feeling was in him that the distance was not of height, as
formerly.  He had risen somehow; he felt higher than before; he saw over
the barrier that had been there.  Pain and sacrifice, perhaps, had lifted
him, raised him to the level where she dwelt; and in that way he was
closer.  A new strength was in him.  At the same time, behind her outer
quietness and her calm, he divined struggle still.  In her atmosphere was
a hint of strain, disharmony.  He was positive of this.  From time to time
he caught trouble in her eyes.  Could she, perhaps, discern--foreknow--the
shadow of the dropping Curtain?  He wondered. . . .  He detected something
in her that was new.

If any weakening of resolve were in himself, it disappeared long before
Tony's arrival on the scene.  A few private words from Mrs. Haughstone
later banished it effectually.  'Your telegram, Mr. Kelverdon, came as a
great surprise.  We had planned a three-day trip to the Sphinx and
Pyramids.  Mr. Winslowe had written to you; he hoped to persuade you to
join us.  Again you left Assouan before the letter arrived.  It's a habit
with you!'

'Apparently.'

The poison no longer fevered him; he was immune.

'Mr. Winslowe--I had better warn you before he comes--was disappointed.'

'I'm sorry I spoilt the trip.  It was most inconsiderate of me.  But you
can make it later when I'm gone--to Cairo, can't you?'

Mrs. Haughstone watched him somewhat keenly.  Did she discover anything,
he wondered?  Was she aware that he was no longer within reach of her
little shafts?

'It's all for the best, I think,' she went on in a casual tone.
'Lettice was too easily persuaded--she didn't really want to go without
you.  She said so.  And Mr. Winslowe soon gets over his sulks----'

Tom interrupted her, turning sharply round.  'Oh,' he laughed, 'was that
why he wouldn't come to breakfast, then?'  And whether it was pain or
pleasure that he felt, he did not know.  The moment's anguish--he verily
believed it--was for Lettice.  And for Tony?  Something akin to sympathy
perhaps!  If Tony should ever suffer pain like his--even
temporarily. . . .!

The other shrugged her angular shoulders a little.  'It's all passed now,'
she observed; 'he's forgotten it, I'm sure.  You needn't notice anything,
by the way,' she added, 'if--if he seems ungracious.'

'Not for worlds,' replied Tom, throwing stones into the sullen river
below.  'I'm far too tactful.'

Mrs. Haughstone looked away.  There was a moment's expression of
admiration on her face.  'You're big, Mr. Kelverdon, very big.  I wish all
men were as generous.'  She spoke hurriedly below her breath.  'I saw this
coming before you arrived.  I wish I could have saved you.  You've got the
hero in you.'

Tom changed the subject, and presently moved away: it was time for lunch
for one thing, and for another he wanted to hide his face from her too
peering eyes.  He was not quite sure of himself just then; his lips
trembled a little; he could not altogether control his facial muscles.
Tony jealous!  Lettice piqued!  Was this the explanation of her new
sweetness towards himself!  The position tried him sorely, testing his new
strength from such amazing and unexpected angles.  It was all beyond him
somehow, the reversal of roles so afflicting, tears and laughter so oddly
mingled.  Yet the sheet-anchor--his self-less love--held fast and true.
There was no dragging, no shuffling where he stood.

Nor was there any weakening of resolution in him, any dimming of the new
dawn within his heart.  He felt sure of something that he did not
understand, aware of a radiant promise some one whispered marvellously in
his ear.  He was alone, yet not alone, outcast yet companioned sweetly,
bereft of all the world holds valuable, yet possessor of riches that the
world passed by.  He felt a conqueror.  The pain was somehow turning into
joy.  He seemed above the earth.  Only one thing mattered--that his ideal
love should have no stain upon it.

The lunch he dreaded passed smoothly and without alarm.  Tony was gay,
light-hearted as usual, belying Mrs. Haughstone's ominous prediction.
They smoked together afterwards, walking up and down the garden
arm-in-arm, Tony eagerly discussing expeditions, picnics, birds, anything
and everything that offered, with keen interest as of old; he even once
suggested coming back to Assouan with his cousin--alone . . . Tom made no
comment on the adverb.  Nor was his sympathy mere acting; he genuinely
felt it; the affection for Tony somehow was not dead. . . .  The joy in
him grew, meanwhile, brighter, clearer, higher.  It was alive.  Some
courage of the sun was in him.  There seemed a great understanding with
it, and a greater forgiveness.

Of one thing only did he feel uncertain.  He caught himself sharply
wondering more than once.  For he had the impression--the conviction
almost--that something had happened during his absence at Assouan--that
there was a change in _her_ attitude to Tony.  It was a subtle change; it
was beginning merely; but it was there.  Her behaviour at breakfast was
not due to pique, not solely due to pique, at any rate.  It had a deeper
origin.  Almost he detected signs of friction between herself and Tony.
Very slight they were indeed, if not imagined altogether.  His perception
was still exceptionally alert, its acuteness left over, apparently, from
the earlier days of pain and jealousy.  Yet the result upon him was
confusing chiefly.

In very trivial ways the change betrayed itself.  The talk between the
three of them remained incongruously upon the surface always.  The play
and chatter went on independently of the Play beneath, almost ignoring it.
In that Wordless Play, however, the change was registered.

'Tom, you've got the straightest back of any man I ever saw,' Lettice
exclaimed once, eyeing them critically with an amused smile as they came
back towards her chair.  'I've just been watching you both.'

They laughed, while Tony turned it wittily into fun.  'It's always safer
to look a person in the face,' he observed.  If he felt the comparison was
made to his disadvantage he did not show it.  Tom, wondering what she
meant and why she said it, felt that the remark annoyed him.  For there
was disparagement of Tony in it.

'I can read your soul from your back alone,' she added.

'And mine!' cried Tony, laughing: 'what about my back too?  Or have I got
no soul misplaced between my shoulder-blades?'

Tom laid his hand between those slightly-rounded shoulders then--and
rather suddenly.

'It's bent from too much creeping after birds,' he exclaimed.  'In your
next life you'll be on all fours if you're not careful.'

The Arab appeared to say the donkeys and sand-cart were waiting in the
road, and Tony went indoors to get cameras and other paraphernalia
essential to a Desert picnic.  Lettice continued talking idly to Tom, who
stood beside her, smoking. . . .  The feeling of dream and reality were
very strong in him at the moment.  He hardly realised what the nonsense
was he had said to his cousin.  There was a slight sense of discomfort in
him.  The little, playful conversation just over had meaning in it.
He missed that meaning.  Somehow the comparison in his favour was
disagreeable--he preferred to hear his cousin praised, but certainly not
belittled.  Perhaps vanity was wounded there--that his successful rival
woke contempt in her was unendurable. . . .  And he thought of his train
for the first time with a vague relief.

'Birds,' she was saying, half to herself, the eyes beneath the big sun-hat
looking beyond him, 'that reminds me, Tom--a dream I had.  A little bird
left its nest and hopped about to try all the other branches, because it
thought it ought to explore them--had to, in a way.  And it got into all
sorts of danger, and ran fearful risks, and couldn't fly or use its wings
properly,--till finally----'

She stopped, and her eyes turned full upon his own.  The love in his face
was plain to read, though he was not conscious of it.  He waited in
silence:

'Till finally it crept back up into its own nest again,' she went on,
'and found its wings lying there all the time.  It had forgotten them!
And it got in, felt warm and safe and cosy--and fell asleep.'

'Whereupon you woke and found it was all a dream,' said Tom.  His tone,
though matter-of-fact, was lower than usual, but it was firm.  No sign of
emotion now was visible in his face.  The eyes were steady, the lips
betrayed no hint.  Her little dream, the way of telling it rather,
perplexed him.

'Yes,' she said, 'but I found somehow that the bird was me.'  She sighed a
little.

It flashed upon him suddenly that she was exhausted, wearied out; that her
heart was beating with some interior stress and struggle.  She seemed on
the point of giving up, some long long battle in her ended.  There was
something she wished to say to him--he got this impression too--something
she could not bring herself to say, unless he helped her, unless he asked
for it.  The duality was ending, perhaps fused into unity again? . . .
The intense and burning desire to help her rose upon him, the desire to
protect.  And the word  'Warsaw' fled across his mind . . . as though it
fell through the heated air into his mind . . . from hers.

'Tony declares,' she was saying, 'that our memories are packed away under
pressure like steam in a boiler, and the dream is their safety-valve . . .
I wonder. . . .  He read it somewhere.  It's not his own, of course.
But Tony never explains--because he doesn't really know.  He's flashy--not
the depth we thought--the truth . . . _Tom!_'

She called his name with emphasis, as if annoyed that he showed so little
interest.  There was an instant's cloud upon her face; the eyes wavered,
then looked away; he felt again there was disappointment somewhere in her
--with himself or with Tony, he did not know. . . .  He kept silent.
He could think of nothing by way of answer--nothing appropriate, nothing
safe.

She waited, keeping silent too.  The Curtain was lowering, its shadow
growing on the air.

'I dream so little,' he stammered at length, 'I can't say.'  It enraged
him that he faltered.  He turned away. . . .  Tony at that moment arrived.
The cart and animals were ready, everything was collected.  He announced
it loudly, urging them with a certain impatience, as though they caused
the delay.  He stared keenly at them a moment. . . .  They started.


