

How trivial, yet how significant of the tension of interior forces--the
careless words, the foolish little dream, the playful allusion to one
man's stoop and to another's upright carriage, how easy to read, how
obvious!  Yet Tom, too intensely preoccupied, perhaps, with keeping his
own balance, was unaware of revelation.  His mind perceived the delicate
change, yet attached a wrong direction to it.  Perplexity and discomfort
in him deepened.  He was relieved when Tony interrupted; he felt glad.
The shifting of values was disturbing to him.  It was as though the
falling Curtain halted. . . .

The hours left to him were few; they both rushed and lingered.
The afternoon seemed gone so quickly, while yet the moments dragged, each
separate instant too intense with feeling to yield up its being willingly.
The minutes lingered; it was the hours that rushed.

Subconsciously, it seemed, Tom counted them in his heart. . . .
Subconsciously, too, he stated the position, as though to do so steadied
him: Three persons, three friends, were off upon a picnic.  At a certain
moment they would turn back; at a certain moment two of them would say
good-bye; at a certain moment a final train would start--his eyes would no
longer see _her_. . . .  It seemed impossible, unreal; it could not
happen. . . .  He could so easily prevent it.  No question had been asked
about his going to Cairo; it was taken for granted that he went on
business and would return.  He could cancel his steamer-berth, no
explanation necessary, nor any asked.

But having weighed the sacrifice against the joy, he was not wanting.

They mounted their lusty donkeys; Lettice climbed into her sand-cart; the
boys came clattering after them down the street of Thebes with the
tea-things and the bundles of clover for the animals.  Across the belt of
brilliant emerald green, past clover-fields and groves of palms, they
followed the ancient track towards the desert.  They were on the eastern
bank, the Theban Hills far behind them on the horizon.  Towards the Red
Sea they headed, though Tom had no notion of their direction, aware only
that while they went further and further from those hills, the hills
themselves somehow came ever nearer.  The gaunt outline followed them;
each time he looked back the shadow cast was closer than before, almost
upon their heels.  But for the assurance of his senses he could have
believed they headed towards these yellow cliffs instead of the reverse.
He could not shake off the singular impression that their weight was on
his back; he felt the oppression of those ancient tombs, those crowded
corridors, that hidden subterranean world.  No mummy, he remembered, but
believed it would one day unwind again when the soul, cleansed and
justified, came back to claim it.  Regeneration was inevitable.
A glorious faith secure in ultimate joy!

They hurried vainly; the distance between them, instead of increasing,
lessened.  The hills would not let them go.

The burning atmosphere, the motionless air caused doubtless the optical
illusion.  The glare was blinding.  Tom did not draw attention to it.
He tugged his obstinate donkey into line with the slower sand-cart, riding
for several minutes in silence, close beside Lettice, aware of her
perfume, her flying veil almost across his eyes from time to time.
Tony was some way ahead.

'Tom,' he heard suddenly, 'must you really go to Cairo to-night?'

'I'm afraid so.  It's important.'  But after a pause he added 'Why?'
He said it because his sentence sounded otherwise suspiciously incomplete.
Above all, he must seem natural.  'Why do you ask?'

The answer made him regret that extra word:

'There's something I want to tell you.'

'_Very_ important?'  He asked it laughingly, busy with the reins
apparently.

'Far more important than your going to Cairo.  I want your advice and
help.'

'I must,' he said slowly.  'Won't it keep?' He tugged violently at the
reins, though the donkey was behaving admirably.

'How long will you stay?' she asked.

'One night only, Lettice.  Not longer.'

They were on soft and yellow sand by now; the desert shone with a luminous
glow; Tom could not hear the sound of his donkey's hoofs, nor the
crunching of the sand-cart.  He heard nothing but a voice singing beside
him in the burning air.  But the air had grown radiant.  He realised that
he was beating the donkey without the slightest reason.

'When you come back, then--I'll tell you when you come back,' he heard.

And a sudden inspiration came to his assistance.  'Couldn't you write it?'
he asked calmly.  'The Semiramis Hotel will find me--in case anything
happened.  I should have time to think it over--I like that best--if it's
really so important.  My mind, you know, works slowly.'

Her reply had a curious effect upon him.  She needed help--his help.
'Perhaps, Tom.  But one can depend so upon your judgment.'

He knew that she was watching his face.  With an effort he turned to meet
her gaze.  He saw her against the background of the hills, whose following
mass towered menacingly above her little outline.  And as he looked he was
suddenly transfixed, he dropped his reins, he stared without a word.
Two pairs of eyes, two smiles, two human physiognomies once again met his
arrested gaze.  He knew them, of course, well enough by now, but never
before had he caught the two expressions so vividly revealed, so
distinctly marked; clear as a composite picture, one face painted in upon
another that lay beneath it.  There was the darker face--and there was
Lettice; and each struggled for complete possession of her features.
There was conflict, sharp and dreadful; one second, the gleam of cruelty
flashed out, a yellow of amber in it, as though gold shone reflected
faintly--the next, an anguish of tenderness, as though love brimmed her
eyes with the moisture of divine compassion.  The conflict was desperate,
amazing, painful beyond words.  Then the darker aspect slowly waned,
withdrawing backwards, melting away into the shadows of the hills behind--
as though it first had issued thence--as though almost it belonged there.
Alive and true, yet vanquished, it faded out. . . .  He saw at last the
dear, innocent eyes of--Lettice only.  It was this Lettice who had spoken.

His donkey stumbled--it was natural enough, seeing that the reins hung
loose and his feet had somehow left the stirrups.  Tom pitched forward
heavily, saving himself and his animal from an ignominious accident just
in the nick of time.  There were cries and laughter.  The sand-cart
swerved aside at the same moment, and Tony, from a distance, came
galloping back towards them.

Tom recovered his balance and told his donkey in honest English what he
thought of it.  'But it was your fault, you careless boy,' cried Lettice;
'you let go the reins and whacked it at the same time.  Your eyes were
popping out of your head.  I thought you'd seen a ghost.'

Tom glanced at her.  'I was nearly off,' he said.  'Another second and it
would have been a case of "Low let me lie where the dead dog----"'

She interrupted him with surprising vehemence:

'Don't, don't, Tom.  I hate it!  I hate the words and the tune and
everything.  I won't hear it . . .!'

Tony came clattering up and the incident was over, ended as abruptly as
begun.  But, as Tom well realised, another hitch had occurred in the
lowering of the Curtain.  The actors, for a moment, had stood there in
their normal fashion, betrayed, caught in the act, a little foolish even.
It was the hand of a woman this time that delayed it.

'Did you hurt yourself anywhere, Tom?'  Her question rang in his head like
music for the next mile or two.  He kept beside the sand-cart until they
reached their destination.  It was absurd--yet he could not ride in front
with Tony lest some one driving behind them should notice--yes, that was
the half-comical truth--notice that Tony was round-shouldered--oh, very,
very slightly so--whereas his own back was straight!  It was ridiculously
foolish, yet pathetic.  At the same time, it was poignantly
dramatic. . . .

And their destination was a deep bay of yellow sand, soft and tawny,
ribbed with a series of lesser troughs the wind had scooped out to look
like a shore some withdrawing ocean had left exposed below the westering
sun.  A solitary palm tree stood behind upon a dune.

The afternoon, the beating hotness of the air, the clouds of high,
suspended sand, the stupendous sunset--as if the world caught fire and
burned along the whole horizon--it was all unforgettable.  The yellow sand
about them blazed and shone, scorching their bare hands; the Desert was
empty, silent, lonely.  Only the western heavens, where the sun sank in a
red mass of ominous splendour, was alive with energy.  Coloured shafts
mapped the vault from horizon to zenith like the spokes of a prodigious
wheel of fire.  Any minute the air and the sand it pressed upon might
burst into a sea of flame.  The furnace where the Khamsin brewed in
distant Nubia sent its warnings in advance; it was slowly travelling
northward.  And hence, possibly, arose the disquieting sensation that
something was gathering, something that might take them unawares.
The sand lay listening, waiting, watching.  There was whispering among the
very grains. . . .

It was half way through tea when the first stray puffs of wind came
dropping abruptly, sighing away in tiny eddies of dust beyond the circle.
Three human atoms upon the huge yellow carpet, that ere long would shake
itself across five hundred miles and rise, whirling, driving, suffocating
all life within its folds--three human beings noted the puffs of heated
air and reacted variously to the little change.  Each felt, it seemed, a
slight uneasiness, as though of trouble coming that was yet not entirely
atmospherical.  Nerves tingled.  They looked into each other's faces.
They looked back.

'We mustn't stay too late,' said Tony, filling a basket for the
donkey-boys in their dune two hundred yards away.  'We've a long way to
go.'  He examined the portentous sky.  'It won't come till night,' he
added, 'still--they're a bit awkward, these sandstorms, and one never
knows.'

'And I've got a train to catch,' Tom mentioned, 'absurd as it sounds in a
place like this.'  He was scraping his lips with a handkerchief.
'I've eaten enough bread-and-sand to last me till dinner, anyhow.'
He helped his cousin with the Arabs' food.  'They probably don't mind it,
they're used to it.'  He straightened up from his stooping posture.
Lettice, he saw, was lying with a cigarette against the bank of sloping
sand that curved above them.  She was intently watching them.  She had not
spoken for some time; she looked almost drowsy; the eyelids were half
closed; the cigarette smoke rose in a steady little thread that did not
waver. . . .  There was perhaps ten yards between them, but he caught the
direction of her gaze, and throwing his own eyes into the same line of
sight, he saw what she saw.  Instinctively, he took a quick step forward--
hiding Tony from her immediate view.

It was certainly curious, this desire to screen his cousin, to prevent his
appearing at a disadvantage.  He was impelled, at all costs and in the
smallest details, to help the man she admired, to increase his value, to
minimise his disabilities, however trivial.  It pained him to see Tony
even at a physical disadvantage; Tony must show always at his very best;
and at this moment, bending over the baskets, the attitude of the
shoulders was disagreeably emphasised.

Tom did not laugh, he did not even smile.  Gravely, as though it were of
importance, he moved forward so that Lettice should not see the detail of
the rounded shoulders which, he knew, compared unfavourably with his own
straighter carriage.  Yet almost the next minute, when he looked back
again, he saw that the cigarette had fallen from her fingers, the eyes
were closed, her body had slipped into a more recumbent angle, she seemed
actually asleep.

'Give a shout, Tom, and the boys will come to fetch it,' said Tony, when
at length the basket was ready.  He put his hands to his own mouth to
coo-ee across the dunes.  Tom stopped him at once.  'Hush! Lettice has
dropped off,' he explained, 'you'll wake her.  It's the heat.  I'll carry
the things over to them.'  He noticed Tony's hands as he held them to his
lips.  And again he felt a touch of sympathy, almost pity.  Had _she_, so
observant, so discerning in her fastidious taste--had she failed to notice
the small detail too?

'No, let me take it,' Tony was saying, seizing the hamper from his cousin.
Tom suggested carrying it between them.  They tried it, laughing and
struggling together with the awkward burden, but keeping their voices low.
They lost the direction too; for all the sand-dunes were alike, and the
boys were hidden in a hollow.  It ended in Tony going off in triumph with
the basket under one arm, guided at length by the faint neighing of a
donkey in the distance.

Some little time had passed, perhaps five minutes, perhaps longer, when
Tom went back to the tea-place across the soft sand, stepping cautiously
so as not to disturb the sleeper.  And another five minutes, perhaps
another ten, had slipped by before Tony's head reappeared above a
neighbouring dune.  A boy had come to meet him, shortening his journey.

But Fate calculated to a nicety, wasting no seconds one way or the other.
There had been time--just time before Tony's return--for Tom to have
stretched himself at her feet, to have lit a cigarette, and to have smoked
sufficient of it for the first ash to fall.  He was very careful to make
no sound, even lighting the match softly inside his hat.  But his hand was
trembling.  For Lettice slept, and in her sleep made little sounds of
pain.

He watched her.  There was a tiny frown between the eyebrows, the lips
twitched from time to time, she moved uneasily upon the bank of sliding
sand; and, as she made these little broken sounds of pain, from beneath
the closed eyelids two small tears crept out upon her cheeks.

Tom stared, making no sound or movement.  The tears rolled down and fell
into the sand.  The suffering in the face made his heart beat irregularly.
Something transfixed him.  She wore the expression he had seen in the
London theatre.  For a moment he felt terror--a terror of something
coming, something going to happen.  He stared, trembling, holding his
breath.  She was dreaming, as a person even in a three-minute sleep can
dream--deeply, vividly.  He waited.  He had the amazing sensation that he
knew what she was dreaming--that he took part in it with her almost. . . .
Unable, finally, to restrain himself another instant, he moved--and the
noise wakened her.  She sighed.  The eyes opened of their own accord.
She stared at him in a dazed way for a moment.  Then she looked over his
shoulder across the desert.

'You've been asleep, Lettice,' he whispered, 'and actually dreaming--all
in five minutes.'

She rubbed her eyes slowly, as though sand was in them.  She stared into
his face a moment before she spoke.

'Yes, I dreamed,' she answered with a little frightened sigh.  'I dreamed
of you----There was a tent--the flap lifted suddenly--oh, it was so vivid!
Then there was a crowd and awful drums were beating--and my river with the
floating faces was there and I plunged in to save one--it was yours,
_Tom_, yours----'

She paused for a fraction of a second, while his heart went thumping
against his ribs.  He did not speak.  He waited.

'Then somehow you were taken from me,' she went on; 'you left me, Tom.'
Her voice sank.  'And it broke my heart in two.'

'Lettice . . .!'

He made a sudden movement in the sand--at which moment, precisely, Tony's
head appeared above the neighbouring dune, the rest of his body following
it immediately.

And it seemed to Tom that his cousin came upon them out of the heart of a
dream, out of the earth, out of a sandy tomb.  His very existence, for
those minutes, had been utterly forgotten, obliterated.  He rose from the
dead and came towards them over the hot, yellow desert.  The distant
hills--the Theban Hills above the Valley of the Kings--disgorged him.
And, as once before, he looked dreadful, threatening, his great hands held
out in front of him.  He came gliding down the yielding slope.  He caught
them!

In that second--it was but the fraction of a second actually--the
impression upon Tom's mind was acute and terrible.  Speech and movement
were not in him anywhere; he could only sit and stare, both terrified and
fascinated.  Between himself and Lettice stretched an interval of six feet
certainly, and into this very gap, the figure of his cousin, followed and
preceded by heaps of moving sand, descended now.  It was towards Lettice
that Tony came so swiftly gliding.

It _was_ his cousin surely . . .?

He saw the big hands outspread, he saw the slightly stooping shoulders, he
saw the face and eyes, the light blue eyes.  But also he saw strange,
unaccustomed raiment, he saw a sheet of gold, he smelt the soft breath of
ambra. . . .  And the face was dark and menacing.  There were words, too,
careless, playful words, uttered undoubtedly by Tony's familiar voice:
'Caught you both asleep!  Well, I declare!  You _are_ a couple . . .!'
followed by something else about its being 'time to pack up and go because
the sand was coming. . . .'  Tom heard the words distinctly, but far away,
tiny with curious distance; they were half smothered, half submerged, it
seemed, behind an acute inner hearing that caught another set of words he
could not understand--in a language he both remembered and forgot.
And the deep sense of dread passed swiftly then into a blinding jealous
rage; he saw red; a fury of wrath that could kill and stab and strangle
rushed over him in a flood of passionate emotion.  He lost control.  He
rushed headlong.

Seconds dragged out incredibly into minutes, as though time halted. . . .
An intense, murderous hatred blazed in his heart.

From where he sat, both figures were above him, sheltered halfway up the
long sliding slope.  At the base of the yellow dune he crouched; he looked
up at them.  His eyes perhaps were blinded by the red tempest in his
heart; or perhaps the tiny particles of flying sand drove against his
eyeballs.  He saw, at any rate, the figures close together, as if the man
came gliding straight into her arms.  He rose--

At the same moment a draught of sudden, violent wind broke with a pouring
rush across the desert, and the entire crest of the undulating dune behind
them rose to meet it in a single whirling eddy.  As a gust of sea-wind
tosses the spray into the air, this burst of scorching desert-wind drew
the ridge up after it, then flung it in a blinding swirl against his face
and skin.

The dune rose in a Wave of glittering yellow sand, drowning them from head
to foot.  He saw the glint and shimmer of the myriad particles in the
sunset; he saw them drifting by the thousand, by the million through the
whirling mass of it; he saw the two figures side by side above him, caught
beneath the toppling crest of this bending billow that curved and broke
against the fiery sky; he smelt the faint perfume of the desert underneath
the hollow arch; he heard the thin, metallic grating of the countless
grains in friction; he heard the palm leaves rattling; he saw two pairs of
eyes . . . his feet went shuffling.  It was The Wave--of sand. . . .

And the nightmare clutch laid hold upon his heart with giant pincers.
The fiery red of insensate anger burst into flames, filled his throat to
choking, set his paralysed muscles free with uncontrollable energy.
This savage lust of murder caught him.  The shuffling went faster,
faster. . . .  He turned and faced the eyes.  He would kill--rather than
see her touched by those great hands.  It seemed he made the leap of a
wild animal upon its prey. . . .

Fire flashed . . . then passed, before he knew it, from red to shining
amber, from sullen crimson into purest gold, from gold to the sheen of
dazzling whiteness.  The change was instantaneous.  His leap was arrested
in mid-air.  The red wrath passed amazingly, forgotten or transmuted.
With a miraculous swiftness he was aware of understanding, of sympathy, of
forgiveness. . . .  The red light melted into white--the white of glory.
The murder faded from his heart, replaced by a deep, deep glow of peace,
of love, of infinite trust, of complete comprehension. . . .  He accepted
something marvellously. . . He forgot--himself. . . .

The eyes faded, the gold, the raiment, the perfume vanished, the sound
died away.  He no longer shuffled upon yielding sand.  There was solid
ground beneath his feet. . . .  He was standing alert and upright, his
arms outstretched to save--Tony from collapse upon the sliding dune.
And the sandy wind drove blindingly against his face and skin.

The three of them stood side by side, holding to each other, laughing,
choking, spluttering, heads bent and eyes closed tightly.  Tom found his
cousin's hand in his own, clutching it firmly to keep his balance, while
behind himself--against his 'straight back,' he realised, even while he
choked and laughed--Lettice clung for shelter.  Tom, therefore, actually
_had_ leaped forward--but to protect and not to kill.  He protected both
of them.  This time, however, it was to himself that Lettice clung,
instead of to another.

The violent gust passed on its way, the flying cloud of sand subsided,
settling down on everything.  For a moment they stood there rubbing their
eyes, shaking their clothing free; then raising their heads cautiously,
they looked about them.  The air was still and calm again, but in the
distance, already a mile away and swiftly travelling across the luminous
waste, they saw the miniature whirlwind driving furiously, leaping from
ridge to ridge.  It swept over the innumerable dunes, lifting the series,
one crest after another, into upright waves upon a yellow shimmering sea,
then scattering them in a cloud that shone and glinted against the fiery
sunset.  Its track was easily marked.  They watched it. . . .

Tony was the first to recover breath.

'Whew!' he cried, still spluttering, 'but that was sudden!  It took me
clean off my feet for a moment.  I got your hand, Tom, only just in time
to save myself!'  He shook himself, the sand was down his back and in his
hair, his shoes were full of it.  'There'll be another any minute now--
another whirlwind--we'd better be starting.'  He began packing up busily,
shouting as he did so to the donkey-boys.  'By Jove!' he cried the next
second, 'look what's happened to our dune!'

Tom, who was on his knees, helping Lettice shake her skirts free, rose to
look.  The high, curving bank of sand where they had sheltered had indeed
changed its shape; the entire ridge had been flattened by the wind; the
crest had been lifted and carried away, scattered in all directions.
The wave-outline of two minutes before no longer existed, it had broken,
fallen over, melted back into the surrounding sea of desert whence it
rose. . . .

'It's disappeared!' exclaimed Tom and Lettice in the same breath.



The boys arrived with the animals and sand-cart; the baskets were quickly
arranged, Tony mounted, Tom helped Lettice in.  She leaned heavily on his
arm and shoulder.  It was in this moment's pause before the actual start
that Lettice turned her head suddenly as though listening.  The air,
motionless again, extraordinarily heated, hung in a dull and yet
transparent curtain between them and the sinking sun.  The entire heavens
seemed to form a sounding-board, the least vibration resonant beneath its
stretch.

'Listen!' she exclaimed.  She had uttered no word till now.  She looked
down at Tom, then looked away again.

They turned their heads in the direction where she pointed, and Tom caught
a faint, distant sound as of little strokes that fell thudding on the
heavy air.  Tony declared he heard nothing.  The sound repeated itself
rapidly, but at rhythmic intervals; it was unpleasant somewhere, a hint of
alarm and menace in the throbbing note--ominous as though it warned.
In the pulse of the blood it seemed, like the beating of the heart, Tom
thought.  It came to him almost through the pressure of her hand upon his
shoulder, although his ear told him it came from the horizon where the
Theban Hills loomed through the coming dusk, just visible, but shadowy.
The muttering died away, then ceased, but not before he suddenly recalled
an early morning hour beside a mountain lake, when months ago the thud of
invisible paddle-wheels had stolen upon him through the quiet air. . . .

'A drum,' he heard Lettice murmur.  'It's a native drum in Thebes.
My little dream!  How the sound travels too!  And how it multiplies!'
She peered at Tom through half-closed eyelids.  'It must be at least a
dozen miles away . . .!'  She smiled faintly, then dropped her eyes
quickly.

'Or a dozen centuries,' he replied, not knowing quite why he said it.
'And more like a thousand drums than only one!'  He smiled too.
For another part of him, beyond capture somehow, knew what he meant, knew
also why he smiled--knew also that _she_ knew.

'It frightens me!  It's horrible.  It sounds like death!'  And though she
whispered the words, more to herself than to the others, Tom heard each
syllable.

The sound died away into the distance, and then ceased.

Then Tony, watching them both, but, unable to hear anything himself,
called out again impatiently that it was time to start, that Tom had a
train to catch, that any minute the real, big wind might be upon them.
The hand slowly, half lingeringly, left Tom's shoulder.  They started
rapidly with a kind of flourish.  In a thin, black line the small
procession crept across the immense darkening desert, like a strip of life
that drifted upon a shoreless ocean. . . .

The sun sank down below the Libyan sands.  But no awful wind descended.
They reached home safely, exhausted and rather silent.  The two hours
seemed to Tom to have passed with a dream-like swiftness.  The stars were
shining as they clattered down the little Luxor street.  In a dream, too,
he went to the hotel to change, and fetch his bag; in a dream he stood
upon the platform, held Tony's hand, held the soft hand of Lettice, said
good-bye . . . and watched the station lights glide past as he left them
standing there together, side by side.


