

One incident, however,--trivial, yet pregnant with significant
revelation,--remained vividly outside the dream.  The Play behind broke
through, as it were; an actor forgot his role, and involved another actor;
for an instant the masquerade tripped up, and merged with the commonplace
reality of daily life.  Explicit disclosure lay in the trifling matter.

They supplied a touch of comedy, but of rather ghastly comedy, ludicrous
and at the same time painful--those smart, new yellow gloves that Tony put
on when he climbed into the sand-cart and took the reins.  His donkey had
gone lame, he abandoned it to the boys behind, he climbed in to drive with
Lettice.  Tom, riding beside the cart, witnessed the entire incident; he
laughed as heartily as either of the others; he felt it, however, as _she_
felt it--a new sudden spiritual proximity to her proved this to him.
Both shrank--from something disagreeable and afflicting.  The hands looked
somehow dreadful.

For the first time Tom realised the physiognomy of hands--that hands,
rather than faces, should be photographed; not merely that they seemed now
so large, so spread, so ugly, but that somehow the glaring canary yellow
subtly emphasised another aspect that was distasteful and unpleasant--an
undesirable aspect in their owner.  The cotton was atrocious.  So obvious
was it to Tom that he felt pity before he felt disgust.  The obnoxious
revelation was so palpable.  He was aware that he felt ashamed--for
Lettice.  He stared for a moment, unable to move his eyes away.
The next second, lifting his glance, he saw that she, too, had noticed it.
With a flash of keen relief, he was aware that she, like himself, shrank
visibly from the distressing half-sinister revelation that was betrayal.

The hands, cased in their ridiculous yellow cotton, had physiognomy.
Upon the pair of them, just then, was an expression not to be denied:
of furtiveness, of something sly and unreliable, a quality not to be
depended on through thick and thin, able to grasp for themselves but not
to hold--for others; eager to take, yet incompetent to give.  The hands
were selfish, mean and unprotective.  It was a remarkable disclosure of
innate duality hitherto concealed.  Their physiognomy dropped a mask the
face still wore.  The hands looked straight at Lettice; they assumed a
sensual leer; they grinned.

'One second,' Tony cried, 'the reins hurt my fingers,'--and had drawn from
his pocket the gloves and quickly slipped them on--canary yellow--cotton!

'Oh, oh!' exclaimed Lettice, 'but how can you!  It's ghastly . . . for a
man . . .!'  She stared a moment, as though fascinated, then turned her
eyes away, flicking the whip in the air and laughing--a trifle nervously.

Why the innocent, if vulgar, scraps of clothing should have been so
revealing was hard to say.  That they were incongruous and out of place in
the Desert was surely an inconsiderable thing, that they were possibly in
bad taste was of even less account.  It was something more than that.
It came in a second of vivid intuition--so, at least, it seemed to Tom,
and therefore perhaps to Lettice too--that he saw his cousin's soul behind
the foolish detail.  Tony had put his soul upon his hands--and the hands
were somewhere cheap and worthless.

So difficult was it to catch the elusive thought in language, that Tom
certainly used none of the adjectives that flashed unbidden across his
mind; he assuredly thought neither of 'coarse,' 'untrustworthy,' nor of
'false' or 'nasty'--yet the last named came probably nearest to expressing
the disquieting sensation that laid its instant pressure upon his nerves,
then went its way again.  It was disturbing in a very searching way; he
felt uneasy for _her_ sake.  How could he leave her with the owner of
those hands, the wearer of those appalling yellow cotton gloves!
The laughter in him was subtle mockery.  For, of course, he laughed at
himself for such an absurd conclusion. . . .  Yet, somehow, those gloves
revealed the man, betrayed him mercilessly!  The hands were naked--they
were stained.

It was just then that her exclamation of disapproval interrupted Tom's
curious sensations.  It came with welcome.  'Thank Heavens!' a voice cried
inside him. . . .  'She feels it too!'

'But my sister sent them to me,' Tony defended himself, 'sent them from
London.  They're the latest thing at home!'  He was laughing at himself.
At the same time he was shifting the responsibility as usual.

Lettice laughed with him then, though her laughter held another note that
was not merriment.  He felt disgust, resentment in her.  There was no
pity there.  Tony had missed a cue--the entire Play was blocked.
The 'hero' stirred contempt in place of admiration.  But more--the
incident confirmed, it seemed, much else that had preceded it.  Her eyes
were opened.

The conflict of pain and joy in Tom was most acute.  His entire
sacrifice--for an instant--trembled in a hair-like balance.  For the
capital role stood gravely endangered in her eyes.

'Take them off, Tony!  Put them away!  Hide them!  I couldn't trust you to
drive me with such things on your hands.  A man in yellow canary cotton!'

All three laughed together, and Tom, watching the trivial incident, as he
rode beside them, saw her seize one hand and pull the glove off by the
fingers.  It seemed she tore a mask from one side of his face--the face
beneath was disfigured.  The glove fell into the bottom of the cart, then
caught the loose rein and was jerked out upon the sand.  The next second,
something of covert fury in the gesture, Tony had taken off the other and
tossed it to keep company with the first.  Both hands showed naked: the
entire face was bare.  Tom looked away.

'They _are_ hideous rather, I admit,' exclaimed Tony.  'The donkey boys can
pick them up and wear them.'  And there was mortification in his tone and
manner; almost--he was found out.



It was the memory of this pregnant little incident that held persistently
before Tom's mind now, as the train bore him the long night through
between the desert and the river that were Egypt.  The bigger crowding
pictures, scenes and sentences, thronged panorama of the recent weeks, lay
in hiding underneath; but it was the incident of those yellow gloves that
memory tossed up for ever before his eyes.  He clung to it in spite of
himself.  Imagination played its impish pranks.  What did it portend?
Removing gloves was the first act in undressing, it struck him.  Tony had
dressed up for the Play, the Play was over, he must put off, piece by
piece, the glamour he had worn so successfully for his passionate role.
Once off the stage, the enchantment of the limelight, the scenery, the
raiment of gold that left a perfume of ambra in the air--all the assumed
allurements he had borrowed must be discarded.  The Tony of the Play
withdrew, the real Tony stood discovered, undressed--by no means
admirable.  No longer on the boards, walking like a king, with the regal
fascination of an older day, he would pass along the busy street
unnoticed, unadorned, bereft of the high distinction that imagination, so
strangely stirred, had laid upon him for a little space. . . .  The yellow
gloves lay now upon the desert sand; perhaps the whirling tempest tossed
them to and fro, perhaps it buried them; perhaps the Arab boys, proud of
the tinsel they mistook for gold, now wore them in their sleep, lying on
beds of rushes beneath the flat-roofed houses of sun-baked clay. . . .

This vivid detail kept the heavier memories back at first; somehow the
long review of his brief Egyptian winter blocked each time against a pair
of stooping shoulders and a pair of yellow cotton gloves.

During the voyage of four days, however, followed then the inevitable
cruel aftermath of doubt, suspicion, jealousy he had fancied long since
overthrown.  A hundred incidents and details forced themselves upon him
from the past--glances, gestures, phrases, such little things and yet so
pregnant with delayed or undelivered meaning.  The meanings rose
remorselessly to the surface now.

All belonged to the first days in Egypt before he noticed anything; the
mind worked backwards to their gleaning.  They had escaped his attention
at the time, yet the mind had registered them none the less.  He did not
seek their recovery, but the series offered itself, compelling him to
examine one and all, demanding that he should pass judgment.  He forced
them back, they leaped up again on springs; the resilience was due to
their life, their truth; they were not to be denied.  There was no
escape. . . .

All pointed to the same conclusion: the month spent alone with Tony had
worked the mischief before his own arrival--by the time he came upon the
scene the new relationship was in full swing beyond her power to stop it.
Heavens, he had been blind!  Ceaselessly, endlessly, he made the circle of
alternate pain and joy, of hope and despair, of doubt and confidences--yet
the ideal in him safe beyond assault.  He believed in her, he trusted, and
he--hoped.

The most poignant test, however, came when port was reached and the
scented land-wind met his nostrils with the--Spring.  He saw the harbour
with its white houses shining in the early April sunshine; the blue sea
recalled a wide-shored lake among the mountains: he saw the sea-gulls,
heard the lapping of the waves against the shipping. . . .

He took the train to a little town along the coast, meaning to stay there
a day or two before facing London, where the dismantling of the Brown Flat
and the search for work awaited him.  And there the full-blooded spring of
this southern climate took him by the throat.  The haze, the sweet moist
air, the luscious fields, the woods and flowery roads, above all the
singing birds--this biting contrast with the dry, blazing desert skies of
tawny Egypt was dislocating.  The fierce glare of perpetual summer seemed
a nightmare he had left behind; he came back to the sweet companionship of
friendly life in field and tree and flower.

The first soft shower of rain, the first long twilight, the singing of the
thrushes after dark, the light in the little homestead windows--he felt
such intimate kindness in it all that the tears rose to his eyes.
He longed to share it with her . . . there was no joy in life without
her. . . .  Egypt lay behind him with its awful loneliness, its stern,
forbidding emptiness, its nightmare sunsets, its cruel desert, its
appalling vastness in which everything had already happened.  Thebes was a
single, enormous tomb; his past lay buried there; from the solemn,
mournful, desolate hills he had escaped. . . .  He emerged into a smiling
land of running streams and flowers.  His new life was beginning like the
Spring.  It gushed everywhere, reminding him of another Spring he had
known among the mountains. . . .  The 'sum of loss' he counted minute by
minute, hour by hour, day by day.  He began the long, long
reckoning. . . .

He felt intolerably alone.  The hunger and yearning in his heart seemed
more than he could bear.  This beauty . . . without her beside him,
without her to share the sweet companionship of the earth . . . was too
much to bear.  For one minute with her beside him in the meadows, picking
flowers, listening to the birds, her blue veil flying in the wet mountain
wind--he would have given all his life, his past, his future, everything
that mind and heart held precious. . . .  In the middle of which and at
its darkest moment came the certain knowledge with a joy that broke in
light and rapture on his soul--that she _was_ beside him because she was
within him. . . .  He approached the impersonal, selfless attitude to
which the attainment of an ideal alone is possible.  She had been added to
him. . . .


