

The silence, meanwhile, was like the silence that death brings.
He clung tenaciously to his ideal, yet he thought of her daily, nightly,
hourly.  She was really never absent from his thoughts.  He starved, yet
perhaps he did not know he starved. . . .  The days grew into weeks with a
grinding, dreadful slowness.  He had written from the steamer, explaining
briefly that he was called to England.  He had written a similar line to
Tony too.  No answers came.

Yet the silence was full of questions.  The mystery of her Egyptian
infatuation remained the biggest one of all perhaps.  But there were
others, equally insistent.  Did he really possess her in a way that made
earthly companionship unnecessary?  Had he lasting joy in this ideal
possession?  Was it true that an ideal once attained, its prototype
becomes unsatisfying?  Did he deceive himself?  And had not her strange
experience after all but ripened and completed her nature, provided
something she had lacked before, and blended the Mother and the Woman into
the perfect mate his dream foretold and his heart's deep instinct
prophesied?

He heard many answers to these questions; his heart made one, his reason
made another.  It was the soft and urgent Spring, however, with its
perfumed winds, its singing birds, its happy message breaking with
tumultuous life--it was the Spring on those wooded Mediterranean shores
that whispered the compelling truth.  He needed her, he yearned.
An ideal, on this earth, to retain its upward lure, must remain--an ideal.
Attainment in the literal sense destroys it.  His arms were hungry and his
heart was desolate.  Then one day he knew the happy yet unhappy feeling
that she suffered too.  He felt her thoughts about him like soft
birds. . . .

And he wrote to her:  'I should just like to know that you are well--and
happy.' He addressed it to the Bungalow.  The same day, chance had it, he
received word from her, forwarded from the Semiramis Hotel in Cairo.
She wrote two lines only: 'Tom, the thing I had to tell you about was--
Warsaw.  It is over.  As you said, it is better written, perhaps, than
told.  Yours, L.'

Egypt came flooding through the open window as he laid the letter down;
the silence, the desert spaces, the perfume and the spell.  He saw one
thing clearly in that second, for he saw it in a flash.  The secret of her
trouble that last day in Luxor was laid bare--the knowledge that within a
few hours she would be free.  To Tom she could not easily tell it;
delicacy, modesty, pride forbade.  Her long, painful duty, faithfully
fulfilled these many years, was over.  Her world had altered, opened out.
Values, of course, had instantly altered too; she saw what was real and
what ephemeral; she looked at Tony and she looked at--himself.  She could
speak to Tony--it was easier, it did not matter--but she could not so
easily speak to Tom.  The yellow gloves of cotton! . . . His heart leaped
within him. . . .

He stared out of the window across the blue Mediterranean with its
dancing, white-capped waves; he saw the white houses by the harbour; he
watched the whirling sea-gulls and tasted the fresh, salt air.
How familiar it all was!  Of her whereabouts at that moment he had no
knowledge; she might be on the steamer, gazing at the same dancing waves;
she might be in Warsaw or in London even; she might pass by the windows of
the Brown Flat. . . .

He turned aside, closing the window.  Egypt withdrew, the glamour waned,
the ancient spell seemed lifted.  He thought of those Theban Hills without
emotion.  Yet something in him trembled; he yearned, he ached, he longed
with all the longing of the Spring.  He wavered--oh, deliciously . . .!
He was glad, radiantly glad, that she had written.  Only--he dared not, he
could not answer. . . .

Yet big issues are decided sometimes by paltry and ignoble influences
when sturdier considerations produce no effect.  It is the contrast
that furnishes the magic.  It was contrast, doubtless, that swayed
Tom's judgment in the very direction he had decided was prohibited.
His surroundings at the moment supplied the contrast, for these
surroundings were petty and ignoble--they drove him by the distress of
sheer disgust into the world of larger values he had known with her.
Probably, he did not discover this consciously for himself: the result, in
any case, was logical and obvious.  Values changed suddenly for him, too,
both in his outlook and his judgment.

For he was spending a few days with his widowed sister, she who had been
playmate to Lettice years ago; and the conditions of her life and mind
distressed him.  He had seen her name in a hotel list of Mentone; he
surprised her with a visit; he was received with inexplicable coldness.
His tie with her was slight, her husband, a clergyman, little to his
liking; he had not been near them for several years.  The frigid
reception, however, had a deeper cause, he felt; his curiosity was piqued.

His sister's chart of existence, indeed, was too remote from his own for
true sympathy to be possible, and her married life had not improved her.
They had drifted apart without openly acknowledging it.  There was no
quarrel, but there was a certain bitterness between them.  She had a
marked _faiblesse_, strange in one securely born, for those nominally in
high places that, while disingenuous enough, jarred painfully always on
her brother.  God was unknown to her, although her husband preached most
familiarly concerning Him.  She had never seen the deity, but an Earl was
a living reality, and often very useful.  This banal weakness, he now
found, had increased in widowhood.  Tom hid his extreme distaste--and
learned the astonishing reason for her coldness.  It was Mrs. Haughstone.
It took his breath away.  He was too amazed to speak.

How clearly he understood her conduct now in Egypt!  For Mrs. Haughstone
had spread stories of the Bungalow, pernicious stories of an incredible
kind, yet with just sufficient basis of apparent truth to render them
plausible--plausible, that is, to any who were glad of an excuse to
believe them against himself.  These stories by a round-about way,
gathering in circumstantial detail as they travelled, had reached his
sister.  She wished to believe them, and she did.  Certain relatives,
moreover, of meagre intelligence but highly placed in the social world,
and consequently of great importance in her life, were remotely affected
by the lurid tales.  A report in full is unnecessary, but Mary held that
the family honour was stained.  It was an incredible imbroglio.  Tom was
so overwhelmed by this revelation of the jealous woman's guile, and the
light it threw upon her role in Egypt, that he did not even trouble to
defend himself.  He merely felt sorry that his sister could believe such
tales--and forgave her without a single word.  He saw in it all another
scrap of evidence that the Wave had indeed fallen, that his life
everywhere, and from the most unlikely directions, was threatened, that
all the most solid in the structure he had hitherto built up and leaned
upon, was crumbling--and must crumble utterly--in order that it might rise
secure upon fresh foundations.

He faced it, but faced it silently.  He washed his hands of all concerned;
he had learned their values too; he now looked forward instead of behind;
that is, he forgot, and at the same time utterly--forgave.

But the effect upon him was curious.  The stagnant ditch his sister lived
in had the result of flinging him headlong back into the larger stream he
had just left behind him; in that larger world things happened indeed,
things unpleasant, cruel, mysterious, amazing--but yet not little things.
The scale was vaster, horizons wider, beauty and wonder walked hand in
hand with love and death.  The contrast shook him; the trivial blow had
this immense effect, that he yearned with redoubled passion for the region
in which bigger ideals with their prototypes, however broken, existed side
by side.

This yearning, and the change involved, remained subtly concealed,
however.  He was not properly conscious of it.  Other very practical
considerations, it seemed, influenced him; his money was getting low; he
had luckily sublet the flat, but the question of work was becoming
insistent.  There was much to be faced. . . .  A month had slipped by, it
was five weeks since he had left Egypt.  He decided to go to London.
He telegraphed to the Club for his letters--he expected important ones--to
be sent to Paris, and it was in a small high room on the top floor of a
second-rate hotel across the Seine that he found them waiting for him.
It was here, in this dingy room, that he read the wondrous words.
The letter had lain at his Club three days, it was dated Switzerland and
the postmark was Montreux.  It was in pencil, without beginning and
without end; his name, the signature did not appear:

     Your little letter has come--yes, I am well, but happy I am not.
     I went to the Semiramis and found that you had sailed, sailed without
     even a good-bye.  I have come here, here to familiar little Montreux
     by the blue lake, where we first knew the Spring together.
     I can't say anything, I can't explain anything.  You must never ask
     me to explain; Egypt changed me--brought out something in me I was
     helpless to resist.  It was something perhaps I needed.
     I struggled--perhaps you can guess how I struggled, perhaps you
     can't.  I have suffered these past weeks, I believe that I have
     expiated something.  The power that drove me is exhausted, and that
     is all I know.  I have worked it out.  I have come back.  There is
     no blame for others--for any one; I can't explain.  Your little
     letter has come, and so I write.  Help me, oh, help me in years to
     find my respect again, and try to love the woman you once knew--knew
     here in Montreux beside the lake, long ago in our childhood days,
     further back still, perhaps, though where I do not know.  And, Tom--
     tell me how you are.  I must know that.  Please write and tell me
     that.  I can bear it no longer.  If anything happened to you I should
     just turn over and die.  You have been true and very big, oh, so true
     and big.  I see it now. . . .

Tom did not answer.  He took the night train.  He was just in time to
catch the Simplon Express from the Gare de Lyon.  He reached Montreux at
seven o'clock, when the June sun was already high above the Dent du Midi
and the lake a sheet of sparkling blue.  He went to his old hotel.  He saw
the swans floating like bundles of dry paper, he saw the whirling
sea-gulls, he obtained his former room.  And spring was just melting into
full-blown summer upon the encircling mountains.

It was still early when he had bathed and breakfasted, too early for
visitors to be abroad, too early to search. . . .  He could settle to
nothing; he filled the time as best he could; he smoked and read an
English newspaper that was several days old at least.  His eyes took in
the lines, but his mind did not take in the sense--until a familiar name
caught his attention and made him keenly alert.  The name was Anthony
Winslowe.  He remembered suddenly that Tony had never replied to his
letter. . . .  The paragraph concerning his cousin, however, dealt with
another matter that sent the blood flaming to his cheeks.  He was
defendant in the breach of promise suit brought by a notorious London
actress, then playing in a popular revue.  The case had opened; the
letters were already produced in court--and read.  The print danced before
his eyes.  The letters were dated last October and November, just before
Tony had come out to Egypt, and with crimson face Tom read them.  It was
more than distressing, it was afflicting--the letters tore an established
reputation into a thousand pieces.  He could not finish the report; he
only prayed that another had not seen it. . . .

It was eleven o'clock when he went out and joined the throng of people
sunning themselves on the walk beside the lake.  The air was sweet and
fresh, there were sailing-boats upon the water, the blue mountains lifted
their dazzling snow far, far into the summer sky.  He leaned over the rail
and watched the myriads of tiny fishes, he watched the swans, he saw the
dim line of the Jura hills in the hazy distance, he heard the muffled beat
of a steamer's paddle-wheels a long way off.  And then, abruptly, he was
aware that some one touched him; a hand in a long white glove was on his
arm; there was a subtle perfume; two dark eyes looked into his; and he
heard a low familiar voice:

'One day we shall find each other in a crowd.'

Tom was amazingly inarticulate.  He just turned and looked down at her,
moving a few inches closer as he did so.  She wore a black boa; the fur
touched his cheek.

'You have come back,' he said.

There was a new wonder in her face, a soft new beauty.  The woman in her
glowed. . . .  He saw the suffering plainly too.

'We have both found out,' she said very low, 'found out what we are to one
another.'

Tom's supply of words failed completely then.  He looked at her--looked
all the language in the world.  And she understood.  She lowered her eyes.
'I feel shy,' he thought he heard.  It was murmured only.  The next minute
she raised her eyes again to his.  He saw them dark and beautiful, tender
as his mother's, true and faithful, as in his boyhood's dream of years
ago.  But they were now a woman's eyes.

'I never really left you, Tom . . .' she said with absolute conviction.
'I never could.  I went aside . . . to fetch something--to give to you.
That was all!'



THE END







