{"name": "Chapter 27", "summary": "Chapter 27 Summary In her journal of 1st November, Mina records that the women in the village makes the sign of the cross each time they see Mina, because of the red scar on her forehead. She has decided to wear a veil in order to avoid that. Van Helsing is worried about Mina because not only she cannot be hypnotized but also because she was becoming healthier and redder. So Van Helsing makes a ring around her and puts some holy wafer on it. Suddenly, from the mist the three women that Jonathan had seen in the castle tries to entice Mina, but they cannot come in because of the Holy ring. Inside an old chapel, Van Helsing finds three graves and he finds the three beautiful women who are vampires. He severs their heads. Suddenly, Van Helsing sees a band of gypsies carrying a carriage with a big chest, which he surmised, was Draculas coffin. He sees two horsemen, Quincey and John following them, and on the other side they see Jonathan and Arthur following. A battle ensues between he gypsies and them. Jonathan rushes up to the chest with Quincey Morris and plunges the knife into the heart of Dracula and Dracula dies. But Quincey is wounded and dies crying, \"now god be thanked that all has not been in vain\" and dies. Seven years later, a son is born to the Harkers on the day Quincey died, whom they call Quincey Van Helsing. They burn rest of all the evidence, as they believe no one will believe them, and they live happily ever after. Notes This chapter is the final climax in which the last battle takes place. There is plenty of action in this chapter from the holy ring around Mina, to the women vampires, who are vanquished by Van Helsing. Dracula is killed but, unfortunately, Quincey Morris also dies. The ring around Mina symbolizes God and is a weapon used against Satan/ Dracula/ women vampires. This ring protects Mina. The final confrontation, however, is slightly one-sided. Dracula, being a super-villain following the epic like structure of having superhuman qualities, except in thing that he is a villain. The band of men vanquishes him when he lies in his coffin unable to do anything. His powers do not help him and so he is easily vanquished. The last chapter of Dracula also emphasizes the courage of the men in the band who are all out to save the world. This act is slightly personalized through Mina, as beside Mina, they fight to save the world and her especially. Therefore, this chapter is the result and the final product made through linking all the links in all the chapters. It is the final outcome.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820041120/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmDracula34.asp"}