{"name": "Chapter 61", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 61, Esther is visting Ada daily, and is hugely concerned about the young couple. Skimpole is in evidence around the Carstone household, and Esther thinks he is again having a bad influence on Richard. The silly attitude of Skimpole also grates on Esther, considering Ada's poor situation and spirits. PARAGRAPH>Esther confronts Skimpole and says that she knows he accepted a bribe for betraying Jo to Inspector Bucket. Skimpole tries to wiggle out of it, but finally decides, under Esther's influence, that Skimpole does more harm than good. Skimpole is renounced. PARAGRAPH>Richard continues to pursue his Chancery suit, and sinks into an even deeper physical decline. One night, Allan walks with Esther and confesses his love. Esther is still engaged to Jarndyce, so she reproaches herself for any delight or desire in Woodcourt. She tells Allan that she is not free to think of his love. Allan accepts this, and pledges to still attend to Richard", "analysis": "The mystery plot having been resolved, a new plot -- Esther's love -- reaches a boiling point.  The date is set for Esther and Jarndyce's wedding, but the love of Allan Woodcourt for Esther, which he has exposed, complicates her happiness terrifically.  Meanwhile, the situation for Ada is becoming not unlike the brickmaker's wife, Jenny, though her husband is addicted to Chancery rather than alcohol.  Woodcourt remains a good helper, but he is not able to save Richard.  No one is.<PARAGRAPH>Skimpole's exposure is particulary satisfying, especially now that he has given over to psychically torturing Ada with his \"lightness.\"<PARAGRAPH>Allan's confession of love is no big surprise, but Esther's reaction, even for a Victorian novel, is perhaps a touch too restrained.  She makes her struggle quite clear for the reader, though, recalling her status as an orphan who lacked  a family's care until that was given her by the generosity of Jarndyce.  She feels that, in this light, she is not free to love Woodcourt, but we feel that she must do so.  Her reaction -- hurrying her own wedding to one man because she loves another -- is indicative of her feelings.<PARAGRAPH>The stunning discovery of the will in Jarndyce in the confusion of Krook's shop brings the Jarndyce suit finally near to its end.  It underscores the irony of Chancery justice that buried among the worthless piles of documents in Krook's abode there was the key to the case all along.  There is a glimmer of hope for Richard, but all the signs have pointed through the entire novel of the hopelessness of this cause.<PARAGRAPH>The episode of Rouncewell going to see his brother ties up the loose ends of this functional, happy family.  They are rewarded with happy endings because of their virtue and loyalty.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421025427/https://www.gradesaver.com/bleak-house/study-guide/summary-chapters-60-63"}