{"name": "Chapter 2", "summary": "Chapter 2 Summary Jonathan Harker continues his journal. On May 5, Jonathan Harker recalls that his first glance of the castle is very grim. A tall old man with a long white mustache, clad in black greets him in excellent English, but with a strange accent. His touch is as cold as ice. He is Count Dracula. Jonathan is relieved of all his fears by Count Dracula's warm greeting and the excellent food served on the table. What is very apparent in Dracula is his long sharp, white teeth. He seems to relish the howling of the wolves. Jonathan feels his fear coming back. On May 7, Jonathan notices that there are no servants and no mirrors. In the library, there were a vast number of English books. Dracula enters the room and in conversation with Jonathan he tells about Transylvania. They talk about business and the purchase of Dracula's estate in England. After Dracula leaves the room, Jonathan finds an atlas, in which in the map of England. There are little rings, marking Dracula's new estate in England, Exeter and Whitby. On May 8, Jonathan talks about the strange fear he is experiencing. He tells how, when he was shaving, Dracula enters the room but his reflection is not visible in the mirror. That startles Jonathan and he cuts himself. As blood trickles down his chin, the Count looks at the blood almost like a demon and makes a grab at his throat, but the crucifix around Jonathan's neck thwarts him. Dracula says, \"Take care, take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country.\" \"And this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!\" Dracula then grabs the mirror and throws it out the window in anger and leaves. Jonathan realizes that the castle is a prison for him. Notes This chapter introduces the character of Count Dracula. The Count is a typical urbane gentleman based in Europe. His English is excellent though with a slight accent. His general knowledge is immense and he is an excellent conversationalist. By face value, he is like any other man but the undercurrents of peculiarity are present. In this chapter, except for the strange episode of Jonathan's shaving and Dracula grabbing his throat and then throwing the mirror out nothing is amiss. But what is important, in this chapter, are the seemingly innocent rings around the estates in London in the atlas. This will be important in the other chapters based in England Jonathan. Harper is a prisoner and he realizes it, as there are no exits in the castle. This is the beginning of the tale of horror in Jonathan's life. The Count has made a grab far Jonathan's throat. This is his first attack where he shows just a glimpse of his true self to Jonathan. Jonathan is horrified. He senses he is in deep trouble.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820041120/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmDracula09.asp"}