{"name": "Chapter 5", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 5<PARAGRAPH>On the way to Mrs. Spencer's house, Marilla asks Anne to tell her about her childhood. Anne tells Marilla that she is eleven years old and originally from Bolingbroke, Nova Scotia. Her mother and father were both teachers. When they had Anne, they were \"a pair of babies and as poor as church mice\". Anne's mother and father died of fever when Anne was 3 months old. Anne did not have any relatives nearby, so a poor woman named Mrs. Thomas took her in. Mrs. Thomas had a husband who was a drunk and four children younger than Anne who Anne looked after until she was eight years old. At that time, Mrs. Thomas's husband died and his mother said that Mrs. Thomas and her biological children could move in with her, but not Anne. PARAGRAPH>Anne moved to the home of a woman named Mrs. Hammond, who took in Anne because she had heard Anne could care for young children well. Life was very difficult for Anne during this time because Mrs. Hammond had eight children including three sets of twins. After two years, Mrs. Hammond's husband died and Mrs. Hammond moved to the United States. Anne had to go to the orphan asylum, where she lived for four months until Mrs. Spencer came and took her away. PARAGRAPH>Marilla asks if Anne ever went to school. Anne responds that she went to school a very small amount when she was at Mrs. Thomas and Mrs. Hammond's houses, and she attended school while at the orphan asylum for four months. However, she says that she can read well and loves poetry. Marilla asks whether Mrs. Thomas and Mrs. Hammond were good to Anne, and Anne gives a mature and empathetic response about how each woman tried to be good but had their hands full. It is clear that Anne had a very difficult childhood bereft of love, education, and fun. Marilla begins to think that perhaps she and Matthew should take in Anne, who seems to be respectful and teachable", "analysis": "L. M. Montgomery makes an interesting and impactful choice by starting Anne of Green Gables with a chapter from the perspective of Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Mrs. Rachel Lynde is a supporting character throughout the novel, but most of the chapters follow the actions of Anne, Marilla, and Matthew. Montgomery's choice to start with a chapter about Mrs. Rachel Lynde acclimates the reader to the culture of Avonlea, particularly the fact that things that are out of the norm will quickly be noticed and gossiped about. This is important for the reader to have in mind when Anne arrives in Avonlea a few chapters later because Anne is sensitive about feeling different from others and wants more than anything to feel accepted.<PARAGRAPH>Marilla and Mrs. Rachel Lynde display a variety of prejudices when discussing Marilla and Matthew's decision to take in an orphan boy. Mrs. Rachel Lynde feels that taking in an orphan is a bad idea and tells multiple stories about orphans causing havoc in their adopted families' homes. Those who end up as orphans are likely those from lower-income backgrounds since their parents may not be able to afford consistent health care or work dangerous jobs. Therefore, the reader may infer that Mrs. Rachel Lynde believes lower-income people are more likely to cause problems in a community. Marilla also shows prejudice against those from other countries, a practice known as xenophobia. Marilla says, \"There's never anybody to be had but those stupid, half-grown little French boys...no London street Arabs for me...Give me a native born at least...I'll feel easier in my mind and sleep sounder at nights if we get a born Canadian\" . It is likely that Marilla holds these views due to the fact that she has seldom traveled outside of Avonlea and may find the customs of foreigners unfamiliar.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery causes readers to feel sympathy for Anne through dramatic irony as Anne and Matthew travel from the train station to Green Gables. The reader knows that Marilla and Matthew wanted an orphan boy to help Matthew on the farm, and Matthew thinks to himself that they will have to send her back to the orphanage. However, Anne does not know this and speaks with happiness and awe, telling Matthew, \"I've never had a real home since I can remember. It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home\" . Experiencing this irony makes the moment when Anne finds out she will be able to stay at Green Gables all the more impactful for the reader.<PARAGRAPH>From the beginning of her time in Avonlea, Anne is very self-conscious of her appearance making her different, which she sees as a negative thing. Anne asks Marilla whether they would want to keep her at Green Gables if she were beautiful and had brown hair, and she later tells Marilla that she doesn't pray to God because she thinks he gave her red hair on purpose. Since red hair is the rarest hair color, Anne has likely felt that she is different from everyone throughout her life. Having this difference on top of the neglect she faced due to being an orphan created a desire to try to fit in as much as possible. However, though Anne wants to fit in so that she will be accepted, it is actually her differences that make so many people in Avonlea love her.<PARAGRAPH>Anne has developed many defense mechanisms due to her traumatic and tumultuous childhood. Anne's main defense mechanism is using her imagination to distract her from sad situations. This serves her well much of the time, but sometimes it seems as if she were almost dissociating from reality, such as when the narrator says, \"Anne became more and more abstracted, eating mechanically, with her big eyes fixed unswervingly and unseeingly on the sky outside the window\" . Anne also elects not to experience certain things so that she will not have to go through the pain of missing them. As she explains, \"There is no use in loving things if you have to be torn from them, is there?\"  These defense mechanisms help Anne stay resilient through hard times, but as she settles into Green Gables and matures over the following years, she must learn to trust that she will not be abandoned again.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-8"}