{"name": "Chapter 17", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 17<PARAGRAPH>The next day, Diana comes to Green Gables to say goodbye to Anne. They profess love to one another and Anne takes a lock of Diana's hair to remember her by. They promise that even though they will have to act like strangers, they will be friends forever. The day after that, Anne comes down in the morning with her school books and tells Marilla she is going back to school so that she can still see Diana every day. Marilla is pleased but tries to conceal it. PARAGRAPH>At school, Anne is welcomed back happily by all of the other students. Many girls give her little gifts such as plums and a perfume bottle. Gilbert and Charlie both give Anne gifts as well, though Anne does not accept Gilbert's. Anne is upset that Diana does not look at her at all her first day back at school, but on her second day back at school, she finds a note from Diana saying that she misses her. Anne does not have any more behavioral issues at school and focuses intently on her studies because she wants to do better than Gilbert. PARAGRAPH>Anne and Gilbert are always at the top of the class, far ahead of other students in their grade. Anne must work very hard on math and spelling to try to do better than him. At the end of the term, both Anne and Gilbert are promoted to a higher class and start studying harder subjects, including geometry which Anne finds especially hard", "analysis": "For readers of the entire Anne of Green Gables series, there is a humorous irony in Anne's antagonistic relationship with Gilbert and declaration that she \"made up her mind to hate Gilbert Blythe to the end of life\" . In fact, in sequels to Anne of Green Gables, Anne and Gilbert marry and have seven children together. Nevertheless, this statement does foreshadow that Anne will stubbornly continue her antagonistic relationship with Gilbert until the end of the novel.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery's chapter titles often create suspense regarding what will happen next in the story. For example, the title of Chapter 16 is \"Diana Is Invited to Tea with Tragic Results\" . The title gives just enough information to create tension throughout the beginning of the chapter, but it does not spoil exactly what the tragic result will be. Similarly, Chapter 18, \"Anne to the Rescue\" , informs the reader that this chapter will have a positive and triumphant tone.<PARAGRAPH>Anne's imagination is a theme throughout Anne of Green Gables. Anne has developed a strong imagination as a coping technique due to the neglect and isolation she experienced in her childhood. Montgomery shows how Anne is able to start lowering her defenses once she feels loved and accepted. Earlier in the book, Anne tells Marilla that when she was living with various guardians who treated her like a servant, she would play with imaginary friends. She speaks quite fondly about these imaginary friends at that point in the novel. However, just after Diana has told Anne that she loves her in Chapter 17, Anne tells Marilla, \"Somehow, little dream girls are not satisfying after a real friend\" . Now that Anne's reality is mostly positive and affirming, she is able to live more in reality, rather than escaping into her mind.<PARAGRAPH>Though Anne's past was traumatic and negatively impacted her self-esteem and education, Montgomery also shows that difficult experiences can forge important skills and character traits. Montgomery demonstrates this in Chapter 18 when Anne is able to save Diana's younger sister's life due to having cared for her guardians' children from a young age. Anne herself says, \"I'm so glad Mrs. Hammond had three pairs of twins after all. If she hadn't I mightn't have known what to do for Minnie May\" . This shows Anne beginning to integrate her negative experiences into a positive image of herself as a capable and caring young woman.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-22"}