{"name": "Chapter 1", "summary": "Chapter 1<PARAGRAPH>The story begins by describing where Mrs. Rachel Lynde's home is located in a town called Avonlea. Mrs. Rachel likes to watch people going by outside her window so that she knows everything going on in Avonlea. Whenever she sees something that she finds odd, she always tries to figure out what is going on. One afternoon in early June, Mrs. Rachel sees a man who lives nearby, Matthew Cuthbert, driving a buggy out of town dressed in fancy clothes. This intrigues Mrs. Rachel Lynde because usually, at this time of year, Matthew Cuthbert would be sowing a field at his home, which is called Green Gables. She is also intrigued because Matthew Cuthbert is usually someone who stays home and keeps to himself. PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Rachel decides to go over to Green Gables to talk to a woman named Marilla about what Matthew is doing. Mrs. Rachel walks the quarter of a mile to Green Gables, criticizing how far the Cuthbert home is built from the main road. She believes this is because the family is shy and odd. As she approaches Green Gables, Mrs. Rachel notes that it is extremely clean. Mrs. Rachel sees Marilla in the kitchen, with three plates laid on the table. Mrs. Rachel surmises that Marilla and Matthew must be expecting company because only the two of them live at Green Gables. She thinks that they must not be expecting anyone very important because the food laid out is nothing fancy. PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Rachel knocks and Marilla lets her in politely. Marilla is described as tall and thin, with dark hair that has some streaks of gray. The narrator notes that she looks like she has a \"rigid conscience\"  and yet something about her mouth indicates that she has a sense of humor. Mrs. Rachel says that she has come over because she saw Matthew driving to town and thought he might be going for a doctor. Marilla says that Matthew went to the train station in Bright River to pick up an orphan boy coming from Nova Scotia. Mrs. Rachel is shocked. Marilla says that she and Matthew are taking in an orphan boy to help Matthew with work around the farm since Matthew is now 60 years old and has heart trouble. Matthew and Marilla thought about hiring a young man from France or London, but Marilla speaks disparagingly about this prospect and says she would prefer to have a \"native born\"  Canadian. Marilla and Matthew asked a woman named Mrs. Spencer to bring them an orphan boy who is 10 or 11 years old since there will still be time to train him. PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Rachel informs Marilla that she thinks this is a foolish and risky idea and tells Marilla a story of an orphan boy burning down a house. Marilla replies that even biological children have risks and that she thinks the orphan boy shouldn't be too different from them since he will be from nearby. Mrs. Rachel tells Marilla another story of an orphan girl who poisoned a well. Marilla responds that she would never dream of taking in an orphan girl. Mrs. Rachel would like to stay until Matthew comes home with the orphan, but she decides instead to go start spreading the gossip she has learned", "analysis": "L. M. Montgomery makes an interesting and impactful choice by starting Anne of Green Gables with a chapter from the perspective of Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Mrs. Rachel Lynde is a supporting character throughout the novel, but most of the chapters follow the actions of Anne, Marilla, and Matthew. Montgomery's choice to start with a chapter about Mrs. Rachel Lynde acclimates the reader to the culture of Avonlea, particularly the fact that things that are out of the norm will quickly be noticed and gossiped about. This is important for the reader to have in mind when Anne arrives in Avonlea a few chapters later because Anne is sensitive about feeling different from others and wants more than anything to feel accepted.<PARAGRAPH>Marilla and Mrs. Rachel Lynde display a variety of prejudices when discussing Marilla and Matthew's decision to take in an orphan boy. Mrs. Rachel Lynde feels that taking in an orphan is a bad idea and tells multiple stories about orphans causing havoc in their adopted families' homes. Those who end up as orphans are likely those from lower-income backgrounds since their parents may not be able to afford consistent health care or work dangerous jobs. Therefore, the reader may infer that Mrs. Rachel Lynde believes lower-income people are more likely to cause problems in a community. Marilla also shows prejudice against those from other countries, a practice known as xenophobia. Marilla says, \"There's never anybody to be had but those stupid, half-grown little French boys...no London street Arabs for me...Give me a native born at least...I'll feel easier in my mind and sleep sounder at nights if we get a born Canadian\" . It is likely that Marilla holds these views due to the fact that she has seldom traveled outside of Avonlea and may find the customs of foreigners unfamiliar.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery causes readers to feel sympathy for Anne through dramatic irony as Anne and Matthew travel from the train station to Green Gables. The reader knows that Marilla and Matthew wanted an orphan boy to help Matthew on the farm, and Matthew thinks to himself that they will have to send her back to the orphanage. However, Anne does not know this and speaks with happiness and awe, telling Matthew, \"I've never had a real home since I can remember. It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home\" . Experiencing this irony makes the moment when Anne finds out she will be able to stay at Green Gables all the more impactful for the reader.<PARAGRAPH>From the beginning of her time in Avonlea, Anne is very self-conscious of her appearance making her different, which she sees as a negative thing. Anne asks Marilla whether they would want to keep her at Green Gables if she were beautiful and had brown hair, and she later tells Marilla that she doesn't pray to God because she thinks he gave her red hair on purpose. Since red hair is the rarest hair color, Anne has likely felt that she is different from everyone throughout her life. Having this difference on top of the neglect she faced due to being an orphan created a desire to try to fit in as much as possible. However, though Anne wants to fit in so that she will be accepted, it is actually her differences that make so many people in Avonlea love her.<PARAGRAPH>Anne has developed many defense mechanisms due to her traumatic and tumultuous childhood. Anne's main defense mechanism is using her imagination to distract her from sad situations. This serves her well much of the time, but sometimes it seems as if she were almost dissociating from reality, such as when the narrator says, \"Anne became more and more abstracted, eating mechanically, with her big eyes fixed unswervingly and unseeingly on the sky outside the window\" . Anne also elects not to experience certain things so that she will not have to go through the pain of missing them. As she explains, \"There is no use in loving things if you have to be torn from them, is there?\"  These defense mechanisms help Anne stay resilient through hard times, but as she settles into Green Gables and matures over the following years, she must learn to trust that she will not be abandoned again.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-8"}