{"name": "Chapter 6", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 6<PARAGRAPH>Marilla and Anne arrive at Mrs. Spencer's house, to the surprise of Mrs. Spencer. When asked about the mix-up, Mrs. Spencer says that she was told the Cuthberts wanted a girl by the person who passed along Marilla's message. Mrs. Spencer tells Marilla that if she doesn't want to keep Anne, another woman named Mrs. Peter is looking for a young girl to watch her children. Marilla is worried about this idea because she has heard that Mrs. Peter had a terrible temper. Just then, Mrs. Peter approaches Mrs. Spencer's house. Mrs. Peter asks Anne her name and age and then tells Anne that she can start caring for her fussy baby right away. Marilla sees that Anne looks miserable and tells Mrs. Peter that she will have to take Anne back to Green Gables for at least the evening to discuss the situation with Matthew. Anne's face brightens when she hears Marilla say this, and when Mrs. Spencer and Mrs. Peter leave the room, Anne tells Marilla that she will do anything to stay at Green Gables. PARAGRAPH>Marilla and Anne return to Green Gables. Marilla tells Matthew about Anne's childhood and the offer Mrs. Peter made. Marilla and Matthew decide that Anne can stay with them and Marilla will raise her. Marilla tells Matthew that he must not interfere with Marilla's methods of raising a child, and Matthew agrees. Marilla decides not to tell Anne about staying at Green Gables until the next day", "analysis": "L. M. Montgomery makes an interesting and impactful choice by starting Anne of Green Gables with a chapter from the perspective of Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Mrs. Rachel Lynde is a supporting character throughout the novel, but most of the chapters follow the actions of Anne, Marilla, and Matthew. Montgomery's choice to start with a chapter about Mrs. Rachel Lynde acclimates the reader to the culture of Avonlea, particularly the fact that things that are out of the norm will quickly be noticed and gossiped about. This is important for the reader to have in mind when Anne arrives in Avonlea a few chapters later because Anne is sensitive about feeling different from others and wants more than anything to feel accepted.<PARAGRAPH>Marilla and Mrs. Rachel Lynde display a variety of prejudices when discussing Marilla and Matthew's decision to take in an orphan boy. Mrs. Rachel Lynde feels that taking in an orphan is a bad idea and tells multiple stories about orphans causing havoc in their adopted families' homes. Those who end up as orphans are likely those from lower-income backgrounds since their parents may not be able to afford consistent health care or work dangerous jobs. Therefore, the reader may infer that Mrs. Rachel Lynde believes lower-income people are more likely to cause problems in a community. Marilla also shows prejudice against those from other countries, a practice known as xenophobia. Marilla says, \"There's never anybody to be had but those stupid, half-grown little French boys...no London street Arabs for me...Give me a native born at least...I'll feel easier in my mind and sleep sounder at nights if we get a born Canadian\" . It is likely that Marilla holds these views due to the fact that she has seldom traveled outside of Avonlea and may find the customs of foreigners unfamiliar.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery causes readers to feel sympathy for Anne through dramatic irony as Anne and Matthew travel from the train station to Green Gables. The reader knows that Marilla and Matthew wanted an orphan boy to help Matthew on the farm, and Matthew thinks to himself that they will have to send her back to the orphanage. However, Anne does not know this and speaks with happiness and awe, telling Matthew, \"I've never had a real home since I can remember. It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home\" . Experiencing this irony makes the moment when Anne finds out she will be able to stay at Green Gables all the more impactful for the reader.<PARAGRAPH>From the beginning of her time in Avonlea, Anne is very self-conscious of her appearance making her different, which she sees as a negative thing. Anne asks Marilla whether they would want to keep her at Green Gables if she were beautiful and had brown hair, and she later tells Marilla that she doesn't pray to God because she thinks he gave her red hair on purpose. Since red hair is the rarest hair color, Anne has likely felt that she is different from everyone throughout her life. Having this difference on top of the neglect she faced due to being an orphan created a desire to try to fit in as much as possible. However, though Anne wants to fit in so that she will be accepted, it is actually her differences that make so many people in Avonlea love her.<PARAGRAPH>Anne has developed many defense mechanisms due to her traumatic and tumultuous childhood. Anne's main defense mechanism is using her imagination to distract her from sad situations. This serves her well much of the time, but sometimes it seems as if she were almost dissociating from reality, such as when the narrator says, \"Anne became more and more abstracted, eating mechanically, with her big eyes fixed unswervingly and unseeingly on the sky outside the window\" . Anne also elects not to experience certain things so that she will not have to go through the pain of missing them. As she explains, \"There is no use in loving things if you have to be torn from them, is there?\"  These defense mechanisms help Anne stay resilient through hard times, but as she settles into Green Gables and matures over the following years, she must learn to trust that she will not be abandoned again.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-8"}