{"name": "Chapter 25", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 25<PARAGRAPH>One day, when the Christmas concert is drawing near, Matthew sees Anne and her friends rehearsing and has a sudden thought that Anne looks different from the other girls. He first thinks it's something about her delicate, lively facial features, but after pondering it for a few hours, he realizes that Anne is not dressed like the other girls. Marilla always dresses Anne in plain colors, all in the same pattern, and never with puffed sleeves. Matthew decides that he will buy Anne a pretty dress and give it to her as a Christmas present. PARAGRAPH>Matthew goes to Carmody, a nearby town, to buy the material for the dress. When he and Marilla shop in Carmody, it is always at the store of a man called William Blair. However, Matthew will need advice about the fabric at the store, and he knows that women work at William Blair's store. Since Matthew petrified of talking to women, he decides to go instead to Lawson's, where he thinks only men work. To Matthew's chagrin, a woman has recently been hired to work at Lawson's, and Matthew is so flustered that he asks her for a number of things he does not actually need. He leaves the store without having bought the fabric, and when he gets home, Marilla is flabbergasted at his buying brown sugar when she rarely cooks with it. PARAGRAPH>Matthew decides he needs to ask a woman to deal with buying fabric and making the dress, so he goes to Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Mrs. Rachel is happy to help since she, too, has thought that Marilla makes Anne dress in clothes that are too plain. On Christmas Eve, Mrs. Rachel brings Anne's new dress to Green Gables. Marilla thinks to herself that she knew Matthew was up to something and that Anne will become even vainer with these ridiculously large puffed sleeves. The next morning, Matthew gives Anne the dress and she cries with joy. PARAGRAPH>After breakfast, Anne goes to Diana's house to wish her Merry Christmas and show her the dress. When she arrives, Diana shows Anne that Aunt Josephine sent Anne a gift: fancy slippers for Anne to wear in the Christmas concert. The Christmas concert goes off without a hitch, and the narrator even notes that \"Anne was the bright particular star of the occasion\". Diana tells Anne that her recitations were beautiful and moving and that she saw Gilbert pick up a flower that fell out of Anne's hair and put it in his pocket. Anne once again tells Diana never to speak to her about Gilbert. PARAGRAPH>At Green Gables, Matthew and Marilla both discuss how proud they are of Anne's performance. Matthew brings up that they will need to think about paying for Anne to go to school after finishing the courses at the Avonlea school, and Marilla says that it may be best to send her to Queen's teaching college. However, Marilla says they shouldn't talk to Anne about this for a year or two since she will only be thirteen in March", "analysis": "Miss Stacy is an important character in Anne of Green Gables because she is a double for Anne in many ways. Like Anne, Miss Stacy is a new and different kind of person in Avonlea. Unlike previous teachers at the Avonlea school, Miss Stacy's curriculum includes outdoor exploration, physical education, and writing stories. This is encouraging to Anne who already loves nature and stories, leading her to excel at school. Furthermore, Anne becomes a teacher at the Avonlea school herself at the end of the novel, and she is likely influenced and inspired by Miss Stacy's teaching style.<PARAGRAPH>Matthew's relationship with Anne is central in this section of the book. His positive and relaxed attitude with Anne contrasts with his awkward, flustered manner toward Anne's friends and with the shopkeeper in Carmody. This contrast demonstrates to the reader that there is something special about Anne: she can charm and befriend anyone. Matthew also understands Anne better than Marilla does in some ways, as shown in this section. He realizes how much having a pretty dress with puffed sleeves would mean to Anne because it would allow her to fit in with her friends--something Marilla has been too stubborn and moralistic to truly consider.<PARAGRAPH>Though Mrs. Rachel Lynde is originally presented as a nosy and judgmental character, in this section of the book it becomes clear that she is also wise and empathetic when it comes to raising children. Earlier in the book, she surprises Marilla--and perhaps the reader--by telling Marilla to let Anne stop going to school for a while. She reasons that Anne will only get in more trouble if she is forced to go to school. In this section, Mrs. Rachel Lynde agrees with Matthew that Anne should be allowed to wear pretty clothes that fit in with other young women in Avonlea, and she states that \"There's no hard and fast method in the world that'll suit every child\" .<PARAGRAPH>Anne and Diana's conversation on Anne's birthday shows how girls were constricted by norms of femininity and modesty in the early 20th century. For example, Diana says, \"Alice Bell is only sixteen and she is wearing her  up, but I think it's ridiculous. I shall wait until I'm seventeen\" . Anne is depicted as traditionally feminine in some ways, such as caring about her appearance and clothing, but she also does not conform to some norms of femininity at the time. For example, she is as smart or smarter than all the boys at her school, she is daring and adventurous, and she has no interest in dating boys.<PARAGRAPH>Anne's story about Cordelia and Geraldine is used by Montgomery to bring out the themes present in the novel as a whole. Female friendship is at the center of Anne's story, and Anne and Diana's friendship is a central component of Anne of Green Gables. Romance, marriage, and betrayal in the middle of Anne's story call attention to Anne's conflicted feelings about femininity and her relationship with Gilbert. Finally, Anne's story ends with death and insanity, which recalls Anne's traumatic childhood and foreshadows that a death will occur at the end of Anne of Green Gables.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-30"}