{"name": "Chapter 20", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 20<PARAGRAPH>Spring begins and Anne is entranced by the beautiful flowers blooming in Avonlea. Soon, it is June, and Anne asks Marilla one night if she knows what it is the anniversary of. Marilla doesn't remember, so Anne tells her: it has been one year since Anne came to Green Gables. Marilla does not make a big fuss over this, but the narratpr notes that Marilla \"sometimes wondered how she could have lived before Anne came\". PARAGRAPH>Marilla sends Anne to ask Mrs. Barry for a sewing pattern, and Anne says she doesn't want to because it is too dark and she is afraid to go through a wood which she has named the Haunted Wood. Anne has made up elaborate fantasies about the Haunted Wood that do not scare her during the day but make her to afraid to go into it at night. Marilla forces Anne to walk through the wood anyway. Anne fears the entire way to the Barry house that she will be grabbed by a goblin. On the way back from the Barry house, Anne keeps her eyes closed while she walks. When Anne returns, she says to Marilla that she won't imagine so much anymore", "analysis": "For readers of the entire Anne of Green Gables series, there is a humorous irony in Anne's antagonistic relationship with Gilbert and declaration that she \"made up her mind to hate Gilbert Blythe to the end of life\" . In fact, in sequels to Anne of Green Gables, Anne and Gilbert marry and have seven children together. Nevertheless, this statement does foreshadow that Anne will stubbornly continue her antagonistic relationship with Gilbert until the end of the novel.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery's chapter titles often create suspense regarding what will happen next in the story. For example, the title of Chapter 16 is \"Diana Is Invited to Tea with Tragic Results\" . The title gives just enough information to create tension throughout the beginning of the chapter, but it does not spoil exactly what the tragic result will be. Similarly, Chapter 18, \"Anne to the Rescue\" , informs the reader that this chapter will have a positive and triumphant tone.<PARAGRAPH>Anne's imagination is a theme throughout Anne of Green Gables. Anne has developed a strong imagination as a coping technique due to the neglect and isolation she experienced in her childhood. Montgomery shows how Anne is able to start lowering her defenses once she feels loved and accepted. Earlier in the book, Anne tells Marilla that when she was living with various guardians who treated her like a servant, she would play with imaginary friends. She speaks quite fondly about these imaginary friends at that point in the novel. However, just after Diana has told Anne that she loves her in Chapter 17, Anne tells Marilla, \"Somehow, little dream girls are not satisfying after a real friend\" . Now that Anne's reality is mostly positive and affirming, she is able to live more in reality, rather than escaping into her mind.<PARAGRAPH>Though Anne's past was traumatic and negatively impacted her self-esteem and education, Montgomery also shows that difficult experiences can forge important skills and character traits. Montgomery demonstrates this in Chapter 18 when Anne is able to save Diana's younger sister's life due to having cared for her guardians' children from a young age. Anne herself says, \"I'm so glad Mrs. Hammond had three pairs of twins after all. If she hadn't I mightn't have known what to do for Minnie May\" . This shows Anne beginning to integrate her negative experiences into a positive image of herself as a capable and caring young woman.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-22"}