{"name": "Chapter 33", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 33<PARAGRAPH>Anne and Diana get ready together for a concert at a hotel in Charlottetown. Anne is the only student from the Avonlea school who has been chosen to perform, and Diana instructs her on how to dress and style her hair for the occasion. Marilla comes to Anne's room and praises Anne as well, though she mixes in criticisms as usual. PARAGRAPH>A young man named Billy Andrews comes to pick up Anne and Diana. He asks Anne to sit in the front with him since she is so slim and beautiful. Anne finds Billy boring and spends the entire car ride talking to Diana and Jane. When they arrive at the hotel, Anne feels \"suddenly shy and frightened and countrified\". Anne becomes even more embarrassed when she hears the other performers talking about the \"country bumpkins\"  in the audience. PARAGRAPH>A professional elocutionist recites wonderfully, and Anne is rapt with attention. When the recitation ends, Anne is seized with panic, thinking her performance will pale in comparison. Anne is called to the stage and develops a terrible case of stage fright. However, when she sees Gilbert Blythe in the crowd, she tells herself that she can't fail in front of him. She recites so powerfully that she causes the other performers to cry and the audience to call her back for an encore. She does a comical recitation as her encore, which the crowd likes as well. PARAGRAPH>After the concert, the other performers, including the professional elocutionist, dote on Anne. Anne and her friends are invited to a supper for the performers. After the supper, they return to Billy's car and drive back to Avonlea. Jane tells Anne that she thinks her recitation was better than the professional's, and Diana tells Anne that a man in the audience said he would like to paint Anne. The girls spend the rest of the ride arguing about whether they would like to be rich; Anne argues, \"I don't want to be anyone but myself, even if I go uncomforted by diamonds all my life. I'm quite content to be Anne of Green Gables\"", "analysis": "This section of the book shows just how special Anne is. Not only is she one of the brightest students at the Avonlea school, but she also ties for first place on the entrance exam into Queen's College, which is taken by students from many different towns; on top of that, she goes on to win a scholarship to university, which at least fifty students were competing for. This is especially impressive since Anne had very little formal education before she was eleven. Anne's educational achievements demonstrate a moral of the story: that hard work and healthy rivalry can lead to success, even for people who have faced trauma or other hindrances.<PARAGRAPH>Time passes quickly in this final section of Anne of Green Gables. While the previous thirty chapters have described three years of Anne's life, her entire school year at Queen's passes in just three chapters. These chapters show how adaptable Anne is. She makes new friends, maintains her relationships with Marilla, Matthew, and Diana, and excels at her schoolwork. This is likely another positive coping skill that Anne gained due to her traumatic childhood. Because she moved to multiple houses and towns before age eleven, she had to learn how to make new relationships and find things in life to keep her happy and motivated. This is further evidence of the moral that people who have experienced trauma or difficulties can succeed in life.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery uses small symbols to show how Anne has changed Marilla and Matthew over the years she has been in their lives. In particular, Marilla's opinions on beauty and vanity have shifted. For example, Montgomery writes, \"In her own white room, where Marilla had set a flowering house rose on the window sill, Anne looked about her and drew a long breath of happiness\" . This contrasts with Marilla's earlier statements that flowers don't belong indoors and Anne's feelings that the bedroom at Green Gables was too plain and bare. Because beauty and nature have always been important to Anne, they have become important to Marilla, too.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery foreshadows Matthew's death at multiple points in Anne of Green Gables. First, the narrator says that the reason Marilla and Matthew are taking in an orphan boy is to help Matthew with farm work due to his declining health. Then, Marilla discusses Matthew's heart with both Anne and Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Finally, Montgomery heavily foreshadows Matthew's death at the end of Chapter 26 and the beginning of Chapter 27. Chapter 26 ends, \"Anne always remembered the silvery, peaceful beauty and fragrant calm of that night. It was the last night before sorrow touched her life; and no life is ever quite the same again when once that cold, sanctifying touch has been laid upon it\" . This is followed by the chapter title, \"The Reaper Whose Name Is Death\" . This foreshadowing prepares readers--particularly young readers--to cope with the difficult emotions around a central character dying.<PARAGRAPH>The end of Anne of Green Gables shows that stubbornness can be a negative and positive quality. Anne's stubbornness prevents her from having a positive relationship with Gilbert throughout their time at the Avonlea school and Queen's College. Anne only makes up with Gilbert after hearing a story from Marilla about how stubbornness led her to break up with Gilbert's father as a young girl. However, stubbornness is also shown to be a good quality through Anne's stubbornness about staying home at Green Gables and caring for Marilla. When Marilla is trying to convince Anne to go to university, Anne responds, \"You can't prevent me. I'm...'obstinate as a mule' as Mrs. Lynde once told me\" . In this case, stubbornness is not a matter of hubris, but rather devotion to a moral obligation.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-31-38"}