{"name": "Chapter 9", "summary": "Chapter 9<PARAGRAPH>After Anne has lived at Green Gables for a fortnight, Mrs. Rachel Lynde comes over to see what she is like. When she arrives, Anne is playing outside. Mrs. Rachel and Lynde talk for a little while. Mrs. Rachel still thinks it is a bad idea to keep an orphan girl in one's home, to which Marilla responds that Anne is already having a positive impact on the household. Marilla calls Anne inside to meet Mrs. Rachel Lynde. When Anne enters, Mrs. Rachel immediately begins to criticize her appearance, including her skinniness, freckles, and red hair. Anne is provoked by these insults, particularly regarding her red hair; she runs up to Mrs. Rachel, stamps her feet, and yells that she hates her. She also calls Mrs. Rachel rude and unfeeling, criticizing Mrs. Rachel's appearance. Marilla sends Anne to her room. Anne bursts into tears, runs up to her room, and slams the door. PARAGRAPH>Marilla tells Mrs. Rachel that she will give Anne a talking-to, but she adds that Mrs. Rachel should not have insulted her. Mrs. Rachel recommends that Marilla whip Anne with a switch and says that she may not be back to visit Marilla for a while. Mrs. Rachel leaves and Marilla goes up to Anne's bedroom. Marilla feels embarrassed at Anne's behavior and confused as to how she should punish Anne. She does not want to whip her, but she wants to make Anne understand that she did something wrong. Marilla tells Anne that she is ashamed of her. However, Marilla thinks back to a time when her appearance was insulted as a child and how long it took her to get over that comment. Marilla tells Anne that Mrs. Rachel was too outspoken, but she adds that Anne still should never behave poorly toward an elderly guest. Marilla tells Anne that she will have to apologize to Mrs. Rachel. Anne refuses, and Marilla says Anne will have to stay in the bedroom until she decides to apologize. Marilla leaves the room and is angry with herself because she finds that she feels like laughing when she recalls Mrs. Rachel's shocked face", "analysis": "In Chapter 9, we again see Anne's sensitivity about her looks when she yells at Mrs. Rachel Lynde after the older woman criticizes Anne's hair, freckles, and skinniness. This pattern will continue to get Anne into trouble throughout the book, such as when she attacks Gilbert at school after he makes fun of her hair, or when she tries to dye her hair black and ends up turning it green. For Anne, someone criticizing her looks is someone pointing out that she is different, and this makes Anne fear that she is unlovable.<PARAGRAPH>Anne's argument and apology to Mrs. Rachel Lynde also demonstrate Anne's unique ability to charm adults. First, the narrator says that Marilla is surprised at herself for defending Anne's actions to Mrs. Rachel Lynde, showing that Anne brings out a rare feistiness in Marilla. Though Marilla scolds herself, she finds herself wanting to laugh at Mrs. Rachel Lynde getting a taste of her own medicine. Then, Mrs. Rachel Lynde herself is charmed by Anne when the young girl apologizes. Mrs. Rachel Lynde remarks, \"She certainly is an odd child, but there is something kind of taking about her after all. I don't feel so surprised at you and Matthew keeping her as I did...On the whole, Marilla, I kind of like her\" . Anne's honest and emotional way of interacting with others may take people aback at first, but throughout the novel, almost everyone she meets ends up wanting to be her friend.<PARAGRAPH>L. M. Montgomery uses foreshadowing frequently in Anne of Green Gables. One example of this is when Marilla tells Anne, \"I guess Diana'll like you well enough. It's her mother you've got to reckon with. If she doesn't like you it won't matter how much Diana does\" . This quote foreshadows a major conflict later in the book when Diana's mother forbids Diana from being Anne's friend. By using foreshadowing, Montgomery creates tension, suspense, and curiosity throughout the novel.<PARAGRAPH>Another example of Montgomery's use of foreshadowing can be seen at the end of Chapter 13. Montgomery introduces the symbol of Marilla's amethyst brooch and specifically says that it \"was Marilla's most treasured possession\" . The narrator also notes that Anne was \"smitten with delighted admiration\"  and begged Marilla to hold it. This foreshadows the conflict between Anne and Marilla in Chapter 14 over whether Anne lost the amethyst brooch. The brooch is an important symbol because it represents Marilla's connection to her family. When Marilla thinks that Anne has lost the brooch, this temporarily ruptures the familial connection the two have been forging.<PARAGRAPH>Marilla's maternal feelings toward Anne grow rapidly during this section of the book, but we also see the deficits she has as a parent figure. Marilla tells Matthew that she can't imagine Green Gables without Anne, but she rarely says this kind of statement to Anne since she seems to think it would spoil her. This leads Anne to turn to Matthew for emotional support rather than Marilla. Marilla also has difficulty disciplining Anne. She is conflicted over whether to whip Anne following the conflict with Mrs. Rachel Lynde, and she tells Anne, \"You are the very wickedest girl I ever heard of\"  when she believes Anne lost her brooch. Though Anne does not react to this statement, it is important to remember that she was neglected and felt unloved throughout her childhood, so this kind of statement could confirm her feelings that she does not belong.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-9-14"}