{"name": "Chapter 37", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 37<PARAGRAPH>One day, Matthew falls down suddenly. Marilla and Anne try to rouse Matthew as their hired man goes to get the doctor. However, Mrs. Rachel Lynde arrives at the house first; after taking Matthew's pulse, she says he is dead. When the doctor arrives, he confirms that Matthew has died and says it was likely an instantaneous death due to a sudden shock. They discover that the shock was the newspaper, which said that the bank where all of Marilla and Matthew's money was kept had failed. PARAGRAPH>Neighbors come to the house all day to grieve Matthew and comfort Marilla and Anne. When night comes, the only ones who remain at the house are Marilla, Anne, the Barrys, and Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Diana offers to sleep with Anne, but Anne says she prefers to be alone so that she can try to realize that Matthew is really gone. Anne has not cried all day, but once she is alone, she thinks of Matthew saying he was proud of her and she begins to weep. Marilla hears Anne weeping and comes in to comfort her. Anne asks what they will do without Matthew, and Marilla responds that they have each other. Additionally, Marilla tells Anne that she loves her as if she were her own flesh and blood. PARAGRAPH>Matthew's funeral is held two days later, and after that, Marilla and Anne try to carry on with life at Green Gables. Anne feels ashamed when she begins to find pleasure in things like flowers and visiting with Diana, but Mrs. Allan reassures her that Matthew would like to know that she is enjoying life. When Anne departs from Mrs. Allan's house, Mrs. Allan tells her that Marilla will be lonely when Anne goes away to college. When Anne gets home, Marilla tells her that she will go to have her eyes checked the next day. They talk amicably about Anne being grown-up and about what the other students in Anne's class will do next with their lives, and then Marilla tells Anne something that shocks her: she once dated Gilbert's father. Marilla says that they broke up because they had a quarrel and both were too stubborn to make up", "analysis": "This section of the book shows just how special Anne is. Not only is she one of the brightest students at the Avonlea school, but she also ties for first place on the entrance exam into Queen's College, which is taken by students from many different towns; on top of that, she goes on to win a scholarship to university, which at least fifty students were competing for. This is especially impressive since Anne had very little formal education before she was eleven. Anne's educational achievements demonstrate a moral of the story: that hard work and healthy rivalry can lead to success, even for people who have faced trauma or other hindrances.<PARAGRAPH>Time passes quickly in this final section of Anne of Green Gables. While the previous thirty chapters have described three years of Anne's life, her entire school year at Queen's passes in just three chapters. These chapters show how adaptable Anne is. She makes new friends, maintains her relationships with Marilla, Matthew, and Diana, and excels at her schoolwork. This is likely another positive coping skill that Anne gained due to her traumatic childhood. Because she moved to multiple houses and towns before age eleven, she had to learn how to make new relationships and find things in life to keep her happy and motivated. This is further evidence of the moral that people who have experienced trauma or difficulties can succeed in life.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery uses small symbols to show how Anne has changed Marilla and Matthew over the years she has been in their lives. In particular, Marilla's opinions on beauty and vanity have shifted. For example, Montgomery writes, \"In her own white room, where Marilla had set a flowering house rose on the window sill, Anne looked about her and drew a long breath of happiness\" . This contrasts with Marilla's earlier statements that flowers don't belong indoors and Anne's feelings that the bedroom at Green Gables was too plain and bare. Because beauty and nature have always been important to Anne, they have become important to Marilla, too.<PARAGRAPH>Montgomery foreshadows Matthew's death at multiple points in Anne of Green Gables. First, the narrator says that the reason Marilla and Matthew are taking in an orphan boy is to help Matthew with farm work due to his declining health. Then, Marilla discusses Matthew's heart with both Anne and Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Finally, Montgomery heavily foreshadows Matthew's death at the end of Chapter 26 and the beginning of Chapter 27. Chapter 26 ends, \"Anne always remembered the silvery, peaceful beauty and fragrant calm of that night. It was the last night before sorrow touched her life; and no life is ever quite the same again when once that cold, sanctifying touch has been laid upon it\" . This is followed by the chapter title, \"The Reaper Whose Name Is Death\" . This foreshadowing prepares readers--particularly young readers--to cope with the difficult emotions around a central character dying.<PARAGRAPH>The end of Anne of Green Gables shows that stubbornness can be a negative and positive quality. Anne's stubbornness prevents her from having a positive relationship with Gilbert throughout their time at the Avonlea school and Queen's College. Anne only makes up with Gilbert after hearing a story from Marilla about how stubbornness led her to break up with Gilbert's father as a young girl. However, stubbornness is also shown to be a good quality through Anne's stubbornness about staying home at Green Gables and caring for Marilla. When Marilla is trying to convince Anne to go to university, Anne responds, \"You can't prevent me. I'm...'obstinate as a mule' as Mrs. Lynde once told me\" . In this case, stubbornness is not a matter of hubris, but rather devotion to a moral obligation.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-31-38"}