Scena Septima.


Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gonerill, Bastard, and Seruants.

  Corn. Poste speedily to my Lord your husband, shew
him this Letter, the Army of France is landed: seeke out
the Traitor Glouster

   Reg. Hang him instantly

   Gon. Plucke out his eyes

   Corn. Leaue him to my displeasure. Edmond, keepe
you our Sister company: the reuenges wee are bound to
take vppon your Traitorous Father, are not fit for your
beholding. Aduice the Duke where you are going, to a
most festinate preparation: we are bound to the like. Our
Postes shall be swift, and intelligent betwixt vs. Farewell
deere Sister, farewell my Lord of Glouster.
Enter Steward.

How now? Where's the King?
  Stew. My Lord of Glouster hath conuey'd him hence
Some fiue or six and thirty of his Knights
Hot Questrists after him, met him at gate,
Who, with some other of the Lords, dependants,
Are gone with him toward Douer; where they boast
To haue well armed Friends

   Corn. Get horses for your Mistris

   Gon. Farewell sweet Lord, and Sister.

Exit

  Corn. Edmund farewell: go seek the Traitor Gloster,
Pinnion him like a Theefe, bring him before vs:
Though well we may not passe vpon his life
Without the forme of Iustice: yet our power
Shall do a curt'sie to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not comptroll.
Enter Gloucester, and Seruants.

Who's there? the Traitor?
  Reg. Ingratefull Fox, 'tis he

   Corn. Binde fast his corky armes

   Glou. What meanes your Graces?
Good my Friends consider you are my Ghests:
Do me no foule play, Friends

   Corn. Binde him I say

   Reg. Hard, hard: O filthy Traitor

   Glou. Vnmercifull Lady, as you are, I'me none

   Corn. To this Chaire binde him,
Villaine, thou shalt finde

   Glou. By the kinde Gods, 'tis most ignobly done
To plucke me by the Beard

   Reg. So white, and such a Traitor?
  Glou. Naughty Ladie,
These haires which thou dost rauish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your Host,
With Robbers hands, my hospitable fauours
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
  Corn. Come Sir.
What Letters had you late from France?
  Reg. Be simple answer'd, for we know the truth

   Corn. And what confederacie haue you with the Traitors,
late footed in the Kingdome?
  Reg. To whose hands
You haue sent the Lunaticke King: Speake

   Glou. I haue a Letter guessingly set downe
Which came from one that's of a newtrall heart,
And not from one oppos'd

   Corn. Cunning

   Reg. And false

   Corn. Where hast thou sent the King?
  Glou. To Douer

   Reg. Wherefore to Douer?
Was't thou not charg'd at perill

   Corn. Wherefore to Douer? Let him answer that

   Glou. I am tyed to'th' Stake,
And I must stand the Course

   Reg. Wherefore to Douer?
  Glou. Because I would not see thy cruell Nailes
Plucke out his poore old eyes: nor thy fierce Sister,
In his Annointed flesh, sticke boarish phangs.
The Sea, with such a storme as his bare head,
In Hell-blacke-night indur'd, would haue buoy'd vp
And quench'd the Stelled fires:
Yet poore old heart, he holpe the Heauens to raine.
If Wolues had at thy Gate howl'd that sterne time,
Thou should'st haue said, good Porter turne the Key:
All Cruels else subscribe: but I shall see
The winged Vengeance ouertake such Children

   Corn. See't shalt thou neuer. Fellowes hold y Chaire,
Vpon these eyes of thine, Ile set my foote

   Glou. He that will thinke to liue, till he be old,
Giue me some helpe. - O cruell! O you Gods

   Reg. One side will mocke another: Th' other too

   Corn. If you see vengeance

   Seru. Hold your hand, my Lord:
I haue seru'd you euer since I was a Childe:
But better seruice haue I neuer done you,
Then now to bid you hold

   Reg. How now, you dogge?
  Ser. If you did weare a beard vpon your chin,
I'ld shake it on this quarrell. What do you meane?
  Corn. My Villaine?
  Seru. Nay then come on, and take the chance of anger

   Reg. Giue me thy Sword. A pezant stand vp thus?

Killes him.

  Ser. Oh I am slaine: my Lord, you haue one eye left
To see some mischefe on him. Oh

   Corn. Lest it see more, preuent it; Out vilde gelly:
Where is thy luster now?
  Glou. All darke and comfortlesse?
Where's my Sonne Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparkes of Nature
To quit this horrid acte

   Reg. Out treacherous Villaine,
Thou call'st on him, that hates thee. It was he
That made the ouerture of thy Treasons to vs:
Who is too good to pitty thee

   Glou. O my Follies! then Edgar was abus'd,
Kinde Gods, forgiue me that, and prosper him

   Reg. Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Douer.
Exit with Glouster.

How is't my Lord? How looke you?
  Corn. I haue receiu'd a hurt: Follow me Lady;
Turne out that eyelesse Villaine: throw this Slaue
Vpon the Dunghill: Regan, I bleed apace,
Vntimely comes this hurt. Giue me your arme.

Exeunt.



