Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.


Enter Edgar.

  Edg. Yet better thus, and knowne to be contemn'd,
Then still contemn'd and flatter'd, to be worst:
The lowest, and most deiected thing of Fortune,
Stands still in esperance, liues not in feare:
The lamentable change is from the best,
The worst returnes to laughter. Welcome then,
Thou vnsubstantiall ayre that I embrace:
The Wretch that thou hast blowne vnto the worst,
Owes nothing to thy blasts.
Enter Glouster, and an Oldman.

But who comes heere? My Father poorely led?
World, World, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make vs hate thee,
Life would not yeelde to age

   Oldm. O my good Lord, I haue bene your Tenant,
And your Fathers Tenant, these fourescore yeares

   Glou. Away, get thee away: good Friend be gone,
Thy comforts can do me no good at all,
Thee, they may hurt

   Oldm. You cannot see your way

   Glou. I haue no way, and therefore want no eyes:
I stumbled when I saw. Full oft 'tis seene,
Our meanes secure vs, and our meere defects
Proue our Commodities. Oh deere Sonne Edgar,
The food of thy abused Fathers wrath:
Might I but liue to see thee in my touch,
I'ld say I had eyes againe

   Oldm. How now? who's there?
  Edg. O Gods! Who is't can say I am at the worst?
I am worse then ere I was

   Old. 'Tis poore mad Tom

   Edg. And worse I may be yet: the worst is not,
So long as we can say this is the worst

   Oldm. Fellow, where goest?
  Glou. Is it a Beggar-man?
  Oldm. Madman, and beggar too

   Glou. He has some reason, else he could not beg.
I'th' last nights storme, I such a fellow saw;
Which made me thinke a Man, a Worme. My Sonne
Came then into my minde, and yet my minde
Was then scarse Friends with him.
I haue heard more since:
As Flies to wanton Boyes, are we to th' Gods,
They kill vs for their sport

   Edg. How should this be?
Bad is the Trade that must play Foole to sorrow,
Ang'ring it selfe, and others. Blesse thee Master

   Glou. Is that the naked Fellow?
  Oldm. I, my Lord

   Glou. Get thee away: If for my sake
Thou wilt ore-take vs hence a mile or twaine
I'th' way toward Douer, do it for ancient loue,
And bring some couering for this naked Soule,
Which Ile intreate to leade me

   Old. Alacke sir, he is mad

   Glou. 'Tis the times plague,
When Madmen leade the blinde:
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure:
Aboue the rest, be gone

   Oldm. Ile bring him the best Parrell that I haue
Come on't what will.

Exit

  Glou. Sirrah, naked fellow

   Edg. Poore Tom's a cold. I cannot daub it further

   Glou. Come hither fellow

   Edg. And yet I must:
Blesse thy sweete eyes, they bleede

   Glou. Know'st thou the way to Douer?
  Edg. Both style, and gate; Horseway, and foot-path:
poore Tom hath bin scarr'd out of his good wits. Blesse
thee good mans sonne, from the foule Fiend

   Glou. Here take this purse, y whom the heau'ns plagues
Haue humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
Makes thee the happier: Heauens deale so still:
Let the superfluous, and Lust-dieted man,
That slaues your ordinance, that will not see
Because he do's not feele, feele your powre quickly:
So distribution should vndoo excesse,
And each man haue enough. Dost thou know Douer?
  Edg. I Master

   Glou. There is a Cliffe, whose high and bending head
Lookes fearfully in the confined Deepe:
Bring me but to the very brimme of it,
And Ile repayre the misery thou do'st beare
With something rich about me: from that place,
I shall no leading neede

   Edg. Giue me thy arme;
Poore Tom shall leade thee.

Exeunt.



