Scena Tertia.


Enter in conquest with Drum and Colours, Edmund, Lear, and
Cordelia, as
prisoners, Souldiers, Captaine.

  Bast. Some Officers take them away: good guard,
Vntill their greater pleasures first be knowne
That are to censure them

   Cor. We are not the first,
Who with best meaning haue incurr'd the worst:

For thee oppressed King I am cast downe,
My selfe could else out-frowne false Fortunes frowne.
Shall we not see these Daughters, and these Sisters?
  Lear. No, no, no, no: come let's away to prison,
We two alone will sing like Birds i'th' Cage:
When thou dost aske me blessing, Ile kneele downe
And aske of thee forgiuenesse: So wee'l liue,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded Butterflies: and heere (poore Rogues)
Talke of Court newes, and wee'l talke with them too,
Who looses, and who wins; who's in, who's out;
And take vpon's the mystery of things,
As if we were Gods spies: And wee'l weare out
In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones,
That ebbe and flow by th' Moone

   Bast. Take them away

   Lear. Vpon such sacrifices my Cordelia,
The Gods themselues throw Incense.
Haue I caught thee?
He that parts vs, shall bring a Brand from Heauen,
And fire vs hence, like Foxes: wipe thine eyes,
The good yeares shall deuoure them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make vs weepe?
Weele see 'em staru'd first: come.
Enter.

  Bast. Come hither Captaine, hearke.
Take thou this note, go follow them to prison,
One step I haue aduanc'd thee, if thou do'st
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To Noble Fortunes: know thou this, that men
Are as the time is; to be tender minded
Do's not become a Sword, thy great imployment
Will not beare question: either say thou'lt do't,
Or thriue by other meanes

   Capt. Ile do't my Lord

   Bast. About it, and write happy, when th'hast done,
Marke I say instantly, and carry it so
As I haue set it downe.

Exit Captaine.

Flourish. Enter Albany, Gonerill, Regan, Soldiers.

  Alb. Sir, you haue shew'd to day your valiant straine
And Fortune led you well: you haue the Captiues
Who were the opposites of this dayes strife:
I do require them of you so to vse them,
As we shall find their merites, and our safety
May equally determine

   Bast. Sir, I thought it fit,
To send the old and miserable King to some retention,
Whose age had Charmes in it, whose Title more,
To plucke the common bosome on his side,
And turne our imprest Launces in our eies
Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen:
My reason all the same, and they are ready
To morrow, or at further space, t' appeare
Where you shall hold your Session

   Alb. Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subiect of this Warre,
Not as a Brother

   Reg. That's as we list to grace him.
Methinkes our pleasure might haue bin demanded
Ere you had spoke so farre. He led our Powers,
Bore the Commission of my place and person,
The which immediacie may well stand vp,
And call it selfe your Brother

   Gon. Not so hot:
In his owne grace he doth exalt himselfe,
More then in your addition

   Reg. In my rights,
By me inuested, he compeeres the best

   Alb. That were the most, if he should husband you

   Reg. Iesters do oft proue Prophets

   Gon. Hola, hola,
That eye that told you so, look'd but a squint

   Rega. Lady I am not well, else I should answere
From a full flowing stomack. Generall,
Take thou my Souldiers, prisoners, patrimony,
Dispose of them, of me, the walls is thine:
Witnesse the world, that I create thee heere
My Lord, and Master

   Gon. Meane you to enioy him?
  Alb. The let alone lies not in your good will

   Bast. Nor in thine Lord

   Alb. Halfe-blooded fellow, yes

   Reg. Let the Drum strike, and proue my title thine

   Alb. Stay yet, heare reason: Edmund, I arrest thee
On capitall Treason; and in thy arrest,
This guilded Serpent: for your claime faire Sisters,
I bare it in the interest of my wife,
'Tis she is sub-contracted to this Lord,
And I her husband contradict your Banes.
If you will marry, make your loues to me,
My Lady is bespoke

   Gon. An enterlude

   Alb. Thou art armed Gloster,
Let the Trumpet sound:
If none appeare to proue vpon thy person,
Thy heynous, manifest, and many Treasons,
There is my pledge: Ile make it on thy heart
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing lesse
Then I haue heere proclaim'd thee

   Reg. Sicke, O sicke

   Gon. If not, Ile nere trust medicine

   Bast. There's my exchange, what in the world hes
That names me Traitor, villain-like he lies,
Call by the Trumpet: he that dares approach;
On him, on you, who not, I will maintaine
My truth and honor firmely.
Enter a Herald.

  Alb. A Herald, ho.
Trust to thy single vertue, for thy Souldiers
All leuied in my name, haue in my name
Tooke their discharge

   Regan. My sicknesse growes vpon me

   Alb. She is not well, conuey her to my Tent.
Come hither Herald, let the Trumpet sound,
And read out this.

A Trumpet sounds.

Herald reads.

If any man of qualitie or degree, within the lists of the Army,
will maintaine vpon Edmund, supposed Earle of Gloster,
that he is a manifold Traitor, let him appeare by the third
sound of the Trumpet: he is bold in his defence.

1 Trumpet.

  Her. Againe.

2 Trumpet.

  Her. Againe.

3 Trumpet.

Trumpet answers within.

Enter Edgar armed.

  Alb. Aske him his purposes, why he appeares
Vpon this Call o'th' Trumpet

   Her. What are you?
Your name, your quality, and why you answer
This present Summons?
  Edg. Know my name is lost
By Treasons tooth: bare-gnawne, and Canker-bit,
Yet am I Noble as the Aduersary
I come to cope

   Alb. Which is that Aduersary?
  Edg. What's he that speakes for Edmund Earle of Gloster?
  Bast. Himselfe, what saist thou to him?
  Edg. Draw thy Sword,
That if my speech offend a Noble heart,
Thy arme may do thee Iustice, heere is mine:
Behold it is my priuiledge,
The priuiledge of mine Honours,
My oath, and my profession. I protest,
Maugre thy strength, place, youth, and eminence,
Despise thy victor-Sword, and fire new Fortune,
Thy valor, and thy heart, thou art a Traitor:
False to thy Gods, thy Brother, and thy Father,
Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious Prince,
And from th' extremest vpward of thy head,
To the discent and dust below thy foote,
A most Toad-spotted Traitor. Say thou no,
This Sword, this arme, and my best spirits are bent
To proue vpon thy heart, where to I speake,
Thou lyest

   Bast. In wisedome I should aske thy name,
But since thy out-side lookes so faire and Warlike,
And that thy tongue (some say) of breeding breathes,
What safe, and nicely I might well delay,
By rule of Knight-hood, I disdaine and spurne:
Backe do I tosse these Treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated Lye, ore-whelme thy heart,
Which for they yet glance by, and scarcely bruise,
This Sword of mine shall giue them instant way,
Where they shall rest for euer. Trumpets speake

   Alb. Saue him, saue him.

Alarums. Fights.

  Gon. This is practise Gloster,
By th' law of Warre, thou wast not bound to answer
An vnknowne opposite: thou art not vanquish'd,
But cozend, and beguild

   Alb. Shut your mouth Dame,
Or with this paper shall I stop it: hold Sir,
Thou worse then any name, reade thine owne euill:
No tearing Lady, I perceiue you know it

   Gon. Say if I do, the Lawes are mine not thine,
Who can araigne me for't?
Enter.

  Alb. Most monstrous! O, know'st thou this paper?
  Bast. Aske me not what I know

   Alb. Go after her, she's desperate, gouerne her

   Bast. What you haue charg'd me with,
That haue I done,
And more, much more, the time will bring it out.
'Tis past, and so am I: But what art thou
That hast this Fortune on me? If thou'rt Noble,
I do forgiue thee

   Edg. Let's exchange charity:
I am no lesse in blood then thou art Edmond,
If more, the more th'hast wrong'd me.
My name is Edgar and thy Fathers Sonne,
The Gods are iust, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague vs:
The darke and vitious place where thee he got,
Cost him his eyes

   Bast. Th'hast spoken right, 'tis true,
The Wheele is come full circle, I am heere

   Alb. Me thought thy very gate did prophesie
A Royall Noblenesse: I must embrace thee,
Let sorrow split my heart, if euer I
Did hate thee, or thy Father

   Edg. Worthy Prince I know't

   Alb. Where haue you hid your selfe?
How haue you knowne the miseries of your Father?
  Edg. By nursing them my Lord. List a breefe tale,
And when 'tis told, O that my heart would burst.
The bloody proclamation to escape
That follow'd me so neere, (O our liues sweetnesse,
That we the paine of death would hourely dye,
Rather then die at once) taught me to shift
Into a mad-mans rags, t' assume a semblance
That very Dogges disdain'd: and in this habit
Met I my Father with his bleeding Rings,
Their precious Stones new lost: became his guide,
Led him, begg'd for him, sau'd him from dispaire.
Neuer (O fault) reueal'd my selfe vnto him,
Vntill some halfe houre past when I was arm'd,
Not sure, though hoping of this good successe,
I ask'd his blessing, and from first to last
Told him our pilgrimage. But his flaw'd heart
(Alacke too weake the conflict to support)
Twixt two extremes of passion, ioy and greefe,
Burst smilingly

   Bast. This speech of yours hath mou'd me,
And shall perchance do good, but speake you on,
You looke as you had something more to say

   Alb. If there be more, more wofull, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolue,
Hearing of this.
Enter a Gentleman.

  Gen. Helpe, helpe: O helpe

   Edg. What kinde of helpe?
  Alb. Speake man

   Edg. What meanes this bloody Knife?
  Gen. 'Tis hot, it smoakes, it came euen from the heart
of- O she's dead

   Alb. Who dead? Speake man

   Gen. Your Lady Sir, your Lady; and her Sister
By her is poyson'd: she confesses it

   Bast. I was contracted to them both, all three
Now marry in an instant

   Edg. Here comes Kent.
Enter Kent.

  Alb. Produce the bodies, be they aliue or dead;

Gonerill and Regans bodies brought out.

This iudgement of the Heauens that makes vs tremble.
Touches vs not with pitty: O, is this he?
The time will not allow the complement
Which very manners vrges

   Kent. I am come
To bid my King and Master aye good night.
Is he not here?
  Alb. Great thing of vs forgot,
Speake Edmund, where's the King? and where's Cordelia?
Seest thou this obiect Kent?
  Kent. Alacke, why thus?
  Bast. Yet Edmund was belou'd:
The one the other poison'd for my sake,
And after slew herselfe

   Alb. Euen so: couer their faces

   Bast. I pant for life: some good I meane to do
Despight of mine owne Nature. Quickly send,
(Be briefe in it) to'th' Castle, for my Writ
Is on the life of Lear, and on Cordelia:
Nay, send in time

   Alb. Run, run, O run

   Edg. To who my Lord? Who ha's the Office?
Send thy token of repreeue

   Bast. Well thought on, take my Sword,
Giue it the Captaine

   Edg. Hast thee for thy life

   Bast. He hath Commission from thy Wife and me,
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame vpon her owne dispaire,
That she for-did her selfe

   Alb. The Gods defend her, beare him hence awhile.
Enter Lear with Cordelia in his armes.

  Lear. Howle, howle, howle: O you are men of stones,
Had I your tongues and eyes, Il'd vse them so,
That Heauens vault should crack: she's gone for euer.
I know when one is dead, and when one liues,
She's dead as earth: Lend me a Looking-glasse,
If that her breath will mist or staine the stone,
Why then she liues

   Kent. Is this the promis'd end?
  Edg. Or image of that horror

   Alb. Fall and cease

   Lear. This feather stirs, she liues: if it be so,
It is a chance which do's redeeme all sorrowes
That euer I haue felt

   Kent. O my good Master

   Lear. Prythee away

   Edg. 'Tis Noble Kent your Friend

   Lear. A plague vpon you Murderors, Traitors all,
I might haue sau'd her, now she's gone for euer:
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little. Ha:
What is't thou saist? Her voice was euer soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I kill'd the Slaue that was a hanging thee

   Gent. 'Tis true (my Lords) he did

   Lear. Did I not fellow?
I haue seene the day, with my good biting Faulchion
I would haue made him skip: I am old now,
And these same crosses spoile me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o'th' best, Ile tell you straight

   Kent. If Fortune brag of two, she lou'd and hated,
One of them we behold

   Lear. This is a dull sight, are you not Kent?
  Kent. The same: your Seruant Kent,
Where is your Seruant Caius?
  Lear. He's a good fellow, I can tell you that,
He'le strike and quickly too, he's dead and rotten

   Kent. No my good Lord, I am the very man

   Lear. Ile see that straight

   Kent. That from your first of difference and decay,
Haue follow'd your sad steps

   Lear. You are welcome hither

   Kent. Nor no man else:
All's cheerlesse, darke, and deadly,
Your eldest Daughters haue fore-done themselues,
And desperately are dead
  Lear. I so I thinke

   Alb. He knowes not what he saies, and vaine is it
That we present vs to him.
Enter a Messenger.

  Edg. Very bootlesse

   Mess. Edmund is dead my Lord

   Alb. That's but a trifle heere:
You Lords and Noble Friends, know our intent,
What comfort to this great decay may come,
Shall be appli'd. For vs we will resigne,
During the life of this old Maiesty
To him our absolute power, you to your rights,
With boote, and such addition as your Honours
Haue more then merited. All Friends shall
Taste the wages of their vertue, and all Foes
The cup of their deseruings: O see, see

   Lear. And my poore Foole is hang'd: no, no, no life?
Why should a Dog, a Horse, a Rat haue life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
Neuer, neuer, neuer, neuer, neuer.
Pray you vndo this Button. Thanke you Sir,
Do you see this? Looke on her? Looke her lips,
Looke there, looke there.

He dies.

  Edg. He faints, my Lord, my Lord

   Kent. Breake heart, I prythee breake

   Edg. Looke vp my Lord

   Kent. Vex not his ghost, O let him passe, he hates him,
That would vpon the wracke of this tough world
Stretch him out longer

   Edg. He is gon indeed

   Kent. The wonder is, he hath endur'd so long,
He but vsurpt his life

   Alb. Beare them from hence, our present businesse
Is generall woe: Friends of my soule, you twaine,
Rule in this Realme, and the gor'd state sustaine

   Kent. I haue a iourney Sir, shortly to go,
My Master calls me, I must not say no

   Edg. The waight of this sad time we must obey,
Speake what we feele, not what we ought to say:
The oldest hath borne most, we that are yong,
Shall neuer see so much, nor liue so long.

Exeunt. with a dead March.


FINIS. THE TRAGEDIE OF KING LEAR.

