Actus Secundus. Scena Prima.


Enter Bastard, and Curan, seuerally.

  Bast. Saue thee Curan

   Cur. And you Sir, I haue bin
With your Father, and giuen him notice
That the Duke of Cornwall, and Regan his Duchesse
Will be here with him this night

   Bast. How comes that?
  Cur. Nay I know not, you haue heard of the newes abroad,
I meane the whisper'd ones, for they are yet but
ear-kissing arguments

   Bast. Not I: pray you what are they?
  Cur. Haue you heard of no likely Warres toward,
'Twixt the Dukes of Cornwall, and Albany?
  Bast. Not a word

   Cur. You may do then in time,
Fare you well Sir.
Enter.

  Bast. The Duke be here to night? The better best,
This weaues it selfe perforce into my businesse,
My Father hath set guard to take my Brother,
And I haue one thing of a queazie question
Which I must act, Briefenesse, and Fortune worke.
Enter Edgar.

Brother, a word, discend; Brother I say,
My Father watches: O Sir, fly this place,
Intelligence is giuen where you are hid;
You haue now the good aduantage of the night,
Haue you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornewall?
Hee's comming hither, now i'th' night, i'th' haste,
And Regan with him, haue you nothing said
Vpon his partie 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
Aduise your selfe

   Edg. I am sure on't, not a word

   Bast. I heare my Father comming, pardon me:
In cunning, I must draw my Sword vpon you:
Draw, seeme to defend your selfe,
Now quit you well.
Yeeld, come before my Father, light hoa, here,
Fly Brother, Torches, Torches, so farewell.

Exit Edgar.

Some blood drawne on me, would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeauour. I haue seene drunkards
Do more then this in sport; Father, Father,
Stop, stop, no helpe?
Enter Gloster, and Seruants with Torches.

  Glo. Now Edmund, where's the villaine?
  Bast. Here stood he in the dark, his sharpe Sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charmes, coniuring the Moone
To stand auspicious Mistris

   Glo. But where is he?
  Bast. Looke Sir, I bleed

   Glo. Where is the villaine, Edmund?
  Bast. Fled this way Sir, when by no meanes he could

   Glo. Pursue him, ho: go after. By no meanes, what?
  Bast. Perswade me to the murther of your Lordship,
But that I told him the reuenging Gods,
'Gainst Paricides did all the thunder bend,
Spoke with how manifold, and strong a Bond
The Child was bound to'th' Father; Sir in fine,
Seeing how lothly opposite I stood
To his vnnaturall purpose, in fell motion
With his prepared Sword, he charges home
My vnprouided body, latch'd mine arme;
And when he saw my best alarum'd spirits
Bold in the quarrels right, rouz'd to th' encounter,
Or whether gasted by the noyse I made,
Full sodainely he fled

   Glost. Let him fly farre:
Not in this Land shall he remaine vncaught
And found; dispatch, the Noble Duke my Master,
My worthy Arch and Patron comes to night,
By his authoritie I will proclaime it,
That he which finds him shall deserue our thankes,
Bringing the murderous Coward to the stake:
He that conceales him death

   Bast. When I disswaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to doe it, with curst speech
I threaten'd to discouer him; he replied,
Thou vnpossessing Bastard, dost thou thinke,
If I would stand against thee, would the reposall
Of any trust, vertue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faith'd? No, what should I denie,
(As this I would, though thou didst produce
My very Character) I'ld turne it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practise:
And thou must make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potentiall spirits
To make thee seeke it.

Tucket within.

  Glo. O strange and fastned Villaine,
Would he deny his Letter, said he?
Harke, the Dukes Trumpets, I know not wher he comes;
All Ports Ile barre, the villaine shall not scape,
The Duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
I will send farre and neere, that all the kingdome
May haue due note of him, and of my land,
(Loyall and naturall Boy) Ile worke the meanes
To make thee capable.
Enter Cornewall, Regan, and Attendants.

  Corn. How now my Noble friend, since I came hither
(Which I can call but now,) I haue heard strangenesse

   Reg. If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue th' offender; how dost my Lord?
  Glo. O Madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd

   Reg. What, did my Fathers Godsonne seeke your life?
He whom my Father nam'd, your Edgar?
  Glo. O Lady, Lady, shame would haue it hid

   Reg. Was he not companion with the riotous Knights
That tended vpon my Father?
  Glo. I know not Madam, 'tis too bad, too bad

   Bast. Yes Madam, he was of that consort

   Reg. No maruaile then, though he were ill affected,
'Tis they haue put him on the old mans death,
To haue th' expence and wast of his Reuenues:
I haue this present euening from my Sister
Beene well inform'd of them, and with such cautions,
That if they come to soiourne at my house,
Ile not be there

   Cor. Nor I, assure thee Regan;
Edmund, I heare that you haue shewne your Father
A Child-like Office

   Bast. It was my duty Sir

   Glo. He did bewray his practise, and receiu'd
This hurt you see, striuing to apprehend him

   Cor. Is he pursued?
  Glo. I my good Lord

   Cor. If he be taken, he shall neuer more
Be fear'd of doing harme, make your owne purpose,
How in my strength you please: for you Edmund,
Whose vertue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend it selfe, you shall be ours,
Nature's of such deepe trust, we shall much need:
You we first seize on

   Bast. I shall serue you Sir truely, how euer else

   Glo. For him I thanke your Grace

   Cor. You know not why we came to visit you?
  Reg. Thus out of season, thredding darke ey'd night,
Occasions Noble Gloster of some prize,
Wherein we must haue vse of your aduise.
Our Father he hath writ, so hath our Sister,
Of differences, which I best thought it fit
To answere from our home: the seuerall Messengers
From hence attend dispatch, our good old Friend,
Lay comforts to your bosome, and bestow
Your needfull counsaile to our businesses,
Which craues the instant vse

   Glo. I serue you Madam,
Your Graces are right welcome.

Exeunt. Flourish.



