{"name": "Chapter XXXIX", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxxxix-xlii", "summary": "Wickfield and Heep. After Mr. Wickfield's death, his law firm, never very prosperous, suffers from lack of good management. It competes for scraps of business on any terms. David goes to Canterbury to visit Agnes at Mr. Wickfield's house. There, he finds that Uriah and his mother are now in charge of the house and Mr. Micawber is working as Uriah's clerk. Mr. Micawber is renting Uriah's old house from him. Mr. Wickfield has been made \"obsolete\" by Uriah's machinations. Mr. Micawber is distant with David and tells him that he is in a position of trust and cannot discuss Uriah or Mr. Wickfield with him. David is overjoyed to see Agnes, whose presence imbues him with peace and happiness. He tells her that he relies on her, but she insists that he should be relying on Dora. David relates his problems with Dora, and Agnes advises him to write to Dora's aunts, with whom Dora has been living since her father's death, and ask permission to visit her. Mrs. Heep keeps watch over David and Agnes, so that they are never left alone. When David goes out for a walk, Uriah insists on joining him. Uriah defends his decision to set a watch over David and Agnes, on the grounds that he considers David a dangerous rival for the affections of Agnes; he is also jealous of Annie for her friendship with Agnes. David replies that he only considers Agnes as a dear sister, but that Uriah is unworthy of her. Uriah says that he was brought up to be humble, and he found that it worked, as people like to feel that they are above others. He adds that though he is humble, he has power. Uriah deliberately gets Mr. Wickfield drunk, and declares that he loves Agnes and intends to marry her. Mr. Wickfield reacts with horror, and says that he is utterly in Uriah's power. Uriah warns Mr. Wickfield to be silent, or he will tell the world Mr. Wickfield's secret. Agnes enters and helps her father from the room. David follows her and begs her not to sacrifice herself for her father's sake by marrying Uriah. Agnes does not reply directly, but only says that David need not fear for her. As David is leaving, Uriah seeks him out and tells him that he and Mr. Wickfield have made up their quarrel. Uriah reflects that he brought up the subject of his marriage to Agnes too soon, and that it can wait", "analysis": ""}