{"name": "Chapter XIX", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-xix-xxii", "summary": "I look about me, and make a discovery. David graduates from Dr. Strong's school. Unsure as to what profession to pursue, he decides to visit Peggotty's family in Yarmouth in the hope that his thinking will become clearer there. When he is saying goodbye to Agnes, she asks him if he has noticed a change in her father. David says that he has noticed that Mr. Wickfield is drinking more, and that whenever he is most under the influence of alcohol, Uriah summons him on business. Agnes remarks that at these times, Mr. Wickfield becomes aware that he is unfit to do business, which depresses him. Dr. Strong throws a tea party in David's honor. While David is there, Mrs. Markleham says that Jack Maldon has written to Dr. Strong complaining that he is ill and wants to return to England. Dr. Strong cheerfully says that he is happy to find alternative arrangements for Jack if it should prove necessary. During this conversation, Annie seems embarrassed and remains silent, and Mr. Wickfield observes this. Mrs. Markleham further reveals that Annie has had a letter from Jack, which implies that he wants to return to England because he is missing her. David suspects that Annie may be in love with Jack. David leaves for Yarmouth on the coach. He tries to appear grown-up, but the effect is spoiled when the coach driver makes him give up his seat, which he has booked, to an older man. When he disembarks at an inn in London, the waiter treats David like a child. In London, David goes to the theatre to see a play. On returning to the inn, he is overjoyed to meet Steerforth. Steerforth is studying at Oxford University, but is bored with his studies and is on his way to visit his mother. Steerforth asks a waiter which room David has been given, and on hearing that it is a poor one, insists that David be given a better one. The same waiter who previously treated David patronizingly is deferential when he realizes that he is with Steerforth. Steerforth nicknames David \"Daisy", "analysis": ""}