{"name": "Chapter XLV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-xliii-xlvii", "summary": "Mr. Dick fulfils my aunt's prediction. Mrs. Markleham is much fonder of pleasure than her daughter Annie, but tries to make Dr. Strong feel that, as an old man, he is unable to keep Annie amused. Mrs. Markleham offers to take Annie to all kinds of amusements, making out that this is an act of charity. Dr. Strong willingly agrees, though David sees pain in his face. Mr. Dick asks David if he thinks him simple-minded. David admits that he does. Mr. Dick seems delighted. He says he has noticed that unhappiness has crept into the relationship between Dr. Strong and Annie. Mr. Dick asks David why Betsey, the \"most wonderful woman in the world,\" and David, a \"fine scholar,\" have done nothing to set things right. David explains that this is too delicate a subject for their interference. Mr. Dick thinks that because he is simple, he may succeed where \"wonderful\" people may not. On evening, David and Betsey call on Dr. Strong. He is busy with a guest, so they wait until he is finished. Mrs. Markleham comes in, excited by having overheard Dr. Strong making his will and leaving everything to Annie. Mr. Dick brings Annie to Dr. Strong. She kneels before her husband and begs to know what has come between them. He tells her he loves and honors her, and only says if there is anything amiss, it is his fault. Annie appeals to anyone in the room who can shed light on the matter to speak. David feels he must divulge Dr. Strong's secret - that Uriah told him that Annie and Jack Maldon were having an affair. Annie tells everyone the story of her relationship with Dr. Strong. She says that she has always loved him and never had any interest in any financial gain she might obtain from him, in spite of her mother's unjust habit of using Annie's name to get money out of him for her relatives. As a result of her mother's actions, Annie has been mortified to realize that people such as Mr. Wickfield suspect she is exploiting Dr. Strong for his money. Regarding Jack Maldon, Annie says that she and he were lovers before she married Dr. Strong, but that she is happy that she never married Jack. She has nothing in common with him, and \"There can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose. She is grateful to Dr. Strong for saving her from \"the first mistaken impulse of my undisciplined heart. Annie tells how the night that Jack departed for India, he declared his love to her, and she was so disgusted that she never told Dr. Strong. She declares that she has always been faithful in body, heart and soul to Dr. Strong, and that she loves him more each year. She begs him not to cast her out of his heart. On his way home, David feels disturbed by Annie's words, \"There can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose\" and \"the first mistaken impulse of my undisciplined heart", "analysis": ""}