{"name": "Chapter XXI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-xix-xxii", "summary": "Little Em'ly. The character of Steerforth's servant Littimer is introduced. In appearance, he is \"a pattern of respectability\" in manner, he is softly spoken and deferential. David invites Steerforth to accompany him to Yarmouth, to visit Mr. Peggotty and Ham, and to meet Little Em'ly and Peggotty. David calls in at Mr. Omer's shop and learns that his daughter, Minnie, is now married to her sweetheart, Mr. Joram. Mr. Omer says that Little Em'ly is working for him as his apprentice; she is an accomplished worker, but many of the local girls are angry with her for wanting to be a lady and having ideas above her station in life. David goes to visit Peggotty. Peggotty does not recognize David at once, but when he tells her who he is, she bursts into tears and cries over him for a long time. Mr. Barkis is very ill, but is even more avaricious than before. He waits until Peggotty and David are out of the room before extracting money from his secret hoard to give to Peggotty to buy dinner. Steerforth arrives to meet Peggotty, and charms her and Mr. Barkis. From the retrospective point of view, David says that if anyone had told him then that Steerforth's delightful manners were just a game played in order to establish his superiority over others and to win what was worthless to him, only to discard it in the next minute, he would not have believed it. David continues to idolize Steerforth. David and Steerforth arrive at Mr. Peggotty's house to find everyone excited by the news that Little Em'ly has agreed to marry Ham. As the evening progresses, David notices how avidly Little Em'ly listens to Steerforth's stories, and how she draws away from Ham. After David and Steerforth leave Mr. Peggotty's house, David expresses his delight in the forthcoming marriage. Steerforth makes a derogatory comment about Ham, which surprises David, as Steerforth has appeared to enjoy everyone's company. David replies that he knows that Steerforth perfectly understands and sympathizes with the feelings of these good-hearted folk, and that he admires Steerforth for it. Steerforth remarks that David is a good person, adding, \"I wish we all were", "analysis": ""}