{"name": "Chapter XXIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxxiii-xxvi", "summary": "I corroborate Mr. Dick, and choose a profession. David decides not to tell Steerforth about Little Em'ly's emotional reaction to Martha's visit, as he feels that she did not intend to reveal as much as she did. During the coach journey home, David receives a letter from Betsey asking him what profession he has decided on. Betsey suggests that he might train to be a proctor, a kind of attorney. David asks Steerforth for his opinion. Steerforth says that he might as well become a proctor as anything else, though he describes the profession in disparaging terms as a sort of \"monkish attorney\" who specializes in obscure disputes over wills, marriages, and ships. David decides to follow this profession. David arrives in London and meets Betsey. He tells her that he is ready to train as a proctor, but is concerned about how much money the training will cost his aunt. But Betsey says that David is her adopted child and that she takes pride and pleasure in looking after him, particularly as she was not happy when she was younger. The next day, David and Betsey set out to visit Mr. Spenlow and Mr. Jorkins in the Doctors' Commons, where proctors have their offices and where David is to train to be a proctor. On the way, Betsey is approached by a man who looks like a beggar. After sending David to a nearby place to wait for her, she gets into a hackney carriage with the man. David thinks that this must be the mysterious man of whom Mr. Dick spoke. When Betsey reappears, she asks David not to ask her about the incident. He notices that almost all of her money has vanished from her purse. David and Betsey arrive at Mr. Spenlow's offices. Mr. Spenlow agrees to employ David as his clerk. Mr. Spenlow says that his fee will be a thousand pounds. He claims that he is not at all mercenary but that his partner, Mr. Jorkins , is strict on such matters. David later finds out that Mr. Jorkins is a mild man who keeps in the background of the business. His only role seems to be to provide a figure of ruthlessness upon which Mr. Spenlow can draw to frighten employees and clients into submission. David goes with Betsey to rent lodgings from a landlady called Mrs. Crupp. Betsey tells David that she trusts that his life from now on will make him firm and self-reliant", "analysis": ""}