{"name": "Chapter VIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersvii-x", "summary": "My holidays. Especially one happy afternoon. The vacation arrives, and David sets out for home. Mr. Barkis, the carrier, asks David to tell Peggotty that he is still waiting for an answer to his message about his being willing. David reaches home, and is delighted to find his mother with a new baby boy. Clara and Peggotty are overjoyed to see David, and the three are able to enjoy their reunion the more as Mr. and Miss Murdstone are out. They all have their dinner around the fire, as in the old days. David reminds Peggotty that Mr. Barkis wants a reply to his proposal of marriage. Clara, who now looks frail and thin, anxiously asks Peggotty if she intends to leave her in order to marry. Peggotty reassures Clara that she will never leave her. Peggotty suddenly thinks of Betsey Trotwood, and wonders whether, if she were to die, she would leave David anything in her will. Clara thinks this a ridiculous idea, as Betsey never forgave David for being a boy. Peggotty and Clara quarrel about the Murdstones. Peggotty does not conceal her dislike of Miss Murdstone, but Clara accuses Peggotty of being jealous because Miss Murdstone has taken over the housekeeping. Clara says that Miss Murdstone is acting with the best intentions, because she herself is too thoughtless to manage the house. She feels that she ought to be thankful to Mr. Murdstone, for taking such pains to improve her. David reflects that Peggotty provoked Clara in order to make Clara justify her marriage and feel better about it. The next morning, David asks Mr. Murdstone's forgiveness for biting him. Miss Murdstone only asks how long the school vacation is and counts the days until David leaves again. Later, David picks up the baby, and Miss Murdstone screams and turns faint at the danger she supposes the baby to be in. She forbids David ever to touch the baby again. When Clara mentions that the baby's eyes are like David's, Miss Murdstone angrily insists that they are not at all similar. David notices that if Clara or Peggotty act lovingly towards him, the Murdstones take offence, so he keeps to his room, where he reads books - only to find himself rebuked by Mr. Murdstone for his sullen, withdrawn behavior. David is relieved to go back to school. As the carrier's cart takes him away, his last memory is of his mother standing alone at the garden gate, holding up her baby for him to see", "analysis": ""}