{"name": "Chapter IV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersiv-vi", "summary": "I fall into disgrace. Clara finds David crying, and blames Peggotty for turning him against Mr. Murdstone. As Clara comforts David, Mr. Murdstone arrives and tells her to be firm with him. David sees that she is compliant to her new husband, seemingly because she is afraid of him. Mr. Murdstone dismisses Clara and Peggotty and threatens David with a beating if he does not fall into line. The adult David reflects that a kind word would have made him love Mr. Murdstone, but no such word came. Mr. Murdstone's cruel sister, Miss Jane Murdstone, arrives to live at the house. She is dark-haired, like her brother, and her heavy eyebrows almost meet over her large nose. She brings with her some hard black boxes, and carries a steel purse in \"a very jail of a bag which hung upon her arm like a heavy chain, and shut up like a bite. She greets David with the cold pronouncement that she does not like boys. Miss Murdstone takes control of the household, in spite of Clara's protest that she and Peggotty have managed perfectly well until now. Mr. Murdstone silences Clara's objections with accusations that she is being ungrateful. He believes that she needs to be trained in \"firmness,\" a quality she lacks. Clara humbly begs forgiveness from Mr. and Miss Murdstone. David notices that his mother's carefree beauty is being worn away by the influence of the Murdstones. Though Clara teaches David his lessons, the Murdstones dominate the sessions with their oppressive criticism of both David and Clara. David, who has always been able to do his lessons easily, becomes so nervous that he cannot remember them. David becomes sullen and alienated from his mother. His only refuge is a collection of his father's books. One day, when David is being particularly slow in remembering his lessons, Mr. Murdstone beats him. In self-defense, David bites his hand. The Murdstones keep him locked in his room for several days. On the last night of his confinement, Peggotty whispers to him through the keyhole that he is to be sent away tomorrow to a boarding school near London. She tells him that she loves him and promises to take care of Clara. The next morning, Clara tearfully tells David that she forgives him for biting her husband, but that he must try to be a better person. David feels bitter that the Murdstones have convinced his mother that he is wicked. David is taken away by horse and cart", "analysis": ""}