{"name": "Chapter VII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersvii-x", "summary": "My \"first half\" at Salem House. It is the beginning of the school term. Mr. Creakle warns the boys that if they fail to do well, he will beat them - an activity he seems to enjoy. Then he beats David. Traddles is beaten more than anyone else, because he is fat. Traddles cheers himself up by drawing skeletons on his slate. Steerforth continues to protect David from everyone except Mr. Creakle, and David adores him uncritically. Steerforth suffers from insomnia, and asks David to stay up with him at nights and tell him stories he remembers from his father's collection. David feels flattered to be asked, though he gets very tired from the missed sleep. Steerforth treats Mr. Mell with contempt, which grieves David because Mr. Mell has helped him. One day in class, Steerforth insults Mr. Mell over his poverty, calling him a \"beggar,\" and a quarrel breaks out. Mr. Creakle enters and intervenes. Steerforth justifies himself by announcing that Mr. Mell's mother lives on charity in an almshouse. Mr. Creakle takes Steerforth's side and fires Mr. Mell on the basis that he \"mistook this for a charity school. David feels terribly guilty, as it was he who told Steerforth about Mr. Mell's taking him to visit an old lady at the almshouse to eat breakfast; Steerforth then worked out that the old lady must be Mr. Mell's mother. Traddles weeps in sympathy for Mr. Mell, for which Mr. Creakle canes him. When the boys are left to themselves, Traddles challenges Steerforth, saying that he has hurt Mr. Mell's feelings and lost him his job. Steerforth is dismissive about Mr. Mell's feelings, and says that he is going to ask his mother to send Mr. Mell some money. He claims that he did what he did for the other boys' sakes. The boys cheer Steerforth. Mr. Peggotty and Ham visit David at the school. Steerforth arrives, and David proudly introduces him to his visitors. Steerforth charms them, and Mr. Peggotty extends an open invitation to him and David to visit him in Yarmouth", "analysis": ""}