{"name": "Chapter LII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxlviii-lii", "summary": "I assist at an explosion. David, Betsey, Mr. Dick, and Traddles meet Mr. Micawber in Canterbury, as he requested. He says that he has consulted Traddles, who is now a lawyer, regarding what he is about to reveal. He asks them all to give him a five-minute start, and then to follow him to Uriah Heep's office at Mr. Wickfield's house. David's party arrives at Mr. Wickfield's house and is greeted by Uriah. Agnes joins them. Mr. Micawber confronts Uriah, calling him a scoundrel. Uriah suddenly drops his humble mask and becomes aggressive. He accuses David of conspiring against him with Mr. Micawber, insults both men, and threatens Betsey and Agnes. Traddles brings in Mrs. Heep. Mr. Micawber reads out a document he has prepared detailing Uriah's crimes: he often asked Mr. Micawber to falsify business in order to deceive Mr. Wickfield; that he made Mr. Wickfield do business when drunk; that he embezzled money from Mr. Wickfield, while managing to make it appear that it was Mr. Wickfield who was the dishonest one; and that he forged Mr. Wickfield's signature. Mrs. Heep tries to save her son by advising him to be humble again, but he has long since abandoned that trick as useless. Mr. Micawber ends his speech by saying that he is now unemployed and sees no other future than the debtors' prison for himself and starvation for his family. He only hopes that it will be recognized that he unmasked Uriah in spite of selfish considerations. Uriah realizes with horror that the account books are missing from the safe, and Traddles reveals that he has them. Betsey seizes Uriah by the collar and announces that it was he who ruined her financially. Previously, she had thought that Mr. Wickfield had made away with her money, and she had kept silent to protect him and Agnes. Traddles tells Uriah that he must make restitution to everyone from whom he has stolen money and property. Uriah accuses David of always being against him, but David points out that it is Uriah who has been against the world in his greed and cunning, and that greed and cunning always over-reach themselves. Mr. and Mrs. Micawber are reconciled, now that Mr. Micawber no longer has to conceal anything from her. Betsey asks what profession their eldest son has been trained to do, and on hearing that his prospects are bleak, she suggests that the Micawbers emigrate to Australia. In recognition of the service that Mr. Micawber has done them all, Betsey offers to loan him the money to go there. The Micawbers enthusiastically embrace the idea.", "analysis": "This section sees the resolution of several plotlines, in which various characters receive their just deserts. In general, the novel has a simple moral structure: the distinction between good and bad characters is clear, and most of the good characters are rewarded, while most of the bad characters are punished. The downfall of Uriah is particularly satisfying, for several reasons. First, Uriah is a demonic character, with no redeeming features - Mr. Micawber refers to him as a \"serpent,\" the creature that symbolizes the devil in the Bible - and the characters he ensnares are good people. Second, Uriah's sudden dropping of his \"umble\" mask after Mr. Micawber's initial accusation terrifyingly reveals him to be not merely devious, but violent in his hatreds and vengefulness. It is easy to believe that, were he to remain free, he would prove dangerous to society. Third, Uriah's exposer is Mr. Micawber, who has finally succeeded in getting a job and doing it extremely well, thus proving that he is, in fact, a deserving character. It was Mr. Micawber's misfortune that in this case, doing his job well meant abetting Uriah in his crimes, but he more than redeems himself by conducting an undercover investigation of Uriah's activities and collecting enough evidence to put him in prison. Mr. Micawber knows that in doing what is right regarding Uriah, he has deprived himself of a job, and feels he can only look forward to the debtors' prison. But in this novel, Dickens emphasizes the importance of kindness and charity that is given without thought of any return. Such acts are generally seen being rewarded; a kindness offered inspires kindness in return. Mr. Micawber's act restores Betsey's fortune, and he is rewarded by Betsey's inspired suggestion that he take his family to Australia and by her offer to loan him the money he will need to get there. Another shining example of the selfless act of kindness is that of the unknown foreigners who rescue Little Em'ly after her flight from Littimer. Mr. Peggotty, whose search for Little Em'ly is itself such an act , praises these people in terms that apply to all such acts by all such characters: \"What they done, is laid up wheer neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and wheer thieves do not break through nor steal. Mas'r Davy, it'll outlast all the treasure in the wureld. The opposite of such kindness and charity is embodied by Uriah. After his unmasking, Uriah claims David has always been against him, but David replies, \"it is you who have been, in your greed and cunning, against all the world. He adds that greed and cunning always over-reach themselves, and are punished. Dickens has been criticized for the unrealistic and simplistic resolution of emigration to Australia that he uses for Mr. Peggotty and Little Em'ly, and for the Micawbers. However, the novel contains many unrealistic and simplistic elements, and in the light of the history of Dickens's time, emigration to Australia seems one of the most realistic and likely outcomes for these characters. Thousands of British people, mostly poor and seeking work, emigrated to Australia in the nineteenth century. Thousands more were transported there as convicts. Many of these people were successful in their new lives, as Mr. Micawber proves to be. It is true that through the device of emigration, Dickens avoids offering any constructive solution to the social and economic problems of Victorian Britain that engulfed characters like Little Em'ly and the Micawbers. But Dickens was aware of the intractability of many of these problems, reinforced as they were by centuries of rigid tradition of the sort that he describes as surrounding the archaic institution of the Doctors' Commons, and by the class-based attitudes of people like Rosa Dartle and the Steerforths. In Dickens's fiction as in life, emigration was a practical and popular solution. As Mr. Micawber comments in Chapter LVII in reply to his wife's wish that their grandchildren may one day live in England, \"Britannia must take her chance. I am bound to say that she has never done much for me, and that I have no particular wish upon the subject"}