{"name": "Chapter XXXIV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxxxi-xxxiv", "summary": "My aunt astonishes me. David writes to Agnes to tell her of his engagement. The very thought of Agnes has a soothing effect on him. Traddles visits David and tells him about his sweetheart, Sophy, who is one of ten children and lives in Devon. Sophy appears to look after her whole family, educating the youngest children and keeping the eldest girl, \"a Beauty,\" in good humor. Their mother is paralyzed. Traddles tells David that Mr. Micawber has changed his name to Mortimer to avoid his creditors, and he does not go out until after dark. Bailiffs have seized the furniture of both Mr. Micawber and Traddles, since Traddles lent Mr. Micawber his name to obtain credit. Since then, Traddles has seen his furniture for sale in a pawnbroker's shop. He asks Peggotty to take his money and buy them back for him, since the pawnbroker would overcharge Traddles. Peggotty agrees, and they all go to the shop to fetch the furniture. On returning to his apartment, David is amazed to see Betsey and Mr. Dick there, with all their belongings. Betsey tells David that she is financially ruined, and has arranged for her cottage to be rented out.", "analysis": "The foreshadowings regarding Steerforth and Little Em'ly are resolved in Steerforth's abduction of her. This catastrophe is the making of Mrs. Gummidge. Until this point, she was sunk in self-pity, barely thinking of others. But once the main object of her love, Little Em'ly, is taken away, she undergoes a transformation, becoming a strong and supportive friend to Mr. Peggotty. Critics have pointed out that Mrs. Gummidge is unique among the characters in the novel, in that she develops markedly, starting out as a weak character and ending up a strong one. The other characters do not develop significantly; David does mature, but he does not change much, retaining his essential innocence throughout. The key to many of the characters is in their names, which define them consistently throughout the novel: Mr. Murdstone's name invokes murder and tombstones; Rosa Dartle is as sharp as the first syllable of her surname; and Mr. Spenlow is reluctant to spend any money, using his business partner as an excuse for his mean habits. Agnes's name derives from the Latin for 'lamb', 'agnus,' and she has qualities of meekness and gentleness associated with that animal; the name also has connotations of Christ, who is known in Latin as 'agnus dei' or the lamb of God. The force that makes Mrs. Gummidge change is suffering. While Dickens portrays suffering as a potentially transforming or maturing influence , he shows that it can also have destructive effects, as in Rosa Dartle and Julia Mills, who are both to varying degrees damaged by love disappointments. Rosa differs from Julia in that while Rosa has become selfish and vindictive through her grief and anger, Julia's experience has made her determined that others should not suffer as she did, and so she makes the effort to reconcile David and Dora. Betsey is similarly motivated, concerned that David shall not cause misery to himself and others by unwise choices of relationships, as she herself and Clara Copperfield did. Dickens uses foreshadowing to hint at the eventual fate of David and Dora's relationship. The fact that he spends hours walking around her house but not daring to call on her demonstrates his comment that he relates primarily to her as an idea, as a being who is beyond the merely human. This is an image that may be disturbed by the reality of actually interacting with her. Dora's dog attacks David whenever he gets near her - representing another obstacle to getting to know her. David's feelings are to a great extent protective of her, showing that he does not view her as an equal, but as a needy child. The couple manages to quarrel even during their short engagement, which Dora breaks, requiring Julia to reconcile them. Dora's words in her letter to David bode ill for their marriage: \"our love had begun in folly, and ended in madness. David refers to the \"agitation\" that he feels during his courtship of Dora; he is \"moon-struck,\" a word commonly used of lunatics; and he gets madly jealous on their outing together. David's fragile relationship with Dora is contrasted with his relationship with Agnes. While his feelings for Dora are described in terms of agitation and madness, he views Agnes as his \"refuge. and \"best friend. David is still too emotionally immature, or \"blind\" , to see that these qualities point to Agnes's suitability for him as a wife"}