{"name": "Chapter V", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersiv-vi", "summary": "I am sent away from home. A crying David is taken away by the carrier, Mr. Barkis, in his cart. As the cart leaves, Peggotty bursts out of a hedge and hugs David. She gives him some cakes and a purse containing money folded in a loving note from his mother, before running off. David gives Mr. Barkis one of his cakes. On hearing that Peggotty baked them, and that she does all the cooking in the house, Mr. Barkis asks David to write and tell her that \"Barkis is willing. Mr. Barkis takes David to an inn, where he is to have dinner and catch the stagecoach for London. His dinner is waiting for him in the name of Murdstone. The waiter tricks David into giving him most of his dinner. When David reveals that he is on his way to a school near London, the waiter gloomily says that that is the school where a boy died from having his ribs broken during a beating. Then the waiter tells David a hard-luck story that makes David leave him some of his money as a tip. The coachman and other passengers believe that David has eaten the huge dinner by himself, and they tease him about his supposed gluttony to such an extent that David cannot muster the courage to eat anything else on the journey. He arrives in London very hungry and disembarks to find that no one has come to meet him. After some time, a man called Mr. Mell arrives to collect David. He is one of the masters at the school. On finding out that David is hungry, Mr. Mell takes him to eat breakfast at a charity home, where he knows one of the old woman residents. Mr. Mell takes David to the school, Salem House. It is quiet, as all the boys are on holiday. The place is dirty and smells unwholesome. David finds a placard with these words written on it: \"Take care of him. He bites. He thinks it must refer to a dangerous dog, but Mr. Mell tells him that he is to wear it on his back as a punishment for biting Mr. Murdstone", "analysis": ""}