{"name": "Chapter XVI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxv-xviii", "summary": "I am a new boy in more senses than one. David goes to the school and meets the headmaster, Dr. Strong, and his young wife, Annie. Dr. Strong and Mr. Wickfield discuss their attempts to find some occupation for Annie's cousin, Jack Maldon. Mr. Wickfield asks whether Dr. Strong would prefer Jack to go abroad, but Dr. Strong insists that he does not mind whether the post is in England or abroad. Dining at Mr. Wickfield's house, David learns from Agnes that her mother died when Agnes was born. Jack Maldon arrives and tells Mr. Wickfield that he will leave to take up his position abroad without delay. Mr. Wickfield says the sooner Jack leaves, the better. Jack speaks disrespectfully of Dr. Strong, drawing attention to the fact that Dr. Strong is older than Annie, and then leaves. After dinner, Mr. Wickfield drinks a great deal of alcohol. David notes that Agnes is a force for goodness, peace, and truth, and that she cares deeply for her father. He feels that she has a beneficial influence on him. Mr. Wickfield invites David to stay with them permanently, and David gladly agrees. David finds Uriah in the office, studying legal texts. Uriah tells David that Mr. Wickfield is paying for him to take his lawyer's examinations. Uriah adds that if it were not for Mr. Wickfield, he and his mother, being \"umble\" people, could never have afforded this training. Uriah asks David if he admires Agnes, and writhes with pleasure when David replies that everyone must admire her. Dr. Strong's school proves excellent, and David does well, quickly catching up in his studies. The boys love Dr. Strong, a kind, scholarly man who plans one day to complete his great work, a dictionary. Dr. Strong and his wife treat each other with great affection. Annie has a large number of poor relatives, including her mother, Mrs. Markleham. The schoolboys nickname Mrs. Markleham \"the Old Soldier\" on account of her skill in marshalling great forces of relatives against Dr. Strong in order to get money and other favors from him. One evening, the Strongs hold a party to celebrate Dr. Strong's birthday and to bid farewell to Jack Maldon, who is leaving to take up a post in India. Mrs. Markleham encourages Dr. Strong to keep up his generosity to members of her family. Dr. Strong cheerfully assents. Annie tries to sing a duet with Jack, but becomes too emotional to continue. Everyone drinks a toast to Jack's success in India, and as he leaves, David notices that he has one of Annie's red ribbons in his hand. Annie faints. Dr. Strong tends to her, pointing out that Jack was her favorite cousin", "analysis": ""}