{"name": "Chapter LXI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-lix-lxiv", "summary": "I am shown two interesting penitents. David is living with Betsey in Dover and is a successful writer. Traddles and Sophy are blissfully happy, and Sophy is working as Traddles's clerk. Since David became famous, he has received a letter from Mr. Creakle, who is now a magistrate. Mr. Creakle writes that he has developed a reliable way of reforming prisoners - solitary confinement. He invites David to the prison to see it in operation. David and Traddles go to the prison, where Mr. Creakle greets them as if he has always been fond of them. As Mr. Creakle leads them through the prison, it becomes clear to David that the prisoners that Mr. Creakle believes to be in solitary confinement are often free to interact. David questions the prisoners and finds that many of them profess penitence without sincerely meaning it. David meets the first of two Model Prisoners, as Mr. Creakle describes them. Mr. Creakle approves of this prisoner because he reads a hymnbook and writes loving letters to his mother. David discovers that it is Uriah Heep. Uriah has resumed his old act of being humble and claims that he likes being in prison because it enables him to see his past follies. The other Model Prisoner turns out to be Littimer. Littimer says he attributes his past follies to allowing himself to be led into weaknesses through his service to young men. He hopes that David too may repent of all the wickedness and sin, to which he has been a party. Littimer asks David to convey to Little Em'ly that he forgives her and calls her to repentance. Uriah says that he wishes everyone could go to prison, as they would improve their souls. Uriah reminds David that he, David, was once violent to him, and struck him in the face, but says he forgives him. David learns that Uriah was convicted of defrauding the Bank of England. Littimer robbed his master and was apprehended by Miss Mowcher. Littimer cut her face and beat her, but she kept hold of him. David reflects that it would have been pointless to tell Mr. Creakle that Uriah and Littimer are unchanged from what they always were: \"hypocritical knaves", "analysis": ""}