{"name": "Book 6, Chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210619215702/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mill-on-the-floss/summary/book-6-chapter-7", "summary": "Philip finally shows up. He and Maggie have a rather awkward reunion. Maggie is conflicted about her feelings for Stephen and Philip. Lucy tries to play matchmaker. But Philip notices a change in Maggie and is worried that her feelings for him have changed. Lucy makes a lame excuse and leaves the room. Maggie and Philip quickly start talking. Maggie tells Philip about her discussion with Tom and the two agree to be friends again. Maggie asks about Philip's dad and Philip says he doesn't care what he thinks. But then Maggie tells Philip she will be leaving soon to get another governess job since she has to earn her own living. Philip and Maggie resume their old debate about Maggie's tendency towards self-sacrifice. Philip is a bit bitter since he has loved Maggie for years and she still can't seem to make up her mind about him. Stephen shows up and Maggie is flustered. The two are overly polite to one another and are secretly hurt by the other's cold attitude. Lucy is oblivious to the tension, but Philip is getting suspicious. The group decides to play some music. Philip plays a song first and is overly emotional. He decides to communicate with Maggie through the power of song, apparently thinking that he is in a musical. Stephen and Philip perform a duet and Maggie is carried away by the music. The two then each perform solos directed at Maggie. Stephen basically seduces Maggie with his awesome singing skills. Philip is getting alarmed at the two of them and suspects that Stephen is stealing his kind-of-but-not-quite girlfriend. In his distress Philip starts butchering his piano piece and Lucy is shocked. The group then goes eat lunch. Mr. Deane randomly starts asking Philip business questions. Later that night Lucy goes to talk with her dad. She wants to know what's up with his grilling of Philip at lunch. Turns out Mr. Deane was being crafty - he was trying to get intel on Mr. Wakem to see if he might be up for selling Dorlcote Mill. Lucy has intel for him though: she tells him that she's going to get Philip's help in buying back the mill. Mr. Deane is skeptical but Lucy assures him that her awesome plan will work.", "analysis": ""}