Ragueneau, Lise, the musketeer.  Cyrano at the little table writing.  The
poets, dressed in black, their stockings ungartered, and covered with mud.

LISE (entering, to Ragueneau):
  Here they come, your mud-bespattered friends!

FIRST POET (entering, to Ragueneau):
  Brother in art!. . .

SECOND POET (to Ragueneau, shaking his hands):
  Dear brother!

THIRD POET:
  High soaring eagle among pastry-cooks!
(He sniffs):
  Marry! it smells good here in your eyrie!

FOURTH POET:
  'Tis at Phoebus' own rays that thy roasts turn!

FIFTH POET:
  Apollo among master-cooks--

RAGUENEAU (whom they surround and embrace):
  Ah! how quick a man feels at his ease with them!. . .

FIRST POET:
  We were stayed by the mob; they are crowded all round the Porte de Nesle!. .
.

SECOND POET:
  Eight bleeding brigand carcasses strew the pavements there--all slit open
with sword-gashes!

CYRANO (raising his head a minute):
  Eight?. . .hold, methought seven.

(He goes on writing.)

RAGUENEAU (to Cyrano):
  Know you who might be the hero of the fray?

CYRANO (carelessly):
  Not I.

LISE (to the musketeer):
  And you?  Know you?

THE MUSKETEER (twirling his mustache):
  Maybe!

CYRANO (writing a little way off:--he is heard murmuring a word from time to
time):
  'I love thee!'

FIRST POET:
  'Twas one man, say they all, ay, swear to it, one man who, single-handed,
put the whole band to the rout!

SECOND POET:
  'Twas a strange sight!--pikes and cudgels strewed thick upon the ground.

CYRANO (writing):
  . . .'Thine eyes'. . .

THIRD POET:
  And they were picking up hats all the way to the Quai d'Orfevres!

FIRST POET:
  Sapristi! but he must have been a ferocious. . .

CYRANO (same play):
  . . .'Thy lips'. . .

FIRST POET:
  'Twas a parlous fearsome giant that was the author of such exploits!

CYRANO (same play):
  . . .'And when I see thee come, I faint for fear.'

SECOND POET (filching a cake):
  What hast rhymed of late, Ragueneau?

CYRANO (same play):
  . . .'Who worships thee'. . .
(He stops, just as he is about to sign, and gets up, slipping the letter into
his doublet):
  No need I sign, since I give it her myself.

RAGUENEAU (to second poet):
  I have put a recipe into verse.

THIRD POET (seating himself by a plate of cream-puffs):
  Go to!  Let us hear these verses!

FOURTH POET (looking at a cake which he has taken):
  Its cap is all a' one side!

(He makes one bite of the top.)

FIRST POET:
  See how this gingerbread woos the famished rhymer with its almond eyes, and
its eyebrows of angelica!

(He takes it.)

SECOND POET:
  We listen.

THIRD POET (squeezing a cream-puff gently):
  How it laughs!  Till its very cream runs over!

SECOND POET (biting a bit off the great lyre of pastry):
  This is the first time in my life that ever I drew any means of nourishing
me from the lyre!

RAGUENEAU (who has put himself ready for reciting, cleared his throat, settled
his cap, struck an attitude):
  A recipe in verse!. . .

SECOND POET (to first, nudging him):
  You are breakfasting?

FIRST POET (to second):
  And you dining, methinks.

RAGUENEAU:
  How almond tartlets are made.

  Beat your eggs up, light and quick;
    Froth them thick;
  Mingle with them while you beat
  Juice of lemon, essence fine;
    Then combine
  The burst milk of almonds sweet.

  Circle with a custard paste
    The slim waist
  Of your tartlet-molds; the top
  With a skillful finger print,
    Nick and dint,
  Round their edge, then, drop by drop,
  In its little dainty bed
    Your cream shed:
  In the oven place each mold:
  Reappearing, softly browned,
    The renowned
  Almond tartlets you behold!

THE POETS (with mouths crammed full):
  Exquisite!  Delicious!

A POET (choking):
  Homph!

(They go up, eating.)

CYRANO (who has been watching, goes toward Ragueneau):
  Lulled by your voice, did you see how they were stuffing themselves?

RAGUENEAU (in a low voice, smiling):
  Oh, ay!  I see well enough, but I never will seem to look, fearing to
distress them; thus I gain a double pleasure when I recite to them my poems;
for I leave those poor fellows who have not breakfasted free to eat, even
while I gratify my own dearest foible, see you?

CYRANO (clapping him on the shoulder):
  Friend, I like you right well!. . .
(Ragueneau goes after his friends.  Cyrano follows him with his eyes, then,
rather sharply):
  Ho there!  Lise!
(Lise, who is talking tenderly to the musketeer, starts, and comes down toward
Cyrano):
  So this fine captain is laying siege to you?

LISE (offended):
  One haughty glance of my eye can conquer any man that should dare venture
aught 'gainst my virtue.

CYRANO:
  Pooh!  Conquering eyes, methinks, are oft conquered eyes.

LISE (choking with anger):
  But--

CYRANO (incisively):
  I like Ragueneau well, and so--mark me, Dame Lise--I permit not that he be
rendered a laughing-stock by any. . .

LISE:
  But. . .

CYRANO (who has raised his voice so as to be heard by the gallant):
  A word to the wise. . .

(He bows to the musketeer, and goes to the doorway to watch, after looking at
the clock.)

LISE (to the musketeer, who has merely bowed in answer to Cyrano's bow):
  How now?  Is this your courage?. . .Why turn you not a jest on his nose?

THE MUSKETEER:
  On his nose?. . .ay, ay. . .his nose.

(He goes quickly farther away; Lise follows him.)

CYRANO (from the doorway, signing to Ragueneau to draw the poets away):
  Hist!. . .

RAGUENEAU (showing them the door on the right):
  We shall be more private there. . .

CYRANO (impatiently):
  Hist!  Hist!. . .

RAGUENEAU (drawing them farther):
  To read poetry, 'tis better here. . .

FIRST POET (despairingly, with his mouth full):
  What! leave the cakes?. . .

SECOND POET:
  Never!  Let's take them with us!

(They all follow Ragueneau in procession, after sweeping all the cakes off the
trays.)




