The SAME.  Cyrano.

CYRANO (appearing from the tent, very calm, with a pen stuck behind his ear
and a book in his hand):
  What is wrong?
(Silence.  To the first cadet):
  Why drag you your legs so sorrowfully?

THE CADET:
  I have something in my heels which weighs them down.

CYRANO:
  And what may that be?

THE CADET:
  My stomach!

CYRANO:
  So have I, 'faith!

THE CADET:
  It must be in your way?

CYRANO:
  Nay, I am all the taller.

A THIRD:
  My stomach's hollow.

CYRANO:
  'Faith, 'twill make a fine drum to sound the assault.

ANOTHER:
  I have a ringing in my ears.

CYRANO:
  No, no, 'tis false; a hungry stomach has no ears.

ANOTHER:
  Oh, to eat something--something oily!

CYRANO (pulling off the cadet's helmet and holding it out to him):
  Behold your salad!

ANOTHER:
  What, in God's name, can we devour?

CYRANO (throwing him the book which he is carrying):
  The 'Iliad'.

ANOTHER:
  The first minister in Paris has his four meals a day!

CYRANO:
  'Twere courteous an he sent you a few partridges!

THE SAME:
  And why not? with wine, too!

CYRANO:
  A little Burgundy.  Richelieu, s'il vous plait!

THE SAME:
  He could send it by one of his friars.

CYRANO:
  Ay! by His Eminence Joseph himself.

ANOTHER:
  I am as ravenous as an ogre!

CYRANO:
  Eat your patience, then.

THE FIRST CADET (shrugging his shoulders):
  Always your pointed word!

CYRANO:
  Ay, pointed words!
  I would fain die thus, some soft summer eve,
  Making a pointed word for a good cause.
  --To make a soldier's end by soldier's sword,
  Wielded by some brave adversary--die
  On blood-stained turf, not on a fever-bed,
  A point upon my lips, a point within my heart.

CRIES FROM ALL:
  I'm hungry!

CYRANO (crossing his arms):
  All your thoughts of meat and drink!
  Bertrand the fifer!--you were shepherd once,--
  Draw from its double leathern case your fife,
  Play to these greedy, guzzling soldiers.  Play
  Old country airs with plaintive rhythm recurring,
  Where lurk sweet echoes of the dear home-voices,
  Each note of which calls like a little sister,
  Those airs slow, slow ascending, as the smoke-wreaths
  Rise from the hearthstones of our native hamlets,
  Their music strikes the ear like Gascon patois!. . .
(The old man seats himself, and gets his flute ready):
  Your flute was now a warrior in durance;
  But on its stem your fingers are a-dancing
  A bird-like minuet!  O flute!  Remember
  That flutes were made of reeds first, not laburnum;
  Make us a music pastoral days recalling--
  The soul-time of your youth, in country pastures!. . .
(The old man begins to play the airs of Languedoc):
  Hark to the music, Gascons!. . .'Tis no longer
  The piercing fife of camp--but 'neath his fingers
  The flute of the woods!  No more the call to combat,
  'Tis now the love-song of the wandering goat-herds!. . .
  Hark!. . .'tis the valley, the wet landes, the forest,
  The sunburnt shepherd-boy with scarlet beret,
  The dusk of evening on the Dordogne river,--
  'Tis Gascony!  Hark, Gascons, to the music!

(The cadets sit with bowed heads; their eyes have a far-off look as if
dreaming, and they surreptitiously wipe away their tears with their cuffs and
the corner of their cloaks.)

CARBON (to Cyrano in a whisper):
  But you make them weep!

CYRANO:
  Ay, for homesickness.  A nobler pain than hunger,--'tis of the soul, not of
the body!  I am well pleased to see their pain change its viscera.  Heart-ache
is better than stomach-ache.

CARBON:
  But you weaken their courage by playing thus on their heart-strings!

CYRANO (making a sign to a drummer to approach):
  Not I.  The hero that sleeps in Gascon blood is ever ready to awake in them.
'Twould suffice. . .

(He makes a signal; the drum beats.)

ALL THE CADETS (stand up and rush to take arms):
  What?  What is it?

CYRANO (smiling):
  You see!  One roll of the drum is enough!  Good-by dreams, regrets, native
land, love. . .All that the pipe called forth the drum has chased away!

A CADET (looking toward the back of the stage):
  Ho! here comes Monsieur de Guiche.

ALL THE CADETS (muttering):
  Ugh!. . .Ugh!. . .

CYRANO (smiling):
  A flattering welcome!

A CADET:
  We are sick to death of him!

ANOTHER CADET:
  --With his lace collar over his armor, playing the fine gentleman!

ANOTHER:
  As if one wore linen over steel!

THE FIRST:
  It were good for a bandage had he boils on his neck.

THE SECOND:
  Another plotting courtier!

ANOTHER CADET:
  His uncle's own nephew!

CARBON:
  For all that--a Gascon.

THE FIRST:
  Ay, false Gascon!. . .trust him not. . .
  Gascons should ever be crack-brained. . .
  Naught more dangerous than a rational Gascon.

LE BRET:
  How pale he is!

ANOTHER:
  Oh! he is hungry, just like us poor devils; but under his cuirass, with its
fine gilt nails, his stomach-ache glitters brave in the sun.

CYRANO (hurriedly):
  Let us not seem to suffer either!  Out with your cards, pipes, and dice. . .
(All begin spreading out the games on the drums, the stools, the ground, and
on their cloaks, and light long pipes):
  And I shall read Descartes.

(He walks up and down, reading a little book which he has drawn from his
pocket.  Tableau.  Enter De Guiche.  All appear absorbed and happy.  He is
very pale.  He goes up to Carbon.)




