{"name": "Book 5", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201025193428/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/meditations/summary/book-5", "summary": "Marcus tells himself that he's got to get out of bed early and take up his work without resentment--especially since he's doing what he was born to do. After all, if birds do it and bees do it, why should he be grouchy about helping the universe to hum along as it ought to? Apparently, this is not encouragement enough for Marcus, who still doesn't want to get out of bed and get to work. Marcus's brain argues with him, telling him that there are limits to everything--especially things which give him pleasure. Marcus scolds himself for being too willing to exceed his limits in pleasure--but not in good actions. It all comes back to Marcus's nature and purpose in life. If he were really concerned to do what he was born for, he would shun everything else. He's seen other people do it. But it's a struggle for Marcus. At this moment, he's really not ready to give up food, drink and sleep to step up to his civic duties. Perhaps he's being a little harsh on himself. Marcus knows a foolproof way to keep his cool: drive away unpleasant thoughts from his mind. Marcus encourages himself to speak and act justly, as a person of reason would--and not to worry about what other people say about him. Other people are guided by their own impulses and what they think is right . Marcus tells himself to stay focused and follow his path, which is in accordance with the universe. Marcus declares his unity with nature and the earth and says that he will continue in harmony with them until he dies. Marcus is feeling down on himself for a lack of intelligence and talent. Marcus suggests to himself that he should show that he has other qualities that people can admire and that are also part of his nature: integrity, kindness, generosity, etc. But Marcus does have to make the effort to display these qualities--and he hasn't. If Marcus could only focus his mind, he could highlight his good traits--and then only be accused of being slow-witted. And if he applied himself, he might be able to fix that, too. Marcus talks about three kinds of people who do kind things for others: 1) those who think about what's now owed to them; 2) those who think that the helped person now in their debt; 3) those who completely forget that they've done a good deed. Marcus compares #3 to a grape vine: it produces good fruit, and that is both its purpose and its reward. Marcus lists creatures that likewise fulfill their purpose without expecting reward: bees, racehorses, hunting dogs. He thinks that he should be just like those critters. There's one objection that Marcus can imagine. Shouldn't we make people aware of their social duties by calling attention to our own good deeds? Marcus responds by saying that this kind of logic belongs to the guys in categories 1 and 2--they only want a reasonable excuse to show off or benefit. Marcus gives an example of the perfect prayer, which is simple and open-hearted. Marcus thinks of affliction or hardship as a kind of \"prescription\" from the Universe. Instead of a recipe or directions for bringing on health, the Universe prescribes these things to bring on a person's fate. There is a \"fitness\" in such catastrophes, as they come together in related ways in a person's life. Marcus is interested in harmony here: in the Universe, in all material bodies that make up the Whole. In this great unity, Destiny is the great driver, bringing everyone's fates together. Marcus says that everyone understands the power of destiny because they recognize when Fate has a hand in a person's life. In that case, we should welcome these \"prescriptions\" from the universe as part of the greater, unified pattern of things. So Marcus urges himself to embrace whatever happens to him--even if it is horrible--because it contributes to the continued working of the universe and Zeus's pleasure. Marcus becomes quite devout here, saying that Zeus would never let terrible things happen if they weren't for the good of the Whole. Marcus continues to reason with himself to accept his fate. Whatever happens, it is a destiny custom made for him. It's also for the good of all, maintaining the balance of the universe. Without this great continuity, the perfection of the Whole is marred. Marcus can't put anything out of sync with this unity without causing great damage. This includes complaining. Marcus gives himself another pep talk: don't be discouraged if you fail to act on all your principles. Try, try again. Marcus also tells himself to man up whenever he makes a mistake and not think of his philosophy as a schoolboy thinks of a tutor. Rather, he should think of his philosophy as a patient thinks of medicine. Philosophy is the thing that will get Marcus back in harmony with his nature--not some unnatural practice that should be hard and unpleasant. Marcus refers to Plato here when he talks about \"realities wrapped in a veil.\" Even philosophers have a hard time distinguishing what's what in this confusing world. It's not a good thing to rely on sense perception to guide us. Marcus urges himself to perceive all things--including people--for what they really are. And what are they? Nothing very great. Marcus calls out the things of this world, describing them as \"shoddy.\" He also calls them some other not very nice names. Marcus finds comfort in the idea that the Whole will only allow things to happen to him that are necessary. He also finds comfort in the fact that he can act in a way that the gods will approve of. Marcus asks himself what he's doing with his life. To be more precise, he asks what he's doing with his soul. Marcus urges himself to continue to ask this question and subject himself to a mental inventory on a regular basis in order to make sure he really knows what kind of person he's becoming inside. Marcus contemplates what true goods are. In his mind, they are qualities like wisdom and generosity. He knows that most people would think of \"goods\" as something different. Marcus handles a popular saying that defines goods and grapples with it. He urges himself to value the goods that don't clutter life but instead furnish the soul. Marcus contemplates his being and states that he is made of up of the \"causal and the material.\" He has no need to fear dissolution, because he knows his parts will revert to their original state. Once all of him is dispersed, it will be recycled and reused by the Universe. Marcus understands that this same cycle brought him and his parents into being, so it's all good. Marcus asserts that reason and reasoning plow their own right path from the beginning. You can't go astray if you follow this path; a person acts properly if he or she is following reason. Marcus somewhat obscurely reminds himself that he shouldn't worry about anything that doesn't pertain to the nature of a man. It's not his lot to occupy himself with it. If he were meant to worry about it, then it would be part of his nature. But since it isn't, he doesn't have to. Marcus gets a bit more specific by speaking of \"goods.\" A man who shows that he is free of the need for them is to be praised; therefore, they are not man's portion. Don't worry about 'em. Marcus trots out what might be his best image in this section: \"souls are dyed by thoughts.\" He means that whatever is most often in your mind will change the character of your soul. Marcus tells himself to keep positive thoughts in his head. They will encourage him to live a good life, even though he is the emperor. Marcus also reminds himself that each human is a social creature, made for the benefit of the community. He points out that each person's life is directed by the Whole, and it ends where it should, for the good of society. Marcus speaks of the scala naturae, in which each walk of life is graded in quality to every other. The rational being comes out on top, as does community over the individual. Marcus says: don't chase the impossible. That's madness. Marcus also says that it's also impossible for bad men not to be bad. He must have been having a bad emperor day. Marcus lays down a cliche: no man is given more than he can endure. He tells himself that other people suffer the same fate as he, but they take it better than he does. Marcus acknowledges that it's hard for humans to accept that the universe only gives what the nature of a human can handle--but he says it's only because humans are too stupid to recognize what is going on. Marcus describes the soul as a closed system: nothing outside it can touch it. Rather, the soul makes determinations about the things around it, and it has its own motion. Marcus gets imperial now, using the royal \"we\" and speaking of humankind as though it were another external thing that shouldn't concern him. Though he acknowledges that humans are kin to him, they are also thorns in his side since they keep him from doing what he considers his work. But since Marcus can think of humans as nothing more than animals or things, he's able to get around these stumbling blocks. He's incredibly flexible like that. This is what the mind does, Marcus claims: it works hard to turn a difficulty into an asset. Marcus tells himself that the power in the universe has replicated itself in him and should be respected. These twin powers rule all else. Marcus uses his city analogy again: if it doesn't hurt the city, the citizens can't be hurt. It's all about perception. If he imagines that he's been wronged, and yet the community is still fine, then he needs to rethink his anger. But even if the community is hurt, he still needs to point out to the wrongdoer the gravity and nature of the sin--but without anger. Marcus muses on the transience of human life and the things around him. Everything is quickly swept away by the tides of time. Marcus also urges himself to think about the vast expanses of time that bracket his life and to understand that the desire for fame or the need to fuss about life is just plain stupid. Marcus reminds himself that he is but the tiniest speck in the smallest moment of time on this earth. His part in history is negligible. Marcus says that he gets to mind his own business when another person does wrong. He has his own nature and reason to tend to, his own path. Let the other guy deal with his own stuff. Marcus emphasizes the need to keep his reason free from concerns of the world--either pleasure or pain--so that it can remain free. If something happens that reaches the mind, Marcus must refrain from adding a value judgment to it, because that will cause him to lose his independence of thought. Marcus defines what it means to live a life in communion with the gods. He respects the divinity within and is content with his lot in life. Marcus tackles a daily dilemma that even modern folk will appreciate: dealing with that guy with B. O. and bad breath. What to do? Marcus gets straight to the heart of the matter. The guy just stinks. That's the way it is. But Marcus himself should be a rational fellow: he should just tell the guy straight up and see if he's clever enough to remedy it. In that way, he doesn't have to feel anger at his stinky neighbor. Problem solved. Marcus talks about quality of life here. If he can't live on earth the way he hopes to live in the hereafter, why not just leave right now? There's no need for such drastic measures, however, as long as he remains independent and rational. Marcus reflects on the social nature of the Universe: the Whole has clearly made the rest of creation for its own sake and so on down the scala naturae. There is harmony in this hierarchy, to the benefit of the Whole. Marcus asks himself to evaluate his relationships with those around him, including his wife, children and friends. Has he been just to them? Marcus also reminds himself that he has lived his life well and has very often stuck to his philosophical principles. Marcus wants to know why ignorant people can get the better of the wise. He tries to remind himself what a wise person is: one who understands the cause and end of things and conforms to Reason, which orders the Universe. Marcus is in a black mood now, harping on the transience of life: it's short and empty. The \"goods\" of life are puny and rotten. Marcus is also lamenting the exodus of virtue to higher ground . So what's a virtuous man to do? Nothing but wait for death and try to cling to his principles. Contrary to some of his earlier comments, Marcus says that he's not in control of anything--not even his body or breath. Marcus is feeling more optimistic now, acknowledging success if he follows the path of reason. He claims that both gods and men have similar abilities in this: external stuff can't really stop them, and they find good in just action. Marcus questions why he lets things bother him, especially if they don't harm the community and if he has not acted unjustly. Marcus reveals a kingly concern here: he wants not to be swept up in other people's grief. It's his duty to help whoever suffers--even if it is over something stupid--but he can't imagine that these people are actually damaged by what has happened. Marcus has to remember that the things of this world are mere toys, and that perspective has to be maintained. A man shouldn't indulge in extremes of emotion--even less so an emperor. Marcus begins with something that looks like a lament for his loss of good fortune. But Marcus turns that frown upside down and tells himself that good luck is something he creates for himself. He also says that it flows from a well-intentioned soul.", "analysis": ""}