{"name": "Chapters7-9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020210431/https://www.novelguide.com/oliver-twist/summaries/chap7-chap9", "summary": "Noah found Mr. Bumble and told him that Oliver had tried to murder him, Charlotte, and Mrs. Sowerberry. Mr. Bumble and the man in white waistcoat were horrified, and Noah exclaimed that Oliver had intended to murder Mr. Sowerberry also. Mr. Bumble went with Noah to thrash Oliver and when they arrived, Mrs. Sowerberry had locked Oliver in the cellar. Mr. Bumble spoke sharply to Oliver and told Mrs. Sowerberry that she had been feeding the boy to liberally and that he should be kept on gruel for the rest of his apprenticeship. Mr. Bumble then stated that Oliver had come from a bad family, which angered Oliver again. Mr. Sowerberry arrives home asks Oliver what happened. Oliver tells him that Noah said bad things about his mother, and Mrs. Sowerberry began insulting her again. She then burst into tears because Oliver was talking back to her, and this forced Mr. Sowerberry to punish Oliver severely. They then sent him to bed, and early the next morning he rose and left the house. On his way towards London he stopped by the house of Mrs. Mann and saw his friend Dick, who appeared to be dying, out in the garden. The boys embrace, talk, and say their farewells to each other, and Oliver heads towards the city intent on running away from the Sowerberrys. Chapter 8: liver began his walk to London. He had very little food and had to beg for it on his way. He walked for seven days and had very little luck getting food or shelter from people in the towns he went through. He sat with bleeding feet on a doorstep one morning when a curious looking young gentleman around his age began talking to him. His name was Jack Dawkins He befriended Oliver and asked if he was going to London. Oliver told him he was and explained that he did not know where he would be staying. Mr. Dawkins told Oliver he could come with him and with his patronage stay with a gentleman he knew. So Oliver went with Jack and saw the filth of London for the first time in the middle of the night. Jack took Oliver into the house of the gentleman and he met the old Jew, Fagin. Fagin fed him and introduced him to the other boys sitting him in the room who, like Mr. Dawkins, were dressed like little adults. They were drinking spirits and smoking pipes and Oliver joined them. Fagin gave him a bed to sleep in and he went to sleep. Chapter 9: Oliver awoke the next morning to see Fagin examining several watches and rings in a wooden box. When he discovered Oliver was awake he questioned him on what he had seen, and admired him for his bravery. Jack, or Dodger, then came in with another boy from the previous evening, Charles Bates, and they showed the old Jew the things they collected from the execution they attended that morning. They then began playing a game where they would practice picking Fagin's pockets. Two girls with painted faces, Nancy and Bet came to visit the young men, and after drinking spirits, they went out with the young man. The Jew pointed out to Oliver what a nice life the young men led, and Oliver asked if they were done working for the day. Fagin said they were and told Oliver to try to lift the handkerchief from his pocket. Oliver succeeded, and began to learn how to 'unmark' them.", "analysis": ""}