{"name": "Phase IV: \"The Consequence,\" Chapter Thirty", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210424232301/http://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tess-of-the-durbervilles/summary/chapter-30", "summary": "Angel and Tess drive along towards the train station with the load of butter for the market. At first they don't talk. After a while it starts to drizzle. They snuggle up, and Angel takes a large piece of cloth and puts it over both of their shoulders. Now that they're all cozy and more-or-less dry, Angel asks her again for her reasons against marrying. She says she'll try to tell him before they get home. They pass an old manor-house, and Angel tells her it's the old seat of the D'Urbervilles--remember, he still doesn't know that she's related to that family. Tess doesn't say much in response. They get to the train station, and unload the butter and milk from the cart. Angel asks her why she won't marry him, if she loves him. She says it's because of something to do with her history. Again, Angel almost laughs. What kind of \"history\" can a country girl like Tess have? Tess starts to relate the story of childhood, but when she says that her father discovered that they were D'Urbervilles, and not Durbeyfields, Angel stops her. He has a romantic interest in old families, because he likes the history, he tells her. He just doesn't like it when people seem to think that good blood is everything. He asks if her D'Urberville connection was the only objection she had to marrying him. She loses courage, and says yes. Angel thinks it's awesome that she's a D'Urberville, and is very happy that that was the only obstacle. He calls her \"Mistress Theresa D'Urberville.\" She says she likes the old spelling of her name better. He tries to remember where he just heard the name D'Urberville recently... oh right, it was the name of that rascal who insulted his father. Tess gets more distressed at this reminder of Alec, but Angel doesn't seem to see it. He thinks she's just agitated with emotion. He asks if she'll marry him, now that her secret is out, and he doesn't mind it. She asks if he's very sure, and if he really, really wants to marry her. Of course he does, and she says yes, but then bursts into hysterical sobs. Angel asks what's up. She says she's broken her vow never to get married. She calms down a bit when she realizes that her crying is hurting his feelings, and she smooches him to show him just how much she loves him. After this make-out session, they climb back in the cart to drive home. She tells him she has to write to her mother, and he asks where her mother lives. When she tells him, he realizes that he had seen her before--at the dance on the village green. Tess, of course, had remembered it long since, and says that she hopes it's not a bad omen for them now, that he didn't dance with her then.", "analysis": ""}