{"name": "Chapters 13\u201316", "summary": "Chapter 13  Fagin erupts into a rage when the Dodger and Charley return without Oliver. Fagin tosses a pot of beer at Charley, but the pot hits Bill Sikes instead. Sikes is a rough, cruel man who makes his living by robbing houses. They resolve to find Oliver before he reveals their operation to the authorities, and persuade Nancy to go to the police station to find out what happened to him. \tNancy dresses in nice clothing, and at the police station she pretends to be Oliver\u2019s distraught sister. She learns that the gentleman from whom the handkerchief was stolen took Oliver home with him to the neighborhood of Pentonville, because the boy had fallen ill during the trial. Fagin sends Charley, Jack, and Nancy to Pentonville to find Oliver. Fagin decides to relocate his operation for the night and fills his pockets with the watches and jewelry from the hidden box after Charley, Nancy, and Jack leave.  Chapter 14  When Oliver next enters the housekeeper\u2019s room, he notices that the portrait of the lady whom he resembles is gone. Mrs. Bedwin says that Brownlow removed it because it seemed to worry Oliver. One day, Brownlow sends for Oliver to meet him in his study. Assuming that Brownlow means to send him away, Oliver begs to remain as a servant. Brownlow assures Oliver that he wishes to be Oliver\u2019s friend. He asks Oliver to tell him his history. Before Oliver can begin, Brownlow\u2019s friend, Mr. Grimwig, arrives to visit. \tGrimwig, a crotchety old man, hints that Oliver might be a boy of bad habits. Brownlow bears his friend\u2019s eccentricity with good humor. Mrs. Bedwin brings in a parcel of books delivered by the bookstall keeper\u2019s boy. Brownlow wishes to send his payment and some returns back with the boy, but he has already gone. Grimwig suggests that Brownlow send Oliver but hints that Oliver might steal the payment and the books. Wishing to prove Grimwig wrong, Brownlow sends Oliver on the errand. It grows dark and Oliver does not return.  Chapter 15  Oliver takes a wrong turn on the way to the bookstall. Suddenly, Nancy appears. She tells everyone on the street that Oliver is her runaway brother who joined a band of thieves, and that she is taking him back home to their parents. Everyone ignores Oliver\u2019s protests. Bill Sikes runs out of a beer shop, and he and Nancy drag Oliver through the dark backstreets.  Chapter 16  Nancy, Sikes, and Oliver arrive at a dilapidated house in a squalid neighborhood. Fagin, the Dodger, and Charley laugh hysterically at the fancy clothing Oliver is wearing. Oliver calls for help and flees, but Sikes threatens to set his vicious dog, Bull\u2019s-eye, on him. Nancy leaps to Oliver\u2019s defense, saying that they have ruined all his good prospects. She has worked for Fagin since she was a small child, and she knows that a life of disrepute lies in wait for Oliver. Fagin tries to beat Oliver for his escape attempt, and Nancy flies at Fagin in a rage. Sikes catches Nancy by the wrists, and she faints. They strip Oliver of his clothing, Brownlow\u2019s money, and the books. Fagin returns Oliver\u2019s old clothing to him and sends him to bed. Oliver had given the clothing to Mrs. Bedwin, who sold it to a Jew, and the Jew then delivered the clothing to Fagin and told Fagin where Oliver was.<PARAGRAPH>", "analysis": "Chapters 13\u201316 These chapters establish a relationship between clothing and identity. The disguise that Nancy wears when she enters the police station reveals key differences between the middle and lower classes in Victorian society. The crowning touch to her disguise is a plainly displayed door key, which marks her as a member of a property-owning class. Because she disguises herself as a middle-class woman, the legal system, in the form of the police station, recognizes her as an individual worth hearing. In the attire of the middle class, she gains both a social voice and social visibility. She becomes an individual rather than a member of the penniless mob. \tJust as Nancy assumes a middle-class identity by changing her clothing, Oliver sheds his identity as a orphan pickpocket when he leaves behind his pauper\u2019s clothes. Brownlow purchases an expensive new suit for him. Oliver thus assumes the identity of a gentleman\u2019s son by wearing the clothing of a gentleman\u2019s son. After he dons his new clothing, Mr. Brownlow asks him what he might like to be when he grows up. At the workhouse, the authorities never even bother to ask Oliver his opinion on the matter of his apprenticeship. In Victorian England, even more than today, an individual\u2019s profession determined a large part of his or her identity. The fact that no one at the workhouse asks for Oliver\u2019s opinion regarding his apprenticeship shows, once again, how much he is denied the right to define himself. Oliver\u2019s situation symbolically represents the silence of the poor. The poor cannot define their social identity\u2014instead, the empowered classes define the identity of the poor for them. Oliver and Nancy both gain a voice the moment they shed their pauper clothing. \tClass identity is correlated not only with clothing, but with history as well. Once Oliver dons his fine clothes, Brownlow asks him to give his own version of his life history. Earlier in the novel, when Oliver wears pauper\u2019s clothing, other people control his history and, therefore, his identity. When he is Sowerberry\u2019s apprentice, Oliver attempts to assume control of his identity by denying Noah\u2019s insults to his mother, but instead he receives a beating for trying to assert the correct version of his past. Once he sheds his pauper status, however, Oliver\u2019s right to explain his past is firmly established. The fact that Oliver is an orphan further underscores his lack of connection to his past. Whereas the upper classes, and particularly members of the aristocracy, are able to establish their identities by tracing their genealogies, Oliver seems to have no genealogy. \tNancy imposes another false identity on Oliver in order to kidnap him: she calls him her \u201cdear brother.\u201d This statement is not entirely a fabrication\u2014those who are denied families in the novel often seek out a family structure or are placed within family structures against their will. While a member of Fagin\u2019s clan, Oliver is a figurative brother to Nancy, since both are subject to the paternal authority of Fagin and are dependent upon him for their food and shelter. Through Nancy\u2019s regret at returning Oliver to Fagin, Dickens suggests that such a family, while providing companionship and a means for survival, is not ultimately nurturing or morally healthy. Nancy knows that for the rest of society, Oliver confirms the worst stereotypes of the poor as a member of Fagin\u2019s pickpocket band. Oliver\u2019s assumption of the identity of a thief comes with his assumption of the very same pauper\u2019s rags he had worn before. Donning his old clothing, the most obvious indicator of his poverty, marks him as a representative of vice for -Victorian society. \tAlthough most major characters in Oliver Twist are either paragons of goodness, like Oliver and Mr. Brownlow, or embodiments of evil, like Mr. Bumble, Fagin, and Sikes, Nancy\u2019s behavior spans moral extremes. Dickens\u2019s description of her manner as \u201cremarkably free and agreeable,\u201d combined with her position as a young, unmarried female pauper, strongly implies that she is a prostitute, a profession for which Dickens\u2019s Victorian readers would have felt little sympathy. In his preface to the 1841 edition of the novel, Dickens confirms this implication, writing that \u201cthe boys are pickpockets, and the girl is a prostitute.\u201d She also spearheads the scheme to bring Oliver back into Fagin\u2019s fold. But her outburst against Sikes and Fagin for seizing and mistreating Oliver demonstrates her deep and passionate sense of morality. Most other \u201cgood\u201d characters we meet are good because they have no firsthand experience with vice and degradation. Nancy knows degradation perfectly well, yet she is good. Her character is a forum for the novel to explore whether an individual can be redeemed from the effects of a bad environment. \tAt the same time, some critics have suggested that Nancy\u2019s speech, in which she announces her regret for having returned Oliver to Fagin\u2019s care, hints that the boys might also be involved in prostitution. Nancy, pointing to Oliver, declares, \u201cI have been in the same trade, and in the same service for twelve years since.\u201d The fact that Nancy points to Oliver even as she speaks about herself implies an absolute identification between the two characters. About this detail, as about Nancy\u2019s own identity as a prostitute, the narrative is purposely vague\u2014Victorian sensibilities mandated that explicit references to sexuality were largely avoided.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210126043207/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/oliver/section4/"}