{"name": "Book 5, Chapter 5", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210619215702/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mill-on-the-floss/summary/book-5-chapter-5", "summary": "Maggie is worried that someone is going to find out about her secret meetings with Philip and she imagines lots of scenarios where her secret is outed. The day after her latest meeting with her now kind-of boyfriend Philip, Maggie has tea with her family and the Pullets. Tom is in a super mood and has been happy that Maggie quit being so weird over the past year. Everyone comments on how nice Maggie is looking. The Pullets and the Tullivers start gossiping about Lucy and Mrs. Pullet mentions Philip Wakem. She says she saw him hanging around the Red Deeps the other day. Maggie freaks out at this statement and quickly tries to chill out, hoping that no one noticed. No one did notice, except for Tom. Tom is really suspicious and, being Tom, he instantly suspects the worst of Maggie. Later that day, Tom is talking with Bob Jakin, who comments on Philip. Bob has seen Philip hanging around the river lots of times. Tom rushes home to confront Maggie with his suspicions. He tells her that they are going to the Red Deeps to meet Philip. He demands that she confess everything. Maggie explains everything to Tom - how long she's been meeting Philip, their professions of love, etc. Tom is outraged. He tells Maggie that she can either swear on a Bible that she'll never see Philip again, or he will tell Mr. Tulliver everything. Maggie is crushed by this choice. She begs to talk to Philip privately one last time, but Tom refuses. Tom clearly isn't a romantic - though maybe he is and he realizes that every epic love-story needs an interfering jerk who tries to keep the couple apart. Way to step up to the plate there, Tom. Maggie finally swears on the Bible to never see Philip again. She is both humiliated and angry at Tom's treatment of her. Tom drags Maggie to the Red Deeps and proceeds to confront Philip. The two get into a huge argument over Maggie - each accuse the other of treating her badly. Tom gets really nasty to Philip and insults his family and his deformity. Maggie gets upset. Maggie says she's going along with this because of her father and Philip says he understands and his feelings haven't changed. Tom drags Maggie away. Maggie fights with Tom after they walk for a bit. She tells him he is judgmental and cruel and Tom insists that he is right and she should submit to him. Maggie runs upstairs when they get home, furious and crying. But she is also a little bit relieved to not see Philip anymore.", "analysis": ""}