{"name": "part 1, Chapter 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408023714/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-valley-of-fear/study-guide/summary-part-i-chapters-1-4", "summary": "This is the sort of moment Holmes lives for. He looks composed and interested, more intellectually excited than shocked or horrified. He explains the background of the cipher to MacDonald, and when MacDonald says they must find Porlock Holmes states that this is impossible. Porlock is connected to Moriarty, he explains. MacDonald smiles a bit and says the Yard thinks Holmes has a bee in his bonnet over the Professor. MacDonald had gone to see the Professor himself and was struck by his solemn mien and erudition. Holmes laughs and asks if MacDonald happened to notice the painting by Jean Baptiste Greuze behind Moriarty's desk. The inspector is confused and says no. Holmes explains who Greuze is and how valuable his paintings are; MacDonald wonders aloud how the Professor could afford it. That is the point, Holmes tells him, and they speculate about the man's illegal activities that procured his great wealth. Holmes knows a lot about Moriarty: he has many bank accounts, and must have extravagant wealth to be able to pay, for example, his chief of staff six thousand a year. The talk turns back to the murdered man, and the men speculate that Douglas came afoul of Moriarty, who ruled over his people with an iron fist. They all agree to go to Birlstone. MacDonald reads a note from Birlstone's local officer, White Mason, who had first taken up the case. Mason asked MacDonald to bring Holmes. Holmes muses aloud that there is a great brain in London and a dead man in Birlstone, and it is their job to trace the connection between them", "analysis": "The novel begins like many of the stories of Sherlock Holmes: a case is presented, Holmes gets involved, and the particulars of the crime are laid out before the reader. However, midway through the novel a major shift takes place in that the backstory of one of the characters takes over; now we are twenty years prior, in the coalfields of Pennsylvania, and dealing with a band of rapacious and murderous Irish union men. It is an abrupt shift and one that disconcerted readers looking for more of the perspicacious British detective, but Doyle was working through his own issues with his Irish identity. In these first few chapters, though, we see the classic duo of Holmes and Watson. Watson narrates the tale  and, as per usual for the Holmes canon, readers fashion of a portrait of the famous detective through the eyes of his friend. Holmes comes across as relaxed, confident, ever sagacious, and sharp; he welcomes the new mystery and seems energized and vitalized by it. Critic Anthony Boucher  says \"this is a ripe, mature Holmes, free from external eccentricities...Here is Holmes in the perfect thinking mind, in crypt-analysis, in observation, in deduction...Holmes  at his most completely charming...There is more overt humor here than is usual...there is a certain fey quality.\" The first mystery  is the identity of Porlock and what Moriarty might be up to. It has been suggested Porlock was actually Mycroft, Sherlock Holmes's elder brother, but Doyle never stated this definitively. Porlock is shadowed in mystery and fear, and his connection to that most cunning of Holmes's enemies, Moriarty, is also ambiguous. Moriarty never makes an actual appearance in the novel; instead, he is fashioned through the comments of Holmes and MacDonald; this adds to the character's mystique, especially as it becomes clear that, without nearly any evidence, he is indelibly connected to this case. The second mystery is the actual case itself. What arguably makes the Sherlock Holmes collection so appealing is that readers have the opportunity to play detectives as well, using Watson as their stand-in to survey the evidence and then see if they can figure the case out. Here the evidence can be easily summed up: the dead body, shot close-range by a sawed-off American shotgun; a stain of blood on the windowsill; muddy shoeprints near the windowsill; one dumbbell; a mysterious card near the body; a missing wedding ring; reports of the timing of the shot; a bicycle in the hedges. Keen readers then pick up on the bluster of Barker and the strangely emotionless behavior of Mrs. Douglas. Watson's encounter with the two in the garden only adds to the rumors of Douglas's jealousy regarding their friendship. Still more clues begin to present themselves in terms of Douglas's past and the sense that he was under some sort of dark cloud. It is clear he came to England to escape some sort of persecution in America, and it is connected with the shadowy \"Valley of Fear.\" This ominous appellation is a physical place as well as a symbolic one in the sense that Douglas is psychologically stuck in that infernal valley."}