{"name": "part 1, Chapter 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408023714/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-valley-of-fear/study-guide/summary-part-i-chapters-1-4", "summary": "Watson narrates the tale. He begins with Sherlock Holmes lost in thought, looking at a letter from 'Porlock'. Watson asks who Porlock is, and Holmes explains it is a nom-de-plume; Porlock is important in that he is connected to an influential man: Professor Moriarty. Moriarty is unknown as a criminal to the public, but Holmes knows better; however, anyone who tries to cast aspersions at the great man would be laughed at. Watson nods in agreement and Holmes continues, saying Porlock has been a secret help to him once or twice. He has now sent a series of numbers and letters with two words: 'Douglas' and 'Birlstone', the latter repeated twice. It is a cipher with no code. Watson asks why there would be no code; Holmes believes it will arrive soon. Indeed, the page soon arrives, but when Holmes opens the letter they see that the frightened Porlock has written that he will not provide the code because he is under suspicion. Watson rues that there is a secret in the cipher that they will never know. Holmes is quiet, and then says that it relates to a book; he infers that Porlock assumed he'd have it. They deduce it must be the most commonly possessed book--an almanac. They locate the right almanac and the correct pages and words in order to discern that someone named Douglas is in danger, and a house of Birlstone is somehow involved. Before they can parse these words much further than acknowledging the danger for this gentleman named Douglas, Alec MacDonald of Scotland Yard enters; he is a friend of Holmes's whom the detective had helped a few times in the past, thereby earning the young, intelligent Scotsman's respect. MacDonald greets Holmes and Watson and says there is new mischief afoot, but before he can get further he sees the cipher on the table. His entire countenance fills with amazement and he sputters out his question of how Holmes got the cipher. After Holmes asks what is amiss; MacDonald says, dazed, Mr. Douglas of Birlstone was murdered last night", "analysis": "The novel begins like many of the stories of Sherlock Holmes: a case is presented, Holmes gets involved, and the particulars of the crime are laid out before the reader. However, midway through the novel a major shift takes place in that the backstory of one of the characters takes over; now we are twenty years prior, in the coalfields of Pennsylvania, and dealing with a band of rapacious and murderous Irish union men. It is an abrupt shift and one that disconcerted readers looking for more of the perspicacious British detective, but Doyle was working through his own issues with his Irish identity. In these first few chapters, though, we see the classic duo of Holmes and Watson. Watson narrates the tale  and, as per usual for the Holmes canon, readers fashion of a portrait of the famous detective through the eyes of his friend. Holmes comes across as relaxed, confident, ever sagacious, and sharp; he welcomes the new mystery and seems energized and vitalized by it. Critic Anthony Boucher  says \"this is a ripe, mature Holmes, free from external eccentricities...Here is Holmes in the perfect thinking mind, in crypt-analysis, in observation, in deduction...Holmes  at his most completely charming...There is more overt humor here than is usual...there is a certain fey quality.\" The first mystery  is the identity of Porlock and what Moriarty might be up to. It has been suggested Porlock was actually Mycroft, Sherlock Holmes's elder brother, but Doyle never stated this definitively. Porlock is shadowed in mystery and fear, and his connection to that most cunning of Holmes's enemies, Moriarty, is also ambiguous. Moriarty never makes an actual appearance in the novel; instead, he is fashioned through the comments of Holmes and MacDonald; this adds to the character's mystique, especially as it becomes clear that, without nearly any evidence, he is indelibly connected to this case. The second mystery is the actual case itself. What arguably makes the Sherlock Holmes collection so appealing is that readers have the opportunity to play detectives as well, using Watson as their stand-in to survey the evidence and then see if they can figure the case out. Here the evidence can be easily summed up: the dead body, shot close-range by a sawed-off American shotgun; a stain of blood on the windowsill; muddy shoeprints near the windowsill; one dumbbell; a mysterious card near the body; a missing wedding ring; reports of the timing of the shot; a bicycle in the hedges. Keen readers then pick up on the bluster of Barker and the strangely emotionless behavior of Mrs. Douglas. Watson's encounter with the two in the garden only adds to the rumors of Douglas's jealousy regarding their friendship. Still more clues begin to present themselves in terms of Douglas's past and the sense that he was under some sort of dark cloud. It is clear he came to England to escape some sort of persecution in America, and it is connected with the shadowy \"Valley of Fear.\" This ominous appellation is a physical place as well as a symbolic one in the sense that Douglas is psychologically stuck in that infernal valley."}