Chapter XVI  Mme. Giry's Astounding Revelations as to Her Personal
Relations with the Opera Ghost


Before following the commissary into the manager's office I must
describe certain extraordinary occurrences that took place in that
office which Remy and Mercier had vainly tried to enter and into which
MM. Richard and Moncharmin had locked themselves with an object which
the reader does not yet know, but which it is my duty, as an historian,
to reveal without further postponement.

I have had occasion to say that the managers' mood had undergone a
disagreeable change for some time past and to convey the fact that this
change was due not only to the fall of the chandelier on the famous
night of the gala performance.

The reader must know that the ghost had calmly been paid his first
twenty thousand francs.  Oh, there had been wailing and gnashing of
teeth, indeed!  And yet the thing had happened as simply as could be.

One morning, the managers found on their table an envelope addressed to
"Monsieur O. G. (private)" and accompanied by a note from O. G. himself:

The time has come to carry out the clause in the memorandum-book.
Please put twenty notes of a thousand francs each into this envelope,
seal it with your own seal and hand it to Mme. Giry, who will do what
is necessary.

The managers did not hesitate; without wasting time in asking how these
confounded communications came to be delivered in an office which they
were careful to keep locked, they seized this opportunity of laying
hands, on the mysterious blackmailer.  And, after telling the whole
story, under the promise of secrecy, to Gabriel and Mercier, they put
the twenty thousand francs into the envelope and without asking for
explanations, handed it to Mme. Giry, who had been reinstated in her
functions.  The box-keeper displayed no astonishment.  I need hardly
say that she was well watched.  She went straight to the ghost's box
and placed the precious envelope on the little shelf attached to the
ledge.  The two managers, as well as Gabriel and Mercier, were hidden
in such a way that they did not lose sight of the envelope for a second
during the performance and even afterward, for, as the envelope had not
moved, those who watched it did not move either; and Mme. Giry went
away while the managers, Gabriel and Mercier were still there.  At
last, they became tired of waiting and opened the envelope, after
ascertaining that the seals had not been broken.

At first sight, Richard and Moncharmin thought that the notes were
still there; but soon they perceived that they were not the same.  The
twenty real notes were gone and had been replaced by twenty notes, of
the "Bank of St. Farce"![1]

The managers' rage and fright were unmistakable.  Moncharmin wanted to
send for the commissary of police, but Richard objected.  He no doubt
had a plan, for he said:

"Don't let us make ourselves ridiculous!  All Paris would laugh at us.
O. G. has won the first game:  we will win the second."

He was thinking of the next month's allowance.

Nevertheless, they had been so absolutely tricked that they were bound
to suffer a certain dejection.  And, upon my word, it was not difficult
to understand.  We must not forget that the managers had an idea at the
back of their minds, all the time, that this strange incident might be
an unpleasant practical joke on the part of their predecessors and that
it would not do to divulge it prematurely.  On the other hand,
Moncharmin was sometimes troubled with a suspicion of Richard himself,
who occasionally took fanciful whims into his head.  And so they were
content to await events, while keeping an eye on Mother Giry.  Richard
would not have her spoken to.

"If she is a confederate," he said, "the notes are gone long ago.  But,
in my opinion, she is merely an idiot."

"She's not the only idiot in this business," said Moncharmin pensively.

"Well, who could have thought it?" moaned Richard.  "But don't be
afraid ... next time, I shall have taken my precautions."

The next time fell on the same day that beheld the disappearance of
Christine Daae.  In the morning, a note from the ghost reminded them
that the money was due.  It read:

Do just as you did last time.  It went very well.  Put the twenty
thousand in the envelope and hand it to our excellent Mme. Giry.

And the note was accompanied by the usual envelope.  They had only to
insert the notes.

This was done about half an hour before the curtain rose on the first
act of Faust.  Richard showed the envelope to Moncharmin.  Then he
counted the twenty thousand-franc notes in front of him and put the
notes into the envelope, but without closing it.

"And now," he said, "let's have Mother Giry in."

The old woman was sent for.  She entered with a sweeping courtesy.  She
still wore her black taffeta dress, the color of which was rapidly
turning to rust and lilac, to say nothing of the dingy bonnet.  She
seemed in a good temper.  She at once said:

"Good evening, gentlemen!  It's for the envelope, I suppose?"

"Yes, Mme. Giry," said Richard, most amiably.  "For the envelope ...
and something else besides."

"At your service, M. Richard, at your service.  And what is the
something else, please?"

"First of all, Mme. Giry, I have a little question to put to you."

"By all means, M. Richard:  Mme. Giry is here to answer you."

"Are you still on good terms with the ghost?"

"Couldn't be better, sir; couldn't be better."

"Ah, we are delighted ...  Look here, Mme. Giry," said Richard, in the
tone of making an important confidence.  "We may just as well tell you,
among ourselves ... you're no fool!"

"Why, sir," exclaimed the box-keeper, stopping the pleasant nodding of
the black feathers in her dingy bonnet, "I assure you no one has ever
doubted that!"

"We are quite agreed and we shall soon understand one another.  The
story of the ghost is all humbug, isn't it? ... Well, still between
ourselves, ... it has lasted long enough."

Mme. Giry looked at the managers as though they were talking Chinese.
She walked up to Richard's table and asked, rather anxiously:

"What do you mean?  I don't understand."

"Oh, you, understand quite well.  In any case, you've got to
understand...  And, first of all, tell us his name."

"Whose name?"

"The name of the man whose accomplice you are, Mme. Giry!"

"I am the ghost's accomplice?  I? ... His accomplice in what, pray?"

"You do all he wants."

"Oh!  He's not very troublesome, you know."

"And does he still tip you?"

"I mustn't complain."

"How much does he give you for bringing him that envelope?"

"Ten francs."

"You poor thing!  That's not much, is it?

"Why?"

"I'll tell you that presently, Mme. Giry.  Just now we should like to
know for what extraordinary reason you have given yourself body and
soul, to this ghost ... Mme. Giry's friendship and devotion are not to
be bought for five francs or ten francs."

"That's true enough ...  And I can tell you the reason, sir.  There's
no disgrace about it...  on the contrary."

"We're quite sure of that, Mme. Giry!"

"Well, it's like this ... only the ghost doesn't like me to talk about
his business."

"Indeed?" sneered Richard.

"But this is a matter that concerns myself alone ...  Well, it was in
Box Five one evening, I found a letter addressed to myself, a sort of
note written in red ink.  I needn't read the letter to you sir; I know
it by heart, and I shall never forget it if I live to be a hundred!"

And Mme. Giry, drawing herself up, recited the letter with touching
eloquence:

MADAM:

1825.  Mlle. Menetrier, leader of the ballet, became Marquise de Cussy.

1832.  Mlle. Marie Taglioni, a dancer, became Comtesse Gilbert des
Voisins.

1846.  La Sota, a dancer, married a brother of the King of Spain.

1847.  Lola Montes, a dancer, became the morganatic wife of King Louis
of Bavaria and was created Countess of Landsfeld.

1848.  Mlle. Maria, a dancer, became Baronne d'Herneville.

1870.  Theresa Hessier, a dancer, married Dom Fernando, brother to the
King of Portugal.

Richard and Moncharmin listened to the old woman, who, as she proceeded
with the enumeration of these glorious nuptials, swelled out, took
courage and, at last, in a voice bursting with pride, flung out the
last sentence of the prophetic letter:

1885.  Meg Giry, Empress!

Exhausted by this supreme effort, the box-keeper fell into a chair,
saying:

"Gentlemen, the letter was signed, 'Opera Ghost.'  I had heard much of
the ghost, but only half believed in him.  From the day when he
declared that my little Meg, the flesh of my flesh, the fruit of my
womb, would be empress, I believed in him altogether."

And really it was not necessary to make a long study of Mme. Giry's
excited features to understand what could be got out of that fine
intellect with the two words "ghost" and "empress."

But who pulled the strings of that extraordinary puppet?  That was the
question.

"You have never seen him; he speaks to you and you believe all he
says?" asked Moncharmin.

"Yes.  To begin with, I owe it to him that my little Meg was promoted
to be the leader of a row.  I said to the ghost, 'If she is to be
empress in 1885, there is no time to lose; she must become a leader at
once.' He said, 'Look upon it as done.'  And he had only a word to say
to M. Poligny and the thing was done."

"So you see that M. Poligny saw him!"

"No, not any more than I did; but he heard him.  The ghost said a word
in his ear, you know, on the evening when he left Box Five, looking so
dreadfully pale."

Moncharmin heaved a sigh.  "What a business!" he groaned.

"Ah!" said Mme. Giry.  "I always thought there were secrets between the
ghost and M. Poligny.  Anything that the ghost asked M. Poligny to do
M. Poligny did.  M. Poligny could refuse the ghost nothing."

"You hear, Richard:  Poligny could refuse the ghost nothing."

"Yes, yes, I hear!" said Richard.  "M. Poligny is a friend of the
ghost; and, as Mme. Giry is a friend of M. Poligny, there we are!  ...
But I don't care a hang about M. Poligny," he added roughly.  "The only
person whose fate really interests me is Mme. Giry...  Mme. Giry, do
you know what is in this envelope?"

"Why, of course not," she said.

"Well, look."

Mine.  Giry looked into the envelope with a lackluster eye, which soon
recovered its brilliancy.

"Thousand-franc notes!" she cried.

"Yes, Mme. Giry, thousand-franc notes!  And you knew it!"

"I, sir?  I? ... I swear ..."

"Don't swear, Mme. Giry! ... And now I will tell you the second reason
why I sent for you.  Mme. Giry, I am going to have you arrested."

The two black feathers on the dingy bonnet, which usually affected the
attitude of two notes of interrogation, changed into two notes of
exclamation; as for the bonnet itself, it swayed in menace on the old
lady's tempestuous chignon.  Surprise, indignation, protest and dismay
were furthermore displayed by little Meg's mother in a sort of
extravagant movement of offended virtue, half bound, half slide, that
brought her right under the nose of M. Richard, who could not help
pushing back his chair.

"HAVE ME ARRESTED!"

The mouth that spoke those words seemed to spit the three teeth that
were left to it into Richard's face.

M. Richard behaved like a hero.  He retreated no farther.  His
threatening forefinger seemed already to be pointing out the keeper of
Box Five to the absent magistrates.

"I am going to have you arrested, Mme. Giry, as a thief!"

"Say that again!"

And Mme. Giry caught Mr. Manager Richard a mighty box on the ear,
before Mr. Manager Moncharmin had time to intervene.  But it was not
the withered hand of the angry old beldame that fell on the managerial
ear, but the envelope itself, the cause of all the trouble, the magic
envelope that opened with the blow, scattering the bank-notes, which
escaped in a fantastic whirl of giant butterflies.

The two managers gave a shout, and the same thought made them both go
on their knees, feverishly, picking up and hurriedly examining the
precious scraps of paper.

"Are they still genuine, Moncharmin?"

"Are they still genuine, Richard?"

"Yes, they are still genuine!"

Above their heads, Mme. Giry's three teeth were clashing in a noisy
contest, full of hideous interjections.  But all that could be clearly
distinguished was this LEIT-MOTIF:

"I, a thief! ... I, a thief, I?"

She choked with rage.  She shouted:

"I never heard of such a thing!"

And, suddenly, she darted up to Richard again.

"In any case," she yelped, "you, M. Richard, ought to know better than
I where the twenty thousand francs went to!"

"I?" asked Richard, astounded.  "And how should I know?"

Moncharmin, looking severe and dissatisfied, at once insisted that the
good lady should explain herself.

"What does this mean, Mme. Giry?" he asked.  "And why do you say that
M. Richard ought to know better than you where the twenty-thousand
francs went to?"

As for Richard, who felt himself turning red under Moncharmin's eyes,
he took Mme. Giry by the wrist and shook it violently.  In a voice
growling and rolling like thunder, he roared:

"Why should I know better than you where the twenty-thousand francs
went to?  Why?  Answer me!"

"Because they went into your pocket!" gasped the old woman, looking at
him as if he were the devil incarnate.

Richard would have rushed upon Mme. Giry, if Moncharmin had not stayed
his avenging hand and hastened to ask her, more gently:

"How can you suspect my partner, M. Richard, of putting twenty-thousand
francs in his pocket?"

"I never said that," declared Mme. Giry, "seeing that it was myself who
put the twenty-thousand francs into M. Richard's pocket." And she
added, under her voice, "There!  It's out! ... And may the ghost
forgive me!"

Richard began bellowing anew, but Moncharmin authoritatively ordered
him to be silent.

"Allow me!  Allow me!  Let the woman explain herself.  Let me question
her."  And he added:  "It is really astonishing that you should take up
such a tone! ... We are on the verge of clearing up the whole mystery.
And you're in a rage! ... You're wrong to behave like that...  I'm
enjoying myself immensely."

Mme. Giry, like the martyr that she was, raised her head, her face
beaming with faith in her own innocence.

"You tell me there were twenty-thousand francs in the envelope which I
put into M. Richard's pocket; but I tell you again that I knew nothing
about it ...  Nor M. Richard either, for that matter!"

"Aha!" said Richard, suddenly assuming a swaggering air which
Moncharmin did not like.  "I knew nothing either!  You put
twenty-thousand francs in my pocket and I knew nothing either!  I am
very glad to hear it, Mme. Giry!"

"Yes," the terrible dame agreed, "yes, it's true.  We neither of us
knew anything.  But you, you must have ended by finding out!"

Richard would certainly have swallowed Mme. Giry alive, if Moncharmin
had not been there!  But Moncharmin protected her.  He resumed his
questions:

"What sort of envelope did you put in M. Richard's pocket?  It was not
the one which we gave you, the one which you took to Box Five before
our eyes; and yet that was the one which contained the twenty-thousand
francs."

"I beg your pardon.  The envelope which M. le Directeur gave me was the
one which I slipped into M. le Directeur's pocket," explained Mme.
Giry.  "The one which I took to the ghost's box was another envelope,
just like it, which the ghost gave me beforehand and which I hid up my
sleeve."

So saying, Mme. Giry took from her sleeve an envelope ready prepared
and similarly addressed to that containing the twenty-thousand francs.
The managers took it from her.  They examined it and saw that it was
fastened with seals stamped with their own managerial seal.  They
opened it.  It contained twenty Bank of St. Farce notes like those
which had so much astounded them the month before.

"How simple!" said Richard.

"How simple!" repeated Moncharmin.  And he continued with his eyes
fixed upon Mme. Giry, as though trying to hypnotize her.

"So it was the ghost who gave you this envelope and told you to
substitute it for the one which we gave you?  And it was the ghost who
told you to put the other into M. Richard's pocket?"

"Yes, it was the ghost."

"Then would you mind giving us a specimen of your little talents?  Here
is the envelope.  Act as though we knew nothing."

"As you please, gentlemen."

Mme. Giry took the envelope with the twenty notes inside it and made
for the door.  She was on the point of going out when the two managers
rushed at her:

"Oh, no!  Oh, no!  We're not going to be 'done' a second time!  Once
bitten, twice shy!"

"I beg your pardon, gentlemen," said the old woman, in self-excuse,
"you told me to act as though you knew nothing ...  Well, if you knew
nothing, I should go away with your envelope!"

"And then how would you slip it into my pocket?" argued Richard, whom
Moncharmin fixed with his left eye, while keeping his right on Mme.
Giry:  a proceeding likely to strain his sight, but Moncharmin was
prepared to go to any length to discover the truth.

"I am to slip it into your pocket when you least expect it, sir.  You
know that I always take a little turn behind the scenes, in the course
of the evening, and I often go with my daughter to the ballet-foyer,
which I am entitled to do, as her mother; I bring her her shoes, when
the ballet is about to begin ... in fact, I come and go as I please ...
The subscribers come and go too...  So do you, sir ...  There are lots
of people about ...  I go behind you and slip the envelope into the
tail-pocket of your dress-coat ...  There's no witchcraft about that!"

"No witchcraft!" growled Richard, rolling his eyes like Jupiter Tonans.
"No witchcraft!  Why, I've just caught you in a lie, you old witch!"

Mme. Giry bristled, with her three teeth sticking out of her mouth.

"And why, may I ask?"

"Because I spent that evening watching Box Five and the sham envelope
which you put there.  I did not go to the ballet-foyer for a second."

"No, sir, and I did not give you the envelope that evening, but at the
next performance ... on the evening when the under-secretary of state
for fine arts ..."

At these words, M. Richard suddenly interrupted Mme. Giry:

"Yes, that's true, I remember now!  The under-secretary went behind the
scenes.  He asked for me.  I went down to the ballet-foyer for a
moment.  I was on the foyer steps ...  The under-secretary and his
chief clerk were in the foyer itself.  I suddenly turned around ... you
had passed behind me, Mme. Giry ...  You seemed to push against me ...
Oh, I can see you still, I can see you still!"

"Yes, that's it, sir, that's it.  I had just finished my little
business.  That pocket of yours, sir, is very handy!"

And Mme. Giry once more suited the action to the word, She passed
behind M. Richard and, so nimbly that Moncharmin himself was impressed
by it, slipped the envelope into the pocket of one of the tails of M.
Richard's dress-coat.

"Of course!" exclaimed Richard, looking a little pale.  "It's very
clever of O. G.  The problem which he had to solve was this: how to do
away with any dangerous intermediary between the man who gives the
twenty-thousand francs and the man who receives it.  And by far the
best thing he could hit upon was to come and take the money from my
pocket without my noticing it, as I myself did not know that it was
there.  It's wonderful!"

"Oh, wonderful, no doubt!"  Moncharmin agreed.  "Only, you forget,
Richard, that I provided ten-thousand francs of the twenty and that
nobody put anything in my pocket!"



[1] Flash notes drawn on the "Bank of St. Farce" in France correspond
with those drawn on the "Bank of Engraving" in England.--Translator's
Note.





