Chapter VIII  The Mysterious Brougham


That tragic evening was bad for everybody.  Carlotta fell ill.  As for
Christine Daae, she disappeared after the performance.  A fortnight
elapsed during which she was seen neither at the Opera nor outside.

Raoul, of course, was the first to be astonished at the prima donna's
absence.  He wrote to her at Mme. Valerius' flat and received no reply.
His grief increased and he ended by being seriously alarmed at never
seeing her name on the program.  FAUST was played without her.

One afternoon he went to the managers' office to ask the reason of
Christine's disappearance.  He found them both looking extremely
worried.  Their own friends did not recognize them: they had lost all
their gaiety and spirits.  They were seen crossing the stage with
hanging heads, care-worn brows, pale cheeks, as though pursued by some
abominable thought or a prey to some persistent sport of fate.

The fall of the chandelier had involved them in no little
responsibility; but it was difficult to make them speak about it.  The
inquest had ended in a verdict of accidental death, caused by the wear
and tear of the chains by which the chandelier was hung from the
ceiling; but it was the duty of both the old and the new managers to
have discovered this wear and tear and to have remedied it in time.
And I feel bound to say that MM. Richard and Moncharmin at this time
appeared so changed, so absent-minded, so mysterious, so
incomprehensible that many of the subscribers thought that some event
even more horrible than the fall of the chandelier must have affected
their state of mind.

In their daily intercourse, they showed themselves very impatient,
except with Mme. Giry, who had been reinstated in her functions.  And
their reception of the Vicomte de Chagny, when he came to ask about
Christine, was anything but cordial.  They merely told him that she was
taking a holiday.  He asked how long the holiday was for, and they
replied curtly that it was for an unlimited period, as Mlle. Daae had
requested leave of absence for reasons of health.

"Then she is ill!" he cried.  "What is the matter with her?"

"We don't know."

"Didn't you send the doctor of the Opera to see her?"

"No, she did not ask for him; and, as we trust her, we took her word."

Raoul left the building a prey to the gloomiest thoughts.  He resolved,
come what might, to go and inquire of Mamma Valerius.  He remembered
the strong phrases in Christine's letter, forbidding him to make any
attempt to see her.  But what he had seen at Perros, what he had heard
behind the dressing-room door, his conversation with Christine at the
edge of the moor made him suspect some machination which, devilish
though it might be, was none the less human.  The girl's highly strung
imagination, her affectionate and credulous mind, the primitive
education which had surrounded her childhood with a circle of legends,
the constant brooding over her dead father and, above all, the state of
sublime ecstasy into which music threw her from the moment that this
art was made manifest to her in certain exceptional conditions, as in
the churchyard at Perros; all this seemed to him to constitute a moral
ground only too favorable for the malevolent designs of some mysterious
and unscrupulous person.  Of whom was Christine Daae the victim?  This
was the very reasonable question which Raoul put to himself as he
hurried off to Mamma Valerius.

He trembled as he rang at a little flat in the Rue
Notre-Dame-des-Victoires.  The door was opened by the maid whom he had
seen coming out of Christine's dressing-room one evening.  He asked if
he could speak to Mme. Valerius.  He was told that she was ill in bed
and was not receiving visitors.

"Take in my card, please," he said.

The maid soon returned and showed him into a small and scantily
furnished drawing-room, in which portraits of Professor Valerius and
old Daae hung on opposite walls.

"Madame begs Monsieur le Vicomte to excuse her," said the servant.
"She can only see him in her bedroom, because she can no longer stand
on her poor legs."

Five minutes later, Raoul was ushered into an ill-lit room where he at
once recognized the good, kind face of Christine's benefactress in the
semi-darkness of an alcove.  Mamma Valerius' hair was now quite white,
but her eyes had grown no older; never, on the contrary, had their
expression been so bright, so pure, so child-like.

"M. de Chagny!" she cried gaily, putting out both her hands to her
visitor.  "Ah, it's Heaven that sends you here! ... We can talk of HER."

This last sentence sounded very gloomily in the young man's ears.  He
at once asked:

"Madame ... where is Christine?"

And the old lady replied calmly:

"She is with her good genius!"

"What good genius?" exclaimed poor Raoul.

"Why, the Angel of Music!"

The viscount dropped into a chair.  Really?  Christine was with the
Angel of Music?  And there lay Mamma Valerius in bed, smiling to him
and putting her finger to her lips, to warn him to be silent!  And she
added:

"You must not tell anybody!"

"You can rely on me," said Raoul.

He hardly knew what he was saying, for his ideas about Christine,
already greatly confused, were becoming more and more entangled; and it
seemed as if everything was beginning to turn around him, around the
room, around that extraordinary good lady with the white hair and
forget-me-not eyes.

"I know!  I know I can!" she said, with a happy laugh.  "But why don't
you come near me, as you used to do when you were a little boy?  Give
me your hands, as when you brought me the story of little Lotte, which
Daddy Daae had told you.  I am very fond of you, M. Raoul, you know.
And so is Christine too!"

"She is fond of me!" sighed the young man.  He found a difficulty in
collecting his thoughts and bringing them to bear on Mamma Valerius'
"good genius," on the Angel of Music of whom Christine had spoken to
him so strangely, on the death's head which he had seen in a sort of
nightmare on the high altar at Perros and also on the Opera ghost,
whose fame had come to his ears one evening when he was standing behind
the scenes, within hearing of a group of scene-shifters who were
repeating the ghastly description which the hanged man, Joseph Buquet,
had given of the ghost before his mysterious death.

He asked in a low voice:  "What makes you think that Christine is fond
of me, madame?"

"She used to speak of you every day."

"Really? ... And what did she tell you?"

"She told me that you had made her a proposal!"

And the good old lady began laughing wholeheartedly.  Raoul sprang from
his chair, flushing to the temples, suffering agonies.

"What's this?  Where are you going?  Sit down again at once, will you?
... Do you think I will let you go like that? ... If you're angry with
me for laughing, I beg your pardon... After all, what has happened
isn't your fault... Didn't you know? ... Did you think that Christine
was free? ..."

"Is Christine engaged to be married?" the wretched Raoul asked, in a
choking voice.

"Why no!  Why no! ... You know as well as I do that Christine couldn't
marry, even if she wanted to!"

"But I don't know anything about it! ... And why can't Christine marry?"

"Because of the Angel of Music, of course! ..."

"I don't follow ..."

"Yes, he forbids her to! ..."

"He forbids her! ... The Angel of Music forbids her to marry!"

"Oh, he forbids her ... without forbidding her.  It's like this: he
tells her that, if she got married, she would never hear him again.
That's all! ... And that he would go away for ever! ... So, you
understand, she can't let the Angel of Music go.  It's quite natural."

"Yes, yes," echoed Raoul submissively, "it's quite natural."

"Besides, I thought Christine had told you all that, when she met you
at Perros, where she went with her good genius."

"Oh, she went to Perros with her good genius, did she?"

"That is to say, he arranged to meet her down there, in Perros
churchyard, at Daae's grave.  He promised to play her The Resurrection
of Lazarus on her father's violin!"

Raoul de Chagny rose and, with a very authoritative air, pronounced
these peremptory words:

"Madame, you will have the goodness to tell me where that genius lives."

The old lady did not seem surprised at this indiscreet command.  She
raised her eyes and said:

"In Heaven!"

Such simplicity baffled him.  He did not know what to say in the
presence of this candid and perfect faith in a genius who came down
nightly from Heaven to haunt the dressing-rooms at the Opera.

He now realized the possible state of mind of a girl brought up between
a superstitious fiddler and a visionary old lady and he shuddered when
he thought of the consequences of it all.

"Is Christine still a good girl?" he asked suddenly, in spite of
himself.

"I swear it, as I hope to be saved!" exclaimed the old woman, who, this
time, seemed to be incensed.  "And, if you doubt it, sir, I don't know
what you are here for!"

Raoul tore at his gloves.

"How long has she known this 'genius?'"

"About three months ...  Yes, it's quite three months since he began to
give her lessons."

The viscount threw up his arms with a gesture of despair.

"The genius gives her lessons! ... And where, pray?"

"Now that she has gone away with him, I can't say; but, up to a
fortnight ago, it was in Christine's dressing-room. It would be
impossible in this little flat.  The whole house would hear them.
Whereas, at the Opera, at eight o'clock in the morning, there is no one
about, do you see!"

"Yes, I see!  I see!" cried the viscount.

And he hurriedly took leave of Mme. Valerius, who asked herself if the
young nobleman was not a little off his head.

He walked home to his brother's house in a pitiful state.  He could
have struck himself, banged his head against the walls!  To think that
he had believed in her innocence, in her purity!  The Angel of Music!
He knew him now!  He saw him!  It was beyond a doubt some unspeakable
tenor, a good-looking jackanapes, who mouthed and simpered as he sang!
He thought himself as absurd and as wretched as could be.  Oh, what a
miserable, little, insignificant, silly young man was M. le Vicomte de
Chagny! thought Raoul, furiously.  And she, what a bold and damnable
sly creature!

His brother was waiting for him and Raoul fell into his arms, like a
child.  The count consoled him, without asking for explanations; and
Raoul would certainly have long hesitated before telling him the story
of the Angel of Music.  His brother suggested taking him out to dinner.
Overcome as he was with despair, Raoul would probably have refused any
invitation that evening, if the count had not, as an inducement, told
him that the lady of his thoughts had been seen, the night before, in
company of the other sex in the Bois.  At first, the viscount refused
to believe; but he received such exact details that he ceased
protesting.  She had been seen, it appeared, driving in a brougham,
with the window down.  She seemed to be slowly taking in the icy night
air.  There was a glorious moon shining.  She was recognized beyond a
doubt.  As for her companion, only his shadowy outline was
distinguished leaning back in the dark.  The carriage was going at a
walking pace in a lonely drive behind the grand stand at Longchamp.

Raoul dressed in frantic haste, prepared to forget his distress by
flinging himself, as people say, into "the vortex of pleasure." Alas,
he was a very sorry guest and, leaving his brother early, found
himself, by ten o'clock in the evening, in a cab, behind the Longchamp
race-course.

It was bitterly cold.  The road seemed deserted and very bright under
the moonlight.  He told the driver to wait for him patiently at the
corner of a near turning and, hiding himself as well as he could, stood
stamping his feet to keep warm.  He had been indulging in this healthy
exercise for half an hour or so, when a carriage turned the corner of
the road and came quietly in his direction, at a walking pace.

As it approached, he saw that a woman was leaning her head from the
window.  And, suddenly, the moon shed a pale gleam over her features.

"Christine!"

The sacred name of his love had sprung from his heart and his lips.  He
could not keep it back... He would have given anything to withdraw it,
for that name, proclaimed in the stillness of the night, had acted as
though it were the preconcerted signal for a furious rush on the part
of the whole turn-out, which dashed past him before he could put into
execution his plan of leaping at the horses' heads.  The carriage
window had been closed and the girl's face had disappeared.  And the
brougham, behind which he was now running, was no more than a black
spot on the white road.

He called out again:  "Christine!"

No reply.  And he stopped in the midst of the silence.

With a lack-luster eye, he stared down that cold, desolate road and
into the pale, dead night.  Nothing was colder than his heart, nothing
half so dead:  he had loved an angel and now he despised a woman!

Raoul, how that little fairy of the North has trifled with you!  Was it
really, was it really necessary to have so fresh and young a face, a
forehead so shy and always ready to cover itself with the pink blush of
modesty in order to pass in the lonely night, in a carriage and pair,
accompanied by a mysterious lover?  Surely there should be some limit
to hypocrisy and lying! ...

She had passed without answering his cry ...  And he was thinking of
dying; and he was twenty years old! ...

His valet found him in the morning sitting on his bed.  He had not
undressed and the servant feared, at the sight of his face, that some
disaster had occurred.  Raoul snatched his letters from the man's
hands.  He had recognized Christine's paper and hand-writing. She said:

DEAR:

Go to the masked ball at the Opera on the night after to-morrow.  At
twelve o'clock, be in the little room behind the chimney-place of the
big crush-room. Stand near the door that leads to the Rotunda.  Don't
mention this appointment to any one on earth.  Wear a white domino and
be carefully masked.  As you love me, do not let yourself be
recognized.  CHRISTINE.




