{"name": "Chapter 30", "summary": "Chapter 30: Good-bye David has to help Alan escape to France. He also desires to clear the name of James Stewart of the Glens, but to do so would risk having himself caught and blamed, and possibly hanged. David believes he must perform his duty, which impresses Mr. Rankeillor. Rankeillor gives him two letters. One letter is to the British Linen Company, giving him the Shaws money that is due to him, and one to a well-respected Balfour, who might be able to help David when he gives his testimony on behalf of James. PARAGRAPH>David plans to get some money to Alan so that he can buy passage to France. Alan arranges for a lawyer to get the money from David and give it to him. The two walk away from the House of Shaws, then part. As he continues on, David goes to Edinburgh and, as the book ends, comes to the doors of the British Linen Company. AnalysisEbenezer is defeated, in a very fitting manner, as he is tricked, just as he repeatedly tricked David. By showing a reluctance to have the boy killed, Ebenezer shows he is not a complete monster or he may just be selfish, and did not want the boy's death on his conscience. It is hardly even a satisfying defeat, since Ebenezer simply gives in without a word. As mentioned previously, both David and Alan can be fitted into an archetypal role. Alan is the dashing rogue, while David is the naive youth who, through great acts, becomes a hero and comes into some sort of inheritance. This is certainly the case with David. He has gained a great amount of experience thus far. He has killed men, survived a shipwreck, spent days alone on an island, trekked through the Highland wilderness, been a wanted man, and fled by cover of night into safety. His character has undergone dynamic change, which is part of the definition of the protagonist, or the main character of the story. Certainly David might be considered a protagonist of Kidnapped, but many readers would be wise to question whether Alan's character has changed much by the end of the book. As an archetype of the \"dashing rogue,\" Alan is in many ways what is often called a \"stock character,\" or a character that is the same no matter what time period or place he turns up, acts in much the same way, and hardly changed. The purpose of most stock characters is to advance the plot, either by helping the protagonist or slowing him down. Often writers will play with stock characters by making them the protagonists and then making them dynamic. Alan, however, is difficult to assess. After his association with David, Alan may have become something less of a braggart, and be nicer to Whigs, if not to Campbells, though he did make peace with Robin Oig. He has grown into a great friendship with David. But he is the same Alan we have known throughout the book. He is no more or less intelligent, clever, or sensitive. Alan has served as a guide and mentor to David for two months, taking him both through the Highlands and down the path to manhood. That is Alan's most important contribution to David's growth as a character. The ending is quite abrupt, and perhaps a little unsatisfying. We know the story is being told at least a few years after the event, and perhaps even more, from the hints dropped by the narrator throughout the novel. A reader could reasonably expect a brief history of what happened after the events in the novel. For instance, David must have failed in his task to get James Stewart acquitted, because in the real history, James was convicted of being \"art and part\" of the Campbell murder by a tribunal composed mostly of Campbells, and was then hanged. His body was left up for months as a warning to the Jacobites. PARAGRAPH>But Stevenson may have written Kidnapped with a sequel in mind. The sequel, called Catriona, published in 1893, takes up the story immediately following the end of Kidnapped. In Catriona, David again meets up with Alan Stewart, and has a number of further adventures in Scotland. The enduring legacy of Kidnapped has been its ability to entertain young people and older people for more than a century. Unfortunately, it has started to suffer from the combined problems of age and place. The book is full of terms that were nearly archaisms in Stevenson's time, since so much of the dialogue is spoken in Scots English, in particular, Highland Scots English. An older reader, with some annotations, can read it with ease. But for Stevenson's intended audience--young children of about the ages of 12-17--the book has become increasingly more difficult to read as times wears on. The result is that Kidnapped and even Treasure Island are now considered \"literature,\" and are read by more adults than children", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210309054006/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/kidnapped/section11/"}