How Pantagruel met with a great storm at sea.

The next day we espied nine sail that came spooning before the wind; they
were full of Dominicans, Jesuits, Capuchins, Hermits, Austins, Bernardins,
Egnatins, Celestins, Theatins, Amadeans, Cordeliers, Carmelites, Minims,
and the devil and all of other holy monks and friars, who were going to the
Council of Chesil, to sift and garble some new articles of faith against
the new heretics.  Panurge was overjoyed to see them, being most certain of
good luck for that day and a long train of others.  So having courteously
saluted the blessed fathers, and recommended the salvation of his precious
soul to their devout prayers and private ejaculations, he caused
seventy-eight dozen of Westphalia hams, units of pots of caviare, tens of
Bolonia sausages, hundreds of botargoes, and thousands of fine angels, for
the souls of the dead, to be thrown on board their ships.  Pantagruel seemed
metagrabolized, dozing, out of sorts, and as melancholic as a cat.  Friar
John, who soon perceived it, was inquiring of him whence should come this
unusual sadness; when the master, whose watch it was, observing the
fluttering of the ancient above the poop, and seeing that it began to
overcast, judged that we should have wind; therefore he bid the boatswain
call all hands upon deck, officers, sailors, foremast-men, swabbers, and
cabin-boys, and even the passengers; made them first settle their topsails,
take in their spritsail; then he cried, In with your topsails, lower the
foresail, tallow under parrels, braid up close all them sails, strike your
topmasts to the cap, make all sure with your sheeps-feet, lash your guns
fast.  All this was nimbly done.  Immediately it blowed a storm; the sea
began to roar and swell mountain-high; the rut of the sea was great, the
waves breaking upon our ship's quarter; the north-west wind blustered and
overblowed; boisterous gusts, dreadful clashing, and deadly scuds of wind
whistled through our yards and made our shrouds rattle again.  The thunder
grumbled so horridly that you would have thought heaven had been tumbling
about our ears; at the same time it lightened, rained, hailed; the sky lost
its transparent hue, grew dusky, thick, and gloomy, so that we had no other
light than that of the flashes of lightning and rending of the clouds.  The
hurricanes, flaws, and sudden whirlwinds began to make a flame about us by
the lightnings, fiery vapours, and other aerial ejaculations.  Oh, how our
looks were full of amazement and trouble, while the saucy winds did rudely
lift up above us the mountainous waves of the main!  Believe me, it seemed
to us a lively image of the chaos, where fire, air, sea, land, and all the
elements were in a refractory confusion.  Poor Panurge having with the full
contents of the inside of his doublet plentifully fed the fish, greedy
enough of such odious fare, sat on the deck all in a heap, with his nose and
arse together, most sadly cast down, moping and half dead; invoked and
called to his assistance all the blessed he- and she-saints he could muster
up; swore and vowed to confess in time and place convenient, and then bawled
out frightfully, Steward, maitre d'hotel, see ho! my friend, my father, my
uncle, prithee let us have a piece of powdered beef or pork; we shall drink
but too much anon, for aught I see.  Eat little and drink the more will
hereafter be my motto, I fear.  Would to our dear Lord, and to our blessed,
worthy, and sacred Lady, I were now, I say, this very minute of an hour,
well on shore, on terra firma, hale and easy.  O twice and thrice happy
those that plant cabbages!  O destinies, why did you not spin me for a
cabbage-planter?  O how few are there to whom Jupiter hath been so
favourable as to predestinate them to plant cabbages!  They have always one
foot on the ground, and the other not far from it.  Dispute who will of
felicity and summum bonum, for my part whosoever plants cabbages is now, by
my decree, proclaimed most happy; for as good a reason as the philosopher
Pyrrho, being in the same danger, and seeing a hog near the shore eating
some scattered oats, declared it happy in two respects; first, because it
had plenty of oats, and besides that, was on shore.  Ha, for a divine and
princely habitation, commend me to the cows' floor.

Murder!  This wave will sweep us away, blessed Saviour!  O my friends! a
little vinegar.  I sweat again with mere agony.  Alas! the mizen-sail's
split, the gallery's washed away, the masts are sprung, the
maintop-masthead dives into the sea; the keel is up to the sun; our shrouds
are almost all broke, and blown away.  Alas! alas! where is our main course?
Al is verlooren, by Godt! our topmast is run adrift.  Alas! who shall have
this wreck?  Friend, lend me here behind you one of these whales.  Your
lantern is fallen, my lads.  Alas! do not let go the main-tack nor the
bowline.  I hear the block crack; is it broke?  For the Lord's sake, let us
have the hull, and let all the rigging be damned.  Be, be, be, bous, bous,
bous.  Look to the needle of your compass, I beseech you, good Sir
Astrophil, and tell us, if you can, whence comes this storm.  My heart's
sunk down below my midriff.  By my troth, I am in a sad fright, bou, bou,
bou, bous, bous, I am lost for ever.  I conskite myself for mere madness and
fear.  Bou, bou, bou, bou, Otto to to to to ti.  Bou, bou, bou, ou, ou, ou,
bou, bou, bous.  I sink, I'm drowned, I'm gone, good people, I'm drowned.




