How Pantagruel discovered a monstrous physeter, or whirlpool, near the Wild
Island.

About sunset, coming near the Wild Island, Pantagruel spied afar off a huge
monstrous physeter (a sort of whale, which some call a whirlpool), that
came right upon us, neighing, snorting, raised above the waves higher than
our main-tops, and spouting water all the way into the air before itself,
like a large river falling from a mountain.  Pantagruel showed it to the
pilot and to Xenomanes.

By the pilot's advice the trumpets of the Thalamege were sounded to warn
all the fleet to stand close and look to themselves.  This alarm being
given, all the ships, galleons, frigates, brigantines, according to their
naval discipline, placed themselves in the order and figure of an Y
(upsilon), the letter of Pythagoras, as cranes do in their flight, and like
an acute angle, in whose cone and basis the Thalamege placed herself ready
to fight smartly.  Friar John with the grenadiers got on the forecastle.

Poor Panurge began to cry and howl worse than ever.  Babille-babou, said
he, shrugging up his shoulders, quivering all over with fear, there will be
the devil upon dun.  This is a worse business than that t'other day.  Let
us fly, let us fly; old Nick take me if it is not Leviathan, described by
the noble prophet Moses in the life of patient Job.  It will swallow us
all, ships and men, shag, rag, and bobtail, like a dose of pills.  Alas! it
will make no more of us, and we shall hold no more room in its hellish
jaws, than a sugarplum in an ass's throat.  Look, look, 'tis upon us; let
us wheel off, whip it away, and get ashore.  I believe 'tis the very
individual sea-monster that was formerly designed to devour Andromeda; we
are all undone.  Oh! for some valiant Perseus here now to kill the dog.

I'll do its business presently, said Pantagruel; fear nothing.  Ods-belly,
said Panurge, remove the cause of my fear then.  When the devil would you
have a man be afraid but when there is so much cause?  If your destiny be
such as Friar John was saying a while ago, replied Pantagruel, you ought to
be afraid of Pyroeis, Eous, Aethon, and Phlegon, the sun's coach-horses,
that breathe fire at the nostrils; and not of physeters, that spout nothing
but water at the snout and mouth.  Their water will not endanger your life;
and that element will rather save and preserve than hurt or endanger you.

Ay, ay, trust to that, and hang me, quoth Panurge; yours is a very pretty
fancy.  Ods-fish! did I not give you a sufficient account of the elements'
transmutation, and the blunders that are made of roast for boiled, and
boiled for roast?  Alas! here 'tis; I'll go hide myself below.  We are dead
men, every mother's son of us.  I see upon our main-top that merciless hag
Atropos, with her scissors new ground, ready to cut our threads all at one
snip.  Oh! how dreadful and abominable thou art; thou hast drowned a good
many beside us, who never made their brags of it.  Did it but spout good,
brisk, dainty, delicious white wine, instead of this damned bitter salt
water, one might better bear with it, and there would be some cause to be
patient; like that English lord, who being doomed to die, and had leave to
choose what kind of death he would, chose to be drowned in a butt of
malmsey.  Here it is.  Oh, oh! devil!  Sathanas!  Leviathan!  I cannot
abide to look upon thee, thou art so abominably ugly.  Go to the bar, go
take the pettifoggers.




