How Homenas, Bishop of Papimany, showed us the Uranopet decretals.

Homenas then said to us:  'Tis enjoined us by our holy decretals to visit
churches first and taverns after.  Therefore, not to decline that fine
institution, let us go to church; we will afterwards go and feast
ourselves.  Man of God, quoth Friar John, do you go before, we'll follow
you.  You spoke in the matter properly, and like a good Christian; 'tis
long since we saw any such.  For my part, this rejoices my mind very much,
and I verily believe that I shall have the better stomach after it.  Well,
'tis a happy thing to meet with good men!  Being come near the gate of the
church, we spied a huge thick book, gilt, and covered all over with
precious stones, as rubies, emeralds, (diamonds,) and pearls, more, or at
least as valuable as those which Augustus consecrated to Jupiter
Capitolinus.  This book hanged in the air, being fastened with two thick
chains of gold to the zoophore of the porch.  We looked on it and admired
it.  As for Pantagruel, he handled it and dandled it and turned it as he
pleased, for he could reach it without straining; and he protested that
whenever he touched it, he was seized with a pleasant tickling at his
fingers' end, new life and activity in his arms, and a violent temptation
in his mind to beat one or two sergeants, or such officers, provided they
were not of the shaveling kind.  Homenas then said to us, The law was
formerly given to the Jews by Moses, written by God himself.  At Delphos,
before the portal of Apollo's temple, this sentence, GNOTHI SEAUTON, was
found written with a divine hand.  And some time after it, EI was also
seen, and as divinely written and transmitted from heaven. Cybele's image
was brought out of heaven, into a field called Pessinunt, in Phrygia; so
was that of Diana to Tauris, if you will believe Euripides; the oriflamme,
or holy standard, was transmitted out of heaven to the noble and most
Christian kings of France, to fight against the unbelievers.  In the reign
of Numa Pompilius, second King of the Romans, the famous copper buckler
called Ancile was seen to descend from heaven.  At Acropolis, near Athens,
Minerva's statue formerly fell from the empyreal heaven.  In like manner
the sacred decretals which you see were written with the hand of an angel
of the cherubim kind.  You outlandish people will hardly believe this, I
fear.  Little enough, of conscience, said Panurge.  And then, continued
Homenas, they were miraculously transmitted to us here from the very heaven
of heavens; in the same manner as the river Nile is called Diipetes by
Homer, the father of all philosophy--the holy decretals always excepted.
Now, because you have seen the pope, their evangelist and everlasting
protector, we will give you leave to see and kiss them on the inside, if
you think meet.  But then you must fast three days before, and canonically
confess; nicely and strictly mustering up and inventorizing your sins,
great and small, so thick that one single circumstance of them may not
escape you; as our holy decretals, which you see, direct.  This will take
up some time.  Man of God, answered Panurge, we have seen and descried
decrees, and eke decretals enough o' conscience; some on paper, other on
parchment, fine and gay like any painted paper lantern, some on vellum,
some in manuscript, and others in print; so you need not take half these
pains to show us these.  We'll take the goodwill for the deed, and thank
you as much as if we had.  Ay, marry, said Homenas, but you never saw these
that are angelically written.  Those in your country are only transcripts
from ours; as we find it written by one of our old decretaline scholiasts.
For me, do not spare me; I do not value the labour, so I may serve you.  Do
but tell me whether you will be confessed and fast only three short little
days of God?  As for shriving, answered Panurge, there can be no great harm
in't; but this same fasting, master of mine, will hardly down with us at
this time, for we have so very much overfasted ourselves at sea that the
spiders have spun their cobwebs over our grinders.  Do but look on this
good Friar John des Entomeures (Homenas then courteously demi-clipped him
about the neck), some moss is growing in his throat for want of bestirring
and exercising his chaps.  He speaks the truth, vouched Friar John; I have
so much fasted that I'm almost grown hump-shouldered.  Come, then, let's go
into the church, said Homenas; and pray forgive us if for the present we do
not sing you a fine high mass.  The hour of midday is past, and after it
our sacred decretals forbid us to sing mass, I mean your high and lawful
mass.  But I'll say a low and dry one for you.  I had rather have one
moistened with some good Anjou wine, cried Panurge; fall to, fall to your
low mass, and despatch.  Ods-bodikins, quoth Friar John, it frets me to the
guts that I must have an empty stomach at this time of day; for, had I
eaten a good breakfast and fed like a monk, if he should chance to sing us
the Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine, I had then brought thither bread and
wine for the traits passes (those that are gone before).  Well, patience;
pull away, and save tide; short and sweet, I pray you, and this for a
cause.




