{"name": "Chapter 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419220659/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/oliver-twist/summary/chapter-2", "summary": "Oliver gets sent out to be \"farmed\" because there isn't a wet nurse to be found at the workhouse after his mother dies. Dickens treats us to a scathingly ironic description of the wretched conditions at the baby farm run by Mrs. Mann. Now, allow us to interrupt our scheduled program for a Historical Context Lesson: \"baby farms\" like Mrs. Mann's actually existed, and the worst ones had mortality rates as high as 90%. Put differently, that would mean that only 1 baby in 10 would survive infancy at a baby farm like Mrs. Mann's. But back to the story: Oliver survives infancy, if he doesn't thrive. He's now eight years old and he's a \"pale, thin child, somewhat diminutive in stature, and decidedly small in circumference\" . Apparently, Mrs. Mann doesn't feed the babies very much; she pockets the extra money she should have been spending on their food and clothing. Sounds like a fun lady. Mr. Bumble, the Beadle, comes to inspect the baby farm. Time for another Historical Context Lesson : in the Church of England, a beadle was somebody who worked for the parish and was in charge of charity . In Judaism, beadles were assistants at the synagogue . Mr. Bumble plans to take Oliver back to the workhouse with him because, at age eight, he's old enough to start working. Oliver is cleaned up and is taken before the parish board and questioned about his religion, and we learn that he's never been taught any religion at all, even though he's been brought up by the parish and associated with the Church of England his whole life . He'll start learning how to pick oakum the next morning at the workhouse. Oliver and the other young boys in the workhouse are close to starvation, because they're given only one ounce of watery gruel for each meal. The boys draw straws to decide who's going to ask for more to eat. Oliver gets the short end of that stick, and we get the famous scene of Oliver asking for more. This is also the first illustration by George Cruikshank. If you're using an edition that doesn't include the illustrations, we recommend looking them up online , or in another edition--they're part of what made the novel so famous. Apparently asking for more to eat is an unforgivable offense--the man in the white waistcoat is so shocked that he prophesies that Oliver \"will be hung I know that boy will be hung\" .", "analysis": ""}