{"name": "Chapters 124-145", "summary": "124 - Flosi, the Sigfussons, Ingjald, and several other men make a pact to slay every last Njalsson or die trying. Those who drop out of the oath will thereby surrender both their lives and property. Flosi tells the men to meet him two days after the Lord's Day at a faraway ridge, which will require the men to ride through the nights. From there they plan to attack the Njalssons with \"fire and iron\" . On the way back from making this pact, Flosi avoids Hall of Sida, because he knows that Hall would disapprove of these harsh measures of revenge. Hrodny finds out about the pact and reprimands her brother Ingjald, whom Njal saved from outlawry three times. Hrodny shows him the bloody cap that Hoskuld Njalsson was wearing at his death, and Ingjald reluctantly agrees not to harm any of the Njalssons even if it costs him his life. Hrodny tells Njal to keep his guard up and his servants well-armed that summer. He is glad for Ingjald's decision, because his action against the Njalssons would have been \"the worst sort of wrong\" . An old woman at Bergthorshvol also has the gift of foresight; Skarphedin witnesses her cursing a pile of chickweed near the hall. He laughs first, but then finds out that the chickweed will be used to burn Njal and the rest of them inside the hall. Skarphedin refuses to remove it on the grounds that, if they are not burned by the chickweed, they will be burned by something else.<PARAGRAPH>125 - A man named Hildiglum sees a man as \"black as pitch\"  on a horse carrying a flaming torch. He announces a verse in a loud voice about the evil he brings, and calls Flosi's plan a flung torch. He then flings his own torch, obscuring the distant mountains with smoke. Hjalti Skeggjason explains that a witch-ride always occurs before great events.<PARAGRAPH>126 - Flosi and the men come together and ride toward the ridge. Ingjald does not show up, but Flosi tells the men to hold off their condemnations. Along the way, they stop at a hall to pray.<PARAGRAPH>127 - Grim and Helgi leave Bergthorshvol for the night, but see some women acting strangely and implore them for news. They have seen the Sigfussons riding in a large group. Grim and Helgi go home, knowing that they should be with Skarphedin. Bergthora prepares each person's favorite meal because she knows it will be the last one she serves. She says that if Grim and Helgi arrive back at the hall before they are finished eating, then her prediction will have been correct. Njal says he cannot see the food or hall: to him, the walls are gone, and he sees blood on the table instead of food. He asks that none of the family go to bed.<PARAGRAPH>128 - Flosi and his men approach Bergthorshvol and see Njal and his sons outside. Flosi knows that if the men stay outside the hall, his side will lose many men. Njal says that his family should go inside because it is safe, but Skarphedin thinks these men dishonorable enough to burn their hall down. Njal thinks his sons are showing him no respect. The sons agree that Njal is wrong in this instance, but to honor their father, they will go inside and burn in the house with him. Flosi tells his men to form quickly around the doors to prevent the Njalssons from escaping. Immediately, Skarphedin kills a man by cutting into his face through the man's shield with his axe. Flosi admits that burning down the hall is \"a great responsibility before God, for we're Christian men,\" but decides that they must do it. <PARAGRAPH>129 - The Sigfussons build a fire in front of the doors and Skarphedin ridicules Grani, reminding him that he avenged Grani's father not long ago. The women are able to put out these initial fires with whey. The Sigfussons try again with the chickweed and are successful in setting the hall alight. Njal asks for God's mercy in not letting them burn twice: once now and once again in the afterlife. He shouts to Flosi, asking him if  he'll make a settlement with his sons and  he'll let the women, children, and servants out of the burning hall. Flosi agrees to the second inquiry but not the first. Helgi dresses as a woman and leaves as well. He is spotted by Flosi and get his head taken off after taking out another man's legs. Flosi begs Njal and Bergthora to come out, but they both refuse on honorable grounds. Bergthora tries to convince Kari's young son and her grandson, Thord, to find somebody to carry him outside, but he refuses on the grounds that Bergthora said they would never part. The three of them lie together on the bed. Njal asks a foreman to spread out an ox-hide over the three of them, and he has the, promise they will not move during the fire so their bodies can be easily found. Skarphedin attributes Njal's early retirement to his old age, not to his honor. Skarphedin and the Njalssons are fighting furiously, and Flosi recognizes that his men are still outmatched even with the fire. Skarphedin tells Kari to escape, to which he responds that they will never meet again if he does. Skarphedin says he would be happy to know that Kari would avenge their deaths. Kari crashes through the roof, setting his clothing and hair on fire and makes his escape to a stream in a hollow, which is now called Kari's Hollow.<PARAGRAPH>130 - Skarphedin also tries to escape through this exit, but the walls crumble toward him and it's impossible to overcome. Gunnar Lambason comes over to the hole and announces that Skarphedin is crying. Skarphedin denies this, and asks Gunnar if he is laughing. Gunnar says that the last time he laughed was when Skarphedin killed Thrain. Skarphedin pulls one of Thrain's molars out from his satchel and throws it at Gunnar with deadly accuracy. He knocks Gunnar's eye out of its socket, sending Gunnar off the roof as well. Skarphedin and Grim try to stamp out the fire, but Grim falls dead during the task. Skarphedin puts it mostly out, but then a wall crashes down on him and he cannot budge. Flosi waits there all night with the Sigfussons and when a man rides by, Flosi tells him of all the deaths and that it was both a mighty and evil deed. The man says that he knows Kari to be alive, since he spoke with him that morning. Kari's blade had turned blue and it was said to have \"lost its temper\" . Flosi knows that the Sigfussons are no longer safe, and he has them come to stay at his place in the east. Modolf Ketilsson speaks a verse about Kari's imminent revenge. Flosi does not want his men bragging about the burning of Njal, though. A verse is heard coming from the burning hall, and they suspect that it is either Skarphedin or Skarphedin's ghost. The men remember that Ingjald has broken his oath, and head after him to kill him and take his property. Flosi sees him first and says that he is willing to spare him if he allows self-judgment. Ingjald agrees, saying that he is not afraid of the Sigfussons. Flosi rides back to the Sigfussons, grabs a spear from one of the men, and sends it through Ingjald's thigh. Ingjald calls it \"a scratch, not a wound\" . Ingjald tells Flosi to stand still if he is not a coward, then hurls the spear back. Flosi dodges it narrowly and it impales Thorstein in the waist, knocking him off his horse and killing him. Ingjald escapes the scene. Flosi has the men ride back to the ridge and wait there for three nights.<PARAGRAPH>131 - Kari reports the burning of Njal to Mord, who grieves greatly. Kari tells him that they need to gather men at Holtsvad. They meet up with Hjalti and find Ingjald there. Mord Valgardsson has gathered many men at Holtsvad. The men split up in search of the Sigfussons and Flosi. They search the country too broadly and cannot track them down. Thorgeir says that he will pursue a sentence of outlawry and blood vengeance, but that, for the moment, they should stop their search and wait for the Althing. Some of the men want to seize the offenders' property, but Mord advises against it. Since his life depends on his loyalty to Kari, the men believe his judgment. The men disband. Flosi and the Sigfussons have been watching their whole discussion from afar in the mountains. They ride to Flosi's place in the east and wait until Christmas.<PARAGRAPH>132 - Kari asks Hjalti to collect Njal's remains and bring them to the church. Under a great deal of ash, the ox-hide lies shriveled up from the fire. Njal, Bergthora, and the boy are unburned, save the boy's finger that stuck out from the ox-hide. The men remark that Njal's body is extraordinarily radiant for being dead. Skarphedin's legs are burned off and he had bitten into his lip, but the rest of his body is unburned. His axe still has its temper, so the men keep it for Thorgeir Skorar-Geir, whom Kari considers \"the best man in that family now\" . Skarphedin has crosses burned on his back and chest, which the men think was his own doing. Altogether, the men find eleven bodies, which they bring to the church. After this, Hjalti cures the infection in Ingjald's leg, but he limps for the rest of his life. When the news of Njal's burning is delivered to Thorhall Asgrimsson, he swells up and blood pours out his ears until he faints. The men consult Gizur the White on the matter of vengeance. He suggests lying low until the Thing, summoning neighbor-witnesses in the meantime. Furthermore, Gizur says that Mord should prosecute because the worst has come from him and it is therefore his duty. One night Asgrim wakes up and notices that Kari is not sleeping, and he knows that he has not slept in some time. Kari speaks a verse about the burning of Njal. He does not speak ill of his enemies or well of his friends: he only speaks of Njal and Skarphedin.<PARAGRAPH>133 - Flosi also sleeps badly one night and asks Glum to bring Ketil of Mork to him. He tells him about his dream: Flosi was on a peak and he witnessed a man coming out from the mountain in a goatskin with an iron staff. This man named all of Flosi's companions by name before telling Flosi of his plan to \"clear the panel of neighbours, and then the court, and then the battlefield for the battlers\" . He speaks a verse about Kari's revenge against them and sends his iron staff into the ground, creating a great crash, and then he walks back into the peak of the mountain. Ketil says this dream foretells the death of the named men, and that he and Flosi should keep this dream a secret. Flosi knows that he must gain the support of as many men as possible before the Althing.<PARAGRAPH>134 - Flosi and his men go by foot to Hall of Sida at Thvotta to ask for advice. Hall tells them they must head north and ask those chieftains for support. They gain strong support from Hallbjorn the Strong and Holmstein, but only reluctant support from Hrafnkel Thorisson. When Sorli Brodd-Helgason says that he will take the side of his father-in-law, Gudmund the Powerful of Modruvellir, Flosi says, \"I can see from your answer that your wife rules here\" . Flosi goes on to bribe two brothers, Thorkel the All-wise and Thorvald, for their support. These brothers' mother overhears the exchange and then tells them of her dream in which Thorkel is wearing extremely tight red clothing. Flosi tries to bribe another fellow, Bjarni, but he refuses, offering his help in hopes of retribution later on. Flosi gains the support of Thorkel Geitisson and the many men in the Fljotsdal district--except for Sorli, who is \"not a violent man\" .<PARAGRAPH>135 - Meanwhile, Kari and Thorhall ride to visit Gizur the White, with whom they stay for a long time. When the burning of Njal comes up in conversation, Kari speaks a verse about his experience escaping the fire. Gizur decides it is best to change the topic of conversation. Gizur advises them to travel not to their homes, but to the east to find Mord Valgardsson to make him pursue the case against Flosi. If Mord objects, they are to \"go into a rage and act as if you'll sink your axe into his head\"; furthermore, Gizur says that he will take back Mord's wife, Gizur's daughter, if he does not comply . Kari and Thorhall know that they don't need as much support as Flosi because he has far more to answer for. Mord shows his reluctance; Kari has Mord's wife, Thorkatla, begin packing her things, at which point Mord changes his tone and takes on the case. Kari tells him to \"prosecute it fearlessly, for your life depends on it\" . Kari makes Mord repeat his summons three times, with three sets of witnesses. The case is centered on Helgi Njalsson's mortal wounds. They take Thorhall Asgrimsson, who also has a limp and leg infection, to advise them in law since he is now one of the greatest lawyers in Iceland. They ride to the Thing.<PARAGRAPH>136 - Flosi and his men ride to Asgrim to show him their ill will. Asgrim sees them coming and sets up his hall with food and chairs. Asgrim does not greet Flosi, but tells him that there is food at hand for those who need it. The men eat and Asgrim turns blood red, saying nothing. Flosi's arrogant demeanor incites Asgrim to take a swing at his head with an axe, but Glum Hildisson prevents him from doing so. Flosi says nobody should harm Asgrim for this attempt, for it showed his boldness. Asgrim wants to see Flosi brought \"down a peg\" at the Thing . Hall reprimands Flosi for his behavior at this meal, while the other praise his braveness.<PARAGRAPH>137 - Mord and many men ride to Thing, where there are more people than have ever been there before in recent memory.<PARAGRAPH>138 - Eyjolf, another of the greatest lawyers in Iceland, is unusually handsome and fond of money. Flosi consults with Bjarni about whom to pay to defend them in law, and he says that Eyjolf is their best bet. On the way to Eyjolf's booth, Flosi bribes several steadfastly resistant men to join his side. They find Eyjolf with a silver inlaid axe and a gold band around his head. They are well-received, but after Eyjolf notices their obsequious flattery, he knows that they will want something from him and he attempts to leave. Then Flosi pulls out a gold bracelet and implores Eyjolf to take it in virtue of their friendship. Eyjolf does so and agrees to take on their defense as well, but he warns that there should be no talk of this gift, especially if the case goes to the Fifth Court. Flosi leaves and Eyjolf goes to Snorri the Godi. Snorri grabs Eyjolf's arm and sees the bracelet. He asks whether it was a gift or a purchase, but Eyjolf is dumbstruck and cannot answer. Snorri says \"it's quite likely that by the time the courts are over you will know what gift you have accepted\" .<PARAGRAPH>139 - Asgrim and Kari meet with Gizur, Hjalti, Thorgeir, and Mord to discuss the case. Gizur says that Snorri has found out about Flosi's large network of support and that the men must reinforce their efforts. The legal proceedings are split among the men and they go to ask for more support. Skafti does not offer his support and furthermore throws insults at Gizur and Asgrim for the killing of Gunnar at Hlidarendi. They despise him for this. Snorri is enlisted as a reinforcement if violence should break out at the Thing. Gizur thanks him.<PARAGRAPH>140 - Next, the group goes to Gudmund, who says that in previous times he had been small-minded and will not repeat that mistake. He offers everything he has; furthermore, he will send Skafti's son to fight alongside the men so that Skafti will do everything in his power to stop violence from breaking out at Law Rock. Gudmund's daughter is married to Skafti, so he has leverage with him.<PARAGRAPH>141 - Mord announces the suits for homicide at Law Rock, and many people talk about how well and boldly he speaks. He calls for full outlawry against Flosi. Thorgeir calls for full outlawry against Glum Hildisson. Kari brings up suits against Kol, Gunnar Lambason, and Grani Gunnarsson. Thorleif Crow brings suits up against all the Sigfussons and the many other men involved in the burning. Flosi and Eyjolf talk in their booth after a long day of summons. Eyjolf says there are no grounds for defense against any of these suits. Eyjolf recommends that instead of defending against the suit, Flosi give up his godord to his brother and declare himself a thingman of a northern Godi. This may not protect them from the Fifth Court, but Flosi commits to it anyway. Nobody is aware of this deviance except for the men involved.<PARAGRAPH>142 - Both sides put marks on their helmets, armed for potential battle. Thorhall warns Asgrim not to be too hasty, and to do everything in its due course. Thorhall's face is blood red and \"great gusts of hail gushed from his eyes,\" so he stays in the booth during the suits . Mord begins pursuing the suit in the East Quarter Court and Flosi comments that their trick may have panned out. Before they pursue this trick, though, they seek to disqualify two of Mord's witnesses, who have blood and religious connection to him and are therefore unable to testify objectively. Asgrim sends a messenger to Thorhall to get advice on this matter, knowing it to be only a temporary tribulation. Thorhall says that they can reverse that disqualification because the witnesses are not related to plaintiff. Eyjolf concedes that this is in accordance with the law and they simply overlooked it. Then Eyjolf dismisses two other witnesses because they are lodgers and not property owners. A messenger is sent to Thorhall once again, and his advice is that these witnesses be reinstated because they own at least three hundreds in land, even though they do not \"live off milch animals,\" which is a distinct qualification for sitting on a witness panel . Eyjolf is not aware of this portion of the law, but Skafti the Lawspeaker says it is so. Eyjolf then dismisses four witnesses because there are four neighbors who live closer to the scene of action who should take their place. People begin to say that Flosi and Eyjolf are being very boastful. Asgrim reminds Mord that Njal had trained Thorhall to be the greatest lawyer in Iceland should he ever be tested, and this may be the test in which he proves himself. Thorhall says that since the majority of witnesses were correctly summoned, Mord will pay three marks per wrongly summoned witness, but that matter cannot be prosecuted at this session. Again, Eyjolf is not aware of this legality and so Skafti the Lawspeaker is consulted a second time. Skafti is astounded that somebody else in the land even knows about this detail of the law, and he says that it is absolutely correct. At last, Flosi is found guilty as charged. Flosi turns to Eyjolf and says that he will laugh when Eyjolf presents the objection.<PARAGRAPH>143 - Eyjolf presents his objection on the basis of the defendant being prosecuted in the wrong court, since he is a Thingman of a northerner.<PARAGRAPH>144 - A messenger is sent to Thorhall, who sees that their plan is to bring a suit against them for violating court procedure at the Fifth Court. Thorhall tells the messenger to have their men pursue a course of lesser outlawry for the exchange of the gold bracelet between Flosi and Eyjolf. Then, they should pursue a course of lesser outlawry for bringing in irrelevant material to the court. Thorhall says that two sentences of lesser outlawry combine to make a sentence of full outlawry. The judges are divided in their decision on this, and the Fifth Court is set in place nearby. They begin legal presentations at the Fifth Court against Flosi and Eyjolf. Part of their testimony involves a clause about not receiving money for testifying. Flosi and Eyjolf cannot find any fault in the witness panel this time. They quote Mord's entire testimony verbatim and the prosecution seems to be in their favor. Gizur warns Mord that they must remove men from the witness panel before a final judgment can be made. Eyjolf thinks that they will forget this detail and the proceeding will be invalidated. Gizur reprimands Mord when he does not take off enough men from the panel after Flosi and Eyjolf refused to do so. A messenger is sent to Thorhall.<PARAGRAPH>145 - When Snorri finds out how the lawsuits are going, he summons his troops to stand by. When Thorhall hears the news, he goes silent with anger. He takes up a spear and sticks it into his leg, pulling the core of the boil out of his infection, sending a stream of pus and blood out of his leg. He gets up and heads to Law Rock without a limp. He comes across one of Flosi's kinsmen and sends his spear through his shield and chest, killing him instantly. Asgrim hears about this and violence breaks out at last. Kari faces off against Arni Kolsson and Hallbjorn the Strong. He splits Arni's shoulder and collar bone from his chest while leaping in the air, killing him instantly. He then takes aim at Hallbjorn, slicing off his big toe. When another of Flosi's kinsmen throws a spear Kari's way, he catches it mid-air and sends it back through him. Thorgeir then goes after Hallbjorn the Strong, but he flees the battle. Thorgeir takes Skarphedin's old spear through Thorvald Thrym-Ketilsson's shield and into his chest, killing him. Asgrim, his son Thorhall, Gizur, and Hjalti go after Flosi and the burners. Flosi's side starts turning away because the fighting is too fierce. Kari consistently dodges attacks and maims men through their shields. Bjarni runs away after being nearly killed by Kari. It is said that there are many more confrontations \"for which no stories have come down\" . Hall's men have retreated to a cave reserved for Flosi's men for protection. Hall says that the fighting must be stopped at Law Rock, even if it will be blamed on their side. Flosi's men run into Snorri's men and Snorri taunts Flosi. Skalti comes to Snorri's booth about his son fighting at the battle, but the fighting is reaching its peak. Asgrim sees Skafti and throws his spear through both of his legs. His rescuers must drag him to a booth for safety because he cannot walk. Flosi's men continue retreating. Solvi, a cook, stands by his booth boiling meat in a large cauldron, commenting on how cowardly Flosi's men look. Hallbjorn the Strong declares that nobody will call them cowards, and dumps Solvi in his own cauldron, killing him instantly. Flosi kills one of Gudmund the Powerful's men, but the spear is quickly taken out of this man and cast back at Flosi, who receives a bad leg wound. He gets up quickly despite this. They come across a patch of lava and one of Gudmund's men kills Ljot, Hall's son, with a spear. Thorgeir spots Eyjolf and tells Kari, who immediately sends his spear into Eyjolf's waist, killing him. Snorri the Godi arrives with Skafti and Hall. They declare a truce for the duration of the Thing. The bodies are laid out and brought to the church.<PARAGRAPH>The next day the men all attend Law Rock and Hall calls for silence. He asks the men to make an even-handed settlement. Kari says that even if all the men on his side settle, he will never do so, because Hall will ask that the killings from yesterday be set against the burning. Skafti says Kari did not have to incite the action yesterday and things would be better for him if he hadn't. Kari speaks three verses. The first ridicules Skafti for running to his booth while he was fighting. The second is about Skafti being dragged pathetically after being attacked yesterday. The third is about the the unfavorable outcome of this situation for Flosi. Men laugh. Snorri adds a short verse adding insult to Skafti's injury. The laughter increases. Hall says that he is willing to let his son's death go without compensation--even though many would consider his compensation to be higher than other men's--for the sake of peace. Snorri offers a wise speech that also pushes for a peaceful settlement. Asgrim says he has not been considering a settlement ever since Flosi acted so arrogantly at his house, but, because of Snorri's speech, he is now willing to partake in one. Flosi's response is that \"the fewer good men I have against me, the better I like it\" . Gudmund the Powerful, Gizur the White, and Hjalti want to settle as well. The settlement includes triple compensation for Njal, double for Bergthora, double for Grim, double for Helgi, and single for all others. Skarphedin's compensation is weighed equally against the slaying of Hoskuld the Godi of Hvitanes. No payment is awarded for the death of Kari's son Thord. Flosi and the rest of the burners have three years to leave the country. Flosi can come back after three years, but the other men are banished for life. Eyjolf is not compensated, on account of his wrongdoing. These pacts are made with a handshake and never broken. Many gifts are exchanged on Asgrim's side, and then they separate. Flosi rides east with the burners, and Kari rides south. Hall of Sida receives compensation from the goodwill of the men at the Althing, despite his offer to let his son's death go uncompensated.<PARAGRAPH>", "analysis": "As it turns out, the burning of Njal was only the first of the twin peaks in the climax of this saga. These chapters unveil the worst in man, and, in particular, how brutal he can be even within the confines of religion. When Flosi sets out to burn the Njalssons alive in their own home, they stop at church to pray. The fact that Njal was also an early adopter of the Christian religion seems to have no bearing on Flosi's decision. The only thing that can stop vicious blood vengeance, it seems, is blood itself. When Hrodny pulls out the bloody cap Hoskuld Njalsson was wearing upon his death, it reminds us of when Hildigunn provoked her uncle by placing her late husband's blood-clotted cloak on his shoulders. Later in this section, a mother dreams of her son, Thorkel the All-Wise, dressed in tight red clothing as a sign of forthcoming death as well.<PARAGRAPH>Aside from those bloody omens, there is an incredible number of portentous events that occur before the burning of Njal. First is the witch-ride. This figure is unlike any other in the saga, seeming to come straight from hell or the imagination. The torch's fire obscures the distant mountains, perhaps as a metaphor for Flosi's obscured moral compass in this retaliation. Another event foreshadows the burning of the hall as well. Bergthora has seen Grim and Helgi go and prepares dinner for those who remain, but she knows that if they come back before the meal is finished, it will be the last Njalsson family dinner. As we've seen before, this is a definite allusion to the Bible: it's the Last Supper before the 'crucification' of Njal, and ultimately there is no changing fate. Strangely, the characters do feel an obligation to propose possible solutions to alter their fates. The distinction between hopeless perseverance and accepting of fate seems blurred until Njal and Bergthora lie down on the bed as their final resting place.<PARAGRAPH>One of the more exhilarating moments in these chapters comes during the burning when Gunnar Lambason jumps on the roof to throw one last insult at Skarphedin. The last time he laughed was when Thrain was killed. Skarphedin seems to have been saving Thrain's molar for just an occasion as poetically ripe as this. He takes out Gunnar's eye with it. Having used his voice improperly, his sight is taken. The dead may yet avenge, it seems.<PARAGRAPH>No spoilers, but the burning of Njal's home without burning Njal himself is a trope that also comes up in Game of Thrones. Of all people to go unburned, it is bizarre that God would have picked a lawyer--but then again, Njal was an early adopter of the religion. Whether he came to that result from a political or spiritual point of view is left to the imagination. If the fire is hell, as the witch-ride may have implied, then Njal is safe in heaven with Bergthora. The cow-hide demonstrates a possible scientific logic to their unburned deaths, because the boy's fingers are burned off outside the hide. From another standpoint, this can be interpreted as an emphasis on man's dependence on animal and their symbiotic relationship.<PARAGRAPH>The second peak of this twin peak climax is the battle at Law Rock, preceded by some of the most suspenseful plotting in the whole saga. It began with Thorhall reacting to Njal's burning. He was so moved that he bled from his ears instead of crying. Of course, no self-respecting man in this saga is allowed to cry. In fact, even with this uber-manly reaction, he feels compelled to stand up and say \"this had not been manly\" . Apparently manliness is all about calling yourself out for even the manliest acts if those acts have anything to do with grief. When Helgi fails to acknowledge his manliness by trying to escape the burning hall in women's clothing, he is immediately beheaded. Manliness is clearly important.<PARAGRAPH>While Thorhall maintains a stoic likeness to ideal 'manliness', Flosi excels in aggression and ego. He insults Sorli for following his father-in-law instead of him, even though this is patently hypocritical, given Flosi's own relationship to Hall of Sida. Eyjolf, too, excels in a manliness underwritten by appearances and cleverness over honor. As usual, the saga makes no clear moral claim in the contest between these ideas of manliness, no matter how certain the reader is about which idea may be right. The one manly quality that can be counted on is man's devotion to his wife. It's the only leverage aside from bribery and duty that Flosi or any other character is able to use to his advantage. This is how Mord, the man who enacted this entire unfortunate episode of trickery, prosecutes Flosi for having done it. If the Thrain's molar taking out Gunnar's eye was not poetic justice, then this certainly may be.<PARAGRAPH>The narrative evolves in an interesting way as the trial comes nearer. In filmic fashion, the narrative begins to cut back and forth between the simultaneous plots of the Sigfussons and the Njalsson camp. Unlike a movie, the characters continue to be introduced before they enter the action of the plot, a style that is rare in modern works. But when it finally comes time for the lawsuit to take place, the montage cuts to a long shot: the narrative now details the exact phrasing of each of the lawyers, the reception of each of their speeches, the technicalities that each party takes advantage of and other granular details. While most of the saga takes place at a distance from the moment-to-moment action, the reader suddenly feels that she is at the scene, with the characters. One explanation for this sudden transition could be that the saga was originally meant as a teaching tool for litigators. One of the highest praises received in the book is to be one of Iceland's greatest lawyers. So if Thorhall is to carry on Njal's legacy, he must demonstrate his immense knowledge of the law, and the reader must experience it so as to gain this knowledge for her own Icelandic litigations. But what can explain the repetition of each of the summons? Perhaps it was legally necessary to repeat the summons in court, but surely the reader can simply intuit the fact that the exact wording will be repeated. However, if the saga was delivered in the oral tradition, this may have allowed the readers to memorize important passages upon hearing them. This is how the first summons that Njal advised came to be: through asking an experienced lawyer for the exact wording of a summons, having him repeat it, and then delivering it for an actual effect.<PARAGRAPH>When all is said and done, Iceland's civil infrastructure is in serious danger. Law Rock has been violated in the most brutal battle in Iceland's recent history and almost everybody is involved in one way or another. The battle is not between men who hate each other, but rather between men who are obligated by unwritten code to pursue vengeance against one another. The real battlefront, therefore, is between methods of compensation: blood and settlement. Or, you could deport  them.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408215530/http://www.gradesaver.com/njals-saga/study-guide/summary-chapters-124-145"}