{"name": "chapter twenty-one: echoing footsteps", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Dickens/A_Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Study_Guide20.html", "summary": "It is now 1789, eight years later. Life is pleasant for the Darnays. Both he and the Doctor are earning good money. Lucie and Darnay have a little girl who is also named Lucie; they also had a son who died young. Lucie often feels as though she will also die soon, but the feeling always passes. Lucie also constantly hears echoes of footsteps that seem to come from afar and indicate trouble. On little Lucie's sixth birthday, these echoes seem to rumble menacingly and suddenly change in sound to that of a great storm in France. Carton comes to visit the Darnays at least six times a year. He continues to work for Mr. Stryver, who is now married to a rich widow with three stupid children. Carton is always sober on his visits. He is also the first stranger that little Lucie reaches out to; during his visit, she grows excessively fond of him. Mr. Lorry comes in one night. He is a bit grumpy since things are very busy at the bank. There is more work because of the unrest in Paris. Mr. Lorry recalls the footsteps that Lucie had heard earlier and confesses that he too can now hear footsteps converging upon them. Both he and Lucie have clear premonitions of the revolution in France having an affect on them. The district of St. Antoine in Paris is a seething mass of raging women and men. Arms and weapons of all kinds are being distributed. Every woman and man seems to be mad with a fierce, implacable passion for revenge; they are ready to sacrifice everything. Finally, under the leadership of Defarge, the mob storms the Bastille and releases all the prisoners. Defarge and Jacques Three then make their way to One Hundred and Five, North Tower, the number of the cell where Dr. Manette was imprisoned. The two men search the cell for something, which Defarge evidently finds and stuffs into his pockets. They then join the mob outside, which is continuing with their bloody rioting. They behead the governor and the prison guards and place their heads on long spikes.", "analysis": ""}