{"name": "chapter one: in secret", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Dickens/A_Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Study_Guide22.html", "summary": "Darnays trip at the end of August, 1792, is very trying. The road between Calais and Paris is bad, and at every town-gate and village-taxing house, there are soldiers who stop and question him and all fellow travelers. While staying in a small town on the way to Paris, Darnay is awakened at night by a local official and three armed soldiers in red caps. They have come to escort him to Paris. On reaching the town of Beauvais, a crowd gathers to curse him angrily and call him a traitor. The innkeeper there explains that a decree has been passed that condemns any emigrant who returns to France to be put to death; since Darnay is a Frenchman who has abandoned France, the decree applies to him. Upon arriving in Paris, an officer asks to see all of Darnay's papers and addresses him as a prisoner. When the officer finds Gabelle's letter, he shows surprise and goes off into the guardroom. As Darnay waits for his return, he watches the city gate and realizes that it is easier for people to enter Paris than to leave. After half an hour, Darnay is taken inside to another officer, who confirms that the prisoner is an Evremonde, and is told that he will be assigned to La Force prison. Darnay tries to explain himself, but the officer tells him that he has no rights. Darnay is instructed to follow Defarge, who inquires if he is the Evremonde married to Dr. Manette's daughter. When Darnay replies in the affirmative, Defarge reveals who he is and asks him his reason for coming to France. Darnay states that he has already explained himself; Defarge looks darkly at him. Darnay is taken to La Force. Through the dismal prison light, the jailer accompanies him through various locked doors until they come to a large, low, vaulted chamber. The room is crowded with prisoners of both genders. The women are seated at a long table, reading, writing, knitting, sewing and embroidering. The men stand behind chairs or walk to and fro. Darnay recoils at the sight, but the prisoners greet him with refinement. He then recognizes the elegance, pride, and high breeding of aristocracy. As he passes through their chamber, they wish Darnay well and hope that his calamity will end soon. He turns at the grated door to thank them, and then finds himself in a lonely cell, where he is tormented by ghostly voices.", "analysis": ""}