{"name": "chapter three: the shadow", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Dickens/A_Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Study_Guide24.html", "summary": "Mr. Lorry is worried about compromising Tellson's Bank by sheltering the wife of a prisoner; he would gladly risk his own security and possessions for Lucie, but he cannot risk those of the bank. He considers going to Defarge, but decides against it. Instead, he confers with Lucie; she tells him of her father's plans of renting a lodge for a short while. Mr. Lorry thinks it is a good idea and locates a suitable place in a safe area. He then takes Lucie, Miss Pross, and little Lucie to the lodge; Jerry Cruncher is placed at the door as a guard. Defarge brings a message to Mr. Lorry from Dr. Manette, stating that Darnay is safe. There is another message from Darnay for Lucie. As Lorry sets out for Lucie's lodging with Defarge, he sees two women knitting in the courtyard; one is Madame Defarge and the other is The Vengeance. They accompany Defarge and Mr. Lorry. Lucie is delighted to receive Darnay's letter, which asks her to have courage and reminds her that her father has influence among the revolutionaries. She is so affected by the letter that she kisses Madame Defarge's hand, in a loving, thankful, and tender way. Madame Defarge makes no response and resumes knitting. Lucie looks at the woman in a terrified manner; Madame Defarge responds with a cold, impassive stare. Mr. Lorry tries to explain to Lucie that Madame Defarge has wished to see them so she will know whom to protect if there is any trouble. Mr. Lorry, however, is having trouble believing her reason after seeing her stony attitude. Madame Defarge asks if little Lucie is Darnay's child. When told that she is, Madame Defarge announces that her work there is done and starts to leave. Lucie pleads with her to use her power to save Darnay. Madame Defarge, looking as cold as ever, turns to The Vengeance and explains that the mothers and wives have not been thought about when their husbands and fathers were rotting in prison. They have suffered all kinds of poverty, hunger, sickness, misery, oppression, and neglect. Turning to Lucie she adds that the troubles of one wife and mother do not mean much to them. She resumes her knitting and walks out. The Vengeance follows, and then Defarge.", "analysis": ""}