{"name": "act 1, Scene 2", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Scene Two<PARAGRAPH>John of Gaunt laments the fact that his son is starting a new quarrel over the Duke of Gloucester's death. The Duchess of Gloucester does not agree with his sentiments, saying instead that her husband's death should be revenged. Powerless to intervene in the state affairs, the Duchess wishes that Mowbray will be killed immediately during the duel with Bolingbroke. Gaunt informs her that he must leave for Coventry where the fight will take place, but that she should pray to God for her revenge", "analysis": "One of the great ironies of Richard II is that Richard is unable to arbitrate the opening dispute since he is himself guilty of the crime. The Duke of Gloucester had been entrusted to Mowbray, but it is likely that Richard ordered Mowbray to kill the duke. Thus Mowbray cannot accuse the true culprit, and his understandably outraged at being called a traitor.<PARAGRAPH>The opening scene serves as a direct challenge to Richard's power, a challenge which will build throughout the play. Mowbray and Bolingbroke become so impassioned that Richard orders them, \"Wrath kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me\" . He then commands the two men to forget the entire affair and to return home. They, however, refuse to be ruled by Richard. The result is the archaic trial by combat, as well as the immediate view of Richard as being an impotent king. Richard sees this quite clearly himself, saying \"We were not born to sue, but to command; / Which since we cannot do...\" . This is a mark of resignation, of defeat for Richard, who cannot control his own subjects.<PARAGRAPH>As in other plays, the old, powerless characters represent the old order, the worldview as it used to be. Thus the Duke of York has loyalties to the crown which he will place over his loyalties to his family. The Duchess of Gloucester represents the opposite worldview, that of placing family loyalty over those to the crown. However, what quickly becomes apparent is that neither conception is acceptable. Instead, Bolingbroke will emerge with a very materialistic, Machiavellian view of the throne which will displace both of these older notions.<PARAGRAPH>The use of language is very significant throughout this play. Richard controls language, but has no authority, whereas Bolingbroke rejects language and relies on material possessions to win his wars. Language quickly is seen as something which belongs to ceremony, but not necessarily to rule. Thus Mowbray, when banished, says \"The language I have learnt these forty years, / My native English, now I must forgo, / And now my tongue's use is to me no more\" . This represents the fact that without language Mowbray is unable to rule. Bolingbroke harbors no such illusions, though, since he rejects the arbitrariness of language and ceremony. When Richard dismisses four year of his banishment, he comments, \"How long a time lies in one little word! / Four lagging winters and four wanton springs / End in a word: such is the breath of kings\" . Bolingbroke's preference for material control rather than language is offered in stark contrast to not only Richard and Mowbray, but also to his father. Gaunt pleads with his son, \"O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words\" . Bolingbroke represents the newer model of monarchy, one in which ceremony and words alone are not sufficient to rule a country.<PARAGRAPH>Richard II is in many ways a tragedy, and follows the traditional pattern of a hero who will fall. Thus throughout the play we are given images of Richard descending from his throne. This is first brought out in 1.3, where Richard tells Bolingbroke that, \"We will descend and fold him in our arms\" . The act of descending for Bolingbroke is of course foreshadowing the actual plot, since later in the play Richard will literally be forced to descend the throne for Bolingbroke, who will ascend it. While the play focuses on Richard's descent, it also serves to illustrate Bolingbroke's ascent, which is from the bottom upwards. In fact, one of the reasons Richard gives for banishing Bolingbroke is his familiarity with the commoners. \"Observed his courtship to the common people, / How he did seem to dive into their hearts\" . For Richard such descent to the common people would be unthinkable, but for Bolingbroke it is a stepping-stone on his path to the throne.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419164219/https://www.gradesaver.com/richard-ii/study-guide/summary-act-1"}