{"name": "Chapter 29", "summary": "CHAPTER SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS FOR KIDNAPPEDCHAPTER 29: I am Come into my Kingdom Summary Mr. Ebenezer makes his appearance first at the window and then at the door. He listens to Alan's claim that he has news of David. Armed with a gun, he threatens Alan of the consequences if he is proved a liar. Ebenezer then listens to Alan's fabricated tale of how David had been saved from drowning and kept in a ruined castle. Since the expense of looking after the boy was proving costly, Alan asks Ebenezer for money for the boy's maintenance. After the old man agrees to pay, Alan extracts information from him about the kidnapping of David. Unwittingly, Ebenezer confesses his role in the kidnapping and explains that he had given Hoseason twenty pounds to do the job. Once the disclosure is made, all three men step forward from their hiding places to seize Ebenezer. When Rankeillor takes Mr. Balfour aside to settle property matters, Ebenezer agrees to give David two-thirds of the entire property of Shaws. David, Alan and Torrance celebrate the occasion with drinks. Notes In this chapter, Stevenson cleverly brings together the two people who have played an important role in David's life. Ebenezer and Alan are shown to be a sharp contrast each other. While Ebenezer has done everything possible to destroy David's life, Alan has risked his own life to save David and help him to establish his identity in the world. The irony lies in the fact that Alan was at first a stranger who had no obligation to David, while Ebenezer was his flesh and blood, who should have loved and protected the boy. Through the two characters, Stevenson shows that friendship is thicker than blood. The chapter shows the cleverness of Alan and Mr. Rankeillor. Alan tricks David's wicked uncle into confessing his guilt. He ingeniously entraps Ebenezer, just as he had used his charms earlier towards the girl to get a boat to Queensferry. After Balfour's confession, the lawyer steps in to exert his pressure about the settlement of property matters. He succeeds in having Ebenezer agree to give David two-thirds of the estate. CHAPTER 30: Goodbye Summary The next morning, as Rankeillor and Torrance bid the boy farewell, David's thoughts center on Alan. He would be leaving his friend in a short while. Troubled by this thought, he accompanies Alan to Edinburgh. At a chosen spot, they take leave of each other in silence, but their hearts are full of admiration for one another. It is agreed that David will either meet Alan or send a messenger to meet him every day at a particular spot until the lawyer arranges for Alan's safe departure to his home. Notes This chapter reveals David's true feelings for Alan. The boy realizes his friend's worth when it is time for them to part. Alan has been his trusted friend from the encounter in the \"Covenant\" until the end of their journey in Queensferry. He has been responsible for saving David's life, protecting him during the journey, and helping him to secure his inheritance. David is greatly indebted to him and knows he must now help his friend. Because Alan is an outlaw, David is compelled to find protection for him. He consults a Stuart lawyer who can arrange a safe passage for Alan to France. Until then David will meet his friend in secret in order to keep him posted on the progress of securing his passage. Although David is now a wealthy man and free to lead his own life, he feels lonely without the company of Alan. The happiness of securing his inheritance is clouded by the misery of losing his dear friend. David has learned the lesson that nothing, including money, is as valuable as true friendship. It is on this note that Stevenson ends the novel.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820035817/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmKidnapped37.asp"}