{"name": "Chapter 48", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210422061744/http://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mansfield-park/summary/chapter-48", "summary": "It's now time for the narrator to wrap things up. Here's the character rundown. Fanny is happy to be back home and helps her family deal with everything. Edmund takes time to get over Mary. Sir Thomas also takes along time to get over his parenting failure. Julia's marriage actually turned out OK and Julia came home to apologize for eloping. Why did she elope? Well, after she heard what Maria had done she panicked at the thought of going home and being grounded for life by an overprotective and un-fun dad. So she accepted Yates's proposal instead and made a run for it. Sir Thomas became a more affectionate father in the future. Tom recovered and became a dutiful and better-behaved son. Sir Thomas decided that Mrs. Norris was pretty awful and needed to go away. Maria hoped to marry Henry but, after living together for a while, the two grew to hate each other and eventually broke up. Mr. Rushworth got a speedy divorce from Maria. Maria tried to come home but her dad wouldn't take her. So she ended up having to go live elsewhere with Mrs. Norris and the two drove each other crazy. We learn why Henry ended up in the bad situation he did: the narrator chalks it up to vanity and pride. He needed Maria to still like him, to be admired and adored, and got in over his head with her. The Grants moved away from Mansfield Park and Mary continues to live with Mrs. Grant. She took a long time to get over Edmund and to find someone else. Edmund eventually fell in love with Fanny, though the narrator won't specify a time frame. Readers can decide for themselves what the \"proper\" amount of time is for Edmund to get over Mary. Edmund and Fanny marry and live quite happy. Susan takes Fanny's place at Mansfield Park Eventually Edmund and Fanny move to the Parsonage where the Grants and the Crawfords once lived.", "analysis": ""}