{"name": "Chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210422061744/http://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mansfield-park/summary/chapter-7", "summary": "Later, Edmund asks Fanny about her opinion of Miss Crawford. Edmund asks leading questions and Fanny makes sure her answers match up to Edmund's opinions. They both \"agree\" that Mary shouldn't have spoken as she did about her Admiral uncle, but Edmund adds that while Mary is lively, she isn't a bad person. Fanny almost always agrees with Edmund but she doesn't like Mary as much as he obviously does. The harp arrives and Edmund starts going over to the Grants' house pretty often to hear Mary play. Edmund starts falling in love with the charming harpist and Mary starts to like Edmund more than she first did. Fanny is surprised at Edmund's interest in Mary. Edmund starts teaching Mary to ride and he borrows Fanny's horse for the lessons. Mary takes to riding really fast and is soon very good. On one of the lesson days, the two are late returning Fanny's horse for her own ride, so Fanny goes to investigate. She watches Mary and Edmund having fun riding and gets jealous. The two come up eventually and Mary apologizes to Fanny for hogging her horse. Fanny goes off on her slow ride with the coachman for company, who tells us that Fanny used to be scared of horses and that Mary is a way better rider than she is. Thanks a lot, Mr. Coachman. Edmund hints that he'd like to use Fanny's horse again tomorrow for a longer lesson, and Fanny lies and says she's fine with that. The next day everyone goes riding together except for Fanny, who no longer had a horse to use even if she wanted to join. A few days later, Edmund and Julia get a dinner invitation to the Grants' house and Maria isn't invited. Mrs. Grant thought Mr. Rushworth was coming back to town and that Maria would be busy. But he doesn't show up so Maria is just mad. Julia and Edmund return that night and find Fanny sitting in the dark in a corner. She has a bad headache and Edmund finds out that Mrs. Norris had Fanny working in the garden in the heat all day. We learn that Fanny has poor health and, given her symptoms, she most likely suffers from migraines. That condition would have been especially bad during that time period since no one had invented painkillers yet. Most things were treated with leeches. The narrator notes that Fanny's headache wasn't helped by the fact that she was depressed about Edmund ignoring her. We now learn that Fanny is depressed quite often and that a lot of her health problems are probably due to her bouts with depression.", "analysis": ""}