{"name": "Chapter 16", "summary": "Chapter Sixteen:<PARAGRAPH>Clifford's Chamber: Hepzibah felt that she, Clifford and Judge Pyncheon were on the brink of adding another disturbing incident to the house. She cannot rid herself of the sense of something unprecedented occurring. She had never adequately estimated how powerful Jaffrey was in intellect and energy of will and had never felt as alone. She goes to Clifford's room, but does not find him there. She calls for help from Jaffrey, telling him that Clifford is not in his room, but then Clifford appears from the parlor. Judge Pyncheon still remains there, slumped over and unresponsive. Clifford points to the dead Judge and says that they can live without such weight anymore, but they must escape the house. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>As Hepzibah searches for Clifford on Jaffrey's request, she even realizes the weight of the Pyncheon history upon her. This chapter adds yet another mysterious and tragic death to the House of the Seven Gables. Hawthorne presents Judge Pyncheon's sudden demise as an ambiguous event. All of the apparent evidence points to Clifford as a murderer. Hepzibah finds him in the room alone with the dead body, and he immediately suggests that they escape from the House of the Seven Gables. This fulfills Hawthorne's prophecy earlier in the story: Hawthorne suggested that it would take no less than death to cure Clifford of his sensitivity and solipsism, yet fulfills this with the death of Jaffrey instead of the assumed death of Clifford. PARAGRAPH>Despite the obvious conclusion that Clifford murdered Jaffrey, Hawthorne leaves great room for the possibility that another situation occurred. Judge Pyncheon's death is a replica of the mysterious death of Colonel Pyncheon, yet another parallel between the two generations. Also, despite his earlier conviction, the frail Clifford seems unlikely as a murderer, particularly in his present state", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417171403/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-house-of-the-seven-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-18"}