{"name": "Chapter 17", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Seventeen:<PARAGRAPH>The Flight of Two Owls: Hepzibah and Clifford began their strange expedition away from the house. They attracted a great deal of notice as they reached the train station, but got on the train unhindered. Hepzibah wonders if this is a dream, but Clifford says that he has never been so awake before. The train was a novelty to the two travelers, for there were so many people in such an enclosed space. Clifford claims that this is life, surrounded by human beings. At home, Hepzibah was guardian, but here Clifford seems to comprehend what belongs to their new position. Clifford chats with the conductor on the train, and says that the railroad is destined to do away with stale ideas of home and fireside, substituting something better. Clifford, talking to an old man, says that men find themselves returning to the ideal of living outside of their defined homes. He says that the greatest possible stumbling block in the path of human happiness is the idea of a home as heaps of brick and stone. He muses about the House of the Seven Gables, which he envisions as an elderly man of stern countenance. Hepzibah tells him to be quiet, for others will think that he's insane, but he continues his conversation. The old man becomes vexed by Clifford's musings about such things as the telegraph. When the old man concedes that telegraphs may be useful for detecting bank-robbers and murderers, Clifford defends these criminals as possibly enlightened and still having their rights. He posits that there might be a dead man with a blood-stain on his shirt in the house of another man who has fled on a railroad, and asks the old man whether the fleeing man's rights should not be infringed. The train reaches a solitary way-station; Clifford and Hepzibah leave the train at this station, finding themselves in a desolate little town. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The escape from the House of the Seven Gables brings Clifford to life once more, yet even alive he and Hepzibah are largely obsolete. Both travelers find the train a terrifying novelty, but approach this new experience in different manners. Clifford draws energy from the rush of new experience, while Hepzibah approaches their flight tentatively, more aware that they are obsolete. When the two leave the train, they are physically and metaphorically isolated, alone in an empty, abandoned town. PARAGRAPH>While chatting with other travelers, Clifford indulges in progressive social sentiments to which he is entirely unsuited. He echoes the beliefs of Holgrave, who also promotes the idea of homes and familial legacies as burdens that must be taken down. His picture of the House of the Seven Gables bears a striking resemblance to Judge  Pyncheon; to Clifford, the house represents that aspect of the Pyncheon legacy. However, the ideas that Clifford proposes do not suit him; his musings about the future indicate emotions contrary to those of Holgrave. While Holgrave approaches a changed future as a great thing, for Clifford there is the sense of chaos and confusion, as if he does not truly understand what he is saying. Only when the conversation turns to murder does Clifford take a more realistic approach; he projects his own situation onto the conversation, revealing his fear and desperation over the fate of Judge Pyncheon and his belief that a supposed criminal can still be redeemable", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417171403/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-house-of-the-seven-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-18"}