{"name": "act 1, scene 4", "summary": "scene 4. Cyrano threatens Montfleury with his sword. Various people in the audience defend Montfleury. Cyrano challenges them all to a duel, but no one dares come forward. He gives Montfleury until the count of three to leave the stage, and Montfleury vanishes. A young man asks Cyrano why he hates Montfleury. Cyrano answers that Montfleury is a dreadful actor, and that the play is worthless. The theater manager, Bellerose, protests that he will have to give the entire audience their money back. Cyrano throws a bag of money onto the stage. Bellerose, stunned by the large amount of money in the bag, tells Cyrano that on these terms, he can stop the performance any day he likes. Bellerose asks the audience to leave, but they are spellbound by the scene that is unfolding between Cyrano and a character called \"Busybody. The Busybody warns Cyrano that Montfleury enjoys the patronage of the powerful Duc de Candale. Cyrano dismisses his warning on the grounds that he too has a powerful proctectress, his sword. Cyrano asks the Busybody why he is staring at his nose. The Busybody denies that he has even noticed it, claiming that it is tiny. Cyrano feels insulted, and launches into an eloquent speech in praise of his \"great proboscis. De Guiche and Valvert remark that Cyrano is tiresome. Valvert approaches Cyrano and remarks that his nose is \"very big. Cyrano is scornful of his lack of inventiveness, and offers a long list of extravagant insults that Valvert could have delivered against his nose. Cyrano continues to mock Valvert. He says he will fight him with his sword, all the while reciting a poem that he will compose as he fights. On the final line, Cyrano will thrust at Valvert. The audience crowds around Cyrano. As Cyrano begins to compose his poem aloud, he and Valvert start to fence. When Cyrano reaches the final line, he thrusts. Valvert falls and his friends carry him away. An ecstatic crowd cheers Cyrano. Eventually, the crowd disperses. Le Bret asks Cyrano why he is not going to dine, and Cyrano says that he has no money; he threw all he had to Bellerose in compensation for the abandoned performance. An orange-girl cannot bear to see Cyrano go hungry, and tries to give him some food. But the proud Cyrano will only accept a grape, half a macaroon, and a glass of water", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212220419/https://www.novelguide.com/cyrano-de-bergerac/summaries/act1-scenes4-7"}