{"name": "Act 1, scene 3", "summary": "Act 1, scene 3. As de Guiche and Valvert walk towards the stage, Christian decides to challenge Valvert to a duel over Roxane. As he reaches into his pocket for his glove to slap Valvert across the face by way of challenge, he encounters the hand of a pickpocket. In exchange for his release, the pickpocket tells Christian that Ligniere is in trouble. Ligniere has offended an important nobleman by writing a satirical song about him, and the nobleman has arranged for Ligniere to be ambushed by a hundred men at the Porte de Nesle on his way home. Christian runs off to rescue Ligniere. De Guiche, Valvert, and the Marquises take their seats on the stage. The crowd chants for the play to begin. Montfleury, a fat and untalented actor, comes on stage dressed as a shepherd and begins his speech. A voice from the pit is heard crying out, \"Fool, have I not forbidden you the stage. Though the speaker is hidden, Le Bret and Cuigy are certain that it is Cyrano. Each time Montfleury tries to continue his speech, the speaker interrupts and threatens him. Montfleury's voice grows fainter and fainter. Finally, Cyrano stands up on his chair, creating a stir among the audience. Analysis of Act 1, scenes 1-3. These scenes introduce the social and cultural background, the characters, and the first seeds of the plot. The theater is presented as a microcosm  of Parisian society, bringing together people from all social backgrounds and walks of life. Poetry and literature are unifying influences: the marquises idolize the literary ladies, while the pastry-cook Ragueneau sells his wares in exchange for poems. In fact, poetry is so important in this culture that it is a matter of life and death: Ligniere's life is threatened because he wrote a satirical song about a nobleman. One of Rostand's themes in Cyrano de Bergerac is what he saw as the decline of French society and culture. This is already evident in the Bourgeois's disapproving comments on the low-life activities taking place among the theater audience, compared with the great tragedies that used to be performed there, such as those of the seventeenth-century French playwrights Jean Rotrou and Pierre Corneille. The nobility have become decadent and foolish, as is shown in the petty snobberies of the Marquises, who disdain Christian because he is not dressed in the latest fashion, and fawn upon de Guiche because he is successful. Against such foolish and inconsequential characters is set the play's hero, Cyrano. Though Cyrano is spoken of at length, he is not seen until the end of scene 3. He is described by his friends as an excellent poet, swordsman, philosopher, and musician: in short, the epitome of the seventeenth-century cavalier ideal of the courtier-soldier-poet. Cyrano's reputation precedes him. A section of the audience waits with bated breath to see whether he will appear at the play, as Montfleury is playing the lead and Cyrano has forbidden him the stage. If Montfleury appears, the audience knows there will be trouble. He is spoken of as an extraordinary, larger-than-life character, and thus suspense builds around him. In fact, there are three layers of suspense in this part of the play: the play audience's expectation of the actor Montfleury appearing in the play, La Clorise; Cyrano's friends' expectation of Cyrano, whose arrival promises far more momentous entertainment than Montfleury; and finally, the expectation of the reader  of the play Cyrano de Bergerac as they await the appearance of this extraordinary character Cyrano. As well as his exceptional abilities, Cyrano's great flaw, his enormous nose, is mentioned. Ragueneau's comment that Cyrano will fight anyone who remarks on it both conveys Cyrano's sensitivity over this trait and foreshadows the conflicts that are sure to spring up around the subject. The fact that Cyrano's friends only mention his nose after they have listed his other great qualities puts his flaw into perspective. To them, it seems relatively unimportant, or just another way in which Cyrano is extraordinary, but Cyrano does not share their view. His insecurity over his nose rules his life. Christian is a foil to Cyrano and his opposite. While Cyrano is extraordinary on the inside but physically unattractive on the outside, Christian is a very ordinary young man blessed with unusual good looks. Christian's love for Roxane sets up the main conflict that drives the plot. The glance they exchange in the theater establishes the immediate physical attraction between them, but Christian's concern over Ligniere's description of her as an intellectual shows his weak point. Unlike the brilliant Cyrano, Christian is dull of mind. While Cyrano represents inward beauty, Christian represents outward beauty", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212220419/https://www.novelguide.com/cyrano-de-bergerac/summaries/act1-scenes1-3"}