{"name": "Chapter 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-6", "summary": "Zenobia warmly greets everyone, telling Coverdale how she has read and enjoys his poetry very much. He is charmed by her praise, blushing with pleasure. He describes her: dressed simply; dark and glossy hair with one single ornamental flower of exotic and fresh plumage; an \"admirable figure\" ; remarkably beautiful. She says she will play hostess tonight, though tomorrow they will all be brothers and sisters. Someone asks how parts are assigned, and she laughs that women will do women's work, but over time that may change. Coverdale wonders aloud that the lot of women is that which \"chiefly distinguishes artificial life -the life of degenerate mortals -from the life of Paradise\". He privately sees her as an Eve of sorts, almost actually beholding her in Eve's earliest garment. He is impressed by her openness and lack of restraint that women usually have, seeing her as warm and rich in a way other women are not. The women begin to cook and the others talk. Silas Foster enters, shaking off snow. He is heavy, uncouth, and bearded. The storm grows stronger outside, but their courage does not flag. They are sure of their vision, not caring for other men's scorn. They are no longer at the pulpit, at the ledger, using their pen; they are no longer indolent but ready to embrace a life of principle that human society has shunned. They will replace pride with love. Foster mingles only a little, annoying Coverdale by talking about practical matters like buying pigs. He begins to realize, though, that in terms of society, they stand in a position of hostility, not brotherhood. When Zenobia comes in, he is slightly surprised to find that her presence makes their experiment seem like an illusion or a masquerade. Later she tells him that she finds it piquing that Hollingsworth is late. They both discuss how strange and lamentable it is that the man is so concerned with his philanthropic endeavor of reforming criminals. Zenobia comments that he ought to spend time working on people who can be saved, not those past help. Coverdale laughs that to please him they ought to commit a crime, and Zenobia gives him a look he cannot quite parse", "analysis": "Hawthorne's third novel is rich, complex, and layered; it has dozens of symbols, metaphors, and philosophical, historical, religious, literary, and psychosexual references. Thus, it is rife with topics for discussion, but can often be difficult in terms of narrowing down areas of focus. Each chapter is utterly jam-packed with things to discuss, so, in terms of a disclaimer, this study guide cannot possibly address every facet of Hawthorne's fascinating and at times inscrutable book. With that in mind, the first six chapters bring us a myriad of mysteries, examples of foreshadowing, and symbols. First of all, Hawthorne sets his story in the spring -it is a cold, blustery April when Coverdale sets out for Blithedale -and ends it in the Fall, when the leaves, Blithedale's founding spirit, and one of its own are dying. He also is keen to begin his exploration of the contrasts between city and countryside. Coverdale speaks of how fresh and revivifying the air is, contrasting it with the stifling air of the city; the invented biography for Priscilla also places the city in a negative light. The countryside is supposed to be an idyllic place where the human spirit can be renewed. It is the perfect place for this experiment of Blithedale to take place, as it is free from the constraints, hierarchies, and engrained norms of the city. Despite the sense of exuberance that pervades Coverdale's narrative for a couple chapters, there is already quite a bit of foreshadowing that things will not turn out well. Coverdale acknowledges that the world outside is hostile to them. He says that the group decides to ignore the land's Indian name, and thus its history, in favor of the anodyne \"Blithedale.\" Silas Foster speaks of the practicalities of working on a farm, destroying some of the illusions of their great purpose, while everyone knows right away that Hollingsworth is barely committed. There are tensions regarding gender roles and duties. Coverdale also catches cold and has feverish dreams that allude to some future doom. Finally, Coverdale begins to exhibit the tendency that makes him a fascinating and complicated narrator: he is obsessively interested in those around him, watching, wondering, and judging. The thing that Coverdale is overwhelmingly concerned with in these early chapters is Zenobia's past. He wonders if she was married, and then wonders if she is not a virgin: \"the freedom of her deportment...was not exactly maidenlike...Her constrained and inevitable manifestation, I said often to myself, was that of a woman to whom wedlock had thrown wide the gates of mystery\" . Zenobia notices his interest in her, speculating that \"I cannot reckon you as an admirer\" . Sex is an important underlying tension throughout the novel, with Coverdale often inadvertently revealing his own fixations as well as giving us clues to those of other characters. Related to this is Zenobia's flower, one of the most potent symbols in the text. It is absolutely identified with her sexuality, and the language Coverdale uses to describe it is rife with eroticism: \"It was an exotic, of rare beauty, and as fresh as if the hot-house gardener had just clipped it...I can see and smell it, at this moment\" ."}