{"name": "Chapter 11", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210508135841/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/hound-of-the-baskervilles/summary/chapter-11", "summary": "Watson travels into Coombe Tracey to see if he can track down Laura Lyons. She's actually pretty easy to find . Watson asks her straight out if she knew Sir Charles. She reluctantly admits that she has received financial assistance from him. Laura goes on to say that a friend of hers, Stapleton, used to speak to Sir Charles on her behalf. She denies that she ever wrote asking to meet him, though. That is, she denies it until Watson quotes her own letter back to her. Oops. She finally admits that she wrote to Sir Charles asking to meet him. She explains why she kept it secret: hello, it's rural England in 1901, a married woman can't just visit an unmarried guy at night without it being a huge scandal. The one thing she won't explain is why she never went to the meeting. She just swears that she made the appointment, but she never went to Baskerville Hall. She says she received the help she needed from \"another source\" . Watson is sure there's more to the story than Laura will tell him, but she never changes her answers. He realizes she must have been asking for money for a divorce, but why so urgently right now? Watson goes back to Baskerville Hall. Mr. Frankland sees him passing by in his carriage and calls him over for a drink. Mr. Frankland starts bragging because he knows something the cops don't know--and he won't tell them. Apparently, there's a boy that has been carrying food to a man hidden near a large hill called Black Tor. Mr. Frankland has been keeping watch with his telescope because he thinks the man is the murderous Selden. Even as they're talking about it, the boy appears on his twice daily errand of sneaking over the moors with food for the mysterious man. Watson ditches Mr. Frankland and goes out onto the moors to follow the boy's tracks. He finds a circle of old stone huts, and he discovers one that's clearly being lived in. Inside the hut, there's a note: \"Dr. Watson has gone to Coombe Tracey\" . Watson realizes that the mystery man has been following him. But he can't find any other signs of the man's identity. Watson sits and waits nervously for the man to return. Finally, he hears the sound of someone approaching. And he hears a familiar voice inviting him to come outside, where it's more comfortable.", "analysis": ""}