SCENE III.

Verona. A street

Enter LAUNCE, leading a dog

  LAUNCE. Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping; all
the
    kind of the Launces have this very fault. I have receiv'd my
    proportion, like the Prodigious Son, and am going with Sir
    Proteus to the Imperial's court. I think Crab my dog be the
    sourest-natured dog that lives: my mother weeping, my father
    wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat wringing
her
    hands, and all our house in a great perplexity; yet did not
this
    cruel-hearted cur shed one tear. He is a stone, a very pebble
    stone, and has no more pity in him than a dog. A Jew would
have
    wept to have seen our parting; why, my grandam having no
eyes,
    look you, wept herself blind at my parting. Nay, I'll show
you
    the manner of it. This shoe is my father; no, this left shoe
is
    my father; no, no, left shoe is my mother; nay, that cannot
be so
    neither; yes, it is so, it is so, it hath the worser sole.
This
    shoe with the hole in it is my mother, and this my father. A
    vengeance on 't! There 'tis. Now, sir, this staff is my
sister,
    for, look you, she is as white as a lily and as small as a
wand;
    this hat is Nan our maid; I am the dog; no, the dog is
himself,
    and I am the dog- O, the dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so,
so.
    Now come I to my father: 'Father, your blessing.' Now should
not
    the shoe speak a word for weeping; now should I kiss my
father;
    well, he weeps on. Now come I to my mother. O that she could
    speak now like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her- why there
'tis;
    here's my mother's breath up and down. Now come I to my
sister;
    mark the moan she makes. Now the dog all this while sheds not
a
    tear, nor speaks a word; but see how I lay the dust with my
    tears.

                            Enter PANTHINO

  PANTHINO. Launce, away, away, aboard! Thy master is shipp'd,
and
    thou art to post after with oars. What's the matter? Why
weep'st
    thou, man? Away, ass! You'll lose the tide if you tarry any
    longer.
  LAUNCE. It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the
    unkindest tied that ever any man tied.
  PANTHINO. What's the unkindest tide?
  LAUNCE. Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.
  PANTHINO. Tut, man, I mean thou'lt lose the flood, and, in
losing
    the flood, lose thy voyage, and, in losing thy voyage, lose
thy
    master, and, in losing thy master, lose thy service, and, in
    losing thy service- Why dost thou stop my mouth?
  LAUNCE. For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.
  PANTHINO. Where should I lose my tongue?
  LAUNCE. In thy tale.
  PANTHINO. In thy tail!
  LAUNCE. Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and the
    service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river were dry, I am
able
    to fill it with my tears; if the wind were down, I could
drive
    the boat with my sighs.
  PANTHINO. Come, come away, man; I was sent to call thee.
  LAUNCE. Sir, call me what thou dar'st.
  PANTHINO. Will thou go?
  LAUNCE. Well, I will go.                                Exeunt





