{"name": "Act 5, Scene 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210613134721/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/the-white-devil/summary/act-5-scene-1", "summary": "After Vittoria and the Duke are married, Brachiano, Flamineo, Marcello, Hortensio,Vittoria, Cornelia, Zanche, and others pass over the stage in a procession. Only Flamineo and Hortensio remain behind. Flamineo says this marriage has made him the happiest he's been in a long time, and they talk about the Moor who is visiting the court. Flamineo says that the Moor seems like a great soldier. They also mention the Moor's companions, two Hungarian noblemen and former warriors who have become monks, now retiring to join the Capuchin order. Flamineo and Hortensio keep talking about the Moor: he is a Christian, and, according to Flamineo, he has an admirably low tolerance for courtly nonsense. He seems to understand that nobles are just as flawed as everyone else. Brachiano, the Moor , the Capuchin monks , and Antonelli all enter. Brachiano praises Mulinassar, and asks him to stay to see some fights at some barriers they'll build tonight, along with ambassadors who are there for the wedding. Mulinassar agrees, and Brachiano, Hortensio, and Flamineo exit. The remaining people on stage--Francisco, Lodovico, Gasparo, and Antonelli--all re-state their vows for revenge, embracing. Lodovico wishes they could poison Brachiano's tennis racket or saddle or do something cool like that. Francisco is open to sneaky stuff, but he kind of wishes he could've killed Brachiano on an open and fair field of fight. Lodovico, Antonelli, and Gasparo all exit, and Flamineo, Marcello, and Zanche re-enter. Marcello says that Flamineo is having an affair with Zanche, and Flamineo acts mildly dismissive, saying women tend to stick where their affection throws them. Zanche says she'll talk to the Moor--since she's a moor, as well--soon, when she gets the chance. She exits. Flamineo and Marcello chat with Mulinassar. Flamineo asks Mulinassar to tell them his exploits, but he's reluctant to toot his own horn. He also won't flatter the duke, since he believes all men are equal made of the same clay. Flamineo says he would probably boast about his war service if he had to beg in churches. Marcello says he's a soldier too, but hasn't made much money. Flamineo says good soldiers aren't recognized in peacetime. He'd personally rather be a cardinal's minion and get away with villainy. Flamineo talks about people he's heard of who went to fight the Turks and discovered they only earned enough money to buy themselves wooden legs and bandages. Francisco exits. Hortensio, a young Lord, and Zanche enter. The young Lord says they're getting ready to fight , and Flamineo disparages this young Lord to Hortensio. Flamineo tells Hortensio that he loves Zanche, but nervously and with caution, since she knows about his villainy. He's promised to marry her, but he acts like it wasn't a serious thing. Zanche comes over, and accuses Flamineo of being cool towards her. He says that's a good thing, and disputes with her when she asks if he remembers the promises he made her: yeah, he remembers them, but they were the like the prayers sailors make in a storm before things calm down and they go back to drinking. Cornelia enters and hits Zanche, telling her to go back to the kitchen. Cornelia exits. Zanche complains about Cornelia, and then Marcello calls her a strumpet and kicks her. Flamineo defends Zanche and argues with Marcello. As the argument heats up, Marcello threatens to cut Zanche's throat. Flamineo says he thinks Marcello might be the product of adultery, and Marcello says that they might end up killing one another. All exit, except for Zanche. Francisco, as Mulinassar, enters. Zanche confesses her love for him, and says that she'll give him a decent dowry if he marries her. Mulinassar says he'll consider the idea. She also says that she can tell him blood-curdling secrets, and Francisco thinks he might be able to get some good intel out of her. They both exit.", "analysis": ""}