{"name": "act 4, Scene 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421072939/https://www.gradesaver.com/julius-caesar/study-guide/summary-act-4", "summary": "Antony, Octavius and Lepidus have banded together in a counter-conspiracy to destroy the men who killed Caesar. Antony has a paper with names on it and he says, \"These many, then, shall die; their names are pricked\". The men then mark more names of people who must die, including the brother of Lepidus and the son of Mark Antony's sister. Antony states that, \"He shall not live. Look, with a spot I damn him\". Antony then sends Lepidus to Caesar's house to fetch the will. He hopes to somehow reduce the amount of money that needs to be paid to the beneficiaries. After Lepidus leaves, Antony tells Octavius that Lepidus was a poor choice to form the second triumvirate with. Octavius says, \"You may do your will; / But he's a tried and valiant soldier\". Antony implies in his speech that he will eventually remove Lepidus from rule, but that they should keep him a while longer", "analysis": "Antony, Octavius and Lepidus differ significantly from the original conspirators. They wish only to avenge Caesar's death and are willing to murder each of them, stating \"These many, then, shall die; their names are pricked\" . In their counter-conspiracy, they are willing to include relatives and friends on the list of those to die, demonstrating they are most serious and dedicated to the task of eradicating those who conspired against Caesar. Antony's statement, \"He shall not live. Look, with a spot I damn him\"  brings to the forefront the calculating nature of the new rulers. Brutus stands out as an example of Republican stoicism on the battlefield. He describes the cause of Portia's death as, \"Impatience of my absence\" . His calmness when speaking about his wife's death frightens even Cassius, who remarks that, \"How scaped I killing when I crossed you so?\" . He is further taken aback by the ease with which Brutus dismisses the topic when Titinius and Messala arrive. Brutus immediately changes the subject, forcing Cassius to take him aside and ask, \"Portia, art thou gone?\" . Brutus tells him not to speak of her anymore. Later, when Messala asks Brutus if he has heard anything about Portia, Brutus replies, \"Nothing, Messala\" . Stoicism and honor mean everything to Brutus, and like Hotspur in Henry IV, Brutus refuses to show weakness to his troops. Letters and poetry appear a great deal throughout this play, possibly more than in any other of Shakespeare's plays. In the first act, Cassius writes anonymous letters to Brutus to convince him to joint he conspiracy, Artemidorus writes an ignored letter warning Caesar of the plot against him, and Cinna the poet is murdered. In this act, a poet again takes the stage, but Brutus orders him removed from his tent. In addition, both Brutus and Messala have letters regarding the state of Rome after Antony's speech.  Brutus states, \"Mine  speaks of seventy senators that died / By their proscriptions, Cicero being one\" . This mention of perhaps the greatest orator Cicero, a man identified closely with words, is almost an afterthought. Even Brutus, when trying to read his book, is unable to continue reading because the ghost of Caesar interrupts him. We therefore see first the manipulative power, and then the destruction and dismissal of literature and poetry after Caesar's death."}