<CHAPTER>
8--Those Who Are Found Where There Is Said to Be Nobody


As soon as the sad little boy had withdrawn from the fire he clasped
the money tight in the palm of his hand, as if thereby to fortify his
courage, and began to run. There was really little danger in allowing a
child to go home alone on this part of Egdon Heath. The distance to
the boy's house was not more than three-eighths of a mile, his father's
cottage, and one other a few yards further on, forming part of the small
hamlet of Mistover Knap: the third and only remaining house was that
of Captain Vye and Eustacia, which stood quite away from the small
cottages and was the loneliest of lonely houses on these thinly
populated slopes.

He ran until he was out of breath, and then, becoming more courageous,
walked leisurely along, singing in an old voice a little song about a
sailor-boy and a fair one, and bright gold in store. In the middle of
this the child stopped--from a pit under the hill ahead of him shone a
light, whence proceeded a cloud of floating dust and a smacking noise.

Only unusual sights and sounds frightened the boy. The shrivelled voice
of the heath did not alarm him, for that was familiar. The thornbushes
which arose in his path from time to time were less satisfactory, for
they whistled gloomily, and had a ghastly habit after dark of putting
on the shapes of jumping madmen, sprawling giants, and hideous cripples.
Lights were not uncommon this evening, but the nature of all of them was
different from this. Discretion rather than terror prompted the boy
to turn back instead of passing the light, with a view of asking Miss
Eustacia Vye to let her servant accompany him home.

When the boy had reascended to the top of the valley he found the fire
to be still burning on the bank, though lower than before. Beside it,
instead of Eustacia's solitary form, he saw two persons, the second
being a man. The boy crept along under the bank to ascertain from
the nature of the proceedings if it would be prudent to interrupt so
splendid a creature as Miss Eustacia on his poor trivial account.

After listening under the bank for some minutes to the talk he turned in
a perplexed and doubting manner and began to withdraw as silently as
he had come. That he did not, upon the whole, think it advisable to
interrupt her conversation with Wildeve, without being prepared to bear
the whole weight of her displeasure, was obvious.

Here was a Scyllaeo-Charybdean position for a poor boy. Pausing when
again safe from discovery, he finally decided to face the pit phenomenon
as the lesser evil. With a heavy sigh he retraced the slope, and
followed the path he had followed before.

The light had gone, the rising dust had disappeared--he hoped for ever.
He marched resolutely along, and found nothing to alarm him till, coming
within a few yards of the sandpit, he heard a slight noise in front,
which led him to halt. The halt was but momentary, for the noise
resolved itself into the steady bites of two animals grazing.

"Two he'th-croppers down here," he said aloud. "I have never known 'em
come down so far afore."

The animals were in the direct line of his path, but that the child
thought little of; he had played round the fetlocks of horses from his
infancy. On coming nearer, however, the boy was somewhat surprised to
find that the little creatures did not run off, and that each wore a
clog, to prevent his going astray; this signified that they had been
broken in. He could now see the interior of the pit, which, being in
the side of the hill, had a level entrance. In the innermost corner the
square outline of a van appeared, with its back towards him. A light
came from the interior, and threw a moving shadow upon the vertical face
of gravel at the further side of the pit into which the vehicle faced.

The child assumed that this was the cart of a gipsy, and his dread of
those wanderers reached but to that mild pitch which titillates rather
than pains. Only a few inches of mud wall kept him and his family from
being gipsies themselves. He skirted the gravel pit at a respectful
distance, ascended the slope, and came forward upon the brow, in order
to look into the open door of the van and see the original of the
shadow.

The picture alarmed the boy. By a little stove inside the van sat a
figure red from head to heels--the man who had been Thomasin's friend.
He was darning a stocking, which was red like the rest of him. Moreover,
as he darned he smoked a pipe, the stem and bowl of which were red also.

At this moment one of the heath-croppers feeding in the outer shadows
was audibly shaking off the clog attached to its foot. Aroused by the
sound, the reddleman laid down his stocking, lit a lantern which hung
beside him, and came out from the van. In sticking up the candle he
lifted the lantern to his face, and the light shone into the whites
of his eyes and upon his ivory teeth, which, in contrast with the
red surrounding, lent him a startling aspect enough to the gaze of a
juvenile. The boy knew too well for his peace of mind upon whose lair
he had lighted. Uglier persons than gipsies were known to cross Egdon at
times, and a reddleman was one of them.

"How I wish 'twas only a gipsy!" he murmured.

The man was by this time coming back from the horses. In his fear of
being seen the boy rendered detection certain by nervous motion. The
heather and peat stratum overhung the brow of the pit in mats, hiding
the actual verge. The boy had stepped beyond the solid ground; the
heather now gave way, and down he rolled over the scarp of grey sand to
the very foot of the man.

The red man opened the lantern and turned it upon the figure of the
prostrate boy.

"Who be ye?" he said.

"Johnny Nunsuch, master!"

"What were you doing up there?"

"I don't know."

"Watching me, I suppose?"

"Yes, master."

"What did you watch me for?"

"Because I was coming home from Miss Vye's bonfire."

"Beest hurt?"

"No."

"Why, yes, you be--your hand is bleeding. Come under my tilt and let me
tie it up."

"Please let me look for my sixpence."

"How did you come by that?"

"Miss Vye gied it to me for keeping up her bonfire."

The sixpence was found, and the man went to the van, the boy behind,
almost holding his breath.

The man took a piece of rag from a satchel containing sewing materials,
tore off a strip, which, like everything else, was tinged red, and
proceeded to bind up the wound.

"My eyes have got foggy-like--please may I sit down, master?" said the
boy.

"To be sure, poor chap. 'Tis enough to make you feel fainty. Sit on that
bundle."

The man finished tying up the gash, and the boy said, "I think I'll go
home now, master."

"You are rather afraid of me. Do you know what I be?"

The child surveyed his vermilion figure up and down with much misgiving
and finally said, "Yes."

"Well, what?"

"The reddleman!" he faltered.

"Yes, that's what I be. Though there's more than one. You little
children think there's only one cuckoo, one fox, one giant, one devil,
and one reddleman, when there's lots of us all."

"Is there? You won't carry me off in your bags, will ye, master? 'Tis
said that the reddleman will sometimes."

"Nonsense. All that reddlemen do is sell reddle. You see all these bags
at the back of my cart? They are not full of little boys--only full of
red stuff."

"Was you born a reddleman?"

"No, I took to it. I should be as white as you if I were to give up the
trade--that is, I should be white in time--perhaps six months; not at
first, because 'tis grow'd into my skin and won't wash out. Now, you'll
never be afraid of a reddleman again, will ye?"

"No, never. Willy Orchard said he seed a red ghost here t'other
day--perhaps that was you?"

"I was here t'other day."

"Were you making that dusty light I saw by now?"

"Oh yes, I was beating out some bags. And have you had a good bonfire up
there? I saw the light. Why did Miss Vye want a bonfire so bad that she
should give you sixpence to keep it up?"

"I don't know. I was tired, but she made me bide and keep up the fire
just the same, while she kept going up across Rainbarrow way."

"And how long did that last?"

"Until a hopfrog jumped into the pond."

The reddleman suddenly ceased to talk idly. "A hopfrog?" he inquired.
"Hopfrogs don't jump into ponds this time of year."

"They do, for I heard one."

"Certain-sure?"

"Yes. She told me afore that I should hear'n; and so I did. They say
she's clever and deep, and perhaps she charmed 'en to come."

"And what then?"

"Then I came down here, and I was afeard, and I went back; but I didn't
like to speak to her, because of the gentleman, and I came on here
again."

"A gentleman--ah! What did she say to him, my man?"

"Told him she supposed he had not married the other woman because he
liked his old sweetheart best; and things like that."

"What did the gentleman say to her, my sonny?"

"He only said he did like her best, and how he was coming to see her
again under Rainbarrow o' nights."

"Ha!" cried the reddleman, slapping his hand against the side of his van
so that the whole fabric shook under the blow. "That's the secret o't!"

The little boy jumped clean from the stool.

"My man, don't you be afraid," said the dealer in red, suddenly becoming
gentle. "I forgot you were here. That's only a curious way reddlemen
have of going mad for a moment; but they don't hurt anybody. And what
did the lady say then?"

"I can't mind. Please, Master Reddleman, may I go home-along now?"

"Ay, to be sure you may. I'll go a bit of ways with you."

He conducted the boy out of the gravel pit and into the path leading
to his mother's cottage. When the little figure had vanished in the
darkness the reddleman returned, resumed his seat by the fire, and
proceeded to darn again.



</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
9--Love Leads a Shrewd Man into Strategy


Reddlemen of the old school are now but seldom seen. Since the
introduction of railways Wessex farmers have managed to do without these
Mephistophelian visitants, and the bright pigment so largely used by
shepherds in preparing sheep for the fair is obtained by other routes.
Even those who yet survive are losing the poetry of existence which
characterized them when the pursuit of the trade meant periodical
journeys to the pit whence the material was dug, a regular camping out
from month to month, except in the depth of winter, a peregrination
among farms which could be counted by the hundred, and in spite of this
Arab existence the preservation of that respectability which is insured
by the never-failing production of a well-lined purse.

Reddle spreads its lively hues over everything it lights on, and stamps
unmistakably, as with the mark of Cain, any person who has handled it
half an hour.

A child's first sight of a reddleman was an epoch in his life. That
blood-coloured figure was a sublimation of all the horrid dreams
which had afflicted the juvenile spirit since imagination began. "The
reddleman is coming for you!" had been the formulated threat of Wessex
mothers for many generations. He was successfully supplanted for a
while, at the beginning of the present century, by Buonaparte; but as
process of time rendered the latter personage stale and ineffective the
older phrase resumed its early prominence. And now the reddleman has
in his turn followed Buonaparte to the land of worn-out bogeys, and his
place is filled by modern inventions.

The reddleman lived like a gipsy; but gipsies he scorned. He was about
as thriving as travelling basket and mat makers; but he had nothing
to do with them. He was more decently born and brought up than the
cattledrovers who passed and repassed him in his wanderings; but they
merely nodded to him. His stock was more valuable than that of pedlars;
but they did not think so, and passed his cart with eyes straight ahead.
He was such an unnatural colour to look at that the men of roundabouts
and waxwork shows seemed gentlemen beside him; but he considered them
low company, and remained aloof. Among all these squatters and folks
of the road the reddleman continually found himself; yet he was not of
them. His occupation tended to isolate him, and isolated he was mostly
seen to be.

It was sometimes suggested that reddlemen were criminals for whose
misdeeds other men wrongfully suffered--that in escaping the law they
had not escaped their own consciences, and had taken to the trade as a
lifelong penance. Else why should they have chosen it? In the present
case such a question would have been particularly apposite. The
reddleman who had entered Egdon that afternoon was an instance of the
pleasing being wasted to form the ground-work of the singular, when an
ugly foundation would have done just as well for that purpose. The one
point that was forbidding about this reddleman was his colour. Freed
from that he would have been as agreeable a specimen of rustic manhood
as one would often see. A keen observer might have been inclined to
think--which was, indeed, partly the truth--that he had relinquished
his proper station in life for want of interest in it. Moreover, after
looking at him one would have hazarded the guess that good nature, and
an acuteness as extreme as it could be without verging on craft, formed
the framework of his character.

While he darned the stocking his face became rigid with thought. Softer
expressions followed this, and then again recurred the tender sadness
which had sat upon him during his drive along the highway that
afternoon. Presently his needle stopped. He laid down the stocking,
arose from his seat, and took a leathern pouch from a hook in the corner
of the van. This contained among other articles a brown-paper packet,
which, to judge from the hinge-like character of its worn folds, seemed
to have been carefully opened and closed a good many times. He sat down
on a three-legged milking stool that formed the only seat in the van,
and, examining his packet by the light of a candle, took thence an old
letter and spread it open. The writing had originally been traced on
white paper, but the letter had now assumed a pale red tinge from the
accident of its situation; and the black strokes of writing thereon
looked like the twigs of a winter hedge against a vermilion sunset. The
letter bore a date some two years previous to that time, and was signed
"Thomasin Yeobright." It ran as follows:--


DEAR DIGGORY VENN,--The question you put when you overtook me coming
home from Pond-close gave me such a surprise that I am afraid I did not
make you exactly understand what I meant. Of course, if my aunt had not
met me I could have explained all then at once, but as it was there was
no chance. I have been quite uneasy since, as you know I do not wish
to pain you, yet I fear I shall be doing so now in contradicting what
I seemed to say then. I cannot, Diggory, marry you, or think of letting
you call me your sweetheart. I could not, indeed, Diggory. I hope you
will not much mind my saying this, and feel in a great pain. It makes me
very sad when I think it may, for I like you very much, and I always put
you next to my cousin Clym in my mind. There are so many reasons why we
cannot be married that I can hardly name them all in a letter. I did not
in the least expect that you were going to speak on such a thing when
you followed me, because I had never thought of you in the sense of a
lover at all. You must not becall me for laughing when you spoke; you
mistook when you thought I laughed at you as a foolish man. I laughed
because the idea was so odd, and not at you at all. The great reason
with my own personal self for not letting you court me is, that I do not
feel the things a woman ought to feel who consents to walk with you
with the meaning of being your wife. It is not as you think, that I have
another in my mind, for I do not encourage anybody, and never have in
my life. Another reason is my aunt. She would not, I know, agree to it,
even if I wished to have you. She likes you very well, but she will
want me to look a little higher than a small dairy-farmer, and marry
a professional man. I hope you will not set your heart against me for
writing plainly, but I felt you might try to see me again, and it is
better that we should not meet. I shall always think of you as a good
man, and be anxious for your well-doing. I send this by Jane Orchard's
little maid,--And remain Diggory, your faithful friend,

THOMASIN YEOBRIGHT.

To MR. VENN, Dairy-farmer.


Since the arrival of that letter, on a certain autumn morning long ago,
the reddleman and Thomasin had not met till today. During the interval
he had shifted his position even further from hers than it had
originally been, by adopting the reddle trade; though he was really in
very good circumstances still. Indeed, seeing that his expenditure was
only one-fourth of his income, he might have been called a prosperous
man.

Rejected suitors take to roaming as naturally as unhived bees; and the
business to which he had cynically devoted himself was in many ways
congenial to Venn. But his wanderings, by mere stress of old emotions,
had frequently taken an Egdon direction, though he never intruded upon
her who attracted him thither. To be in Thomasin's heath, and near her,
yet unseen, was the one ewe-lamb of pleasure left to him.

Then came the incident of that day, and the reddleman, still loving
her well, was excited by this accidental service to her at a critical
juncture to vow an active devotion to her cause, instead of, as
hitherto, sighing and holding aloof. After what had happened it was
impossible that he should not doubt the honesty of Wildeve's intentions.
But her hope was apparently centred upon him; and dismissing his regrets
Venn determined to aid her to be happy in her own chosen way. That this
way was, of all others, the most distressing to himself, was awkward
enough; but the reddleman's love was generous.

His first active step in watching over Thomasin's interests was taken
about seven o'clock the next evening and was dictated by the news which
he had learnt from the sad boy. That Eustacia was somehow the cause
of Wildeve's carelessness in relation to the marriage had at once been
Venn's conclusion on hearing of the secret meeting between them. It did
not occur to his mind that Eustacia's love signal to Wildeve was the
tender effect upon the deserted beauty of the intelligence which her
grandfather had brought home. His instinct was to regard her as a
conspirator against rather than as an antecedent obstacle to Thomasin's
happiness.

During the day he had been exceedingly anxious to learn the condition of
Thomasin, but he did not venture to intrude upon a threshold to which
he was a stranger, particularly at such an unpleasant moment as this. He
had occupied his time in moving with his ponies and load to a new point
in the heath, eastward to his previous station; and here he selected a
nook with a careful eye to shelter from wind and rain, which seemed to
mean that his stay there was to be a comparatively extended one. After
this he returned on foot some part of the way that he had come; and,
it being now dark, he diverged to the left till he stood behind a holly
bush on the edge of a pit not twenty yards from Rainbarrow.

He watched for a meeting there, but he watched in vain. Nobody except
himself came near the spot that night.

But the loss of his labour produced little effect upon the reddleman.
He had stood in the shoes of Tantalus, and seemed to look upon a certain
mass of disappointment as the natural preface to all realizations,
without which preface they would give cause for alarm.

The same hour the next evening found him again at the same place; but
Eustacia and Wildeve, the expected trysters, did not appear.

He pursued precisely the same course yet four nights longer, and without
success. But on the next, being the day-week of their previous meeting,
he saw a female shape floating along the ridge and the outline of
a young man ascending from the valley. They met in the little ditch
encircling the tumulus--the original excavation from which it had been
thrown up by the ancient British people.

The reddleman, stung with suspicion of wrong to Thomasin, was aroused
to strategy in a moment. He instantly left the bush and crept forward on
his hands and knees. When he had got as close as he might safely venture
without discovery he found that, owing to a cross-wind, the conversation
of the trysting pair could not be overheard.

Near him, as in divers places about the heath, were areas strewn with
large turves, which lay edgeways and upside down awaiting removal by
Timothy Fairway, previous to the winter weather. He took two of these
as he lay, and dragged them over him till one covered his head and
shoulders, the other his back and legs. The reddleman would now have
been quite invisible, even by daylight; the turves, standing upon him
with the heather upwards, looked precisely as if they were growing. He
crept along again, and the turves upon his back crept with him. Had he
approached without any covering the chances are that he would not
have been perceived in the dusk; approaching thus, it was as though he
burrowed underground. In this manner he came quite close to where the
two were standing.

"Wish to consult me on the matter?" reached his ears in the rich,
impetuous accents of Eustacia Vye. "Consult me? It is an indignity to
me to talk so--I won't bear it any longer!" She began weeping. "I have
loved you, and have shown you that I loved you, much to my regret; and
yet you can come and say in that frigid way that you wish to consult
with me whether it would not be better to marry Thomasin. Better--of
course it would be. Marry her--she is nearer to your own position in
life than I am!"

"Yes, yes; that's very well," said Wildeve peremptorily. "But we must
look at things as they are. Whatever blame may attach to me for having
brought it about, Thomasin's position is at present much worse than
yours. I simply tell you that I am in a strait."

"But you shall not tell me! You must see that it is only harassing me.
Damon, you have not acted well; you have sunk in my opinion. You have
not valued my courtesy--the courtesy of a lady in loving you--who used
to think of far more ambitious things. But it was Thomasin's fault.

"She won you away from me, and she deserves to suffer for it. Where is
she staying now? Not that I care, nor where I am myself. Ah, if I were
dead and gone how glad she would be! Where is she, I ask?"

"Thomasin is now staying at her aunt's shut up in a bedroom, and keeping
out of everybody's sight," he said indifferently.

"I don't think you care much about her even now," said Eustacia with
sudden joyousness, "for if you did you wouldn't talk so coolly about
her. Do you talk so coolly to her about me? Ah, I expect you do! Why did
you originally go away from me? I don't think I can ever forgive you,
except on one condition, that whenever you desert me, you come back
again, sorry that you served me so."

"I never wish to desert you."

"I do not thank you for that. I should hate it to be all smooth. Indeed,
I think I like you to desert me a little once now and then. Love is the
dismallest thing where the lover is quite honest. O, it is a shame to
say so; but it is true!" She indulged in a little laugh. "My low spirits
begin at the very idea. Don't you offer me tame love, or away you go!"

"I wish Tamsie were not such a confoundedly good little woman," said
Wildeve, "so that I could be faithful to you without injuring a worthy
person. It is I who am the sinner after all; I am not worth the little
finger of either of you."

"But you must not sacrifice yourself to her from any sense of justice,"
replied Eustacia quickly. "If you do not love her it is the most
merciful thing in the long run to leave her as she is. That's always
the best way. There, now I have been unwomanly, I suppose. When you have
left me I am always angry with myself for things that I have said to
you."

Wildeve walked a pace or two among the heather without replying. The
pause was filled up by the intonation of a pollard thorn a little way to
windward, the breezes filtering through its unyielding twigs as through
a strainer. It was as if the night sang dirges with clenched teeth.

She continued, half sorrowfully, "Since meeting you last, it has
occurred to me once or twice that perhaps it was not for love of me you
did not marry her. Tell me, Damon--I'll try to bear it. Had I nothing
whatever to do with the matter?"

"Do you press me to tell?"

"Yes, I must know. I see I have been too ready to believe in my own
power."

"Well, the immediate reason was that the license would not do for the
place, and before I could get another she ran away. Up to that point
you had nothing to do with it. Since then her aunt has spoken to me in a
tone which I don't at all like."

"Yes, yes! I am nothing in it--I am nothing in it. You only trifle with
me. Heaven, what can I, Eustacia Vye, be made of to think so much of
you!"

"Nonsense; do not be so passionate.... Eustacia, how we roved among these
bushes last year, when the hot days had got cool, and the shades of the
hills kept us almost invisible in the hollows!"

She remained in moody silence till she said, "Yes; and how I used to
laugh at you for daring to look up to me! But you have well made me
suffer for that since."

"Yes, you served me cruelly enough until I thought I had found someone
fairer than you. A blessed find for me, Eustacia."

"Do you still think you found somebody fairer?"

"Sometimes I do, sometimes I don't. The scales are balanced so nicely
that a feather would turn them."

"But don't you really care whether I meet you or whether I don't?" she
said slowly.

"I care a little, but not enough to break my rest," replied the young
man languidly. "No, all that's past. I find there are two flowers where
I thought there was only one. Perhaps there are three, or four, or any
number as good as the first.... Mine is a curious fate. Who would have
thought that all this could happen to me?"

She interrupted with a suppressed fire of which either love or anger
seemed an equally possible issue, "Do you love me now?"

"Who can say?"

"Tell me; I will know it!"

"I do, and I do not," said he mischievously. "That is, I have my times
and my seasons. One moment you are too tall, another moment you are too
do-nothing, another too melancholy, another too dark, another I don't
know what, except--that you are not the whole world to me that you used
to be, my dear. But you are a pleasant lady to know and nice to meet,
and I dare say as sweet as ever--almost."

Eustacia was silent, and she turned from him, till she said, in a voice
of suspended mightiness, "I am for a walk, and this is my way."

"Well, I can do worse than follow you."

"You know you can't do otherwise, for all your moods and changes!" she
answered defiantly. "Say what you will; try as you may; keep away from
me all that you can--you will never forget me. You will love me all your
life long. You would jump to marry me!"

"So I would!" said Wildeve. "Such strange thoughts as I've had from time
to time, Eustacia; and they come to me this moment. You hate the heath
as much as ever; that I know."

"I do," she murmured deeply. "'Tis my cross, my shame, and will be my
death!"

"I abhor it too," said he. "How mournfully the wind blows round us now!"

She did not answer. Its tone was indeed solemn and pervasive. Compound
utterances addressed themselves to their senses, and it was possible to
view by ear the features of the neighbourhood. Acoustic pictures were
returned from the darkened scenery; they could hear where the tracts of
heather began and ended; where the furze was growing stalky and tall;
where it had been recently cut; in what direction the fir-clump lay,
and how near was the pit in which the hollies grew; for these differing
features had their voices no less than their shapes and colours.

"God, how lonely it is!" resumed Wildeve. "What are picturesque ravines
and mists to us who see nothing else? Why should we stay here? Will you
go with me to America? I have kindred in Wisconsin."

"That wants consideration."

"It seems impossible to do well here, unless one were a wild bird or a
landscape-painter. Well?"

"Give me time," she softly said, taking his hand. "America is so far
away. Are you going to walk with me a little way?"

As Eustacia uttered the latter words she retired from the base of the
barrow, and Wildeve followed her, so that the reddleman could hear no
more.

He lifted the turves and arose. Their black figures sank and disappeared
from against the sky. They were as two horns which the sluggish heath
had put forth from its crown, like a mollusc, and had now again drawn
in.

The reddleman's walk across the vale, and over into the next where his
cart lay, was not sprightly for a slim young fellow of twenty-four. His
spirit was perturbed to aching. The breezes that blew around his mouth
in that walk carried off upon them the accents of a commination.

He entered the van, where there was a fire in a stove. Without lighting
his candle he sat down at once on the three-legged stool, and pondered
on what he had seen and heard touching that still-loved one of his.
He uttered a sound which was neither sigh nor sob, but was even more
indicative than either of a troubled mind.

"My Tamsie," he whispered heavily. "What can be done? Yes, I will see
that Eustacia Vye."


</CHAPTER>
