{"name": "Chapter 12", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 12<PARAGRAPH>Includes the September 18th and September 19th entries of Dr. Seward's diary; an unopened letter from Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra, dated September 17th; a report from Patrick Hennessey, M. D. to Dr. Seward, dated September 20th; an unopened letter from Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra, dated September 18th; and the September 20th entry of Dr. Seward's diary. PARAGRAPH>The two doctors arrive the next day but all of the entrances are locked; they are forced to break in through a window. They find the four maids unconscious, Mrs. Westenra dead, and Lucy near death. Seward wakes three of the servants , who draw up a bath for Lucy. A messenger arrives from Arthur Holmwood, but Seward tells the maid to tell the messenger to wait; he then forgets about him. After giving the unconscious Lucy a warm bath, the two doctors are at a loss: Lucy needs another transfusion, and neither of them has enough blood to give one. At that moment, Quincey Morris appearshe is the messenger from Arthur that Seward has kept waiting. He gives the blood. Van Helsing has found Lucy's memorandum, which describes last night's events. He gives it to Seward, who does not know what to make of it, but for Van Helsing the memorandum confirms his suspicions. Later, Quincey asks Seward how Lucy could possibly absorb so much bloodhis is the fourth transfusion, and her body is not big enough to carry so much. While Lucy sleeps, Van Helsing puts the memorandum back on her chest, where he found it. In her sleep, she tries to rip the memorandum to pieces, but Van Helsing manages to save the piece of paper. The next day, Seward reports that Lucy's teeth look much longer and sharper. Arthur Holmwood arrives. He is overcome with emotion by the tragic events. Seward writes that he doubts Lucy will survive another day. PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, Mina writes  to tell Lucy that she and Jonathan have returned to England. Jonathan is now the junior partner in Hawkins' firm, and Jonathan and Mina have been made the heirs to Hawkins' fortune. PARAGRAPH>Seward's assistant Patrick Hennessey reports the latest news on Renfield. On seeing two men who are carrying boxes of earth to the Carfax estate, Renfield escapes and attacks them before he is subdued and brought back to the asylum. PARAGRAPH>Mina writes to tell Lucy that Mr. Hawkins has died, leaving the Harkers his whole estate. Jonathan is deeply troubled, in mourning and anxious about his new responsibilities. PARAGRAPH>Lucy is near death. In her sleep, she tears away the garlic wreath that Van Helsing lays on her throat, and her teeth, particularly her canines, are very sharp. Whenever she is awake, she pulls the flowers near her; when asleep, she pushes them away. Seward notices a bat flying around outside. On the morning of September 20th, the doctors discover that the wounds on her throat have completely disappeared. Van Helsing says gravely that the end is near, and they call in Arthur. Lucy asks Arthur to kiss her, \"in a soft, voluptuous voice, such as I  had never heard from her lips. He is about to do so, when Van Helsing stops him. At first, Lucy is enraged, but after a moment and a short sleep she regains her old self. She calls Van Helsing her true friend, and asks him to protect Arthur and to give her peace. The old man solemnly swears that he will do both. Her eyes meet with Arthur's after he kisses her on the forehead instead of the lips, and she dies. She seems to regain her beauty in death, the color returning to her face. PARAGRAPH>Analysis Chapter 12<PARAGRAPH>Renfield's licking of Seward's blood suggests why he has given up eating flieshis desire to consume life has found a new model in the vampire. He seeks to serve his master and also to imitate him. PARAGRAPH>A series of tragedies hit all at once: Mrs. Westenra, Arthur's father, Mr. Hawkins, and Lucy all day within a few days of each other. Lucy's transformation is already under way. Her teeth sharpen, and while she sleeps she cannot bear the scent of garlic. She also attempts to destroy the evidence provided in her own memorandum. Her voice, when she asks Arthur for a kiss, is far more sexual than any voice Lucy has ever used. She is on her way to becoming a depraved sexual being, like the women in Dracula's castle. Her transformation is from a flirtatious but basically pure Victorian maiden to a sexually wanton member of the undead. She seems aware, in the end, of what is happening. She asks Van Helsing to protect Arthur and give her peacewhich will mean destroying the vampire that she is about to become", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421150649/https://www.gradesaver.com/dracula/study-guide/summary-chapter-11-15"}