{"name": "Chapter XLIV", "summary": "Chapter XLIV. The Grand Master orders that Rebecca be freed. Then Richard the Lion-hearted arrives with a band of armed men. He had been intending to be Rebecca's champion. He orders one of his knights of arrest Malvoisin for treason, and then tells the Grand Master that the flag of England now flies over the castle, rather than the flag of the Templar Order. For a few moments it appears as if there may be a violent conflict between Richard's forces and the Knights Templar. But the Templars depart without a fight. The Grand Master says he will appeal to the Pope because Richard has usurped the privileges of the Order. During the tumult of the Templars' retreat, Isaac and Rebecca slip away unnoticed. The Earl of Essex, who accompanied Richard, tells Ivanhoe that Richard has sent his brother John back to their mother, to wait until the disorder dies down. Some little while later, Cedric gives his consent to the marriage of Ivanhoe and Rowena, and also softens his dislike of the Normans, since Richard treats him well. The marriage of Ivanhoe and Rowena is attended by Normans and Saxons alike, and acts as a pledge of peace and harmony between the races. The next day Rebecca visits Rowena to convey her thanks to Ivanhoe. She and Isaac are leaving England for Spain. She gives Rowena an expensive necklace. Rowena tries to persuade her not to leave England, but Rebecca is adamant. Ivanhoe and Rowena have a long and happy marriage. PARAGRAPH>De Bois-Guilbert's death is a strange one. He dies \"unscathed by the lance of his enemy. a victim to the violence of his own contending passions. The idea is that he is fatally divided against himself. He can not reconcile his need as a proud knight to show prowess in battle, with his infatuation with Rebecca and his desire to protect her. Having De Bois-Guilbert die in this way also spares Ivanhoe the responsibility of killing him, which might have cast a shadow over his triumph. Throughout the novel, Ivanhoe kills no one; he is an unblemished hero. These final chapters further characterize Richard, but the portrayal of him is more ambivalent than that of Ivanhoe. He is generous and gracious, and knows how to get along with nobleman and commoner alike. His mild treatment of Prince John, who plotted against him, is to his credit. However, Richard does not go uncensored by Scott. An example occurs in Chapter XLI, when Ivanhoe dares to question Richard's habit of journeying alone and undertaking \"rash adventures. But Richard does not listen to him, and Ivanhoe realizes that it is impossible \"to contend with the wild spirit of chivalry which so often impelled his master upon dangers which he might easily have avoided. This forms part of Scott's critical attitude to chivalry", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304062321/https://www.novelguide.com/ivanhoe/summaries/chapter40-46"}