{"name": "Chapter XXVII", "summary": "Chapter XXVII. Urfried ushers the reluctant Cedric into a small apartment. She begins to tell him her story. Cedric is amazed to discover that she is the daughter of Torquil Wolfganger, his father's friend. Urfried then guesses that she is talking to Cedric, and she continues her story. Her real name is Ulrica. She was forced to live as the paramour of her father's killer, but she did everything she could to ensure that the family she was compelled to live with met misfortune. She fomented hatred between the elder Front-de-Boeuf and his son, and the son  killed his father. Cedric despises Ulrica because she did not kill herself to escape such a tormented existence. But she says she still has the power of revenge. She tells him that when the besiegers see a red flag flying from the turret, they are to press their assault, for the Normans will have enough to deal with within the castle. She then leaves and Front-de-Boeuf enters. He gives Cedric  a scroll to take to the castle of Philip de Malvoisin. Malvoisin is then to send it to York. After the phony monk has left, Front-de-Boeuf calls for Cedric to be brought to him. When he discovers that the man purporting to be Cedric is in fact Wamba, and that Cedric has escaped, he is furious. He threatens to throw Wamba from the battlements, but De Bracy persuades him to allow the jester to join his, De Bracy's, service. Athelstane then offers to pay a thousand marks as a ransom for the freedom of all the prisoners. Front-de-Boeuf agrees, but he will not release Isaac, Rebecca, Rowena and Wamba. Athelstane says the deal is off, because Rowena is his bride-to-be and Wamba has just saved the life of Cedric his master, so he cannot allow them to remain as captives. Then Ambrose, an old monk in attendance on the Prior of Jorvaulx, arrives. He says that the Prior has been captured by outlaws in the woods, who are demanding ransom. He asks for the knights' assistance, but they refuse. The knights prepare the castle for the expected assault", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304062321/https://www.novelguide.com/ivanhoe/summaries/chapter25-28"}