{"name": "Chapter XXXIX", "summary": "Chapter XXXIX. In the evening, De Bois-Guilbert visits Rebecca in the apartment where she is being held. He tries to reason with her, saying that he is not responsible for her predicament, since he did not know that the Grand Master would be at the Preceptory. Rebecca does not accept his argument, saying that he concurred in her condemnation and is set to be the champion who asserts her guilt. De Bois-Guilbert replies that it was he who gave her the scroll that told her to demand a champion. She says that was merely a brief respite from instant death. De Bois-Guilbert responds that he had in fact intended to disguise himself and emerge as her champion. He says he would have had little difficulty in showing her innocence by defeating any opponent. Rebecca is skeptical. De Bois-Guilbert goes on to say that unless he appears as her accuser he will lose all chance of attaining the position he desires within the Order, that of Grand Master. His ambitions will be in ruins. But he says he will accept this if she will accept him. They will flee to Palestine where he will win fame and glory and she will be his queen. Rebecca wants no part of this scheme. De Bois-Guilbert says that nothing can save her, but he wants them to part as friends. She forgives him for his part in her death. He leaves her apartment. Outside, he tells Malvoisin that he is inclined to go to the Grand Master and refuse the task that has fallen to him. Malvoisin advises him not to do so, since he will be imprisoned or put on trial. Malvoisin also advises him not to flee. De Bois-Guilbert hopes that no champion emerges for Rebecca; then he will not have to fight and will not be responsible for her death. PARAGRAPH>The anti-Semitism noticeable in the presentation of Isaac is entirely absent from the portrayal of Rebecca. Indeed, like Shakespeare in The Merchant of Venice, Scott now turns his guns on the Christians, who are seen, in the characters of the Grand Master and Malvoisin, to be intolerant, dishonest, vengeful, and lacking in all sense of decency. The perjury of the witnesses who testify against Rebecca with fantastic tales echo the way Jews were persecuted in medieval Europe. Rebecca, on the other hand, is a shining example of courage and dignity when under severe duress", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304062321/https://www.novelguide.com/ivanhoe/summaries/chapter36-39"}