{"name": "Chapter XII", "summary": "Chapter XII. In the second day of the tournament, all the knights battle at once, rather than in single combat. There are fifty knights on each side. Athelstane has enlisted on the side of the Knight Templar. This is because he considers Rowena to be his future bride, and he wants to punish the Disinherited Knight for having chosen her the previous day. During the ferocious battle, the Disinherited Knight and De Bois-Guilbert continually but unsuccessfully try to seek each other out. Eventually they do close in a one-on-one fight. De Bois-Guilbert is joined by Front-de-Boeuf and Athelstane. The Disinherited Knight fights with great skill, but seems certain to be overcome by the superior forces arrayed against him. But then a knight in black armor on a black horse rides forward, soon vanquishes Front-de-Boeuf and Athelstane and then retires from the fight. The Disinherited Knight then unseats De Bois-Guilbert, leaps from his own horse and demands that the fallen De Bois-Guilbert yield. But before De Bois-Guilbert can respond, Prince John calls a halt to the proceedings. Thus the day ends. Four knights are dead, over thirty seriously wounded, some of whom never recover or are disabled for life. Prince John awards the honors of the day to the Black Knight, but he cannot be located. So the Prince names the Disinherited Knight instead. When the Knight comes to receive his award from Rowena, his helmet is removed, and he looks pale as death. He collapses at her feet and it is found that he has a wound in his side. Cedric, to his consternation, recognizes the knight as his banished son. PARAGRAPH>The contest between Ivanhoe and De Bois-Guilbert is only one of the struggles between opposed pairs in the novel. The other major struggle is between Prince John and King Richard. John's unattractive character has already been suggested in Chapter VII , and these chapters do nothing to dispel that negative impression", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304062321/https://www.novelguide.com/ivanhoe/summaries/chapter9-12"}