{"name": "Chapter 57", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227044315/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/bleakhouse/section12/", "summary": "\"Esther's Narrative\" Esther tells us that when Mr. Jarndyce wakes her up, she immediately prepares to go with Bucket. Bucket reads her the letter, and they set off. Bucket asks her a few questions about her relationship with Lady Dedlock and if there is anyone Lady Dedlock may have confided in. Esther says perhaps Mr. Boythorn. Bucket stops in a police station and quietly gives instructions to a few men. They continue on their journey. Bucket stops by the water and speaks to some policemen and sailors, then he inspects what Esther suspects is a person who drowned. They make several other stops as they go on and eventually head toward Saint Albans. After another stop, where Bucket gets Esther a cup of tea, he says he's been told that Lady Dedlock passed through there that evening. They head toward Bleak House. Bucket tells Esther that he took Jo away when she'd been sheltering him in the stable to protect Lady Dedlock since Jo had been telling too many people about the lady he led to the burial ground. At Bleak House, Bucket asks if Skimpole always stays in the same room when he visits. He tells Esther that Skimpole had showed him where to find Jo after Bucket had given him some money for the information. Esther feels betrayed by Skimpole, and Bucket warns her to watch out for people like Skimpole. None of the servants at Bleak House has seen Lady Dedlock. Bucket and Esther head toward the brickmaker's cottage. There, Esther finds out that Jenny, Liz, and their husbands live together in a single cottage. Jenny is not there, but they speak to the others. Bucket asserts that he knows a lady had been there the night before; Jenny's husband is defensive and unresponsive. Esther suspects that Liz wants to talk to her alone, but there is no way for her to do this. Esther asks where Jenny is, but before Liz can answer, her husband kicks her. Jenny's husband says she went to London last night. Esther asks if Jenny was home when the lady visited. Liz asks her husband if she can answer, but her husband threatens her. Jenny's husband says Jenny was home, and that the lady asked for Esther's handkerchief. Then he says that the lady went one way and Jenny went the other. He says he isn't sure what time it was, since they don't have a watch. Esther asks how the lady looked, and Liz said she didn't look well. They leave the cottage. Outside, Bucket tells Esther he's sure Lady Dedlock gave them her watch, since it was strange for Jenny's husband to mention a watch. He wonders what they gave Lady Dedlock in return and says that if Liz had been alone she probably would have told them more. Bucket speculates that Lady Dedlock may have sent Jenny to London to see Esther, but they continue on straight ahead. It's snowing, and the snow slows their journey. Bucket seems to lose some of his confidence and eventually admits that he has lost the trail. At an inn, Esther faints and is then cared for by the landlady and her daughters. Later, when they stop again to change horses, Bucket realizes something and says he finally understands. He excitedly orders the driver to return to London, which shocks Esther. He says he is going to follow Jenny. Esther protests that they shouldn't abandon Lady Dedlock, but Bucket tells her not to worry", "analysis": "Lady Dedlock is Sir Leicester's greatest weakness, and the revelation of her secret personal history is enough to nearly destroy him. Bombastic, influential Sir Leicester collapses when he learns Lady Dedlock's secret, losing his ability to move and speak after suffering what appears to be a stroke. Suddenly bedridden, he is dependent on his subordinates to care for him and understand him. Although there are many tragedies in Bleak House, Jo's death among them, the fall of Sir Leicester may be the most affecting. We may see it as a tragedy caused by love: Lady Dedlock hid her secret to protect Sir Leicester and then fled to escape the wrath she expected, while Sir Leicester forgives her easily and fully despite her transgressions. He never has the chance to prove the depth of his devotion, nor does Lady Dedlock ever have the opportunity to see it. Their partnership has never been an obviously warm one, thanks in part to Lady Dedlock's carefully maintained haughtiness, but the tragic fall of Sir Leicester shows that there was passion in their marriage after all. Esther and Bucket's frantic nighttime pursuit of Lady Dedlock ratchets up the suspense of the novel, and Dickens skillfully raises the tension by switching between his two narrators more frequently than usual. The third-person narrator narrates chapter 56, describing Sir Leicester's sad state and then following Bucket as he calls for Esther in the middle of the night. Esther takes over the narration in chapter 57, and she leads us on their fast, feverish journey. The chapter ends in a rush, with Bucket making the unexpected decision to return to London. The third-person narrator takes over again in chapter 58, removing us from the nighttime journey and taking us back to Sir Leicester, who is waiting earnestly in his bed for news. In chapter 59, we're back out in the cold with Esther as the search continues and finally ends. This quick back-and-forth, which jerks us in and out of the action of the search, increases the suspense of the journey and raises the stakes. Esther is not the only one frantic to find Lady Dedlock; Sir Leicester, who has prepared Lady Dedlock's rooms and lit the fires, is perhaps even more desperate than she is. Dickens's use of two narrators in these chapters is perhaps more affecting than at any other point in the novel. Esther demonstrates a remarkable control over her narrative in chapters 59 and 60, proving once again that she is an agile storyteller and a confident guide through this sordid, bulky tale. Although she is narrating Bleak House from a point seven years in the future, she withholds information and feigns ignorance when doing so increases the dramatic effect. We've seen her do this with her feelings for Woodcourt, which increased the poignancy of Mr. Jarndyce's proposal. In this section, when Esther, Bucket, and Woodcourt finally find the woman they've been pursuing, who Esther believes is Jenny, she tells us she doesn't understand what Bucket is getting at when he explains that Jenny and Lady Dedlock switched clothes. When Esther sees that the woman is actually Lady Dedlock's body, we share her shock. She has successfully drawn us into her own disoriented confusion to make the story more intriguing."}