{"name": "Chapter 64", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227044315/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/bleakhouse/section13/", "summary": "\"Esther's Narrative\" Esther says that Mr. Jarndyce gives her some money for her to begin planning the wedding, which she wants to be very private. She tells Mrs. Woodcourt she's getting married, and Mrs. Woodcourt approves. Esther feels some hope for the Jarndyce and Jarndyce lawsuit, and she understands that the marriage won't take place until after the case next appears in court. Mr. Jarndyce goes to Yorkshire to help Woodcourt with some business. He writes Esther a letter and tells her to meet him in the country, giving her all the travel details. Esther reflects that she speculated on what he wanted, but that she never even came close to being right. When she arrives at the hotel, Mr. Jarndyce tells her that he bought Woodcourt a house out of gratitude for all he's done for them and that he needs her help in fixing it up. In tears, Esther agrees. She cries more later that night, hoping that she is crying out of happiness. The next day, Mr. Jarndyce takes Esther to the house. The gardens are laid out exactly like the gardens at Bleak House, and the inside of the house reflects all of Esther's tastes and habits. Then he shows her the name of the house: Bleak House. He sits her down and explains that even though he'd always intended to marry her and was happy that she'd agreed to marry him, he suspected their marriage wouldn't really make her happy. He says that he understood this fully when Mr. Woodcourt returned. He says that he has once again resumed his role as her guardian and father. He says that Woodcourt confessed his feelings for Esther to him, not knowing that Mr. Jarndyce had already proposed. To prove Esther's virtue, Mr. Jarndyce confided in Mrs. Woodcourt that he knew Esther would marry Mr. Jarndyce anyway, despite the fact that she loved Mr. Woodcourt. He'd asked Mrs. Woodcourt to observe Esther to see if this was true. Mr. Jarndyce says that he knew Mr. Woodcourt would confess his feelings to Esther and had even agreed he should. He was surprised and pleased by Esther's response to Woodcourt. Woodcourt appears, and Mr. Jarndyce gives Esther to him, telling them never to thank him. The next day, Woodcourt makes the announcement to Ada and Richard, while Esther stays home with Mr. Jarndyce. While they'd been away, Guppy had called three times, and Esther tells Mr. Jarndyce that Guppy had proposed and then rescinded it. Guppy arrives again with his mother and Mr. Weevle. Guppy renews his proposal, thinking himself highly magnanimous. Mr. Jarndyce, laughing, rejects it on Esther's behalf and dismisses the visitors", "analysis": "The insidious, endlessly droning Chancery suit comes to a somewhat abrupt ending in chapter 65, rendering even more absurd the generations of people who have sacrificed their lives for it. Just like that, Jarndyce and Jarndyce ends in its ridiculous, anticlimactic way, but it claims one final victim before dissolving. Strangely, Richard dies immediately after the suit ends, as though the suit had been his lifeblood or as if he and the lawsuit had been one and the same. Indeed, the abundance of cannibalistic images of Mr. Vholes suggests that the suit and Richard existed in a kind of reciprocal life-giving relationship. Once the final will is discovered, both the suit and Richard dissolve. Dickens concludes the novel shortly after the suit ends, suggesting that the Jarndyce and Jarndyce suit serves as a kind of structural backbone to the story. Esther's happy conclusion stands in stark contrast to the dismal conclusion of the narrator's portion of the novel, in which he describes hollow, creepy Chesney Wold and the eclectic collection of people who populate it. Whereas the two Bleak Houses are lively, full of children, friends, and love, Chesney Wold is so desolate that people are afraid to walk through its rooms alone. While the two Bleak Houses restore happiness to the grieving Ada, Chesney Wold drives a maid to depression and, eventually, sudden departure. Even the people themselves in each world fall on vastly different sides of the divide between life and death. The Bleak Houses shelter those who are young and robust, while Chesney Wold contains more than its share of the infirm. There is Sir Leicester, who never fully recovered from his ailments; Phil, the crippled former soldier; Boythorn, nearby, with his eternally broken heart; Volumnia, fading from her coquettish glory; and, occasionally, a collection of dispirited cousins. Only Mrs. Rouncewell and George seem to hold much peace or vibrant energy. A true path of victims concludes the novel, a result of the narrative drive to reach the conclusion of Bleak House. Even though Richard's death darkens the final portions of Bleak House, Esther's narrative ends rather happily with a wedding and a birth among Esther's close, nurturing circle. A series of surprises brings Esther and Woodcourt together and reveals that people have been conspiring behind Esther's back to ensure her happiness. While the transition of Mr. Jarndyce from guardian/father to intended husband and back to guardian/father may make modern readers a bit queasy, the notions of loyalty, steadfastness, and devotion are the only issues at play here. Ada gives birth to a son, who revives his mother in the way Ada hoped he would revive Richard. Along with Esther's two daughters, the baby boy, named Richard, form a trio that mirrors the trio of Esther, Ada, and Richard, who arrived at Bleak House so long ago. The new Bleak House is, in a sense, an offspring as well. The \"birth\" of this new Bleak House and the births of children who inhabit both houses provide a sense of renewal and new beginnings after hundreds of pages filled with so much despair."}