{"name": "Chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227044315/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/bleakhouse/section2/", "summary": "\"Signs and Tokens\" Esther expresses astonishment that she is still writing about herself. She says that Richard is very fond of Ada and that they are falling in love. Esther hides their secret. Richard thinks of becoming a sailor. Mr. Jarndyce writes to a relative named Sir Leicester Dedlock to see if he can advance Richard's career, but Sir Dedlock confesses that he can be of no help. Richard is not bothered by this news. Esther observes that Richard is quite careless, although he believes himself to be very cautious. She explains herself by telling us that when Mr. Jarndyce repaid the money she and Richard had loaned Skimpole, Richard spent the money quickly and considers it to be profit since he had assumed the money was gone forever. One morning, Mr. Jarndyce gets a letter from an old classmate named Lawrence Boythorn. Jarndyce describes him as loud, impetuous, and hearty, with incredibly strong lungs and a tendency to speak in extremes. When Boythorn visits Bleak House, he proves himself to speak always in superlatives and to have a house-shaking laugh. Everyone likes him. At dinner, Boythorn introduces his small pet bird, who sits on his head. Boythorn tells Jarndyce he should be more forceful in settling the Jarndyce and Jarndyce lawsuit. Boythorn describes a trespassing suit he is involved in with his neighbor, Sir Leicester. He hates the whole family, although his anger is mitigated by his laugh and the bird sitting on his head. Later in the evening, Esther asks Jarndyce if Boythorn had ever been married, and, hearing that he hasn't, asserts that Boythorn looks so kind that surely he wanted to have been. Jarndyce says she is right, and that a woman broke his heart. Now he is alone except for the bird. In the morning, Kenge and Carboy's clerk, Mr. Guppy, arrives to see Boythorn. Esther is happy to see him and tells him that she will serve him lunch when he has finished his meeting. He asks if she will be there, and she says yes. At lunch, Mr. Guppy reveals that he is in love with her and wants to marry her. Esther is horrified and refuses him. He tells her that his feelings will never change and that she should contact him if she changes her mind. Once he is gone, Esther cries", "analysis": "When Esther, Richard, and Ada arrive at Bleak House, they have many chances to form first impressions of places and people. They first see Bleak House in the distance, on a hill. As they head quickly toward it, the house appears to disappear in the trees. The house's initial elusiveness suggests that seeing it completely--that is, understanding the house, its inhabitants, and what goes on within its walls--will prove difficult once the trio finally makes it their home. Their first impression of Mr. Jarndyce is formed in the chaos of their arrival, although his instant effusiveness and affection set them all at ease. Esther's description of the house, its many rooms, and the abundance of mismatched furniture suggests an overload of first impressions. As the house is confusing and mazelike, so too are Esther's first impressions, although Mr. Jarndyce is so welcoming that the impressions are in no way negative. Despite its name, Bleak House proves to be unintimidating and warm. Even though Esther frequently claims to be modest and uncomfortable with talking so much about herself, she clearly relishes the chance to do so and never misses an opportunity to mention her own good deeds and the praise others give her. When Mr. Jarndyce asks about their stay with the Jellybys in chapter 6, for example, Ada breathlessly tells him how wonderful Esther was with the children--details that Esther recounts in their entirety. When Mr. Jarndyce confides in Esther in the Growlery in chapter 8, he compliments her cleverness, discretion, and good advice, accolades that Esther vehemently denies but includes in her narrative nonetheless. In chapter 9, Esther goes so far as to claim, \"I try to think about myself as little as possible,\" a claim that seems blatantly at odds with her narration so far. Esther's overabundance of self-denigration suggests that she actually holds the opposite view of herself. Mr. Skimpole and Mr. Boythorn, two vibrant characters Esther meets at Bleak House, are pleasant company but suggest that contradictions are inherent in every person. Skimpole has created a childlike image for himself, which allows him to avoid all responsibility and the consequences of his actions. He also sees himself as beneficent, although he always takes, never gives. For example, he depends on others to pay his debts for him, then believes that those people should be the grateful ones because he has given them the opportunity to be generous. Esther is confused by his twisted logic, calling it a \"perplexing and extraordinary contradiction.\" However, she blames her confusion on her lack of cleverness. Mr. Boythorn exhibits contradictions in a less manipulative way, as his broken heart and the small pet bird that rest on his head belie his loud voice, explosive anger, and hyperbolic way of speaking. Esther herself reveals her own internal contradictions in her profession of modesty but clearly enjoys her own narration and inclusion in the tale. The story of the Ghost's Walk in chapter 7 is the first supernatural element in Bleak House and adds a layer of dark intrigue to the story. Since Bleak House was originally published as a serial, it makes sense for Dickens to include such a mystery, since it would surely compel readers to look forward to the next installment. Indeed, the second installment of the serial ends after chapter 7. Similarly, Mr. Guppy's out-of-the-blue marriage proposal in chapter 9 seems intended to add a bit of romance and melodrama to the tale. Mr. Guppy's affection seems so surprising that it's difficult to understand why Dickens would have included such a scene. On the other hand, the image of Esther sobbing to herself after Mr. Guppy leaves provides a touching, emotional moment with our heroine."}