{"name": "Chapter 53", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227044315/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/bleakhouse/section11/", "summary": "\"The Track\" The narrator describes Bucket's habit of moving his forefinger around his face and ears when mulling something over. Bucket neglects his wife, who is a good detective herself. Only a few people attend Tulkinghorn's funeral, but there are many empty cars that signify his dead relatives. Bucket meets Mrs. Bucket on the steps of Tulkinghorn's house, then joins the funeral procession, but he gets out and heads to Sir Leicester's home. He lets himself in with the key he has been given. The servant, Mercury, gives him a letter that has come for him, one of several that have come over the past day. It says only \"Lady Dedlock,\" just as the others had. He walks around the house, comparing the handwriting to other letters and papers he finds. He decides to tell Sir Leicester tomorrow. Later, Sir Leicester asks Bucket if he has anything to tell him, but Bucket says no. Sir Leicester is distraught over Tulkinghorn's death. Bucket says he'll have the final pieces of the case figured out very soon. In the hall, Bucket engages Mercury in conversation about Lady Dedlock. She soon comes home and asks Bucket if he's found out anything else; then she goes upstairs. When she is gone, Bucket slyly gets Mercury to admit that Lady Dedlock was out walking alone the night of the murder, wearing a fringed veil", "analysis": "Ada and Richard's hasty, secret marriage, along with Esther and Mr. Jarndyce's engagement, turns the once-happy foursome of Bleak House into two awkward pairings. Though Ada and Richard truly love each other, their alliance is plainly unwise. Richard has reduced himself to debt, a dismal apartment, a relationship with creepy Vholes, and an unhealthy obsession with the Jarndyce and Jarndyce lawsuit. Ada, young and blooming, is loyal to him but is too distraught to leave the comfort and warmth of Bleak House. Richard, furthermore, is exhausted and sickly. Esther, usually willing to celebrate any happiness, feels pity for Ada, crying for her just as she cried for herself when Mr. Jarndyce had proposed. Both women have loyal partners--romantic in Ada's case and deeply affectionate in Esther's--but neither partnership promises complete and total satisfaction. Inspector Bucket's elaborate investigation temporarily turns Bleak House into a detective novel. Bucket isn't a very prominent character until the narrator focuses on him in chapters 53 and 54, when the extent of his knowledge becomes clear. Canny and determined, Tulkinghorn hired Bucket to investigate Lady Dedlock, who Tulkinghorn believed had found her former lover. Bucket has amassed a number of clues, secrets, suspects, motives, and witnesses that seem not only to prove Tulkinghorn's suspicions but also to unmask Lady Dedlock as a murderer. When Bucket explains what he knows to Sir Leicester, the sprawling pieces of Bleak House--its large group of characters, their many secrets, and the weaving, disparate storylines--finally seem to come together into a cohesive whole. We get the sense that Dickens has been revealing clues slowly throughout the hundreds of pages that have passed so far. When Bucket unexpectedly arrests Mademoiselle Hortense instead of Lady Dedlock, the twist is surprising but somewhat anticlimactic; the violent murder was simply the crime of a jealous maid rather than a passionate act of desperation. Mrs. Rouncewell's reunion with George is the second mother-child reunion in the novel, and although the circumstances of the two reunions seem vastly different, they have many similarities. At first the reunions seem more different than similar. Unlike Lady Dedlock, Mrs. Rouncewell has always known her child was alive. Unlike Esther, George knows who his mother is and even where to find her. Yet beneath the surface, there are many similarities. For example, both mother-child pairs were separated because of shame: Esther was taken from Lady Dedlock because of the shameful circumstances of her birth, and George separated himself from Mrs. Rouncewell because he was ashamed of his roving, restless lifestyle. Both Lady Dedlock and Mrs. Rouncewell are also desperate to find their children, even though Mrs. Rouncewell has searched for years and Lady Dedlock has only recently learned Esther is alive. The reunions are also similarly emotional, with many tears and pleas for forgiveness. The intensity of these familial pursuits and reunions reveals the prominence of motherhood as a thematic thread throughout the novel."}