{"name": "Chapter 54", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227044315/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/bleakhouse/section11/", "summary": "\"Springing a Mine\" Bucket presents himself to Sir Leicester, locking the door to ensure their privacy. He tells Sir Leicester that the murderer is not George, but a woman. He prepares Sir Leicester for a shock, telling him he must shoulder it bravely. He says that Tulkinghorn distrusted Lady Dedlock because he suspected that she had learned about the existence of her former lover. She had seen some handwriting of his and recognized it. Tulkinghorn suspected Lady Dedlock of visiting this man's grave after he died, and Bucket had investigated this claim by questioning Mademoiselle Hortense, whose dress Lady Dedlock had worn, and Jo, who had led her to the grave. Bucket says that on the night of the murder, Lady Dedlock had gone to Tulkinghorn's room, wearing a veil with fringe. Sir Dedlock is devastated. He asks why Tulkinghorn hadn't told him this information sooner, and Bucket says he had planned to, once he was ready. There are noises at the door; several people have arrived. Bucket says he fears the news has gotten out and tells Sir Leicester to just nod at whatever he says. Grandfather Smallweed, Mr. Chadband, Mrs. Chadband, and Mrs. Snagsby are all admitted inside. Grandfather Smallweed says that Krook was his brother-in-law, and that after he died, Grandfather Smallweed went through his papers. He found some letters belonging to Krook's dead lodger, Captain Hawdon, and looked through them before Tulkinghorn got them. They were from the lodger's lover, Honoria. Grandfather Smallweed says he doesn't know anyone by the name of Honoria. He wants to know where the letters are and demands that the murder be investigated more thoroughly. Bucket says he will solve the murder and that he has the letters. He shows them to Smallweed, who asks for money. Mrs. Chadband then reveals that she raised Lady Dedlock's daughter after Lady Dedlock's sister claimed the baby was dead. Mrs. Snagsby speaks up and claims everyone has wronged her, and she goes through a litany of offenses that have little grounding in reality. The group leaves. Bucket tells Sir Leicester that he's going to arrest the guilty party immediately. First, though, he calls for Mademoiselle Hortense. He says that she has been his lodger for several weeks and calls her his \"angel. She says she has come to see Lady Dedlock, who isn't here. Bucket instructs her to sit on the couch. He then arrests her for murder. He tells her to stay quiet, but she spews invectives. Bucket explains to Sir Leicester that Mademoiselle Hortense had tried to get Tulkinghorn to help her and that he gave her some money. She became Bucket's lodger while she continued to harass Tulkinghorn and Snagsby. On the night he arrested George, Bucket came home and found Mademoiselle Hortense having dinner with Mrs. Bucket, exaggerating her affection for Mrs. Bucket and her grief over Tulkinghorn. Bucket immediately knew she was guilty, so he laid a trap. He told Mrs. Bucket what he knew and didn't go back to the house. He and Mrs. Bucket communicated secretly. Mrs. Bucket kept a constant watch on Mademoiselle Hortense. She discovered that Mademoiselle Hortense was trying to frame Lady Dedlock for the murder. The letters saying \"Lady Dedlock\" were all written by Mademoiselle Hortense. Bucket says that if he had arrested her last night, he wouldn't have gotten the weapon. He says that after the funeral, Mademoiselle Hortense suggested to Mrs. Bucket that they go into the country for tea. While there, she disappeared briefly, and Mrs. Bucket suspected she had thrown the weapon into the water. Bucket had the water dragged and found the gun. He soon leaves with Mademoiselle Hortense. Sir Leicester is very quiet. He looks out the window, then falls to the floor, feeling compassion for Lady Dedlock, not anger", "analysis": "Ada and Richard's hasty, secret marriage, along with Esther and Mr. Jarndyce's engagement, turns the once-happy foursome of Bleak House into two awkward pairings. Though Ada and Richard truly love each other, their alliance is plainly unwise. Richard has reduced himself to debt, a dismal apartment, a relationship with creepy Vholes, and an unhealthy obsession with the Jarndyce and Jarndyce lawsuit. Ada, young and blooming, is loyal to him but is too distraught to leave the comfort and warmth of Bleak House. Richard, furthermore, is exhausted and sickly. Esther, usually willing to celebrate any happiness, feels pity for Ada, crying for her just as she cried for herself when Mr. Jarndyce had proposed. Both women have loyal partners--romantic in Ada's case and deeply affectionate in Esther's--but neither partnership promises complete and total satisfaction. Inspector Bucket's elaborate investigation temporarily turns Bleak House into a detective novel. Bucket isn't a very prominent character until the narrator focuses on him in chapters 53 and 54, when the extent of his knowledge becomes clear. Canny and determined, Tulkinghorn hired Bucket to investigate Lady Dedlock, who Tulkinghorn believed had found her former lover. Bucket has amassed a number of clues, secrets, suspects, motives, and witnesses that seem not only to prove Tulkinghorn's suspicions but also to unmask Lady Dedlock as a murderer. When Bucket explains what he knows to Sir Leicester, the sprawling pieces of Bleak House--its large group of characters, their many secrets, and the weaving, disparate storylines--finally seem to come together into a cohesive whole. We get the sense that Dickens has been revealing clues slowly throughout the hundreds of pages that have passed so far. When Bucket unexpectedly arrests Mademoiselle Hortense instead of Lady Dedlock, the twist is surprising but somewhat anticlimactic; the violent murder was simply the crime of a jealous maid rather than a passionate act of desperation. Mrs. Rouncewell's reunion with George is the second mother-child reunion in the novel, and although the circumstances of the two reunions seem vastly different, they have many similarities. At first the reunions seem more different than similar. Unlike Lady Dedlock, Mrs. Rouncewell has always known her child was alive. Unlike Esther, George knows who his mother is and even where to find her. Yet beneath the surface, there are many similarities. For example, both mother-child pairs were separated because of shame: Esther was taken from Lady Dedlock because of the shameful circumstances of her birth, and George separated himself from Mrs. Rouncewell because he was ashamed of his roving, restless lifestyle. Both Lady Dedlock and Mrs. Rouncewell are also desperate to find their children, even though Mrs. Rouncewell has searched for years and Lady Dedlock has only recently learned Esther is alive. The reunions are also similarly emotional, with many tears and pleas for forgiveness. The intensity of these familial pursuits and reunions reveals the prominence of motherhood as a thematic thread throughout the novel."}