{"name": "Chapter 58", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227044315/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/bleakhouse/section12/", "summary": "\"A Wintry Day and Night\" The narrator says that at the Dedlock town house, people are told that Lady Dedlock has gone to Lincolnshire, but rumors abound about where she really is and what has happened between her and Sir Leicester. Sir Leicester is still bedridden. In the morning, he instructs Mrs. Rouncewell to have Lady Dedlock's rooms prepared for her. Mrs. Rouncewell admits to George that she thinks Lady Dedlock will not be returning to Chesney Wold or anywhere else. She says that Lady Dedlock told her yesterday that the footsteps on the Ghost's Walk had \"almost walked her down. The narrator describes the abandoned appearance of Lady Dedlock's rooms. Mrs. Rouncewell and George help the servants light fires and prepare for her return. Volumnia sits with Sir Leicester. When Mrs. Rouncewell returns, Volumnia praises George, and Mrs. Rouncewell explains to Sir Leicester that George is her long-lost son. Sir Leicester seems hopeful at the news and asks to see George immediately. George appears and helps arrange Sir Leicester more comfortably in his bed. Sir Leicester tells George he is unwell, that he has had an attack that \"deadens\" and \"confuses\". He tells everyone in the room--Volumnia, Mrs. Rouncewell, and George--that if he gets worse and becomes unable to communicate, then they should make it known that his feelings for Lady Dedlock have not changed whatsoever and that he harbors no anger toward her. After his speech he lays back. George stays with him. The narrator says that the day is coming to an end, but that Sir Leicester is unwilling to admit it. Mrs. Rouncewell convinces him to rest. He maintains his hopes by thinking that her rooms are prepared for her arrival. Eventually, everyone goes to bed, except for Mrs. Rouncewell and George. Volumnia can't sleep, worrying that if Sir Leicester dies she will have no income. George runs into her as he walks around the house and convinces her to go to bed. The morning comes", "analysis": "Lady Dedlock is Sir Leicester's greatest weakness, and the revelation of her secret personal history is enough to nearly destroy him. Bombastic, influential Sir Leicester collapses when he learns Lady Dedlock's secret, losing his ability to move and speak after suffering what appears to be a stroke. Suddenly bedridden, he is dependent on his subordinates to care for him and understand him. Although there are many tragedies in Bleak House, Jo's death among them, the fall of Sir Leicester may be the most affecting. We may see it as a tragedy caused by love: Lady Dedlock hid her secret to protect Sir Leicester and then fled to escape the wrath she expected, while Sir Leicester forgives her easily and fully despite her transgressions. He never has the chance to prove the depth of his devotion, nor does Lady Dedlock ever have the opportunity to see it. Their partnership has never been an obviously warm one, thanks in part to Lady Dedlock's carefully maintained haughtiness, but the tragic fall of Sir Leicester shows that there was passion in their marriage after all. Esther and Bucket's frantic nighttime pursuit of Lady Dedlock ratchets up the suspense of the novel, and Dickens skillfully raises the tension by switching between his two narrators more frequently than usual. The third-person narrator narrates chapter 56, describing Sir Leicester's sad state and then following Bucket as he calls for Esther in the middle of the night. Esther takes over the narration in chapter 57, and she leads us on their fast, feverish journey. The chapter ends in a rush, with Bucket making the unexpected decision to return to London. The third-person narrator takes over again in chapter 58, removing us from the nighttime journey and taking us back to Sir Leicester, who is waiting earnestly in his bed for news. In chapter 59, we're back out in the cold with Esther as the search continues and finally ends. This quick back-and-forth, which jerks us in and out of the action of the search, increases the suspense of the journey and raises the stakes. Esther is not the only one frantic to find Lady Dedlock; Sir Leicester, who has prepared Lady Dedlock's rooms and lit the fires, is perhaps even more desperate than she is. Dickens's use of two narrators in these chapters is perhaps more affecting than at any other point in the novel. Esther demonstrates a remarkable control over her narrative in chapters 59 and 60, proving once again that she is an agile storyteller and a confident guide through this sordid, bulky tale. Although she is narrating Bleak House from a point seven years in the future, she withholds information and feigns ignorance when doing so increases the dramatic effect. We've seen her do this with her feelings for Woodcourt, which increased the poignancy of Mr. Jarndyce's proposal. In this section, when Esther, Bucket, and Woodcourt finally find the woman they've been pursuing, who Esther believes is Jenny, she tells us she doesn't understand what Bucket is getting at when he explains that Jenny and Lady Dedlock switched clothes. When Esther sees that the woman is actually Lady Dedlock's body, we share her shock. She has successfully drawn us into her own disoriented confusion to make the story more intriguing."}