{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Ten - The Substance of the Shadow", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-iii-chapter-ten-the-substance-of-the-shadow", "summary": "It's 1767. Dr. Manette writes in his prison cell. He's decided to recount the reason that he's been unjustly imprisoned for so long. To do so, he starts his history ten years earlier, in 1757. It's late at night. The doctor is out walking near his residence by the medical college. Suddenly, a carriage races by. The driver calls Dr. Manette's name and the carriage screeches to a halt. Inside the carriage, two men sit in the dark. We're sensing that this will lead to no good. No good at all. The men ask if he's Dr. Manette. He says that he is. They inform him that he needs to come with them to see to some patients. Dr. Manette has misgivings, but he gets in the carriage. Soon the carriage arrives at a country house. As they go in the gate, one of the men strikes the gate-keeper with his glove. That's a big hint: he's not a very nice guy. Dr. Manette notices the same thing. Inside the house, he finds a patient who appears to be suffering from brain fever. She's a beautiful young woman who seems to be about twenty years old. Her hands are bound to the bed. Oh, and she appears to be delirious. As the doctor approaches her, she moans, \"My husband, my father, and my brother!\" and then counts to twelve and whispers, \"Hush!\" Puzzled, Dr. Manette listens as she repeats the same phrases over and over. When he asks the brothers how long this has lasted, they say she's been screaming since last night. They bring out a case of medicines for the doctor to use. After taking one look at the medicines, the doctor realizes that they're all narcotics and poisons. The younger brother asks if he doubts their worth. Calmly, Dr. Manette gives the young woman a small amount of a narcotic. She continues to scream for her husband, father, and brother. Eventually she starts shaking so violently that he has to restrain her. After a few hours, the elder brother says that there's actually another patient in the house as well. Surprised, the doctor follows the brothers out into the barn. A young man lies in the hay. He's been stabbed. Hmm...and no one thought that the doctor should see him until now? Astonished, Dr. Manette asks to see the wound. The young man refuses. He's dying. He doesn't want to be treated. As Dr. Manette looks at the man, he realizes that he's been stabbed with a sword. Only nobles carry swords. The boy says that he may be poor, but he has pride. Suddenly they can all hear the young girl screaming again. The boy asks if Dr. Manette has seen her. He tells the doctor that the girl is his sister. She married a young man she loved. The nobles wanted the girl. They harnessed her husband to a dog cart and drove him all day, but he wouldn't give his wife to them. Needless to say, they killed him. The young nobleman rode away with the young boy's sister. When he ran in to tell his father, the old man's heart broke. He died. Desperate to save his family, the young boy took his other sister away from the country where they lived. He returned to seek revenge for the rape and kidnapping of his sister. The nobleman met him and tried to whip him, but the young boy forced him to fight. The noble struck the boy through with his sword. Even though the young boy is clearly dying now, he asks Dr. Manette to raise him so that he can look at the two noble brothers who've wrecked his family. The younger brother has run away. The elder, however, stands watching. Gasping for breath, the young boy curses the nobles and all of their family. Then he dies. Dr. Manette returns to the young woman. After sitting with her for days, he slowly realizes that she's pregnant. At that point, he realizes that she's given up any desire to live at all. When the Marquis asks Dr. Manette how his patient is doing, he says that she's almost dead. The Marquis says something slighting about the amazing strength of the poor. Dr. Manette replies that there's often great strength in despair. That's when the nobles realize that they can't trust Manette. Once the girl dies, the Marquis offers Dr. Manette gold. He turns it down. Back at home, Dr. Manette gets a letter saying that a lady is waiting to meet him. It's the wife of the Marquis. Somehow, she's learned about the fate of the young woman and her family. She's devastated at the ruin caused by her husband. She wants her son to have a different life than his father. Asking for a way to help the family, the woman begs Dr. Manette to tell her where the other sister of the family was taken. He doesn't know. The woman rides away. She's decided to leave her husband and take her child with her. Troubled by all of this, Dr. Manette writes a letter to the Minister of State explaining the situation. That night, Dr. Manette's servant, Ernest Defarge, comes into the house to say that a man is standing at the gate. Shocked, Dr. Manette realizes that the man isn't at the gate. He's right behind Ernest! The man, of course, is from the Marquis. He takes Dr. Manette to an \"urgent\" medical case. On the road, the carriage stops. Two brothers emerge from the shadows and identify Dr. Manette. The elder holds Dr. Manette's letter. He burns the letter in front of Dr. Manette's eyes, and then the carriage drives to the prison. Since then, he's been locked in a living grave. When the court finishes reading Dr. Manette's letter, they immediately vote to hang Charles Evremonde. The crowd roars in approval.", "analysis": ""}