{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Eight - A Hand at Cards", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-8", "summary": "While Darnay is being arrested at home, Miss Pross and Jerry are still out shopping for his feast. All of a sudden, Miss Pross sees a man and starts to scream. The man jumps in awkward embarrassment. Miss Pross runs up to him, calling out his name. Soloman, the man, drags her into an alley and tells her to shut up. Jerry follows them into the alley. He's a bit confused. Angry, Soloman wants to know what Miss Pross wants. Miss Pross, teary-eyed, introduces Soloman to Jerry as her beloved brother. Of course, our narrator is quick to tell us that Soloman stole Miss Pross' money and then pretended to be dead...but she doesn't know that yet. Suddenly, Jerry takes an interest in Soloman. As he remembers it, however, Soloman wasn't his name back in England. In fact, he thinks that Soloman used to be a spy. He was supposed to have died. What was the name Soloman used to use? While Jerry thinks, a new voice breaks into the conversation. It's Sydney Carton. He informs Jerry that Solomon's old name was Barsad. Carton reassures Miss Pross that everything is all right. He showed up a day ago; he's been to see Mr. Lorry and he's now trying to be of some help to the Manettes. Now, though, he's here to see Barsad. Apparently Soloman/Barsad has become a spy in the French prisons. Carton explains that he'd like to have a conversation with Barsad at Mr. Lorry's. When Barsad seems inclined to say no, Carton gently tells him that he has information that could make life pretty sticky for Barsad. That changes Barsad's mind! Miss Pross, however, is worried. She begs Carton to protect her brother. Carton promises. At Mr. Lorry's, Carton introduces Barsad. Next, he breaks the bad news to Mr. Lorry: Darnay has been arrested again. Not to worry, though: Carton has a plan. To make the plan work, though, he needs Barsad's help. As we may have mentioned, Barsad isn't exactly the helping sort. In fact, he needs quite a bit of convincing. Luckily, however, Carton has some dirt on Barsad. Barsad has been spying on the prisoners for the French revolutionaries, but he's also been spying on the French for the English. No one likes a double-crossing spy. Moreover, Carton knows that Barsad's friend is passing as a Frenchman--but he's really an Englishman, Roger Cly. Jerry suddenly pays close attention. He wants to know why Roger Cly never got properly buried. In fact, he asks Barsad. Barsad can't figure out how Jerry would know this...until Jerry informs them that he tried to dig Roger up. In Roger's place, however, he found an empty coffin. Barsad knows that Carton's managed to beat him in this particular game. Now that he gets the point, Barsad wants to know what Carton wants from him. As it turns out, Carton doesn't want much. Barsad is a keyholder of the prison. He can pass in and out at will, right? Barsad agrees. He's able to go into the prison whenever he likes. Carton nods, then asks Barsad to step into the next room so they can have a word together in private. ...and, unfortunately, we don't get to read about that particular conversation.", "analysis": ""}