{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Three - The Shadow", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-3", "summary": "It's now noon of the next day. The doctor still hasn't returned. Mr. Lorry wants to be worried about the Manettes, but bank business must come first. At the moment, bank business also involves making sure that Lucie and her child aren't hanging out in the bank. If worse comes to worst, their presence could make trouble for Tellson's. We can't fault the guy's reasoning. It's a bit strange, maybe, but it's probably accurate. Accordingly, Mr. Lorry moves Lucie, her child, and Miss Pross into his own rooms. Back at Tellson's, he waits anxiously for the end of the day. Right as the business day is about to end, a man shows up at the door. He's accompanied by two women, one of whom is knitting. He waits for Mr. Lorry to recognize him. Mr. Lorry doesn't. The man prompts Mr. Lorry a bit: they last saw each other at the wine-shop he runs. That's right, folks, it's Defarge. Wait, didn't he say that he wouldn't help Darnay? Well, yes. But this is different. He comes with a letter from Dr. Manette to Mr. Lorry, asking Mr. Lorry to let Defarge see Lucie. In Lucie's room, Defarge hands over a letter from Darnay. It's short, but it lets them all know that he's still okay. Overwhelmed, Lucie reaches up and kisses Madame Defarge's hand. The hand doesn't stop knitting. Madame Defarge is a real piece of work. Lucie looks up at her, terrified. Something just doesn't seem right... Mr. Lorry quickly explains that Madame Defarge likes to look at those whom she may be able to help in times of crisis. Calling in Miss Pross and little Lucie so that Madame Defarge can see them, too, Mr. Lorry asks for her help in the future. Lucie pleads for mercy for her husband. Madame Defarge ignores this cry. She says that she's here for the daughter of Dr. Manette . Frantic, Lucie asks her to protect her husband because he's the doctor's son-in-law. She begs for pity as a wife and a mother. Madame Defarge stares at her coldly and says that the wives and mothers of France have been suffering for a very long time. She leaves without ever promising to help.", "analysis": ""}