{"name": "Volume II, Chapter Two - A Sight", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-2-chapter-2", "summary": "Jerry Cruncher heads into the bank to figure out what his assignment for the day will be. An old bank clerk sends him to the courts with a note for Mr. Lorry. Apparently, Mr. Lorry just wants Jerry to hang around as a messenger for him at the court. Interested in the prospect of some excitement at the court, Jerry asks the clerk what sort of trial will be held today. It's a trial for treason. That means that the accused will be drawn and quartered. Jerry's pretty excited. for a quick history announcement: Drawing and quartering is the traditional punishment for high treason in the U.K. Remember the ending of Braveheart? That's drawing and quartering. For those of you who aren't Mel Gibson fans, however, we'll explain a bit. First, convicted traitors were hanged until they were almost dead. Then they were disemboweled. Then they were beheaded. And their bodies were cut into four parts. In other words, it wasn't all that pleasant. It wasn't all that much better for women at the time, either. They weren't beheaded: they were burned at the stake. Back to our story... Mr. Jerry Cruncher is actually pretty excited about the prospect of a high treason case. Chances are that the guy will be hanged--whether or not he's guilty. Jerry heads to the court. Mr. Lorry's already there. The court itself is packed to the gills. Apparently everyone loves a treason case as much as Jerry does. Also, everyone loves a good drink. The place reeks of alcohol. Hmm...sounds more like Judge Judy than Law and Order. We're not really sure if this is supposed to be a court or a circus. In the center of all the hubbub is the prisoner. He's going to be central to the story, so we'll spend some time introducing him. He's about twenty-five. He appears to be a gentleman. Oh, and did we mention that he's really good-looking? Well, he is. Although he appears to be a little bit shaken to be in the middle of a three-ring circus, Charles Darnay is, in all other respects, a fine, fine man. Of course, that doesn't stop the rest of the spectators in the court from mentally hanging, drawing, and quartering the guy before he's even been tried. ...everyone, that is, except for a young woman and a distinguished-looking older man. They're Lucie and her father, in case you were wondering. As it turns out, they happen to be the key witnesses in the case against Darnay. What? Don't worry, we'll explain. It just might take us a chapter or two.", "analysis": ""}