{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Five - The Wood-Sawyer", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-5", "summary": "A year passes. Then another three months pass. Nothing's changed. Lucie, in particular, seems to have weathered the calamity pretty well. She's not wearing bright, fancy clothes, sure, but otherwise she's cheerful. Only occasionally does her grief break through. Then she cries on her father's shoulder all night. He remains confident that he can save Darnay and tries to reassure his daughter as much as he can. One day, the doctor comes home with some news: every now and then, Darnay can make his way to a little window that looks out onto the street. He usually manages to be there at three in the afternoon. It's not every day...in fact, it's only about once a week. Nonetheless, he asked if Lucie would be willing to come stand in front of the window at three o'clock so he could see her. From that time on, Lucie goes to the street next to the window every afternoon. Whatever the weather's like, she stands outside for two hours. Talk about devotion, huh? We're not the only ones who notice how devoted Lucie is. A woodcutter happens to realize that she's standing on his street every day. At first, he greets her and she returns the greeting. After a bit, though, he begins to make jokes about the guillotine. Unsurprisingly, Lucie doesn't find them very funny. He thinks it's a riot, though. He even makes a miniature version of the guillotine and hangs it outside his window. Honestly, we think the guy needs some hobbies of his own. One day, he's not in his shop. Lucie's relieved--until she sees him dancing with The Vengeance and a mob of hundreds of other people. They're dancing a wild, bloody, violent dance. Apparently, it involves lots of teeth-gnashing. It's called the Carmagnole. Lucie stares at them, frightened. Her father comes up to lead her away, and she asks him about the horrible dance. He tries to calm her, although he's seen it several times before. Suddenly, Madame Defarge appears right beside them. She disappears as quickly as she came. As they walk home, Dr. Manette tells Lucie that Darnay has been summoned to the Tribunal. He's supposed to have a trial tomorrow. In the distance, they hear the guillotine chopping off three heads. We sure hope that this isn't foreshadowing. The doctor leaves Lucie at home and heads off to see Mr. Lorry to make plans for the next day.", "analysis": ""}