{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Two - The Grindstone", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-2", "summary": "Tellson's has set up temporary offices in the abandoned palace of an aristocrat. From this rather inauspicious location, Mr. Lorry has been making lots and lots of financial decisions. Riches have to be preserved , papers have to be saved, even more papers have to be burned...all in all, he's been a pretty busy guy. Fortunately, Tellson's seems to be in a safe space for now. Mr. Lorry looks out into the courtyard, where a large grindstone has been set up. The patriots use the courtyard as a space where they re-grind the edges of their weapons. Strangely enough, that makes the building a fairly safe place to be. As Mr. Lorry looks out the window, he receives a violent shock: Lucie and her father are coming in the courtyard door. Quickly, Mr. Lorry opens the door and rushes them inside. Lucie tells him that Darnay has come to the city. Immediately, Mr. Lorry realizes what this means. Darnay is in trouble. He tries to shield the Manettes from the windows, but the doctor coolly ignores him. Dr. Manette, you see, is something of a hero for the patriots. As a former prisoner of the Bastille, he's untouchable. In fact, he might even have some leverage in getting Darnay out of prison. That's why he and Lucie had come to Paris. Mr. Lorry actually agrees. He hurries Lucie up to his room, and then he and the doctor look out the window. Patriots are grinding weapons like mad. The entire courtyard has become stained with blood. Sparks fly off the grindstone, making the entire place look something like a hell on earth. Mr. Lorry whispers to the doctor that the patriots have begun murdering prisoners. Dr. Manette sighs and goes out into the crowd. Soon Mr. Lorry hears the crowd screaming, \"Long live the Bastille prisoner!\" He watches as Dr. Manette is carried out into the streets by the mob. Later that night, he and Lucie wait upstairs for Dr. Manette to return. Lucie listens, startled, as the grindstone works through the night.", "analysis": ""}