{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Seven - A Knock at the Door", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-7", "summary": "The Manettes have been living pretty frugally, as they've had to pay for all of Darnay's food and lodging in prison. It hasn't been cheap. Nonetheless, they decide to have a little feast to celebrate Darnay's return. Miss Pross and Jerry Cruncher have been taking care of the shopping for the past few months. It's actually a harder job than it might seem. See, since everyone is now suspicious of anyone who has money, Miss Pross and Jerry have to go around buying things in really small quantities. They buy one thing at one store, then go across town to buy another thing at another store. As they set out that night, Miss Pross expresses her opinion of the patriots of the new Republic. She doesn't like them all that much. In fact, she thinks that they're a bunch of hooligans. Before they leave, though, Miss Pross has one question for the Manettes: when will they be able to leave? Dr. Manette thinks that they should stay in Paris for a few days, just so that no one gets suspicious. With that, Miss Pross and Jerry set out on their errands. Lucie and her father stay downstairs for a minute. Suddenly, Lucie starts. She thinks she hears footsteps on the stairs. The doctor assures her that nothing can be wrong now. He's saved Darnay. Sure enough, though, soldiers appear at the door. They ask for Darnay. He's been denounced by Saint Antoine. The doctor demands to know why. The soldiers reply that the doctor shouldn't ask questions. If the Republic needs him to sacrifice his son-in-law, then he should do it happily. After all, it's for the good of the Republic. Sound a little creepy? We think so, too. Finally, though, the soldier relents. Darnay has been denounced by Monsieur and Madame Defarge...and one other. When the doctor asks who the other person is, the soldier stares at him for a minute. He doesn't know?", "analysis": ""}