{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Six - Triumph", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-6", "summary": "It's the morning of Darnay's trial. Five judges sit at the Tribunal bench. The audience hall is packed with people here to see a show. One woman sits in the front row, knitting. Beside her, Darnay sees Defarge. Dr. Manette sits right beneath the president of the Tribunal, ready to testify. Darnay's charges are read: he's an emigrant, and all emigrants are subject to death. It doesn't matter, of course, that this law was instituted after Darnay came to France. The crowd seems to agree. They immediately call for his death. Darnay testifies that he's been living in England and earning his own money there. He even married a woman in England. When asked, Darnay announces that his wife is Lucie, the daughter of Dr. Manette. The crowd gasps in astonishment. This is an even better show than they'd anticipated. The president asks why Darnay chose to return to France. Darnay explains that he felt a moral obligation to return, even though he'd given up any claim to his own lands long ago. He'd come back to save a citizen's life. How could this be criminal? The audience now agrees with Darnay. They shout pretty loudly to save him. Audiences are pretty fickle, in case you haven't noticed. The president reads Gabelle's letter to Darnay aloud. Now Dr. Manette takes the stand. When he testifies that Darnay had actually been on trial in England for being a foe to England and a friend of the United States, the crowd goes crazy. The French helped the U.S. in the American Revolution, remember? Therefore, Darnay must be a good guy! The jury adds its voices to the choir: Darnay is set free! Crying \"Long Live the Republic!\" the crowd hoists Darnay on people's shoulders and carries him out of the courtroom. He's like a football hero: no one can get enough of him. Soon, though, the Manettes manage to get him home. Lucie and Darnay fall onto the floor, praying in thanks for Darnay's release. Dr. Manette enters and Lucie runs to him, trembling. Smiling, the doctor tells her to be strong. He's saved Darnay.", "analysis": ""}