{"name": "Volume II, Chapter Fifteen - Knitting", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-2-chapter-15", "summary": "Folks are coming into the Defarges' wine-shop as early as six in the morning today. Our narrator reflects that it can't be because of the wine . There must be something else going on. In fact, there is. Monsieur Defarge walks into his shop, where everyone is drinking quietly. Once he greets his customers, however, the entire shop erupts into conversations. Defarge saunters over to a table where a man from the country sits silently. Pulling his wife over to the table, he announces that the man is a mender of roads from the country. Defarge calls the man \"Jacques.\" We all know what that means. Soon the man is headed out toward the back of the shop, ostensibly to visit an apartment that the Defarges can lease to him. Once he's outside, Defarge calls the other three Jacques. They all follow the mender of roads into the garret where Dr. Manette stayed when he was in Paris. Nervous, the mender of roads asks Defarge where he should begin his tale. Defarge tells him to start at the very beginning. It's a very good place to start. The mender of roads tells the assembled men that, a year ago, he was working on the road when he saw the Marquis' carriage pass by. That wasn't too unusual. What was unusual, however, was that a man was hanging off of the bottom of the carriage. Later, the Marquis asked the mender of roads what the man looked like. The mender recounts that he answered truthfully, saying that the man was tall as a ghost. The Jacques group scoffs at the honesty of the mender of roads. They would have lied to the Marquis. Enough interruptions already. Back to the mender's story: Later the next day, the mender of roads was working on roads again. While he was working, he saw the same stowaway. This time, however, the tall man was a prisoner. Six guards hauled him down the road in chains. Describing the way that the soldiers tortured the prisoner, the mender of roads finally says that the prisoner was sent to the jail. He didn't remain there long, though. Before the mender of roads continues with the story of the prisoner, he spends some time discussing the way that rumors about the prisoner's fate circulated through the village. Execution? An official stay of execution? Life imprisonment? No one knew what his fate was going to be. After a few days, the prisoner was dragged into the village. The guards hanged him at midday. The gallows was erected over the town well. Because official orders insisted that the body remain where it was hanged, the town well is now polluted. Telling his tale, the mender of roads seems to get disgusted and angered all over again. He erupts in a violent declaration of anger at the injustice of this hanging and the injustice of polluting the well. Defarge pauses for a second, then asks the multiple Jacques what they think. They agree that the perpetrators of this crime should be \"registered\" in their records as people who should be destroyed. Jacques Two pauses to ask if anyone will ever be able to steal the group's register. Defarge scoffs. Madame Defarge keeps the register in her knitting. No one could decipher it, even if they knew what it was supposed to be. Defarge announces that the mender of roads plans to stay in Paris for a few days. Apparently he wants to see the King and Queen. The rest of the group is aghast. The mender of roads is a fan of royalty? How can he be trusted? Defarge calms the group down. Give the man a little taste of the way the royals behave, he reminds the Jacques group, and he'll be a fierce soldier against them in the future. The next day, the mender of roads and the Defarges head over to the royal procession. The mender cheers wildly as the King and Queen pass. Defarge mutters in Madame Defarge's ear that this man is exactly the sort of peasant they need around. He'll convince the King and Queen that their reign will last forever. That way, they'll be all the more surprised when revolution comes.", "analysis": ""}