{"name": "Volume III, Chapter Four - Calm in a Storm", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-4", "summary": "Dr. Manette doesn't return for four days. When he finally makes it back to the house, he tells Lucie a condensed version of what he's seen. Mr. Lorry, however, gets the full story: Dr. Manette went to the Tribunal that tries all the prisoners. He announced himself as a former prisoner of the Bastille, and was awarded special status in the Tribunal. From his seat, he saw Darnay brought before the court and almost released. At the last minute, however, the President of the Tribunal got some new information. He ordered that Darnay be held in prison. He won't be executed, but he won't be set free. Dr. Manette describes the Tribunals as madness. There's not any justice or even any attempt at observing any laws. Finally, however, he decides to use all the influence he has to save Darnay. In fact, for the first time since he was released from prison, he seems like a socially powerful man. The doctor becomes the head medical inspector of three prisons. In that position, he's able to bring back occasional news of Darnay. Strangely enough, Mr. Lorry observes that the doctor begins to take pride in his ability to do things for his family. For a long time, Lucie took care of him. Now he's able to return the favor. Nonetheless, despite all the doctor's efforts, Darnay remains in prison. Time passes without any real markers. And now, friends, we're introduced to the real star of this novel: the guillotine. Our narrator takes a good, long time to describe the ways that it influences and symbolizes the new Republic. It's actually a really good bit of the novel--we recommend that you check it out for yourselves. The doctor moves through all the madness of this time. The guillotine chops off heads right and left, Darnay remains in prison, and Lucie...waits.", "analysis": ""}