{"name": "Volume I, Chapter Six - The Shoemaker", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-1-chapter-6", "summary": "Defarge greets the white-haired shoemaker; he responds vaguely. The very voice of Dr. Manette seems to have shriveled inside of him. The lesson of this chapter, in case you haven't guessed, is that prison is a very, very unhappy place. Don't go there. We're not kidding. Just look at Dr. Manette. Defarge asks the doctor if he can bear a little more light in the room. The doctor replies that he must bear it if Defarge chooses to open a window. Apparently they're not so into free will and choice and all that good stuff in prison. We repeat: prison is bad. It's so bad, in fact, that Dr. Manette seems to think that he never left it. Defarge introduces Mr. Lorry, but Dr. Manette seems to have forgotten him completely. In fact, when he's asked what his own name is, Dr. Manette replies, \"One Hundred and Five, North Tower.\" After an awkward pause, Mr. Lorry asks if Dr. Manette has been a shoemaker all his life. The doctor replies that he actually learned how to make shoes in prison. Flustered, Mr. Lorry asks if he remembers nothing about a banker from long ago. For a moment, Dr. Manette thinks he remembers something...but it's too far off, too long ago. Lucie moves slowly forward. She stops in front of his workbench. Startled, he asks who she is. Slowly, he reaches up and touches her golden hair. He recognizes the hair...it's her hair. Slowly, he begins to remember. Lucie puts her arms around him and promises to tell him some other time who her mother and father were. For now, though, she promises to take care of him. France, she declares, is too wicked a country for them to stay in. They'll return to England, where she can honor the man who is her father properly. Dr. Manette begins to cry. Relieved, Defarge and Mr. Lorry begin to prepare for the journey. As they leave the room, Lucie asks her father if he remembers coming to this place. He doesn't. In fact, he doesn't remember anything but being in prison. Everything after that is a blank. As they pass through the gates of Paris, a guardsman asks for the doctor's traveling papers. Defarge whispers to him as he shows him the papers; the man looks in astonishment at the doctor. Rolling away in the carriage, Mr. Lorry remembers again the conversation he imagined with a dead man. Does the doctor really want to be recalled to life?", "analysis": ""}