{"name": "Volume II, Chapter Eighteen - Nine Days", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-2-chapter-18", "summary": "It's the day of the wedding. Everyone is ready to head to the church. Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross chat amicably together. By now, they're actually pretty good friends. Darnay is in the doctor's room, having a last-minute discussion before the wedding. Suddenly, the doctor emerges from his room. He's white as a sheet. Nothing else seems to be the matter, however. He doesn't say anything. Lucie takes his arm. Together, they head to the church. After the wedding, Lucie and Darnay leave for their honeymoon. Dr. Manette helps Lucie into the carriage, and then the three older people walk back to the Manettes' house. Mr. Lorry glances worriedly at the doctor. The old scared look has returned to his face. Advising Miss Pross to leave the doctor in peace for the time being, Mr. Lorry decides that he'll return later in the night to check on the doctor. Sure enough, when he comes back later that evening, Dr. Manette is holed up in his room, working furiously at making shoes. When Mr. Lorry tries to call out to him, the doctor doesn't even recognize his old friend. Miss Pross and Mr. Lorry hold a hurried conference. They don't want to disturb Lucie on her honeymoon, so they send her a letter supposedly written by her father. They also agree to keep a constant watch on the doctor for a few days. Maybe he'll snap out of it. On the first night, however, that doesn't happen. Dr. Manette takes food when it's given to him, but otherwise he just works at his bench. He doesn't recognize anyone. The same thing happens the next day. And the next. Mr. Lorry and Miss Pross try to talk to the doctor. He listens...but he never replies. After nine days, the doctor hasn't shaken out of his relapse. If anything, he's gotten more and more skillful at making shoes. With growing terror, Mr. Lorry watches his old friend regress further and further into his prison-identity.", "analysis": ""}