{"name": "Volume II, Chapter Eight - Monseigneur in the Country", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-2-chapter-8", "summary": "The Marquis' carriage heads out into the country. As he drives, our narrator gives us a description of the land. It's parched and almost dead. All the crops that can be wrung out of the land have been grown and are slowly dying--like the poor people who farm them. Heading into the village, the carriage pauses. Our narrator takes this time to explain why the village looks so crummy, as well. See, the Marquis has been taxing his villagers within an inch of their lives. They don't have the money to buy food or care for their children because they're sending all of their money to the Marquis. In the village, the Marquis pulls aside a man whom he passed on the road. Understandably, the guy's a bit nervous. The Marquis isn't exactly known for his generosity around here. The Marquis demands to know what the guy was staring at when the carriage passed him by a few minutes before. Gulping, the man says that he was staring at another man who was riding below the carriage as a stowaway. Angry and astonished, the Marquis demands to know more. The peasant describes the stowaway as a tall, thin, white-faced man. Gabelle, the town tax collector and postmaster, steps forward to take charge of a hunt for the mysterious man. The Marquis' carriage heads out of town. They've almost reached the Marquis' country estate when a single woman stops them on the road. She's poor and desperate. Her husband has just died, their farm yields no money, and now her children are starving. She's not asking for food, however. She'd just like money to build a small tombstone for her husband. See, the woman is about to die, as well--and she's very upset at the thought that the townspeople won't be able to bury her beside her husband. Right now there's nothing to mark his grave. Without a headstone, no one will know where he was buried. Any guesses as to what the Marquis will do? Exactly. He rides away without listening to another word. Just in case you were wondering, this is exhibit B in the case Dickens is building. Case? What case? Well, we'll call it the \"Why the Marquis is a heartless monster\" case, for now. Hmm...killing a small child and ignoring the pleas of a desperate woman. Sounds like the Marquis is a monster after all. Luckily for him, he doesn't care. His carriage pulls up to a magnificent country mansion. As the Marquis gets out, he asks if Monsieur Charles has arrived yet. Hang on a second...don't we already know a Charles? What's going on here?", "analysis": ""}