{"name": "Chapters 5-6", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201101053115/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/i/ivanhoe/summary-and-analysis/chapters-56", "summary": "Isaac of York is introduced in these chapters. His dealings with the Palmer herald further meetings of the two. In conversation, Cedric learns of Ivanhoe's prowess in the Crusades and the Palmer pledges a meeting between Ivanhoe and Brian de Bois-Guilbert. By his knowledge of the language of the Saracen slaves the Palmer uncovers a plot by the Templar to rob Isaac. When the Palmer helps Isaac escape, Isaac rewards him with a loan of horse and armor for the coming tournament at Ashby-de-la-Zouche.", "analysis": "The hatred for Isaac infects everyone, both Saxon and Norman, from the lords and knights to the lowest menial. Even the Palmer, who shows mercy, is not without prejudice. As he says, \"it beseems not men of my character and thine to travel together longer than need be.\" Isaac enlists little sympathy, however, for his greed and claim to poverty are well characterized. Note Wamba's remark about Isaac stealing a \"gammon of bacon.\" Pork was an abomination to Isaac. The tax imposed by the Exchequer upon the Jews was indeed heavy. It was a means of reprisal for the usury practiced by the Jewish moneylenders. The hunting terms in this section were the highly particular words coined each year about which no French gentleman dared be ignorant. The beginning of this science is credited to Sir Tristem . The identity of Ivanhoe in the disguise of the Palmer is indicated by his intelligence, his conversation with Rowena, and his apparent power over Gurth. Gurth's change of attitude after the Palmer's words with him show that Gurth has some reason to be in awe of the Palmer and to show his obeisance. Glossary recheat a signal to the hounds to return from following a false scent mort a bugle call at the death of a stag curee the portion of the deer given to the hounds arbor the pluck of the deer nombles the entrails of the deer cri de guerre war cry grace-cup a cup used in drinking a final health after the grace at the end of a meal, or a health drunk from it shekel an ancient weight and money unit, or coin. Hebrew shekel for gold about 252 2/3 grains  halfling the half of a silver penny solere a garret or upper chamber benison blessing, benediction matins morning prayers lazarus Biblical beggar gammon a ham or lower half of bacon side, smoked or dried buckram coarse cloth en croupe behind the saddle"}