{"name": "Chapter 3", "summary": "Chapter 3:<PARAGRAPH>The TT  shows his audience the Time Machine, now in slight disrepair, though it still works. That morning, he uses it and quickly jumps ahead over five hours. He gives it a second run and watches the world around him as the advance of time continues to speed up. After a while, the laboratory disappears--he assumes by destruction--though he remains on the same hill in the open air. He watches trees and buildings rise and fall, and his pace soon rises to over one year for every minute of his existence. He looks forward to seeing more of the developments of civilization he witnesses, such as great buildings and lush environments. Though it is not a problem while he travels at such high speed, he worries about colliding with some substance when he stops. PARAGRAPH>He finally does stop, and he and the machine are flung through the air and land in a garden during a hail-storm. He sees a huge winged statue of white marble  in the distance through the hail. After the hail stops, he looks at the statue and worries about what might have befallen mankind. He sees other huge buildings and panics, and when the sky clears he feels vulnerable. As he attempts to readjust the Time Machine, it turns over and strikes him. PARAGRAPH>Before he mounts the machine, however, his courage returns. The TT notices robed figures in a nearby house who are watching him. Some run toward him, and one approaches him. The creature is small, wears a purple tunic and sandals, and strikes the TT as beautiful but frail. Observing the creature's calm lack of fear, the TT regains his confidence and lets go of the machine. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The TT is portrayed as the consummate Social Darwinist, believing society and mankind will advance in the future, and fearful that the opposite may have occurred. While the future he lands in seems advanced in some ways--there are huge buildings within an exotic environment--the White Sphinx is reminiscent of the sphinx of ancient Egypt. The White Sphinx will play an important role later. PARAGRAPH>Important in the chapter is the TT's immediate impression of the creatures. While evolution implies that species increasingly adapt to their environments and thus, generally, grow stronger in their complexity, these creatures have simple bodies  which are frail. How exactly they survive with their \"unfit\" bodies is another mystery in the novel. In fact, this chapter reveals how Wells generally reveals his mysteries--bit by bit. We learn how he receives the cut on his chin visible when he had returned to the past , and to appreciate the novel's careful plotting, one must read closely for clues. PARAGRAPH>It is crucial to note that the TT does not move in space, but only in time. Therefore, we can read the novel as a projection of England's future. Even the momentary hail is somewhat similar to England's dreary climate", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210410230910/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-time-machine/study-guide/summary-chapters-3-4"}