CHAPTER I

ITS HISTORY AND ITS EXTENSION


In plague there exists the most intimate relationship between cause and
prevention. We will therefore set forth here, as briefly and concisely
as their importance will permit, the principal facts related to the
causation of the disease. Without an understanding of this relationship
there can be no rational preventive treatment.

These facts constitute one of the interesting stories of modern
medicine: the story of the arrangement and interpretation of certain
apparently unrelated facts, some of them long known to men, in the
clear light of modern method; the story of the application of analysis,
synthesis, logic and experiment, all leading to the creation of an
understanding which permits us to battle successfully with _pestis
bubonica_, one of the most ancient of human plagues.

HISTORY.--This disease has an historic interest, most engaging and
fascinating, which one finds it difficult to pass over with mere
mention.

I venture to recall, therefore, that plague almost certainly dates
back to the pre-Christian era, the earlier record naturally being
lacking in sufficient accuracy of description to enable us to identify
the recorded epidemics, definitely and positively, with true bubonic
plague.

An epidemic of the second century B.C., as described, seems to have
been one of true plague, while the pandemic which began in Egypt in the
sixth century A.D., thence extending to Constantinople, Europe and the
British Isles, was certainly the disease known in modern times as the
plague. This pandemic, beginning as the plague of Justinian, was
probably followed by the continuous presence of the disease in Europe,
marked by many local outbreaks and periods of quiescence and extending
down through the centuries to the period of the Crusades. In the
eleventh and twelfth centuries the returning Crusaders spread the
plague widely through Europe, which country it ravished from the
eleventh to the fourteenth centuries, reaching its climax of intensity
in the "Black Death" of Europe of the Middle Ages. The disease
thereafter continued to devastate Europe, the great population centres,
Paris and London, suffering especially from its visitations and its
more or less constant presence. The Great Plague of London, the last
important epidemic of the disease in that metropolis, began in 1664 and
lasted five years. With less than half a million of inhabitants it is
estimated that London gave one of every six or seven of her citizens to
the Black Death during the first year of the epidemic. Then followed a
remarkable disappearance of the disease from Western Europe. The
eighteenth century was marked by few epidemic appearances of plague.

At the end of the first half of the nineteenth century it had
practically disappeared from Egypt and from European and Asiatic
Turkey, formerly its favorite haunts. In interior Asia it has probably
existed for centuries, the non-emigrating character of the people
limiting and confining its devastations.

To these centres and to the commercial invasion of China, we must
probably trace the beginning of the present pandemic of plague, which
exists to-day, a menace to the civilized and uncivilized world. In the
days of the Crusades a religious invasion of the infected centres
caused the disease to spread throughout Christendom, while in the
present day a commercial invasion has caused it to spread completely
around the world.

That this is a truth and not a fanciful statement is shown by the
appearance of plague in the following countries since 1894, when it
spread from interior China. In every case it has followed those
sanitary lines of least resistance, the paths of commerce.

EXTENSION.--To the eastward, from China, it spread to Japan, the
Philippines, Australia, the Hawaiian Islands, Alaska, California,
Mexico, Peru and the western coast of South America. To the westward,
it invaded India, Mauritius, Egypt, Suez ports, Eastern, Central and
South Africa, Mediterranean ports, Great Britain (Scotland), the West
Indies and Brazil. In the last twenty years plague has caused millions
of deaths, and, during a single week in April, 1907, it destroyed more
than 75,000 lives in India, a number about equal to the deaths of a
year in London during the Great Plague of 1665. In contrast with India
the rest of the world has suffered little during the present
world-epidemic, but this loss, while relatively small, is enormous when
translated into lives and dollars. The figures for India are simply
huge.

MORTALITY.--The official lists of _deaths_ in India for the last twenty
years include some in which the number of _reported_ deaths per year
exceeded one million, and it has been estimated that the actual number
of persons dead from the plague during this period approximates
8,000,000.

It is gratifying to note a marked decrease in the total mortality in
the reports of the last few years, but so long as the annual death
list, year after year, was measured by hundreds of thousands, rather
than thousands, the situation could not be considered as anything but
grave.

WIDESPREAD DISSEMINATION IN RECENT YEARS.--Without going into
statistics deeply we may consider also the list of countries, states
and islands from which plague cases have been reported officially
during the last few years.

My purpose is to invite attention to the continued existence of various
plague foci, any one of which might serve to extend the infection
further, were governmental quarantine and public health supervision
relaxed.

During August, September, October, November and December, 1909, plague
cases occurred in India, Mauritius, China, Japan, Egypt, Turkey,
Russia, British East Africa, the Azores, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru,
Chili, California (two cases), and the Hawaiian Islands.

During the first half of 1910 no very marked variation in the
distribution of plague occurred, cases being reported from practically
all of the foreign countries just named.

A year later the situation, so far as the distribution of plague cases
is concerned, was not greatly changed, as may be seen from the
following tabulation, which I have abstracted from the _British Medical
Journal_ of September 16, 1911.

_India._--Deaths from plague in India during the first six months,
604,634. Most prevalent (1) United Provinces, 281,317; (2) Punjab,
171,084; (3) Bengal, 58,515; (4) Bombay Presidency, 28,109. Deaths in
July, not included above, 8990.

_Hong Kong._--April 24 to August 21, 255 cases, 194 deaths.

_China._--Since January 1, 1911, plague was reported in varying
intensity in (provinces and towns) Manchuria, Peking, Tien-tsin, Chefo,
Shantung, Shanghai, Amoy, Foochow, Swatow, Canton, Pakhoi and Laichow.

_Indo-China._--At Saigon, in March and April, 1911, many cases
reported. April 17 to May 7, 56 cases; 17 deaths. May 22 to May 28, 37
cases; 12 deaths.

_Siam._--In Bangkok plague was more severe during 1911 than in any
previous year. March 15 to April 15, 33 cases and 29 deaths.

_Java and Sumatra._--In Java, May 25 to June 3, 105 cases and 62 deaths
(one province). In Sumatra plague was present, no statistics.

_Straits Settlements._--A few cases, mostly imported, reported in 1911.

_Japan._--A few cases at Kobe in 1911. In Formosa, from April 2 to
April 15, 31 cases; 24 deaths.

_Egypt._--Plague reported from Port Said, Suakin (on board ship), Cairo
and Alexandria; also from 11 provinces. The province of Kena had a
severe outbreak, May 5 to May 31, 51 cases and 49 deaths.

_Persia._--Several cases reported from ports on the Persian Gulf.

_Turkey in Asia._--A few cases at Muscat, Basra and at Port of Jeddah.

_British East Africa._--Kismayu and Port Florence reported a few cases
in April, 1911.

_Mauritius._--January 1 to April 11, 110 cases and 70 deaths.

_Portuguese East Africa._--Plague was reported present at Nahoria in
May, 1911.

_Russia._--In the Kirgis Steppe in the Astrakan Government in January,
50 cases; 30 deaths.

_South America._--Plague prevailed during 1911 in Peru, Ecuador,
Brazil, Chile and Venezuela. No severe outbreak except in Peru, where
from February to May many cases occurred and died. At Libertad, in
March, were reported 60 cases and 23 deaths.

APPEARANCE OF PLAGUE IN PORTO RICO, NEW ORLEANS AND MANILA.--The
developments of 1912, which most concern us, were the appearance of
human plague and the discovery of plague-infected rats in Porto Rico,
Cuba, and the Philippines, and the discovery of infected rats in New
Orleans. Thus the Atlantic cities of the United States were for the
first time seriously threatened, and the menace of the pestilence at
home loomed up on our horizon with sufficient prominence to excite
public concern. Our protectors and guardians of the United States
Public Health Service, to whose watchfulness we must credit our
prolonged escape from the plague, are carrying out all the protective
measures at their command with the utmost activity.

At the present time we find Porto Rico freed from the disease. New
Orleans has undergone and is still undergoing treatment which may be
expected, most confidently, to clear it of both human and animal
plague.

Of Manila and the work there, much will be found in the following
pages, but as both rat plague and human plague have been absent for
more than a year we may fairly look upon the epidemic as ended. After
so long an interval as this any reappearance of plague may fairly be
viewed as a new epidemic, although it is not humanly possible to say
that rat plague has entirely and permanently disappeared from the city
of Manila, as yet.




