CHAPTER II

THE CAUSE AND THE MENACE OF PLAGUE


The foregoing facts are quite sufficient to make us realize both the
possibility and the danger of a world-epidemic; a danger which has
existed for some years and which recently has been especially menacing
to the United States.

CAUSATION OF THE DISEASE.--Plague is an acute infectious epizootic
disease, caused solely by _Bacillus pestis_, a bacterial organism. The
disease is common to man and to a number of the lower animals and
fowls.

Prominent among the animals susceptible to the disease is the rat, and
from this animal, through the intermediation of the flea, by far the
most cases of human plague arise. In California the ground squirrel
(_Citellus beecheyi_), a rodent closely related to the marmots of Asia,
    plays a similar role. Of the Asian marmots, the tarbagan, a large
    rodent, also commonly suffers from subacute chronic plague, which is
    transmissible to man as an acute disease by the fleas which the animal
    harbors.

    ITS CONVEYANCE.--Although conveyance of plague through rats by contact
    alone--that is to say without the medium of the flea--is denied by
    modern experimenters, it is perhaps wiser and safer to consider the
    disease infectious, inoculable and contagious in the common medical
    meaning of these terms. While it is usually conveyed to man by the
    flea, it may be acquired by the inhalation of plague bacilli and,
    according to some authorities, by ingesting or swallowing the bacilli.

    When infection takes place through the digestive tract, or in other
    words, by the ingestion of bacilli, either the flesh of plague-infected
    animals or fowls, or food superficially contaminated with plague
    bacilli by rats, cockroaches or other carriers, serves as the medium.

    Speaking practically, the possibility of infection through ingestion is
    nearly negligible. Indeed, the conclusion of Simpson in regard to this
    possibility has been disputed and denied. However, the recent
    occurrence of plague in a cat in Manila, in my own experience, observed
    with me and carefully worked out by Dr. Otto Schoebl, points strongly to
    the possibility of ingestion plague, the cat in this case apparently
    having acquired plague from eating rats dead from plague.

    A full account of this case appears in the bacteriologic observations
    of Dr. Schoebl and in my recital of the history of the Manila epidemic.

    TYPES OF PLAGUE.--Plague in man may be of several types and these are
    designated by names descriptive of the symptoms or of the regions of
    the body most affected. Thus we have bubonic, septicaemic and pneumonic
    types. As both mild and virulent cases occur, we also use terms
    descriptive of the severity and course of the cases. Thus we describe
    certain cases as ambulant, abortive, larval and fulminant. In the rat
    the evidences of plague are less striking in life than they are at the
    post-mortem table. Indeed plague-stricken rats, either naturally or
    artificially (experimentally) infected, often show very slight
    evidences of disease before death. Chronic plague in rats and a
    relative immunity to inoculation in certain wild rats are fairly well
    recognized phenomena.

    FLEA CONVEYANCE OF PLAGUE BACILLI.--Both male and female fleas convey
    plague, but the exact method of carrying the plague bacilli from
    diseased rats to man, while fairly well determined, is of such recent
    decision as to leave room for further experimentation. At present it is
    believed that the flea deposits plague bacilli, at the time of biting,
    upon the skin, by ejecting the contents of its rectum and by
    regurgitation of its stomach contents. At least the flea is known to
    perform these acts at the time of biting, and the rubbing or scratching
    of the flea bite with the hand may easily introduce the bacilli into
    the skin at this spot.[1]

    [1] Acknowledgment is hereby made to the Contributors to "The Rat and
    Its Relation to Public Health" by various authors, prepared by
    direction of the Surgeon-General, P. H. and M. H. S., for numerous
    facts utilized in the preparation of this article. The particular
    contributors whose valuable chapters have been drawn upon for
    information are D. E. Lantz, C. W. McCoy, D. H. Currie, Carrol Fox,
    Rupert Blue, W. C. Rucker, R. H. Creel, M. J. Rosenau, V. C. Heiser,
    W. C. Hobdy, and J. W. Kerr.

    The possibility that the flea introduces the plague bacilli upon his
    mandibles, or the skin-piercing armament with which he is provided, is
    also to be considered. However, the following facts support the first
    proposition. It has been experimentally shown that the average capacity
    of a flea's stomach is about one-half of a cubic millimetre and that
    thousands of plague bacilli may be ingested by the flea during the
    biting of a plague-diseased rat; that the plague bacilli multiply
    enormously and for many days in the flea's stomach and that the bacilli
    are found only in the insect's digestive tract; that plague bacilli are
    regurgitated from the stomach and are voided from the rectum with the
    digested blood.

    It has also been proved that almost all varieties of rat fleas, under
    favorable circumstances, will bite man and that the most common human
    flea (_Pulex irritans_) is frequently found upon rats, the flea,
    generally speaking, being much less particular in his choice of hosts
    and in his permanence of residence than most insects and ectoparasites
    in general.

    Of the rat fleas, _Pulex pallidus_ (_Loemopsylla cheopis_) is common
    under various names in India, the Philippines, Australia, Italy, Brazil
    and in tropical countries generally. It bites both rat and man.
    _Ceratophyllus fasciatus_, the common rat flea of Great Britain and the
    United States, also bites both rat and man. In North America and
    elsewhere certain other fleas of the genus _Ceratophyllus_ have been
    found upon ground squirrels, cats, rats, sparrows and in chicken yards.

    Dog fleas and cat fleas (genus _Ctenocephalus_) also infest rats, and
    fleas of other genera are found upon mice, rats and ground squirrels
    rather indiscriminately.

    The significance of these facts in connection with prevention of
    plague is apparent and it is plain that our warfare against fleas must
    be made upon _all_ fleas and not upon a single variety. In this
    connection the possibilities of the conveyance of plague bacilli by
    other suctorial parasites and by insects which are not parasites, must
    be borne in mind.

    Thus the bed-bug, the louse, the tick and the mosquito must be
    suspected as possible intermediaries and the fly and the cockroach as
    possible food contaminators. Indeed, laboratory experiments have
    already incriminated bed-bugs, flies and lice as potential vectors of
    plague bacilli.

    Experiment and observation have demonstrated, however, that above all
    other parasites and insects, the flea is most likely to convey the
    plague germ from rat to man, by reason of his frequent excursions from
    rat-host to human-host, his taste for blood from either host, his
    enormous activity and his ability to jump. After a searching inquiry
    into the plague question the Indian Plague Commission came to the
    conclusion that contagion plays a very minor part in the spread of the
    disease, less than three per cent of human cases being so acquired.

    This commission also decided that infection is conveyed from rat to
    rat and from rat to man solely through the agency of fleas. While these
    conclusions are probably true--and therefore of the utmost importance
    from the standpoint of practical prevention--I should question whether
    the other possibilities, however remote, are entirely negligible.

    Seasonal conditions may affect the course of an epidemic in various
    ways. (a) By effect upon flea prevalence, cold weather greatly
    lessening the number of insects. (b) By effect upon rats, cold weather
    and rains either driving them from overground to underground, or vice
    versa, or from their principal avenues of travel in cities (the
            sewers), into houses and buildings. (c) By effect upon the plague germ,
    _Bacillus pestis_. The resistance of this organism is very variable,
    sunlight and drying being its greatest enemies, while darkness and
    dampness are its chief allies. So far as temperature is concerned, the
    plague bacillus is not likely to be seriously affected by natural
    temperatures, as it is not destroyed by heat below 150 degrees
    Fahrenheit, nor by cold measured by zero Fahrenheit, which means that
    it survives freezing, generally speaking.

    It is probable that the periods of greatest seasonal prevalence of
    plague will be found to correspond generally with increased prevalence
    of rat fleas. During the periods when rat fleas are absent or least
prevalent, the disease is perpetuated in the form of chronic (subacute)
    rat plague in a small number of the rodents. The India Plague
    Commission made and verified this observation.

    Cholera epidemics often abate spontaneously and this is believed to be
    due in part to attenuations of virulence and changes in the cholera
    organism which may be demonstrated in the laboratory. We can hardly
    hope for such spontaneous abatements in plague epidemics, as it has
    been found difficult to attenuate or to intensify cultures of plague
    bacilli permanently in laboratory experiments with animals. If it is
    true that plague epidemics are often marked by a preponderance of mild
    cases in the early days and a gradual subsidence of intensity of the
    cases as the epidemics wane, we probably will have to look to the
    susceptibility of our patients for our explanation of this phenomenon,
    rather than to variations in the virulence of the plague bacilli. If
    plague bacilli continue to be distributed to susceptible people the
    disease should continue with a general stability of virulence.

    STABILITY OF VIRULENCE OF _B. Pestis_.--According to Strong, stability
    of virulence is a marked characteristic of _B. pestis_, it having been
    shown by him that it is difficult to increase the virulence of a very
    virulent strain or to intensify an attenuated one in laboratory
    animals, working with monkeys, rats and guinea-pigs.[2] If his
    observations are correct (and they seem to correspond with the findings
            of other observers), the oft-recorded occurrence of a preponderance of
    mild cases of plague in the early days of an epidemic and the gradual
    subsidence in intensity of the disease as the epidemic approaches its
    close will have to be explained upon other grounds than those of
    variability of virulence by attenuation of virulent strains alone.
    While he admits that _B. pestis_ may become attenuated under certain
    conditions many times during the course of an epidemic, it may also
    regain its virulence, he contends, under other conditions.

    [2] "Studies in Plague Immunity," R. P. Strong, Philippines Journal
    of Science, June 1907, No. 3. Frequent reference has been made to
    these studies in the preparation of this article, for which
    acknowledgment is hereby made.

    With these facts concerning the cause and the manner of extension of
    plague and its menace before us, we are in position to approach the
    problem of prevention intelligently, and in the case of plague
    prevention is preeminently preferable to cure, as well as decidedly
    more practicable.

    I think we may be permitted here to sum up the problem of plague
    prevention thus: Without fleas, without rats, or without human plague
    cases, there can be no extension of plague, practically speaking.

    Therefore the destruction of both rats and fleas, the isolation of
    human plague cases, and the exclusion from them of all suctorial
    parasites and insects, will provide practical security for mankind
    generally.

    A word concerning pneumonic plague may be permissible. This form of
    plague occasionally occurs in epidemics of great fatality, as, for
    example, the epidemic in Manchuria, North China, a few years ago.

    The mystery of this outbreak was largely dispelled by the work of the
    Americans, Strong, Teague and Barber, of the Bureau of Science of
    Manila.

    The occurrence of secondary pneumonia in bubonic or septicaemic plague
    is rather common and it is likely that such secondary plague pneumonias
    are the starting points of epidemics of pneumonic plague, _i.e._, of
    cases of primary plague pneumonia, the point of infection being in the
    respiratory organs and the infection being acquired through the
    inspiration of plague bacilli.

    The principal prerequisites seem to be an extremely moist atmosphere
    under confined conditions and a low temperature; conditions most
    unfavorable to evaporation and ventilation. Under these conditions the
    pneumonic patient sprays plague bacilli into the air while coughing and
    droplet infection follows.

    It is therefore apparent that epidemic pneumonic plague is controllable
    by sanitary and hygienic measures and, furthermore, that in the absence
    of original cases of bubonic and septicaemic plague, with secondary
    plague pneumonias which give rise to primary plague pneumonia in the
    manner explained, respiratory plague in epidemic form will not occur.

    There is no evidence pointing to the conveyance of respiratory plague
    by insects or other carriers.




