CHAPTER IV

ITS DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT


It was not my original intention to include the subjects of diagnosis
and treatment in this presentation, except in so far as I have already
referred to them in the relation of my Manila experiences in the
preceding pages. I have decided, however, to add a chapter upon
Diagnosis and Treatment, for the sake of completeness. No attempt will
be made to present these subjects in the orthodox way.

Rather, my remarks will be confined to such matter as I believe to be
thoroughly practical and relevant.

In my opinion, the day has arrived when we may properly exclude from
such handbooks as this one (intended for practical guidance), all such
methods of diagnosis and treatment as have failed to meet the test of
actual experience through a reasonable length of time. Twice in recent
years,[17] I have described the diagnosis and treatment of plague,
attempting in each case to present a reasonably full account of the
methods employed and advocated by authorities, for theoretic reasons
and from the recorded personal experiences of medical men throughout
the world. There comes a time, however, when wheat and chaff must be
separated and when methods which have failed, in application, to
justify preformed expectations must be relegated to the department of
historical medicine.

[17] Tropical Medicine (1907) and Hare's Modern Treatment (1911),
vol. 1.

Judging from recent medical text books it is evident that medical
writers are generally accepting this view as the proper one. At any
rate, my experiences and those of my medical friends during the Manila
epidemic of 1912-1914, have led me to discard as impracticable,
unproven, disproven or unpromising, certain plans of treatment formerly
deemed worthy of trial. I do not refer to these methods individually
but will content myself, instead, with reciting briefly the methods
which I believe, from personal experience and the collected experience
of others, to be worthy of continuance and of further trial.

DIAGNOSIS.--The rapid diagnosis of plague is always of the utmost
importance, both from the view-point of prognosis and treatment, in the
individual case, and from the community view-point of the recognition
of the presence of a dangerous communicable disease, with the resultant
obligation falling upon the health authorities.

THE BIOLOGIC DIAGNOSIS.--Let us understand, first and finally, that but
one diagnosis is absolutely and irrefutably dependable, viz.: the
biologic diagnosis. Herein I would include not only the recovery of the
pest bacillus from the patient, but the recovery and identification of
the organism from inoculated animals, infected from blood, tissues,
secretions or cultivated plague bacilli derived from the human patient
or cadaver.

This entire process involves a lapse of time of several days, and,
while it is indispensable in the earliest cases of an epidemic, and
highly desirable for the proper study of all cases of plague, it is
impracticable and unnecessary, in communities where plague is known to
exist, to carry out more than the first steps of the biologic
diagnosis, viz.: the recovery of _B. pestis_ (morphologic
identification) from the patient.

NECESSITY FOR TRAINED BACTERIOLOGIST.--It is evident that the services
of a trained bacteriologist are indispensable in the accurate diagnosis
of plague, unless (as rarely is the case) the observer himself is both
clinician and bacteriologist. Even in this case it is far better for
two persons, clinician and bacteriologist, to work together. I will not
discuss the technic of the procedures of biologic diagnosis, which is
described by Dr. Schoebl in the preceding pages. Except under
circumstances of necessity, the clinician should always turn this work
over to the bacteriologist.

Serum reactions, when present, occur too late to be of service in
practical diagnosis.

The necessary procedures of the biologic diagnosis include
blood-culture, smear examination (microscopic) of aspirated material
from the oedematous tissues surrounding gland masses and from glands
themselves; examination of sputum smears and of thick-blood smears.

All should be practised but, according to our Manila experiences, smear
examinations of aspirated material and blood cultures are the most
reliable methods, in the hands of a competent bacteriologist. Attention
is invited to the reports of Dr. Otto Schoebl, already quoted.

BACTERIOLOGIC PROCEDURE.--Dr. Schoebl was able to secure positive blood
cultures, within 24 hours, from all of a long series of cases of
plague, both bubonic and septicaemic. As much blood as it was possible
to secure was aspirated from superficial veins and introduced into the
culture media at the bedside, ten c.c. being secured whenever it was
possible.

The smear preparations for staining and culture inoculations upon
slants were also made at the bedside from aspirated matter obtained
from oedematous periglandular tissues or from gland puncture, an
aspirating syringe being used. The drop or two of fluid which can be
expelled from the hollow needle is usually sufficient for smears and
tube inoculations.

NON-BIOLOGIC DIAGNOSIS.--I do not contend that other diagnostic means
than biologic ones should not be used in plague.

On the contrary, it will inevitably happen at times that resort must be
had to methods of diagnosis which are purely clinical. When this is the
case, treatment, along lines to be detailed presently, should be
instituted upon the establishment of a presumptive diagnosis. This
presumptive diagnosis may be reached after due consideration of
physical signs and symptoms. A carefully taken history of the onset
and course of the disease will be valuable but unfortunately such
histories can rarely be secured. It is far safer to mistakenly
pronounce a case "plague" and to institute appropriate treatment, than
it is to hesitate in the absence of a perfect clinical picture and to
permit the golden moment for treatment to pass.

It must be remembered that septicaemic, bubonic and pneumonic plague are
all manifestations of systemic infection with _B. pestis_; that they
are all expressions of the same disease; that they call for the same
treatment and that when the distinctive signs of bubo or pneumonia
appear the disease is dangerously advanced.

It should also be realized that every case is, almost from its onset, a
septicaemic case, either mildly or overwhelmingly so. Accordingly the
treatment should invariably be the treatment of septicaemic plague.

The attitude of the diagnostician should be one of suspicion and he
should have the courage to carry out antiplague treatment, practically
upon suspicion. In this way only can the mortality of plague be greatly
reduced. It is true of plague, just as it is true of cholera, that many
of the fatal cases develop and become hopeless before the disease is
suspected or diagnosticated. It is also true that many fatal cases of
plague, in times of epidemic, completely escape recognition during
life, the diagnosis being made in the autopsy room.

Therefore, I lay great stress upon the necessity for an attitude of
suspicion on the part of practitioners, wherever even a single case of
plague (human or rodent) is known to have occurred.

When it becomes necessary to establish a presumptive diagnosis, _i.e._,
without resort to the microscope, the following symptoms and physical
signs will be found to be most significant.

SYMPTOMATOLOGY.--Acuteness of onset; rapidity of fever development;
rapidity of the development of mental dulness or cloudiness, impairment
of speech, delirium, stupor or restlessness; early and extreme
prostration (perhaps more pronounced than in any other acute disease);
extreme tenderness over involved gland masses, in the bubonic type of
plague; cough, with considerable frothy sputum, soon becoming
blood-discolored, in the pneumonic type of plague; and early cardiac
asthenia in all clinical types of plague, septicaemic, pneumonic and
bubonic.

The following diseases may be confounded with plague, if symptoms
alone are considered: typhus (_exanthematicus_), influenza pneumonia,
broncho-pneumonia, severe malaria, septicaemia, acute toxic typhoid,
venereal bubo, mumps and tonsillitis.

I call attention again to the fact that mild cases of plague,
septicaemic and bubonic, occur at times, clinical pictures in such cases
being incomplete.

The statement that the prognosis in all cases of septicaemic plague is
hopeless is not confirmed by my experience.

It should also be remembered that primary pneumonic plague and
secondary pneumonia developing in the course of systemic plague are
quite different in their significance and mortality, primary pneumonic
plague being well nigh invariably fatal.

PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS.--Only the student of plague pathology, who
has seen a large number of complete autopsies, can understand how
universal is the involvement of organs, glands and tissues in systemic
plague and how widespread is the distribution of _B. pestis_ throughout
the body, and he will best understand how treatment, to be in the
least effective, must be given in the very earliest hours of the
disease.

Plague is an exquisitely septicaemic disease and this fact must never be
lost sight of by the therapeutist, who must realize that from the
earliest moment of infection all plague is septicaemic plague.

TREATMENT, CONDITIONS AND PROGNOSIS.--Passing to the subject of
treatment let us, first of all, admit that even under the most
favorable and approved conditions of treatment the mortality is
extremely high. On account of the delay which usually occurs in the
recognition of plague,--a delay which in the natural order of things is
and must be the rule rather than the exception, because of the rapidity
of onset of the disease and the fact that it occurs much more
frequently in the lower social classes than elsewhere,--no brilliant
results are to be expected from any plan of treatment.

The matter of plague treatment is far from being in the same
satisfactory state as the matter of preventive control. I do feel,
however, that biologic treatment from the earliest possible moment,
with serum, is of the greatest promise, however discouraging the
general prognosis may be in plague.

SERUM TREATMENT.--Recent writers agree that there is no treatment with
curative value except that with antipest serum. To this belief I
subscribe assent, as I find it entirely in accord with my experience
and that of my colleagues in Manila during 1912-1914.

Holding this view, I can see no reason for repeating here the details
of purely symptomatic treatment. Symptomatic treatment has for its
object the securing of comfort and of relief from suffering for the
patient and is highly proper in its place, remembering always that it
is not curative and that if employed alone it is worse than inadequate.

SYMPTOMATIC TREATMENT.--Opiates (morphine by needle) for pain, delirium
and excitement; application of ice bags and cold or tepid sponge
bathing for high temperature; stimulants for heart weakness, are all
indicated and are required in nearly every case of plague.

As a rule surgery is not called for nor appropriate, except in cases
which develop secondary surgical conditions, which conditions we need
not consider at this time.

STATISTICAL STUDIES IN MORTALITY.--The statistical study of plague
mortality from the point of view of treatment is misleading and
unsatisfactory for reasons already given in our discussion of
treatment, viz.: failure to secure early recognition and early serum
treatment, and the greater incidence of plague in the lower social
classes.

Few statistical compilations divide the cases studied into moribund and
non-moribund, and indeed such division, being a matter of judgment,
largely involves the personal equation of the observer.

The ease with which statistics may be moulded to support theories, or
to break them down, all with perfect honesty of purpose, is proverbial.

To me, the spectacle of a single case of plague, apparently ill unto
death, recovering under the administration of antiplague serum, is more
impressive than the contemplation of statistics; and I have seen more
than one such case respond to serum treatment and recover.

So far as it goes, however, the study of statistics supports the view
that treatment with antiplague serum is effective.

I have not at hand the records of the last 20 or more cases, but of
the first 68 cases of plague in the recent Manila epidemic, 32 were
either found dead or died upon the same day that they were found.

If we exclude these cases from consideration there remain 36 cases. All
of these patients received serum treatment and ten of them recovered.

It is at once apparent that this percentage of recoveries (27 per cent.
plus) is far more favorable than the actual percentage of recovery in
the series in which cases found dead and moribund are considered, the
recovery percentage here being a little more than 14 per cent. It is
also quite fair, it seems to me, to make this separation of cases, or
even a more liberal one, if we are to consider the effects of serum
treatment statistically.

DOSAGE AND TECHNIQUE OF SERUM ADMINISTRATION.--The amount of antiplague
serum to be given will vary somewhat with the age and weight of the
patient and with the apparent severity of the case.

In general terms it may be said that adults should be given from 300
c.c. to 500 c.c. of serum by injection, 100 c.c. being given every four
hours. The injection may be either intramuscular or intravenous.

In view of the improvements in technic of intravenous administrations
and its comparative simplicity, and especially in view of the
uncertainties and delays of absorption from the tissues, the
intravenous route should be given the preference. The serum may be
delivered intravenously from a large glass syringe, the introduction
being very slowly made, or through a gravity apparatus, as in the
administration of salvarsan. The serum should not be diluted.

The use of antiplague serum for protective (immunizing) purposes is
also recommended--especially when exposure to infection has
occurred--in the same way in which diphtheria antitoxin is used. Its
protective properties are conceded to be somewhat superior to those of
plague vaccines as the protection conferred is immediate, whereas
plague vaccines do not protect until sometime after their
administration. The dose is from 30 c.c. to 50 c.c.

PROPHYLACTIC SERUM AND ANAPHYLAXIS.--On one occasion in Manila in 1913,
when some 30 persons were given prophylactic doses of serum,
intramuscularly, following a particularly dangerous exposure to fleas
from rats dead from plague, there occurred a number of cases of "serum
sickness" (anaphylaxis). These persons suffered from severe urticarial,
arthralgic and nervous symptoms, lasting for several days and a few
were obliged to enter a hospital. In one case the symptoms did not
entirely abate for a week. It has been stated that newly-prepared serum
is particularly apt to produce serum sickness when used for immunizing
purposes. This form of protection is brief (1 to 2 weeks) and is best
suited for use where there has been special exposure.

PLAGUE VACCINES.--Haffkine originally proposed prophylactic
immunization, using killed broth cultures of _B. pestis_ (carbolized to
1/2 per cent.), giving two injections at intervals of 10 days.
Statistically it seems to be shown that this prophylactic immunization
with dead bacteria reduces the incidence and mortality one-fourth or
one-half (approximately). Experimentally, also, it appears that
antibodies (agglutinins) are produced by the vaccine (and modifications
thereof). Instead of broth cultures, normal salt solution suspensions
of killed pest bacilli are usually used in vaccines at present.

Castellani[18] has prepared a combined cholera and plague vaccine for
use in countries where both diseases coincidentally prevail. It is a
mixed vaccine, so prepared that 1 c.c. of the emulsion contains 1000
millions of plague bacilli and 2000 millions of cholera vibrios. The
cultures are grown on agar, killed by phenol and suspended in normal
salt solution.

[18] A. Castellani: Journal of Ceylon Branch of British Medical
Association, June, 1914.

He finds (1) that inoculation of the vaccine in the lower animals
induces a production of protective substances for the plague bacillus
and the cholera vibrio; (2) that the inoculation of human beings is
harmless (producing less reaction than the Haffkine inoculation); (3)
that a small amount of agglutinins, both for plague and cholera, appear
in the blood of most inoculated persons (similar to amounts produced by
Haffkine's vaccine), a rough index only of the amount of immunity
produced.

