{"name": "Chapter 17", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20220429102908/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-rise-of-silas-lapham/study-guide/summary-chapters-1419", "summary": "The following morning, Silas wonders why neither of his daughters comes to breakfast or has work to do. Persis responds by saying that they are young and because they have the privilege of Silas' wealth, respectively. Silas changes the subject by wondering aloud what Tom Corey wanted when he paid a visit last night. Persis suggests that Tom may have come to see about Irene but did not have the courage to stay and ask Silas formally. Thinking it to be an urgent question, Persis goes upstairs to ask Penelope what happened with Tom the previous evening. She finds Penelope restless and crying, and when she asks Penelope what the matter is, Penelope confesses that Tom \"offered himself to last night\". After her revelation, Penelope again tries aloud to cope with her possible guilt in leading Tom on, but Persis says that she does not blame Penelope. Persis says that she saw from the start that Irene was not equal to Tom, but this only makes Penelope express her anger that Persis and others never considered her as a potential match for Tom. The two then puzzle over what to do next and whether to tell Irene. Persis suggests that Penelope ought to just marry Tom, since it cannot be helped and because they have remained true to Irene and each other from the beginning. Ultimately, they resolve to tell Irene, knowing that it will hurt her beyond measure. Still, Penelope feels very guilty and insists that she must have done something wrong to make Tom's courtship of Irene fail and instead direct focus to herself. At the same time, however, she wavers in her resolve and briefly considers that she would be doing nothing wrong by pursuing Tom. Persis says that she will ask Silas what to do, but this only makes Penelope angrier, since she feels that others are taking control of her life and private matters. As Persis leaves to go tell Irene to leave Penelope alone for the day , Penelope suggests that she has heard of cases of self-sacrifice where women have suffered to give another woman a chance with the man they both love. Persis successfully tells Irene to stay away from Penelope, who she says has not slept well. On her way downstairs, however, Persis thinks of how she herself is to blame for the current situation. She thinks that the family's wealth and ambition has blinded them to the truth of Tom's affections, since they wanted so badly for him to fancy Irene. At the same time, however, Persis is scared that Silas will be both too angry and too proud to think rationally of what to do in this situation. After sending for Silas at work, saying that she wants to speak with him, Persis waits at home, where all she can think about as she watches Irene is how futile all her hopes now are. As the chapter closes, Irene says she wants to get a hairpin like the one Nanny Corey was wearing, but Persis quickly tells her this is a bad idea. When she sees how hurt Irene looks, however, Persis recants and says she should get the pin. Meanwhile, she waits for Silas to return", "analysis": "Chapters 14-19 focus primarily on the dinner thrown by the Coreys--a turning point in the novel--and the fallout that results from this event. Like other chapters in the book, this section touches and offers social commentary on many Gilded Age institutions--marriage, courtship, elite social clubs, explosive and exploitative business, and even the Church. On the other hand, certain thematic and symbolic signifiers are paid a great deal more attention in Chapters 14-19 than elsewhere in Howells' novel. These include the distinctions between activity and mimicry, between reality and fiction, and between what should be public and what should remain private. The idea of legitimate knowledge or action--as compared to mimicry or imitation--emerges very early on in these chapters. When Silas arrives at the Coreys' home, he puzzles over his gloves and removes them only because he seeks to imitate Tom, who he notices does not wear them . The gloves have heretofore come to be symbolic of the Laphams' ignorance of genteel habits, so their deployment here is particularly effective in conveying Silas' naivete and imitations of wealth. Later, when Silas enters the home and is introduced to those in attendance, he addresses them by saying \"what name?\" because he heard \"a great man\" once say the same thing . At the table, too, he does \"only what the others ,\" and accepts all food and drink that is offered to him . The idea of mimicry versus legitimate or original action is even, fittingly, discussed at the table itself. When Bromfield Corey turns the discussion towards the hollowness of painting as an enterprise when compared to architecture, he frames this as a comparison between a mimetic art and a creative one: \"you architects and the musicians are the true and only artistic creators. All the rest of us, sculptors, painters, novelists, and tailors, deal with forms that we have before us; we try to imitate, we try to represent\" . This framing of painting as a weaker art form notably provides one reason that the Coreys might look down so strongly on Silas' profession as vulgar. Additionally, Bromfield's bringing together of the theme of imitation--which, up to this point, has primarily been associated with both class and social decorum--and the idea of art develops over the following chapters, and this meeting thus deserves special attention. In particular, these themes develop in tandem as the guests at the dinner party move on to discuss Tears, Idle Tears, a popular contemporary novel about one woman's self-sacrifice so that the man she loves can be with another woman who also loves him. Tears, Idle Tears thus becomes a particularly important symbol in the novel because it both introduces a larger discussion about the nature of reality and fiction as well as serves as a touchpoint in Chapter 19's meeting between Tom Corey and Penelope Lapham. To speak to the former point, Reverend Sewell's comment that \"The novelists might be the greatest possible help to us if they painted life as it is, and human feelings in their true proportion and relation\" is a bold statement advocating for the advancement of Literary Realism, which Howells himself championed . The argument presented at the table suggests that Romantic novels and literature go too far in glorifying both unrealistic struggles as well as loving relationships. If, in Romantic and Baroque novels, love is given \"divine honors,\" Sewell and others believe that love should be demystified and treated as \"natural and mortal\" . This idea that literature can serve as the place where reality is presented instructionally, rather than made colossal and unrealizable, also has profound implications for the novel's ongoing discussions of class and status. What is the world of high society, for example, besides an unrealistic fantasy world? And is the gap between mainstream society and high society in Gilded Age America not the same gap that Irene fails to overcome with Tom Corey, particularly in the realm of their literary and aesthetic knowledge? Finally, Silas' reliance on the Beacon Street house to serve as his introduction to the manners and particularly aesthetics of genteel Boston also directly and symbolically connects the world of manners to an unreal world of aesthetics, far away from the utilitarian world in which Silas was born and raised. This is the very reason he fails to convey his own experiences of poverty when they come up at the table: the Coreys' dining room is simply another world . This discussion also is furthered when Penelope herself brings up Tears, Idle Tears. It would seem that she and Tom, in representing a possible liminal or transitional state between high society and common society, also represent an interesting boundary between the fictional world of Tears, Idle Tears and the \"real\" world of their own lives in Howells' imagination. This is a complex point, but it is one served well by examples. Before we even are told explicitly that Penelope is reading Tears, Idle Tears in Chapter 19, we are given a hint that this is so in Chapter 17: \"I've read of cases where a girl gives up the man that loves her so as to make some other girl happy that the man does not love\" . As we come to learn, this is the exact plot of Tears, Idle Tears, and Penelope's desire to adopt the strategies of this novel into her real life shows just one example of how Penelope's attitudes and behavior seek to link reality and fiction. Importantly, this is also inherently a mimetic or imitative tendency that she displays. On the other hand, Tom Corey's treatment of Tears, Idle Tears comes down on exactly the opposite point--that is, that reality and fiction are linked but ought to be divorced from one another. At the conclusion of Chapter 19, Tom tells Penelope as much directly: \"you were talking of that book; and you said it was foolish and wicked to do as that girl did. Why is it different with you, except that you give me nothing, and can never give me anything when you take yourself away?\" . Tom also believes that the fictional world of Tears, Idle Tears is related to his reality, but he wants to pull Penelope away from the lessons of that novel and towards acting with common sense. Both Tom and Penelope are transitional figures between reality and fiction, and importantly, they also serve as transitional figures between common society and genteel society. Their eventual marriage thus is symbolic and evocative of America's future--one that links common and aristocratic life--as well as America's literature--accepting the lessons of literature and using them to represent reality faithfully. Finally, another meeting point between these themes, particularly as applied to a discussion of status, is in these chapters' treatment of the public and the private. Bromfield Corey's idea of opening vacant aristocratic homes to the poor, for example, seeks to open the private world to the public . The gossip at the table that later appalls Silas also has this tendency of making private matters public . Also at the Coreys' dinner, Silas' oversharing of his own experiences and his braggadocio regarding his new home and its finishes also show an impulse to take private matters and improperly make them public. This impulse is only added to by Silas' self-effacing confessions and apologies to Tom in Chapter 15. These actions all carry the flavor of Silas' earlier attitudes towards the Events, the newspaper that he feels represented him and his biography unfairly. At the same time as much private detail is inappropriately made public, however, a great deal of private information is rightfully exposed in these chapters. Most importantly, this includes Penelope's self-exposure and realization that she may have been trying to attract Tom from the very beginning. It includes Irene's gifting of all Tom's souvenirs to Penelope, which unmasks the depths of Irene's fantasy and obsession over Tom. It includes the Laphams going to Reverend Sewell in Chapter 18 and seeking the advice that will eventually bring Penelope and Tom together. It includes Penelope's revelation to Tom in Chapter 19 that the Laphams all thought Tom to be interested in Irene. Finally, it includes Tom's more detailed confession of love to Penelope, which explains the Stanton farm pamphlet from earlier, among other things. This association between things wrongly made public and high society--as well as the association between things properly made public and a more nuanced interaction of the classes--is no accident on Howells' part. After all, a great deal of misfortune in the novel might have been avoided if only the characters had chosen to speak up earlier or be honest with each other. This is an important idea to keep in mind towards the novel's close as we continue to learn more about Silas' business with Mr. Rogers and Zerilla Dewey, the relationship between the Coreys and the Laphams, and Silas' eventual relapse back to common society. Howells' critique of Gilded Age society and manners is strongest here, after the turning point and catalyst of the Coreys' dinner, and our attention should also correspondingly strengthen."}