{"name": "chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025232/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Invisible_Man_Ellison/Invisible_Man_Study_Guide10.html", "summary": "The narrator arrives at the bus station and recognizes the veteran surgeon from the Golden Day. Though he does not want to sit by the man since the experience from the day before still haunts him, he has no choice, for blacks are relegated to a small section in the rear. When he sits next to him, the narrator learns that the veteran is being transferred to another mental institution. The veteran begins to tease the narrator about traveling north to seek freedom. He also warns the young black man to wake up and be aware of the lying that goes on; he insists that he does not have to believe in the lies to succeed. He explains that the reality is that people do not see the narrator, for he is black; he then tries to explain the advantages of being invisible. The narrator, confused, ignores the old man. Before getting off at the first stop, the veteran acts in a nurturing manner towards the narrator, putting his hand on his shoulder and offering some last advice. He tells the narrator to be his person, for the world is full of possibility. He also warns him to stay away from the Mr. Nortons in life. When the narrator leaves the bus, he heads towards Harlem, feeling worldly and sophisticated with his suitcase and leather briefcase in hand. Entering the subway system, he struggles against the crowd. He is afraid of standing close to the woman on the subway and thinks that riots must regularly happen because of such crowded situations. He decides that next time he will enter the subway with his hands on the lapels of his jacket. Walking into Harlem, he is shocked to see the multitudes of black people living and working as normal employees, such as cashiers and police officers. Perhaps he can believe what the veteran has said about a world of possibility. The narrator is suddenly jolted by the voice of Ras, a West Indian man standing on a soapbox and yelling angry words about the government. The narrator feels sure the speech will spark a riot; however, he notices two white police officers calmly talking amongst themselves with their backs turned to the scene. The policemen see him staring and question him. He asks for directions to the Men's House. Upon getting there, he relaxes, realizing he will not be able to take in Harlem all at once.", "analysis": ""}