{"name": "Chapter 32", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210118112326/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/huckfinn/section13/", "summary": "With only trust in providence to help him free his friend, Huck finds the Phelps's house, where Jim is supposedly being held. A pack of hounds threatens Huck, but a slave woman calls them off. The white mistress of the house, Sally, comes outside, delighted to see Huck because she is certain he is her nephew, Tom. Sally asks why he has been delayed the last several days. Taking the opportunity to conceal his identity by pretending to be her nephew, Huck explains that a cylinder head on the steamboat blew out. When Sally asks whether anyone was hurt in the explosion, Huck says no, a \"nigger\" was killed. Sally expresses relief that the explosion was so \"lucky. Huck is not sure he will be able to keep up the charade as Tom. When Sally's husband, Silas, returns, however his enthusiastic greeting reveals to Huck that Sally and Silas are the aunt and uncle of none other than Tom Sawyer, Huck's best friend. Hearing a steamboat go up the river, Huck heads out to the docks, supposedly to get his luggage but really to inform Tom of the situation should he arrive", "analysis": "As in the early chapters of the novel, Tom Sawyer again serves as a foil to Huck in these chapters. Brash, unconcerned with others, and dependent on the \"authorities\" of romantic adventure novels, Tom hatches a wild plan to free Jim. Huck recognizes the foolishness and potential danger of Tom's plan and says it could get the three of them killed. It is not surprising that Tom's willingness to help free Jim confuses Huck, for Tom has always concerned himself with conforming to social expectations and preserving his own reputation. Freeing Jim would seem to be objectionable on both counts. Huck, meanwhile, though willing to trade his life and reputation for Jim, thinks of himself as a poor, worthless member of white society. Huck sees Tom's life as worth something more than that and believes that Tom has something to lose by helping to free Jim. In the end, though, we sense that Tom has no concept of the life-and-death importance of Jim's liberation but instead just views the effort simply as one big opportunity for fun and adventure. Twain makes a scathing comment on the insidious racism of the South in the exchange between Sally and Huck about the explosion on the steamboat. When Sally asks if anyone was hurt in the explosion, Huck replies \"No'm. Killed a nigger,\" to which Sally replies, \"Well, it's lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt.\" It is unclear whether Huck is simply role-playing--mimicking the attitudes of an average white Southern boy in pretending to be Tom--or whether he still retains some vestiges of the racism with which he has been brought up. Sally, however, is inarguably racist in her response, saying that it's fortunate no one was hurt when she has just learned that a black man lost his life. Twain condemns this kind of automatic, offhand racism throughout the novel, but his criticism is at its most apparent here. This conversation provides yet another example of the confusing moral environment that surrounds Huck: Sally is clearly a \"good\" and kind woman in many traditional senses, yet she doesn't think twice about considering the loss of a black man's life no loss at all."}