Canto XXXII. The Gift Of The Treasures.


That speech so noble which conveyed
His friendly wish, the chief obeyed,
With steps made swift by anxious thought
The wise Suyajna's home he sought.
Him in the hall of Fire(307) he found,
And bent before him to the ground:
"O friend, to Rama's house return,
Who now performs a task most stern."
He, when his noonday rites were done,
Went forth with fair Sumitra's son,
And came to Rama's bright abode
Rich in the love which Lakshmi showed.
The son of Raghu, with his dame,
With joined hands met him as he came,
Showing to him who Scripture knew
The worship that is Agni's due.
With armlets, bracelets, collars, rings,
With costly pearls on golden strings,
With many a gem for neck and limb
The son of Raghu honoured him.
Then Rama, at his wife's request,
The wise Suyajna thus addressed:
"Accept a necklace too to deck
With golden strings thy spouse's neck.
And Sita here, my friend, were glad
A girdle to her gift to add.
And many a bracelet wrought with care,
And many an armlet rich and rare,
My wife to thine is fain to give,
Departing in the wood to live.
A bed by skilful workmen made,
With gold and various gems inlaid--
This too, before she goes, would she
Present, O saintly friend, to thee.
Thine be my elephant, so famed,
My uncle's present, Victor named;
And let a thousand coins of gold,
Great Brahman, with the gift be told."
Thus Rama spoke: nor he declined
The noble gifts for him designed.
On Rama, Lakshman, Sita he
Invoked all high felicity.

  In pleasant words then Rama gave
His best to Lakshman prompt and brave,
As Brahma speaks for Him to hear
Who rules the Gods' celestial sphere:
"To the two best of Brahmans run;
Agastya bring, and Kusik's son,
And precious gifts upon them rain,
Like fostering floods upon the grain.
O long-armed Prince of Raghu's line,
Delight them with a thousand kine,
And many a fair and costly gem,
With gold and silver, give to them.
To him, so deep in Scripture, who,
To Queen Kausalya, ever true,
Serves her with blessing and respect,
Chief of the Taittiriya sect(308)--
To him, with women-slaves, present
A chariot rich with ornament,
And costly robes of silk beside,
Until the sage be satisfied.
On Chitraratha, true and dear,
My tuneful bard and charioteer,
Gems, robes, and plenteous wealth confer--
Mine ancient friend and minister.
And these who go with staff in hand,
Grammarians trained, a numerous band,
Who their deep study only prize,
Nor think of other exercise,
Who toil not, loving dainty fare,
Whose praises e'en the good declare--
On these be eighty cars bestowed,
And each with precious treasures load.
A thousand bulls for them suffice,
Two hundred elephants of price,
And let a thousand kine beside
The dainties of each meal provide.
The throng who sacred girdles wear,
And on Kausalya wait with care--
A thousand golden coins shall please,
Son of Sumitra, each of these.
Let all, dear Lakshman of the train
These special gifts of honour gain:
My mother will rejoice to know
Her Brahmans have been cherished so."

  Then Raghu's son addressed the crowd
Who round him stood and wept aloud,
When he to all who thronged the court
Had dealt his wealth for their support:
"In Lakshman's house and mine remain,
And guard them till I come again."
To all his people sad with grief,
In loving words thus spoke their chief,
Then bade his treasure-keeper bring
Gold, silver, and each precious thing.
Then straight the servants went and bore
Back to their chief the wealth in store.
Before the people's eyes it shone,
A glorious pile to look upon.
The prince of men with Lakshman's aid
Parted the treasures there displayed,
Gave to the poor, the young, the old,
And twice-born men, the gems and gold.

  A Brahman, long in evil case,
Named Trijat, born of Garga's race,
Earned ever toiling in a wood
With spade and plough his livelihood.
The youthful wife, his babes who bore,
Their indigence felt more and more.
Thus to the aged man she spake:
"Hear this my word: my counsel take.
Come, throw thy spade and plough away;
To virtuous Rama go to-day,
And somewhat of his kindness pray."

  He heard the words she spoke: around
His limbs his ragged cloth he wound,
And took his journey by the road
That led to Rama's fair abode.
To the fifth court he made his way;
Nor met the Brahman check or stay.
Brighu, Angiras(309) could not be
Brighter with saintly light than he.
To Rama's presence on he pressed,
And thus the noble chief addressed:
"O Rama, poor and weak am I,
And many children round me cry.
Scant living in the woods I earn:
On me thine eye of pity turn."
And Rama, bent on sport and jest,
The suppliant Brahman thus addressed:
"O aged man, one thousand kine,
Yet undistributed, are mine.
The cows on thee will I bestow
As far as thou thy staff canst throw."

  The Brahman heard. In eager haste
He bound his cloth around his waist.
Then round his head his staff he whirled,
And forth with mightiest effort hurled.
Cast from his hand it flew, and sank
To earth on Sarju's farther bank,
Where herds of kine in thousands fed
Near to the well-stocked bullock shed.
And all the cows that wandered o'er
The meadow, far as Sarju's shore,
At Rama's word the herdsmen drove
To Trijat's cottage in the grove.
He drew the Brahman to his breast,
And thus with calming words addressed:
"Now be not angry, Sire. I pray:
This jest of mine was meant in play.
These thousand kine, but not alone.
Their herdsmen too, are all thine own.
And wealth beside I give thee: speak,
Thine shall be all thy heart can seek."

  Thus Rama spake. And Trijat prayed
For means his sacrifice to aid.
And Rama gave much wealth, required
To speed his offering as desired.





