Canto LXXI. Bharat's Return.


Then Bharat's face was eastward bent
As from the royal town he went.
He reached Sudama's farther side,
And glorious, gazed upon the tide;
Passed Hladini, and saw her toss
Her westering billows hard to cross.
Then old Ikshvaku's famous son
O'er Satadru(348) his passage won,
Near Ailadhana on the strand,
And came to Aparparyat's land.
O'er Sila's flood he hurried fast,
Akurvati's fair stream he passed,
Crossed o'er Agneya's rapid rill,
And Salyakartan onward still.
Silavaha's swift stream he eyed,
True to his vows and purified,
Then crossed the lofty hills, and stood
In Chaitraratha's mighty wood.
He reached the confluence where meet
Sarasvati(349) and Ganga fleet,
And through Bharunda forest, spread
Northward of Viramatsya, sped.
He sought Kalinda's child, who fills
The soul with joy, begirt by hills,
Reached Yamuna, and passing o'er,
Rested his army on the shore:
He gave his horses food and rest,
Bathed reeking limb and drooping crest.
They drank their fill and bathed them there,
And water for their journey bare.
Thence through a mighty wood he sped
All wild and uninhabited,
As in fair chariot through the skies,
Most fair in shape a Storm-God flies.
At Ansudhana Ganga, hard
To cross, his onward journey barred,
So turning quickly thence he came
To Pragvat's city dear to fame.
There having gained the farther side
To Kutikoshtika he hied:
The stream he crossed, and onward then
To Dharmavardhan brought his men.
Thence, leaving Toran on the north,
To Jambuprastha journeyed forth.
Then onward to a pleasant grove
By fair Varutha's town he drove,
And when a while he there had stayed,
Went eastward from the friendly shade.
Eastward of Ujjihana where
The Priyak trees are tall and fair,
He passed, and rested there each steed
Exhausted with the journey's speed.
There orders to his men addressed,
With quickened pace he onward pressed,
A while at Sarvatirtha spent,
Then o'er Uttanika he went.
O'er many a stream beside he sped
With coursers on the mountains bred,
And passing Hastiprishthak, took
The road o'er Kutika's fair brook.
Then, at Lohitya's village, he
Crossed o'er the swift Kapivati,
Then passed, where Ekasala stands,
The Sthanumati's flood and sands,
And Gomati of fair renown
By Vinata's delightful town.
When to Kalinga near he drew,
A wood of Sal trees charmed the view;
That passed, the sun began to rise,
And Bharat saw with happy eyes,
Ayodhya's city, built and planned
By ancient Manu's royal hand.
Seven nights upon the road had passed,
And when he saw the town at last
Before him in her beauty spread,
Thus Bharat to the driver said:
"This glorious city from afar,
Wherein pure groves and gardens are,
Seems to my eager eyes to-day
A lifeless pile of yellow clay.
Through all her streets where erst a throng
Of men and women streamed along,
Uprose the multitudinous roar:
To-day I hear that sound no more.
No longer do mine eyes behold
The leading people, as of old,
On elephants, cars, horses, go
Abroad and homeward, to and fro.
The brilliant gardens, where we heard
The wild note of each rapturous bird,
Where men and women loved to meet,
In pleasant shades, for pastime sweet,--
These to my eyes this day appear
Joyless, and desolate, and drear:
Each tree that graced the garden grieves,
And every path is spread with leaves.
The merry cry of bird and beast,
That spake aloud their joy, has ceased:
Still is the long melodious note
That charmed us from each warbling throat.
Why blows the blessed air no more,
The incense-breathing air that bore
Its sweet incomparable scent
Of sandal and of aloe blent?
Why are the drum and tabour mute?
Why is the music of the lute
That woke responsive to the quill,
Loved by the happy, hushed and still?
My boding spirit gathers hence
Dire sins of awful consequence,
And omens, crowding on my sight,
Weigh down my soul with wild affright.
Scarce shall I find my friends who dwell
Here in Ayodhya safe and well:
For surely not without a cause
This crushing dread my soul o'erawes."

  Heart sick, dejected, every sense
Confused by terror's influence,
On to the town he quickly swept
Which King Ikshvaku's children kept.
He passed through Vaijayanta's gate,
With weary steeds, disconsolate,
And all who near their station held,
His escort, crying Victory, swelled,
With heart distracted still he bowed
Farewell to all the following crowd,
Turned to the driver and began
To question thus the weary man:
"Why was I brought, O free from blame,
So fast, unknown for what I came?
Yet fear of ill my heart appals,
And all my wonted courage falls.
For I have heard in days gone by
The changes seen when monarchs die;
And all those signs, O charioteer,
I see to-day surround me here:
Each kinsman's house looks dark and grim,
No hand delights to keep it trim:
The beauty vanished, and the pride,
The doors, unkept, stand open wide.
No morning rites are offered there,
No grateful incense loads the air,
And all therein, with brows o'ercast,
Sit joyless on the ground and fast.
Their lovely chaplets dry and dead,
Their courts unswept, with dust o'erspread,
The temples of the Gods to-day
No more look beautiful and gay.
Neglected stands each holy shrine,
Each image of a Lord divine.
No shop where flowery wreaths are sold
Is bright and busy as of old.
The women and the men I mark
Absorbed in fancies dull and dark,
Their gloomy eyes with tears bedewed,
A poor afflicted multitude."

  His mind oppressed with woe and dread,
Thus Bharat to his driver said,
Viewed the dire signs Ayodhya showed,
And onward to the palace rode.





