Canto LXXXIV. Guha's Anger.


King Guha saw the host spread o'er
The wide expanse of Ganga's shore,
With waving flag and pennon graced,
And to his followers spoke in haste:
"A mighty army meets my eyes,
That rivals Ocean's self in size:
Where'er I look my very mind
No limit to the host can find.
Sure Bharat with some evil thought
His army to our land has brought.
See, huge of form, his flag he rears,
That like an Ebony-tree appears.
He comes with bonds to take and chain,
Or triumph o'er our people slain:
And after, Rama will he slay,--
Him whom his father drove away:
The power complete he longs to gain,
And--task too hard--usurp the reign.
So Bharat comes with wicked will
His brother Rama's blood to spill.
But Rama's slave and friend am I;
He is my lord and dear ally.
Keep here your watch in arms arrayed
Near Ganga's flood to lend him aid,
And let my gathered servants stand
And line with troops the river strand.
Here let the river keepers meet,
Who flesh and roots and berries eat;
A hundred fishers man each boat
Of the five hundred here afloat,
And let the youthful and the strong
Assemble in defensive throng.
But yet, if, free from guilty thought
'Gainst Rama, he this land have sought,
The prince's happy host to-day
Across the flood shall make its way."

  He spoke: then bearing in a dish
A gift of honey, meat, and fish,
The king of the Nishadas drew
Toward Bharat for an interview.
When Bharat's noble charioteer
Observed the monarch hastening near,
He duly, skilled in courteous lore,
The tidings to his master bore:
"This aged prince who hither bends
His footsteps with a thousand friends,
Knows, firm ally of Rama, all
That may in Dandak wood befall:
Therefore, Kakutstha's son, admit
The monarch, as is right and fit:
For doubtless he can clearly tell
Where Rama now and Lakshman dwell."

  When Bharat heard Sumantra's rede,
To his fair words the prince agreed:
"Go quickly forth," he cried, "and bring
Before my face the aged king."
King Guha, with his kinsmen near,
Rejoiced the summoning to hear:
He nearer drew, bowed low his head,
And thus to royal Bharat said:
"No mansions can our country boast,
And unexpected comes thy host:
But what we have I give thee all:
Rest in the lodging of thy thrall.
See, the Nishadas here have brought
The fruit and roots their hands have sought:
And we have woodland fare beside,
And store of meat both fresh and dried.
To rest their weary limbs, I pray
This night at least thy host may stay:
Then cheered with all we can bestow
To-morrow thou with it mayst go."





