Canto VII. Sutikshna.


So Raghu's son, his foemen's dread,
With Sita and his brother sped,
Girt round by many a twice-born sage,
To good Sutikshna's hermitage.(420)
Through woods for many a league he passed,
O'er rushing rivers full and fast,
Until a mountain fair and bright
As lofty Meru rose in sight.
Within its belt of varied wood
Ikshvaku's sons and Sita stood,
Where trees of every foliage bore
Blossom and fruit in endless store.
There coats of bark, like garlands strung,
Before a lonely cottage hung,
And there a hermit, dust-besmeared,
A lotus on his breast, appeared.
Then Rama with obeisance due
Addressed the sage, as near he drew:
"My name is Rama, lord; I seek
Thy presence, saint, with thee to speak.
O sage, whose merits ne'er decay,
Some word unto thy servant say."

  The sage his eyes on Rama bent,
Of virtue's friends preeminent;
Then words like these he spoke, and pressed
The son of Raghu to his breast:
"Welcome to thee, illustrious youth,
Best champion of the rights of truth!
By thine approach this holy ground
A worthy lord this day has found.
I could not quit this mortal frame
Till thou shouldst come, O dear to fame:
To heavenly spheres I would not rise,
Expecting thee with eager eyes.
I knew that thou, unkinged, hadst made
Thy home in Chitrakuta's shade.
E'en now, O Rama, Indra, lord
Supreme by all the Gods adored,
King of the Hundred Offerings,(421) said,
When he my dwelling visited,
That the good works that I have done
My choice of all the worlds have won.
Accept this meed of holy vows,
And with thy brother and thy spouse,
Roam, through my favour, in the sky
Which saints celestial glorify."

  To that bright sage, of penance stern,
The high-souled Rama spake in turn,
As Vasava(422) who rules the skies
To Brahma's gracious speech replies:
"I of myself those worlds will win,
O mighty hermit pure from sin:
But now, O saint, I pray thee tell
Where I within this wood may dwell:
For I by Sarabhanga old,
The son of Gautama, was told
That thou in every lore art wise,
And seest all with loving eyes."

  Thus to the saint, whose glories high
Filled all the world, he made reply:
And thus again the holy man
His pleasant speech with joy began:
"This calm retreat, O Prince, is blest
With many a charm: here take thy rest.
Here roots and kindly fruits abound,
And hermits love the holy ground.
Fair silvan beasts and gentle deer
In herds unnumbered wander here:
And as they roam, secure from harm,
Our eyes with grace and beauty charm:
Except the beasts in thickets bred,
This grove of ours has naught to dread."

  The hermit's speech when Rama heard,--
The hero ne'er by terror stirred,--
On his great bow his hand he laid,
And thus in turn his answer made:
"O saint, my darts of keenest steel,
Armed with their murderous barbs, would deal
Destruction mid the silvan race
That flocks around thy dwelling-place.
Most wretched then my fate would be
For such dishonour shown to thee:
And only for the briefest stay
Would I within this grove delay."

  He spoke and ceased. With pious care
He turned him to his evening prayer,
Performed each customary rite,
And sought his lodging for the night,
With Sita and his brother laid
Beneath the grove's delightful shade,
First good Sutikshna, as elsewhere, when he saw
The shades of night around them draw,
  With hospitable care
The princely chieftains entertained
With store of choicest food ordained
  For holy hermit's fare.





