Canto IV. Lakshman's Reply.


Cheered by the words that Rama spoke,
Joy in the Vanar's breast awoke,
And, as his friendly mood he knew,
His thoughts to King Sugriva flew:
"Again," he mused, "my high-souled lord
Shall rule, to kingly state restored;
Since one so mighty comes to save,
And freely gives the help we crave."

  Then joyous Hanuman, the best
Of all the Vanar kind, addressed
These words to Rama, trained of yore
In all the arts of speakers' lore:(549)
"Why do your feet this forest tread
By silvan life inhabited,
This awful maze of tree and thorn
Which Pampa's flowering groves adorn?"

  He spoke: obedient to the eye
Of Rama, Lakshman made reply,
The name and fortune to unfold
Of Raghu's son the lofty-souled:
"True to the law, of fame unstained,
The glorious Dasaratha reigned,
And, steadfast in his duty, long
Kept the four castes(550) from scathe and wrong.
Through his wide realm his will was done,
And, loved by all, he hated none.
Just to each creature great and small,
Like the Good Sire he cared for all.
The Agnishtom,(551) as priests advised,
And various rites he solemnized,
Where ample largess ever paid
The Brahmans for their holy aid.
Here Rama stands, his heir by birth,
Whose name is glorious in the earth:
Sure refuge he of all oppressed,
Most faithful to his sire's behest.
He, Dasaratha's eldest born
Whom gifts above the rest adorn,
Lord of each high imperial sign,(552)
The glory of his kingly line,
Reft of his right, expelled from home,
Came forth with me the woods to roam.
And Sita too, his faithful dame,
Forth with her virtuous husband came,
Like the sweet light when day is done
Still cleaving to her lord the sun.
And me his sweet perfections drew
To follow as his servant true.
Named Lakshman, brother of my lord
Of grateful heart with knowledge stored
Most meet is he all bliss to share,
Who makes the good of all his care.
While, power and lordship cast away,
In the wild wood he chose to stay,
A giant came,--his name unknown,--
And stole the princess left alone.
Then Diti's son(553) who, cursed of yore,
The semblance of a Rakshas wore,
To King Sugriva bade us turn
The robber's name and home to learn.
For he, the Vanar chief, would know
The dwelling of our secret foe.
Such words of hope spake Diti's son,
And sought the heaven his deeds had won.
Thou hast my tale. From first to last
Thine ears have heard whate'er has past.
Rama the mighty lord and I
For refuge to Sugriva fly.
The prince whose arm bright glory gained,
O'er the whole earth as monarch reigned,
And richest gifts to others gave,
Is come Sugriva's help to crave;
Son of a king the surest friend
Of virtue, him who loved to lend
His succour to the suffering weak,
Is come Sugriva's aid to seek.
Yes, Raghu's son whose matchless hand
Protected all this sea-girt land,
The virtuous prince, my holy guide,
For refuge seeks Sugriva's side.
His favour sent on great and small
Should ever save and prosper all.
He now to win Sugriva's grace
Has sought his woodland dwelling-place.
Son of a king of glorious fame;--
Who knows not Dasaratha's name?--
From whom all princes of the earth
Received each honour due to worth;--
Heir of that best of earthly kings,
Rama the prince whose glory rings
Through realms below and earth and skies,
For refuge to Sugriva flies.
Nor should the Vanar king refuse
The boon for which the suppliant sues,
But with his forest legions speed
To save him in his utmost need."

  Sumitra's son, his eyes bedewed
With piteous tears, thus sighed and sued.
Then, trained in all the arts that guide
The speaker, Hanuman replied:

  "Yea, lords like you of wisest thought,
Whom happy fate has hither brought,
Who vanquish ire and rule each sense,
Must of our lord have audience.
Reft of his kingdom, sad, forlorn,
Once Bali's hate now Bali's scorn,
Defeated, severed from his spouse,
Wandering under forest boughs,
Child of the Sun, our lord and king
Sugriva will his succours bring,
And all our Vanar hosts combined
Will trace the dame you long to find."

  With gentle tone and winning grace
Thus spake the chief of Vanar race,
And then to Raghu's son he cried:
"Come, haste we to Sugriva's side."

  He spoke, and for his words so sweet
Good Lakshman paid all honour meet;
Then turned and cried to Raghu's son:
"Now deem thy task already done,
Because this chief of Vanar kind,
Son of the God who rules the wind,
Declares Sugriva's self would be
Assisted in his need by thee.
Bright gleams of joy his cheek o'erspread
As each glad word of hope he said;
And ne'er will one so valiant deign
To cheer our hearts with hope in vain."

  He spoke, and Hanuman the wise
Cast off his mendicant disguise,
And took again his Vanar form,
Son of the God of wind and storm.
High on his ample back in haste
Raghu's heroic sons he placed,
And turned with rapid steps to find
The sovereign of the Vanar kind.





