Canto LVI. Sampati.


Then came the vultures' mighty king
Where sat the Vanars sorrowing,--
Sampati,(761) best of birds that fly
On sounding pinions through the sky,
Jatayus' brother, famed of old,
Most glorious and strong and bold.
Upon the slope of Vindhya's hill
He saw the Vanars calm and still.
These words he uttered while the sight
Filled his fierce spirit with delight:
"Behold how Fate with changeless laws
Within his toils the sinner draws,
And brings me, after long delay,
A rich and noble feast to-day,
These Vanars who are doomed to die
My hungry maw to satisfy."

  He spoke no more: and Angad heard
The menace of the mighty bird;
And thus, while anguish filled his breast,
The noble Hanuman addressed:
"Vivasvat's(762) son has sought this place
For vengeance on the Vanar race.
See, Yama, wroth for Sita's sake,
Is come our guilty lives to take.
Our king's decree is left undone,
And naught achieved for Raghu's son.
In duty have we failed, and hence
Comes punishment for dire offence.
Have we not heard the marvels wrought
By King Jatayus,(763) how he fought
With Ravan's might, and, nobly brave,
Perished, the Maithil queen to save?
There is no living creature, none,
But loves to die for Raghu's son,
And in long toils and dangers we
Have placed our lives in jeopardy.
Blest is Jatayus, he who gave
His life the Maithil queen to save,
And proved his love for Rama well
When by the giant's hand he fell.
Now raised to bliss and high renown
He fears not fierce Sugriva's frown.
Alas, alas! what miseries spring
From that rash promise of the king!(764)
His own sad death, and Rama sent
With Lakshman forth to banishment:
The Maithil lady borne away:
Jatayus slain in mortal fray:
The fall of Bali when the dart
Of Rama quivered in his heart:
And, after toil and pain and care,
Our misery and deep despair."

  He ceased: the feathered monarch heard,
His heart with ruth and wonder stirred:
"Whose is that voice," the vulture cried,
"That tells me how Jatayus died,
And shakes my inmost soul with woe
For a loved brother's overthrow?
After long days at length I hear
The glorious name of one so dear.
Once more, O Vanar chieftains, tell
How King Jatayus fought and fell.
But first your aid, I pray you, lend,
And from this peak will I descend.
The sun has burnt my wings, and I
No longer have the power to fly."





