Canto III. Lanka.


He ceased: and Raghu's son gave heed,
Attentive to his prudent rede:
Then turned again, with hope inspired,
To Hanuman, and thus inquired:

  "Light were the task for thee, I ween,
To bridge the sea that gleams between
The mainland and the island shore.
Or dry the deep and guide as o'er.
Fain would I learn from thee whose feet
Have trod the stones of every street,
Of fenced Lanka's towers and forts,
And walls and moats and guarded ports,
And castles where the giants dwell,
And battlemented citadel.
O Vayu's son, describe it all,
With palace, fort, and gate, and wall."

  He ceased: and, skilled in arts that guide
The eloquent, the chief replied:

  "Vast is the city, gay and strong,
Where elephants unnumbered throng,
And countless hosts of Rakshas breed
Stand ready by the car and steed.
Four massive gates, securely barred,
All entrance to the city guard,
With murderous engines fixt to throw
Bolt, arrow, rock to check the foe,
And many a mace with iron head
That strikes at once a hundred dead.
Her golden ramparts wide and high
With massy strength the foe defy,
Where inner walls their rich inlay
Of coral, turkis, pearl display.
Her circling moats are broad and deep,
Where ravening monsters dart and leap.
By four great piers each moat is spanned
Where lines of deadly engines stand.
In sleepless watch at every gate
Unnumbered hosts of giants wait,
And, masters of each weapon, rear
The threatening pike and sword and spear.
My fury hurled those ramparts down,
Filled up the moats that gird the town,
The piers and portals overturned,
And stately Lanka spoiled and burned.
Howe'er we Vanars force our way
O'er the wide seat of Varun's(899) sway,
Be sure that city of the foe
Is doomed to sudden overthrow,
Nay, why so vast an army lead?
Brave Angad, Dwivid good at need,
Fierce Mainda, Panas famed in fight,
And Nila's skill and Nala's might,
And Jambavan the strong and wise,
Will dare the easy enterprise.
Assailed by these shall Lanka fall
With gate and rampart, tower and wall.
Command the gathering, chief: and they
In happy hour will haste away."





