Canto XXV. Ravan's Spies.(938)


When Rama and the host he led
Across the sea had safely sped,
Thus Ravan, moved by wrath and pride,
To Suka and to Saran cried:
"O counsellors, the Vanar host
Has passed the sea from coast to coast,
And Dasaratha's son has wrought
A wondrous deed surpassing thought.
And now in truth I needs must know
The strength and number of the foe.
Go ye, to Rama's host repair
And count me all the legions there.
Learn well what power each captain leads
His name and fame for warlike deeds.
Learn by what artist's wondrous aid
That bridge athwart the sea was made;
Learn how the Vanar host came o'er
And halted on the island shore.
Mark Rama son of Raghu well;
His valour, strength, and weapons tell.
Watch his advisers one by one,
And Lakshman, Raghu's younger son.
Learn with observant eyes, and bring
"Unerring tidings to your king.

  He ceased: then swift in Vanar guise
Forth on their errand sped the spies.
They reached the Vanars, and, dismayed,
Their never-ending lines surveyd:
Nor would they try, in mere despair,
To count the countless legions there,
That crowded valley, plain and hill,
That pressed about each cave and rill.
Though sea-like o'er the land were spread
The endless hosts which Rama led,
The bridge by thousands yet was lined,
And eager myriads pressed behind.
But sage Vibhishan's watchful eyes
Had marked the giants in disguise.
He gave command the pair to seize,
And told the tale in words like these:

  "O Rama these, well known erewhile,
Are giant sons of Lanka's isle,
Two counsellors of Ravan sent
To watch the invading armament."

  Vibhishan ceased: at Rama's look
The Rakshas envoys quailed and shook;
Then suppliant hand to hand they pressed
And thus Ikshvaku's son addressed:
"O Rama, bear the truth we speak:
Our monarch Ravan bade us seek
The Vanar legions and survey
Their numbers, strength, and vast array."

  Then Rama, friend and hope and guide
Of suffering creatures, thus replied:

  "Now giants, if your eyes have scanned
Our armies, numbering every band,
Marked lord and chief, and gazed their fill,
Return to Ravan when ye will.
If aught remain, if aught anew
Ye fain would scan with closer view,
Vibhishan, ready at your call,
Will lead you forth and show you all.
Think not of bonds and capture; fear
No loss of life, no peril here:
For, captive, helpless and unarmed,
An envoy never should be harmed.
Again to Lanka's town repair,
Speed to the giant monarch there,
And be these words to Ravan told,
Fierce brother of the Lord of Gold:
"Now, tyrant, tremble for thy sin:
Call up thy friends, thy kith and kin,
And let the power and might be seen
Which made thee bold to steal my queen.
To-morrow shall thy mournful eye
Behold thy bravest warriors die,
And Lanka's city, tower and wall,
Struck by my fiery shafts, will fall.
Then shall my vengeful blow descend
Its rage on thee and thine to spend,
Fierce as the fiery bolt that flew
From heaven against the Danav crew,
Mid those rebellious demons sent
By him who rules the firmament."

  Thus spake Ikshvaku's son, and ceased:
The giants from their bonds released
Lauded the King with glad accord,
And hasted homeward to their lord.
Before the tyrant side by side
Suka and Saran stood and cried:
"Vibhishan seized us, King, and fain
His helpless captives would have slain.
But glorious Rama saw us; he,
Great-hearted hero, made us free.
There in one spot our eyes beheld
Four chiefs on earth unparalleled,
Who with the guardian Gods may vie
Who rule the regions of the sky.
There Rama stood, the boast and pride
Of Raghu's race, by Lakshman's side.
There stood the sage Vibhishan, there
Sugriva strong beyond compare.
These four alone can batter down
Gate, rampart, wall, and Lanka's town.
Nay, Rama matchless in his form,
A single foe, thy town would storm:
So wondrous are his weapons, he
Needs not the succour of the three.
Why speak we of the countless train
That fills the valley, hill and plain,
The millions of the Vanar breed
Whom Rama and Sugriva lead?
O King, be wise, contend no more,
And Sita to her lord restore."





