Canto XXXVII. Preparations.


Lords of the legions of the wood,
The chieftains with Vibhishan stood,
And, strangers in the foeman's land,
Their hopes and fears in council scanned:

  "See, see where Lanka's towers ascend,
Which Ravan's power and might defend,
Which Gods, Gandharvas, fiends would fail
To conquer, if they durst assail.
How shall our legions pass within,
The city of the foe to win,
With massive walls and portals barred
Which Ravan keeps with surest guard?"
With anxious looks the walls they eyed:
And sage Vibhishan thus replied:
"These lords of mine(946) can answer: they
Within the walls have found their way,
The foeman's plan and order learned,
And hither to my side returned.
Now, Rama, let my tongue declare
How Ravan's hosts are stationed there.
Prahasta heads, in warlike state,
His legions at the eastern gate.
To guard the southern portal stands
Mahodar, girt by Rakshas bands,
Where mighty Mahaparsva, sent
By Ravan's hest, his aid has lent.
Guard of the gate that fronts the west
Is valiant Indrajit, the best
Of warriors, Ravan's joy and pride;
And by the youthful chieftain's side
Are giants, armed for fierce attacks
With sword and mace and battle-axe.
North, where approach is dreaded most,
The king, encompassed with a host
Of giants trained in war, whose hands
Wield maces, swords and lances, stands.
All these are chiefs whom Ravan chose
As mightiest to resist his foes;
And each a countless army(947) leads
With elephants and cars and steeds."

  Then Rama, while his spirit burned
For battle, words like these returned:
"The eastern gate be Nila's care,
Opponent of Prahasta there.
The southern gate, with troops arrayed
Let Angad, Bali's son, invade.
The gate that fronts the falling sun
Shall be by brave Hanuman won;
Soon through its portals shall he lead
His myriads of Vanar breed.
The gate that fronts the north shall be
Assailed by Lakshman and by me,
For I myself have sworn to kill
The tyrant who delights in ill.
Armed with the boon which Brahma gave,
The Gods of heaven he loves to brave,
And through the trembling worlds he flies,
Oppressor of the just and wise.
Thou, Jambavan, and thou, O King
Of Vanars, all your bravest bring,
And with your hosts in dense array
Straight to the centre force your way.
But let no Vanar in the storm
Disguise him in a human form,
Ye chiefs who change your shapes at will,
Retain your Vanar semblance still.
Thus, when we battle with the foe,
Both men and Vanars will ye know,
In human form will seven appear;
Myself, my brother Lakshman here;
Vibhishan, and the four he led
From Lanka's city when he fled."

  Thus Raghu's son the chiefs addressed:
Then, gazing on Suvela's crest,
Transported by the lovely sight,
He longed to climb the mountain height.





