Canto XLI. Rama's Envoy.


When Rama saw each bloody trace
On King Sugriva's limbs and face,
He cried, while, sorrowing at the view,
His arms about his friend he threw:
"Too venturous chieftain, kings like us
Bring not their lives in peril thus;
Nor, save when counsel shows the need,
Attempt so bold, so rash a deed.
Remember, I, Vibhishan all
Have sorrowed fearing for thy fall.
O do not--for us all I speak--
These desperate adventures seek."
"I could not," cried Sugriva, "brook
Upon the giant king to look,
Nor challenge to the deadly strife
The fiend who robbed thee of thy wife."
"Now Lakshman, marshal," Rama cried,
"Our legions where the woods are wide,
And stand we ready to oppose
The fury of our giant foes.
This day our armies shall ascend
The walls which Ravan's powers defend,
And floods of Rakshas blood shall stain
The streets encumbered with the slain."
Down from the peak he came, and viewed
The Vanars' ordered multitude.
Each captain there for battle burned,
Each fiery eye to Lanka turned.
On, where the royal brothers led
To Lanka's walls the legions sped.
The northern gate, where giant foes
Swarmed round their monarch, Rama chose
Where he in person might direct
The battle, and his troops protect.
What arm but his the post might keep
Where, strong as he who sways the deep,(949)
Mid thousands armed with bow and mace,
Stood Ravan mightiest of his race?
The eastern gate was Nila's post,
Where marshalled stood his Vanar host,
And Mainda with his troops arrayed,
And Dwivid stood to lend him aid.
The southern gate was Angad's care,
Who ranged his bold battalions there.
Hanuman by the port that faced
The setting sun his legions placed,
And King Sugriva held the wood
East of the gate where Ravan stood.
On every side the myriads met,
And Lanka's walls of close beset
That scarce the roving gale could win
A passage to the hosts within.
Loud as the angry ocean's roar
When wild waves lash the rocky shore,
Ten thousand thousand throats upsent
A shout that tore the firmament,
And Lanka with each grove and brook
And tower and wall and rampart shook.
The giants heard, and were appalled:
Then Raghu's son to Angad called,
And, led by kingly duty,(950) gave
This order merciful as brave:
"Go, Angad, Ravan's presence seek,
And thus my words of warning speak:
"How art thou changed and fallen now,
O Monarch of the giants, thou
Whose impious fury would not spare
Saint, nymph, or spirit of the air;
Whose foot in haughty triumph trod
On Yaksha, king, and Serpent God:
How art thou fallen from thy pride
Which Brahma's favour fortified!
With myriads at thy Lanka's gate
I stand my righteous ire to sate,
And punish thee with sword and flame,
The tyrant fiend who stole my dame.
Now show the might, employ the guile,
O Monarch of the giants' isle,
Which stole a helpless dame away:
Call up thy power and strength to-day.
Once more I warn thee, Rakshas King,
This hour the Maithil lady bring,
And, yielding while there yet is time,
Seek, suppliant, pardon for the crime,
Or I will leave beneath the sun
No living Rakshas, no, not one.
In vain from battle wilt thou fly,
Or borne on pinions seek the sky;
The hand of Rama shall not spare;
His fiery shaft shall smite thee there.' "

  He ceased: and Angad bowed his head;
Thence like embodied flame he sped,
And lighted from his airy road
Within the Rakshas king's abode.
There sate, the centre of a ring
Of counsellors, the giant king.
Swift through the circle Angad pressed,
And spoke with fury in his breast:
"Sent by the lord of Kosal's land,
His envoy here, O King, I stand,
Angad the son of Bali: fame
Has haply taught thine ears my name.
Thus in the words of Rama I
Am come to warn thee or defy:
Come forth, and fighting in the van
Display the spirit of a man.
This arm shall slay thee, tyrant: all
Thy nobles, kith and kin shall fall:
And earth and heaven, from terror freed,
Shall joy to see the oppressor bleed.
Vibhishan, when his foe is slain,
Anointed king in peace shall reign.
Once more I counsel thee: repent,
Avoid the mortal punishment,
With honour due the dame restore,
And pardon for thy sin implore."

  Loud rose the king's infuriate cry:
"Seize, seize the Vanar, let him die."
Four of his band their lord obeyed,
And eager hands on Angad laid.
He purposing his strength to show
Gave no resistance to the foe,
But swiftly round his captors cast
His mighty arms and held them fast.
Fierce shout and cry around him rang:
Light to the palace roof he sprang,
There his detaining arms unwound,
And hurled the giants to the ground.
Then, smiting with a fearful stroke,
A turret from the roof he broke,--
As when the fiery levin sent
By Indra from the clouds has rent
The proud peak of the Lord of Snow,--
And flung the stony mass below.
Again with loud terrific cry
He sprang exulting to the sky,
And, joyous for his errand done,
Stood by the side of Raghu's son.





