Canto LIV. Vajradanshtra's Death.


The giant leader fiercely rained
His arrows and the fight maintained.
Each time the clanging cord he drew
His certain shaft a Vanar slew.
Then, as the creatures he has made
Fly to the Lord of Life for aid,
To Angad for protection fled
The Vanar hosts dispirited.
Then raged the battle fiercer yet
When Angad and the giant met.
A hundred thousand arrows, hot
With flames of fire, the giant shot;
And every shaft he deftly sent
His foeman's body pierced and rent.
From Angad's limbs ran floods of gore:
A stately tree from earth he tore,
Which, maddened as his gashes bled,
He hurled at his opponent's head.
His bow the dauntless giant drew;
To meet the tree swift arrows flew,
Checked the huge missile's onward way,
And harmless on the earth it lay.
A while the Vanar chieftain gazed,
Then from the earth a rock he raised
Rent from a thunder-splitten height,
And cast it with resistless might.
The giant marked, and, mace in hand,
Leapt from his chariot to the sand,
Ere the rough mass descending broke
The seat, the wheel, the pole and yoke.

  Then Angad seized a shattered hill,
Whereon the trees were flowering still,
And with full force the jagged peak
Fell crashing on the giant's cheek.
He staggered, reeled, and fell: the blood
Gushed from the giant in a flood.
Reft of his might, each sense astray,
A while upon the sand he lay.
But strength and wandering sense returned
Again his eyes with fury burned,
And with his mace upraised on high
He wounded Angad on the thigh.
Then from his hand his mace he threw,
And closer to his foeman drew.
Then with their fists they fought, and smote
On brow and cheek and chest and throat.
Worn out with toil, their limbs bedewed,
With blood, the strife they still renewed,
Like Mercury and fiery Mars
Met in fierce battle mid the stars.

  A while the deadly fight was stayed:
Each armed him with his trusty blade
Whose sheath with tinkling bells supplied,
And golden net, adorned his side;
And grasped his ponderous leather shield
To fight till one should fall or yield.
Unnumbered wounds they gave and took:
Their wearied bodies reeled and shook.
At length upon the sand that drank
Streams of their blood the warriors sank,
But as a serpent rears his head
Sore wounded by a peasant's tread,
So Angad, fallen on his knees,
Yet gathered strength his sword to seize;
And, severed by the glittering blade,
The giant's head on earth was laid.

[I omit Cantos LV, LVI, LVII, and LVIII, which relate how Akampan and
Prahasta sally out and fall. There is little novelty of incident in these
Cantos and the results are exactly the same as before. In Canto LV,
Akampan, at the command of Ravan, leads forth his troops. Evil omens are
seen and heard. The enemies meet, and many fall on each side, the Vanars
transfixed with arrows, the Rakshases crushed with rocks and trees.

In Canto LVI Akampan sees that the Rakshases are worsted, and fights with
redoubled rage and vigour. The Vanars fall fast under his "nets of
arrows." Hanuman comes to the rescue. He throws mountain peaks at the
giant which are dexterously stopped with flights of arrows; and at last
beats him down and kills him with a tree.

In Canto LVII, Ravan is seriously alarmed. He declares that he himself,
Kumbhakarna or Prahasta, must go forth. Prahasta sallies out vaunting that
the fowls of the air shall eat their fill of Vanar flesh.

In Canto LVIII, the two armies meet. Dire is the conflict; ceaseless is
the rain of stones and arrows. At last Nila meets Prahasta and breaks his
bow. Prahasta leaps from his car, and the giant and the Vanar fight on
foot. Nila with a huge tree crushes his opponent who falls like a tree
when its roots are cut.]





