Canto LIX. Ravan's Sally.


They told him that the chief was killed,
And Ravan's breast with rage was filled.
Then, fiercely moved by wrath and pride,
Thus to his lords the tyrant cried:

  "No longer, nobles, may we show
This lofty scorn for such a foe
By whom our bravest, with his train
Of steeds and elephants, is slain.
Myself this day will take the field,
And Raghu's sons their lives shall yield."

  High on the royal car, that glowed
With glory from his face, he rode;
And tambour shell and drum pealed out,
And joyful was each giant's shout.
A mighty host, with eyeballs red
Like flames of kindled fire, he led.
He passed the city gate, and viewed,
Arrayed, the Vanar multitude,
Those wielding massy rocks, and these
Armed with the stems of uptorn trees,
And Rama with his eyes aglow
With warlike ardour viewed the foe,
And thus the brave Vibhishan, best
Of weapon-wielding chiefs, addressed:
"What captain leads this bright array
Where lances gleam and banners play,
And thousands armed with spear and sword
Await the bidding of their lord?"

  "Seest, thou," Vibhishan answered, "one
Whose face is as the morning sun,
Preeminent for hugest frame?
Akampan(962) is the giant's name.
Behold that chieftain, chariot-borne,
Whom Brahma's chosen gifts adorn.
He wields a bow like Indra's own;
A lion on his flag is shown,
His eyes with baleful fire are lit:
'Tis Ravan's son, 'tis Indrajit.
There, brandishing in mighty hands
His huge bow, Atikaya stands.
And that proud warrior o'er whose head
A moon-bright canopy is spread:
Whose might, in many a battle tried,
Has tamed imperial Indra's pride;
Who wears a crown of burnished gold,
Is Lanka's lord the lofty-souled."

  He ceased: and Rama knew his foe,
And laid an arrow on his bow:
"Woe to the wretch," he cried, "whom fate
Abandons to my deadly hate."
He spoke, and, firm by Lakshman's side,
The giant to the fray defied.
The lord of Lanka bade his train
Of warriors by the gates remain,
To guard the city from surprise
By Rama's forest born allies.
Then as some monster of the sea
Cleaves swift-advancing billows, he
Charged with impetuous onset through
The foe, and cleft the host in two.
Sugriva ran, the king to meet:
A hill uprooted from its seat
He hurled, with trees that graced the height
Against the rover of the night:
But cleft with shafts that checked its way
Harmless upon the earth it lay.
Then fiercer Ravan's fury grew,
An arrow from his side he drew,
Swift as a thunderbolt, aglow
With fire, and launched it at the foe.
Through flesh and bone a way it found,
And stretched Sugriva on the ground.
Sushen and Nala saw him fall,
Gavaksha, Gavaya heard their call,
And, poising hills, in act to fling
They charged amain the giant king.
They charged, they hurled the hills in vain,
He checked them with his arrowy rain,
And every brave assailant felt
The piercing wounds his missiles dealt,
Then smitten by the shafts that came
Keen, fleet, and thick, with certain aim,
They fled to Rama, sure defence
Against the oppressor's violence,
Then, reverent palm to palm applied,
Thus Lakshman to his brother cried:
"To me, my lord, the task entrust
To lay this giant in the dust."
"Go, then," said Rama, "bravely fight;
Beat down this rover of the night.
But he, unmatched in bold emprise,
Fears not the Lord of earth and skies,
Keep on thy guard: with keenest eye
Thy moments of attack espy.
Let hand and eye in due accord
Protect thee with the bow and sword."

  Then Lakshman round his brother threw
His mighty arms in honour due,
Bent lowly down his reverent head,
And onward to the battle sped.
Hanuman from afar beheld
How Ravan's shafts the Vanars quelled:
To meet the giant's car he ran,
Raised his right arm and thus began:
"If Brahma's boon thy life has screened
From Yaksha, God, Gandharva, fiend,
With these contending fear no ill,
But tremble at a Vanar still."
With fury flashing from his eye
The lord of Lanka made reply:
"Strike, Vanar, strike: the fray begin,
And hope eternal fame to win.
This arm shall prove thee in the strife
And end thy glory and thy life."
"Remember," cried the Wind-God's son,
"Remember all that I have done,
My prowess, King, thou knowest well,
Shown in the fight when Aksha(963) fell."

  With heavy hand the giant smote
Hanuman on the chest and throat,
Who reeled and staggered to and fro,
Stunned for a moment by the blow.
Till, mustering strength, his hand he reared
And struck the foe whom Indra feared.
His huge limbs bent beneath the shock,
As mountains, in an earthquake, rock,
And from the Gods and sages pealed
Shouts of loud triumph as he reeled.
But strength returning nerved his frame:
His eyeballs flashed with fiercer flame.
No living creature might resist
That blow of his tremendous fist
Which fell upon Hanuman's flank:
And to the ground the Vanar sank,
No sign of life his body showed:
And Ravan in his chariot rode
At Nila; and his arrowy rain
Fell on the captain and his train.
Fierce Nila stayed his Vanar band,
And, heaving with his single hand
A mountain peak, with vigorous swing
Hurled the huge missile at the king.

  Hanuman life and strength regained,
Burned for the fight and thus complained:
"Why, coward giant, didst thou flee
And leave the doubtful fight with me?"
Seven mighty arrows keen and fleet
The giant launched, the hill to meet;
And, all its force and fury stayed,
The harmless mass on earth was laid.
Enraged the Vanar chief beheld
The mountain peak by force repelled,
And rained upon the foe a shower
Of trees uptorn with branch and flower.
Still his keen shafts which pierced and rent
Each flying tree the giant sent:
Still was the Vanar doomed to feel
The tempest of the winged steel.
Then, smarting from that arrowy storm,
The Vanar chief condensed his form,(964)
And lightly leaping from the ground
On Ravan's standard footing found;
Then springing unimpeded down
Stood on his bow and golden crown.
The Vanar's nimble leaps amazed
Ikshvaku's son who stood and gazed.
The giant, raging in his heart,
Laid on his bow a fiery dart;
The Vanar on his flagstaff eyed,
And thus in tones of fury cried:
"Well skilled in magic lore art thou:
But will thine art avail thee now?
See if thy magic will defend
Thy life against the dart I send."

  Thus Ravan spake, the giant king,
And loosed the arrow from the string.
It pierced, with direst fury sped,
The Vanar with its flaming head.
His father's might, his power innate
Preserved him from the threatened fate.
Upon his knees he fell, distained
With streams of blood, but life remained.

  Still Ravan for the battle burned:
At Lakshman next his car he turned,
And charged amain with furious show,
Straining in mighty hands his bow.
"Come," Lakshman cried, "assay the fight:
Leave foes unworthy of thy might."
Thus Lakshman spoke: and Lanka's lord
Heard the dread thunder of the cord.
And mad with burning rage and pride
In hasty words like these replied:
"Joy, joy is mine, O Raghu's son:
Thy fate to-day thou canst not shun.
Slain by mine arrows thou shalt tread
The gloomy pathway of the dead."

  Thus as he spoke his bow he drew,
And seven keen shafts at Lakshman flew,
But Raghu's son with surest aim
Cleft every arrow as it came.
Thus with fleet shafts each warrior shot
Against his foe, and rested not.
Then one choice weapon from his store,
By Brahma's self bestowed of yore,
Fierce as the flames that end the world,
The giant king at Lakshman hurled.
The hero fell, and racked with pain,
Scarce could his hand his bow retain.
But sense and strength resumed their seat
And, lightly springing to his feet,
He struck with one tremendous stroke
And Ravan's bow in splinters broke.
From Lakshman's cord three arrows flew
And pierced the giant monarch through.
Sore wounded Ravan closed, and round
Ikshvaku's son his strong arms wound.
With strength unrivalled, Brahma's gift,
He strove from earth his foe to lift.
"Shall I," he cried, "who overthrow
Mount Meru and the Lord of Snow,
And heaven and all who dwell therein,
Be foiled by one of Rama's kin?"
But though he heaved, and toiled, and strained,
Unmoved Ikshvaku's son remained.
His frame by those huge arms compressed
The giant's God-given force confessed,
But conscious that himself was part
Of Vishnu, he was firm in heart.

  The Wind-God's son the fight beheld,
And rushed at Ravan, rage-impelled.
Down crashed his mighty hand; the foe
Full in the chest received the blow.
His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way,
And senseless on the earth he lay.

  The Wind-God's son to Rama bore
Deep-wounded Lakshman stained with gore.
He whom no foe might lift or bend
Was light as air to such a friend.
The dart that Lakshman's side had cleft,
Untouched, the hero's body left,
And flashing through the air afar
Resumed its place in Ravan's car;
And, waxing well though wounded sore,
He felt the deadly pain no more.
And Ravan, though with deep wounds pained,
Slowly his sense and strength regained,
And furious still and undismayed
On bow and shaft his hand he laid.

  Then Hanuman to Rama cried:
"Ascend my back, great chief, and ride
Like Vishnu borne on Garud's wing,
To battle with the giant king."
So, burning for the dire attack,
Rode Rama on the Vanar's back,
And with fierce accents loud and slow
Thus gave defiance to the foe,
While his strained bowstring made a sound
Like thunder when it shakes the ground:
"Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay,
The penalty of sin to pay.
Stay! whither wilt thou fly, and how
Escape the death that waits thee now?"

  No word the giant king returned:
His eyes with flames of fury burned.
His arm was stretched, his bow was bent,
And swift his fiery shafts were sent.
Red torrents from the Vanar flowed:
Then Rama near to Ravan strode,
And with keen darts that never failed,
The chariot of the king assailed.
With surest aim his arrows flew:
The driver and the steeds he slew.
And shattered with the pointed steel
Car, flag, and pole and yoke and wheel.
As Indra hurls his bolt to smite
Mount Meru's heaven-ascending height,
So Rama with a flaming dart
Struck Lanka's monarch near the heart,
Who reeled and fell beneath the blow
And from loose fingers dropped his bow.
Bright as the sun, with crescent head,
From Rama's bow an arrow sped,
And from his forehead, proud no more,
Cleft the bright coronet he wore.
Then Rama stood by Ravan's side
And to the conquered giant cried:
"Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slain
Strong heroes of the Vanar train.
I will not strike or slay thee now,
For weary, faint with fight art thou.
To Lanka's town thy footsteps bend,
And there the night securely spend.
To-morrow come with car and bow,
And then my prowess shalt thou know."

  He ceased: the king in humbled pride
Rose from the earth and naught replied.
With wounded limbs and shattered crown
He sought again his royal town.





