Canto LXXIII. Indrajit's Victory.


But Indrajit the fierce and bold
With words like these his sire consoled:
"Dismiss, O King, thy grief and dread,
And be not thus disquieted.
Against this numbing sorrow strive,
For Indrajit is yet alive;
And none in battle may withstand
The fury of his strong right hand.
This day, O sire, thine eyes shall see
The sons of Raghu slain by me."

  He ceased: he bade the king farewell:
Clear, mid the roar of drum and shell,
The clash of sword and harness rang
As to his car the warrior sprang.
Close followed by his Rakshas train
Through Lanka's gate he reached the plain.
Then down he leapt, and bade a band
Of giants by the chariot stand:
Then with due rites, as rules require,
Did worship to the Lord of Fire.
The sacred oil, as texts ordain,
With wreaths of scented flowers and grain,
Within the flame in order due,
That mightiest of the giants threw.
There on the ground were spear and blade,
And arrowy leaves and fuel laid;
An iron ladle deep and wide,
And robes with sanguine colours dyed.
Beside him stood a sable goat:
The giant seized it by the throat,
And straight from the consuming flame
Auspicious signs of victory came.
For swiftly, curling to the right,
The fire leapt up with willing light
Undimmed by smoky cloud, and, red
Like gold, upon the offering fed.
They brought him, while the flame yet glowed,
The dart by Brahma's grace bestowed,
And all the arms he wielded well
Were charmed with text and holy spell.

  Then fiercer for the fight he burned,
And at the foe his chariot turned,
While all his followers lifting high
Their maces charged with furious cry.
Dire, yet more dire the battle grew,
As rocks and trees and arrows flew.
The giant shot his shafts like rain,
And Vanars fell in myriads slain,
Sugriva, Angad, Nila felt
The wounds his hurtling arrows dealt.
His shafts the blood of Gaya drank;
Hanuman reeled and Mainda sank.
Bright as the glances of the sun
Came the swift darts they could not shun.
Caught in the arrowy nets he wove,
In vain the sons of Raghu strove;
And Rama, by the darts oppressed,
His brother chieftain thus addressed:
"See, first this giant warrior sends
Destruction, mid our Vanar friends,
And now his arrows thick and fast
Their binding net around us cast.
To Brahma's grace the chieftain owes
The matchless power and might he shows;
And mortal strength in vain contends
With him whom Brahma's self befriends.
Then let us still with dauntless hearts
Endure this storm of pelting darts.
Soon must we sink bereaved of sense;
And then the victor, hurrying hence,
Will seek his father in his hall
And tell him of his foemen's fall."
He ceased: o'erpowered by shaft and spell
The sons of Raghu reeled and fell.
The Rakshas on their bodies gazed;
And, mid the shouts his followers raised,
Sped back to Lanka to relate
In Ravan's hall the princes' fate.





