Canto C. Ravan In The Field.


The plain with bleeding limbs was spread,
And heaps of dying and of dead.
His mighty bow still Rama strained,
And shafts upon the giants rained.
Still Angad and Sugriva, wrought
To fury, for the Vanars fought.
Crushed with huge rocks through chest and side
Mahodar, Mahaparsva died,
And Virupaksha stained with gore
Dropped on the plain to rise no more.
When Ravan saw the three o'erthrown
He cried aloud in furious tone:
"Urge, urge the car, my charioteer,
The haughty Vanars' death is near.
This very day shall end our griefs
For leaguered town and slaughtered chiefs.
Rama the tree whose lovely fruit
Is Sita, shall this arm uproot,--
Whose branches with protecting shade
Are Vanar lords who lend him aid."

  Thus cried the king: the welkin rang
As forth the eager coursers sprang,
And earth beneath the chariot shook
With flowery grove and hill and brook.
Fast rained his shafts: where'er he sped
The conquered Vanars fell or fled,
On rolled the car in swift career
Till Raghu's noble sons were near.
Then Rama looked upon the foe
And strained and tried his sounding bow,
Till earth and all the region rang
Re-echoing to the awful clang.
His bow the younger chieftain bent,
And shaft on shaft at Ravan sent.
He shot: but Ravan little recked;
Each arrow with his own he checked,
And headless, baffled of its aim,
To earth the harmless missile came;
And Lakshman stayed his arm o'erpowered
By the thick darts the giant showered.
Fierce waxed the fight and fiercer yet,
For Ravan now and Rama met,
And each on other poured amain
The tempest of his arrowy rain.
While all the sky above was dark
With missiles speeding to their mark
Like clouds, with flashing lightning twined
About them, hurried by the wind.
Not fiercer was the wondrous fight
When Vritra fell by Indra's might.
All arts of war each foeman knew,
And trained alike, his bowstring drew.
Red-eyed with fury Lanka's king
Pressed his huge fingers on the string,
And fixed in Rama's brows a flight
Of arrows winged with matchless flight.
Still Raghu's son endured, and bore
That crown of shafts though wounded sore.
O'er a dire dart a spell he spoke
With mystic power to aid the stroke.
In vain upon the foe it smote
Rebounding from the steelproof coat.
The giant armed his bow anew,
And wondrous weapons hissed and flew,
Terrific, deadly, swift of flight,
Beaked like the vulture and the kite,
Or bearing heads of fearful make,
Of lion, tiger, wolf and snake.(995)
Then Rama, troubled by the storm
Of flying darts in every form
Shot by an arm that naught could tire,
Launched at the foe his dart of fire,
Which, sacred to the Lord of Flame,
Burnt and consumed where'er it came.
And many a blazing shaft beside
The hero to his string applied.
With fiery course of dazzling hue
Swift to the mark each missile flew,
Some flashing like a shooting star,
Some as the tongues of lightning are;
One like a brilliant plant, one
In splendour like the morning sun.
Where'er the shafts of Rama burned
The giant's darts were foiled and turned.
Far into space his weapons fled,
But as they flew struck thousands dead.





