Canto CXV. Sita's Joy.


The Vanar chieftain bowed his head,
Within the walls of Lanka sped,
Leave from the new-made king obtained,
And Sita's lovely garden gained.
Beneath a tree the queen he found,
Where Rakshas warders watched around.
Her pallid cheek, her tangled hair,
Her raiment showed her deep despair,
Near and more near the envoy came
And gently hailed the weeping dame.
She started up in sweet surprise,
And sudden joy illumed her eyes.
For well the Vanar's voice she knew,
And hope reviving sprang and grew.

  "Fair Queen," he said, "our task is done:
The foe is slain and Lanka won.
Triumphant mid triumphant friends
Kind words of greeting Rama sends.
"Blest for thy sake, O spouse most true,
My deadly foe I met and slew.
Mine eyes are strangers yet to sleep:
I built a bridge athwart the deep
And crossed the sea to Lanka's shore
To keep the mighty oath I swore.
Now, gentle love, thy cares dispel,
And weep no more, for all is well.
Fear not in Ravan's house to stay
For good Vibhishan now bears sway,
For constant truth and friendship known
Regard his palace as thine own."
He greets thee thus thy heart to cheer,
And urged by love will soon be here."

  Then flushed with joy the lady's cheek.
Her eyes o'erflowed, her voice was weak;
But struggling with her sobs she broke
Her silence thus, and faintly spoke:
"So fast the flood of rapture came,
My trembling tongue no words could frame.
Ne'er have I heard in days of bliss
A tale that gave such joy as this.
More precious far than gems and gold
The message which thy lips have told."

  His reverent hands the Vanar raised
And thus the lady's answer praised:
"Sweet are the words, O Queen, which thou
True to thy lord, hast spoken now,
Better than gems and pearls of price,
Yea, or the throne of Paradise.
But, lady, ere I leave this place,
Grant me, I pray, a single grace.
Permit me, and this vengeful hand
Shall slay thy guards, this Rakshas band,
Whose cruel insult threat and scorn
Thy gentle soul too long has borne."

  Thus, stern of mood, Hanuman cried:
The Maithil lady thus replied:
"Nay, be not wroth with servants: they,
When monarchs bid must needs obey.
And, vassals of their lords, fulfil
Each fancy of their sovereign will.
To mine own sins the blame impute,
For as we sow we reap the fruit.
The tyrant's will these dames obeyed
When their fierce threats my soul dismayed."

  She ceased: with admiration moved
The Vanar chief her words approved:
"Thy speech," he cried, "is worthy one
Whom love has linked to Raghu's son.
Now speak, O Queen, that I may know
Thy pleasure, for to him I go."
The Vanar ceased: then Janak's child
Made answer as she sweetly smiled:
"'My first, my only wish can be,
O chief, my loving lord to see."
Again the Vanar envoy spoke,
And with his words new rapture woke:
"Queen, ere this sun shall cease to shine
Thy Rama's eyes shall look in thine.
Again the lord of Raghu's race
Shall turn to thee his moon-bright face.
His faithful brother shall thou see
And every friend who fought for thee,
And greet once more thy king restored
Like Sachi(1014) to her heavenly lord."
To Raghu's son his steps he bent
And told the message that she sent.





