Canto CXXIV. The Departure.


The giant lord the chariot viewed,
And humbly thus his speech renewed:
"Behold, O King, the car prepared:
Now be thy further will declared."
He ceased: and Rama spake once more:
"These hosts who thronged to Lanka's shore
Their faith and might have nobly shown,
And set thee on the giants' throne.
Let pearls and gems and gold repay
The feats of many a desperate day,
That all may go triumphant hence
Proud of their noble recompense."
Vibhishan, ready at his call,
With gold and gems enriched them all.
Then Rama clomb the glorious car
That shone like day's resplendent star.
There in his lap he held his dame
Vailing her eyes in modest shame.
Beside him Lakshman took his stand,
Whose mighty bow still armed his hand,
"O King Vibhishan," Rama cried,
"O Vanar chiefs, so long allied,
My comrades till the foemen fell,
List, for I speak a long farewell.
The task, in doubt and fear begun,
With your good aid is nobly done.
Leave Lanka's shore, your steps retrace,
Brave warriors of the Vanar race.
Thou, King Sugriva, true, through all,
To friendship's bond and duty's call,
Seek far Kishkindha with thy train
And o'er thy realm in glory reign.
Farewell, Vibhishan, Lanka's throne
Won by our arms is now thine own,
Thou, mighty lord, hast nought to dread
From heavenly Gods by Indra led.
My last farewell, 0 King, receive,
For Lanka's isle this hour I leave."

  Loud rose their cry in answer: "We,
O Raghu's son, would go with thee.
With thee delighted would we stray
Where sweet Ayodhya's groves are gay,
Then in the joyous synod view
King-making balm thy brows bedew;
Our homage to Kausalya pay,
And hasten on our homeward way."

  Their prayer the son of Raghu heard,
And spoke, his heart with rapture stirred:
"Sugriva, O my faithful friend,
Vibhishan and ye chiefs, ascend.
A joy beyond all joys the best
Will fill my overflowing breast,
If girt by you, O noble band,
I seek again my native land."
With Vanar lords in danger tried
Sugriva sprang to Rama's side,
And girt by chiefs of giant kind
Vibhishan's step was close behind.
Swift through the air, as Rama chose,
The wondrous car from earth arose.
And decked with swans and silver wings
Bore through the clouds its freight of kings.





