Canto CXXX. The Consecration.


Then, reverent hand to hand applied,
Thus Bharat to his brother cried:
"Thy realm, O King, is now restored,
Uninjured to the rightful lord.
This feeble arm with toil and pain,
The weighty charge could scarce sustain.
And the great burthen wellnigh broke
The neck untrained to bear the yoke.
The royal swan outspeeds the crow:
The steed is swift, the mule is slow,
Nor can my feeble feet be led
O'er the rough ways where thine should tread.
Now grant what all thy subjects ask:
Begin, O King, thy royal task.
Now let our longing eyes behold
The glorious rite ordained of old,
And on the new-found monarch's head
Let consecrating drops be shed."

  He ceased; victorious Rama bent
His head in token of assent.
He sat, and tonsors trimmed with care
His tangles of neglected hair
Then, duly bathed, the hero shone
With all his splendid raiment on.
And Sita with the matrons' aid
Her limbs in shining robes arrayed,
Sumantra then, the charioteer,
Drew, ordered by Satrughna near,
And stayed within the hermit grove
The chariot and the steeds he drove.
Therein Sugriva's consorts, graced
With gems, and Rama's queen were placed,
All fain Ayodhya to behold:
And swift away the chariot rolled.
Like Indra Lord of Thousand Eyes,
Drawn by fleet lions through the skies.
Thus radiant in his glory showed
King Rama as he homeward rode,
In power and might unparalleled.
The reins the hand of Bharat held.
Above the peerless victor's head
The snow-white shade Satrughna spread,
And Lakshman's ever-ready hand
His forehead with a chourie fanned.
Vibhishan close to Lakshman's side
Sharing his task a chourie plied.
Sugriva on Satrunjay came,
An elephant of hugest frame:
Nine thousand others bore, behind,
The chieftains of the Vanar kind
All gay, in forms of human mould,
With rich attire and gems and gold.
Thus borne along in royal state
King Rama reached Ayodbya's gate
With merry noise of shells and drums
And joyful shouts, He comes, he comes,
A Brahman host with solemn tread,
And kine the long procession led,
And happy maids in ordered bands
Threw grain and gold with liberal hands.
Neath gorgeous flags that waved in rows
On towers and roofs and porticoes.
Mid merry crowds who sang and cheered
The palace of the king they neared.
Then Raghu's son to Bharat, best
Of duty's slaves, these words addressed:
"Pass onward to the monarch's hall.
The high-souled Vanars with thee call,
And let the chieftains, as is meet,
The widows of our father greet.
And to the Vanar king assign
Those chambers, best of all, which shine
With lazulite and pearl inlaid,
And pleasant grounds with flowers and shade."

  He ceased: and Bharat bent his head;
Sugriva by the hand he led
And passed within the palace where
Stood couches which Satrughna's care,
With robes and hangings richly dyed,
And burning lamps, had seen supplied.
Then Bharat spake: "I pray thee, friend,
Thy speedy messengers to send,
Each sacred requisite to bring
That we may consecrate our king."
Sugriva raised four urns of gold,
The water for the rite to hold,
And bade four swiftest Vanars flee
And fill them from each distant sea.
Then east and west and south and north
The Vanar envoys hastened forth.
Each in swift flight an ocean sought
And back through air his treasure brought,
And full five hundred floods beside
Pure water for the king supplied.
Then girt by many a Brahman sage,
Vasishtha, chief for reverend age,
High on a throne with jewels graced
King Rama and his Sita placed.
There by Jabali, far revered,
Vijay and Kasyap's son appeared;
By Gautam's side Katvayan stood,
And Vamadeva wise and good,
Whose holy hands in order shed
The pure sweet drops on Rama's head.
Then priests and maids and warriors, all
Approaching at Vasishtha's call,
With sacred drops bedewed their king,
The centre of a joyous ring,
The guardians of the worlds, on high,
And all the children of the sky
From herbs wherewith their hands were filled
Rare juices on his brow distilled.
His brows were bound with glistering gold
Which Manu's self had worn of old,
Bright with the flash of many a gem
His sire's ancestral diadem.
Satrughna lent his willing aid
And o'er him held the regal shade:
The monarchs whom his arm had saved
The chouries round his forehead waved.
A golden chain, that flashed and glowed
With gems the God of Wind bestowed:
Mahendra gave a glorious string
Of fairest pearls to deck the king,
The skies with acclamation rang,
The gay nymphs danced, the minstrels sang.
On that blest day the joyful plain
Was clothed anew with golden grain.
The trees the witching influence knew,
And bent with fruits of loveliest hue,
And Rama's consecration lent
New sweetness to each flowret's scent.
The monarch, joy of Raghu's line,
Gave largess to the Brahmans, kine
And steeds unnumbered, wealth untold
Of robes and pearls and gems and gold.
A jewelled chain, whose lustre passed
The glory of the sun, he cast
About his friend Sugriva's neck;
And, Angad Bali's son to deck,
He gave a pair of armlets bright
With diamond and lazulite.
A string of pearls of matchless hue
Which gleams like tender moonlight threw
Adorned with gems of brightest sheen,
He gave to grace his darling queen.
The offering from his hand received
A moment on her bosom heaved;
Then from her neck the chain she drew,
A glance on all the Vanars threw,
And wistful eyes on Rama bent
As still she held the ornament.
Her wish he knew, and made reply
To that mute question of her eye:
"Yea, love; the chain on him bestow
Whose wisdom truth and might we know,
The firm ally, the faithful friend
Through toil and peril to the end."

  Then on Hanuman's bosom hung
The chain which Sita's hand had flung:
So may a cloud, when winds are still
With moon-lit silver gird a hill.

  To every Vanar Rama gave
Rich treasures from the mine and wave.
And with their honours well content
Homeward their steps the chieftains bent.
Ten thousand years Ayodhya, blest
With Rama's rule, had peace and rest,
No widow mourned her murdered mate,
No house was ever desolate.
The happy land no murrain knew,
The flocks and herds increased and grew.
The earth her kindly fruits supplied,
No harvest failed, no children died.
Unknown were want, disease, and crime:
So calm, so happy was the time.(1029)





APPENDIX.




Section XIII. Ravan Doomed.


Afterwards Rishyasring said again to the King "I will perform another
sacrificial act to secure thee a son." Then the son of Vibhandak, of
subdued passions, seeking the happiness of the king, proceeded to perform
the sacrifice for the accomplishment of his wishes. Hither were previously
collected the gods, with the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the sages, for
the sake of receiving their respective shares, Brahma too, the sovereign
of the gods, with Sthanu, and Narayana, chief of beings and the four
supporters of the universe, and the divine mothers of all the celestials,
met together there. To the Asvamedha, the great sacrifice of the
magnanimous monarch, came also Indra the glorious one, surrounded by the
Maruts. Rishyasring then supplicated the gods assembled for their share of
the sacrifice (saying), "This devout king Dasaratha, who, through the
desire of offspring, confiding in you, has performed sacred austerities,
and who has offered to you the sacrifice called Asvamedha, is about to
perform another sacrifice for the sake of obtaining sons: To him thus
desirous of offspring be pleased to grant the blessing: I supplicate you
all with joined hands. May he have four sons, renowned through the
universe." The gods replied to the sage's son supplicating with joined
hands, "Be it so: thou, O Brahman, art ever to be regarded by us, as the
king is in a peculiar manner. The lord of men by this sacrifice shall
obtain the great object of his desires." Having thus said, the gods
preceded by Indra, disappeared.

They all then having seen that (sacrifice) performed by the great sage
according to the ordinance went to Prajapati the lord of mankind, and with
joined hands addressed Brahma the giver of blessings, "O Brahma, the
Raksha Ravana by name, to whom a blessing was awarded by thee, through
pride troubleth all of us the gods, and even the great sages, who
perpetually practise sacred austerities. We, O glorious one, regarding the
promise formerly granted by thy kindness that he should be invulnerable to
the gods, the Danavas and the Yakshas have born (_sic_) all, (his
oppression); this lord of Rakshas therefore distresses the universe; and,
inflated by this promise unjustly vexes the divine sages, the Yakshas, and
Gandharvas, the Asuras, and men: where Ravana remains there the sun loses
his force, the winds through fear of him do not blow; the fire ceases to
burn; the rolling ocean, seeing him, ceases to move its waves. Visravas,
distressed by his power, has abandoned Lanka and fled. O divine one save
us from Ravana, who fills the world with noise and tumult. O giver of
desired things, be pleased to contrive a way for his destruction."

Brahma thus informed by the devas, reflecting, replied, "Oh! I have
devised the method for slaying this outrageous tyrant. Upon his
requesting, 'May I be invulnerable to the divine sages, the Gaundharvas,
the Yakshas, the Rakshasas and the serpents,' I replied 'Be it so.' This
Raksha, through contempt, said nothing respecting man; therefore this
wicked one shall be destroyed by man." The gods, preceded by Sakra,
hearing these words spoken by Brahma, were filled with joy.

At this time Vishnu the glorious, the lord of the world, arrayed in
yellow, with hand ornaments of glowing gold, riding on Vinateya, as the
sun on a cloud, arrived with his conch, his discus, and his club in his
hand. Being adored by the excellent celestials, and welcomed by Brahma, he
drew near and stood before him. All the gods then addressed Vishnu, "O
Madhusudana, thou art able to abolish the distress of the distressed. We
intreat thee, be our sanctuary, O Vishnu." Vishnu replied, "Say, what
shall I do?" The celestials hearing these his words added further. "The
virtuous, the encourager of excellence, eminent for truth, the firm
observer of his vows, being childless, is performing an Asvamedha for the
purpose of obtaining offspring. For the sake of the good of the universe,
we intreat thee, O Vishnu, to become his son. Dividing thyself into four
parts, in the wombs of his three consorts equal to Hari, Sri, and Kirti,
assume the sonship of king Dasaratha, the lord of Ayodhya, eminent in the
knowledge of duty, generous and illustrious, as the great sages. Thus
becoming man, O Vishnu, conquer in battle Ravana, the terror of the
universe, who is invulnerable to the gods. This ignorant Rakshasa Ravana,
by the exertion of his power, afflicts the gods, the Gandharvaa, the
Siddhas, and the most excellent sages; these sages, the Gandharvas, and
the Apsaras, sporting in the forest Nandana have been destroyed by that
furious one. We, with the sages, are come to thee seeking his destruction.
The Siddhas, the Gandharvas, and the Yakshas betake themselves to thee,
thou art our only refuge; O Deva, afflicter of enemies, regard the world
of men, and destroy the enemy of the gods."

Vishnu, the sovereign of the gods, the chief of the celestials, adored by
all beings, being thus supplicated, replied to all the assembled gods
(standing) before Brahma, "Abandon fear; peace be with you; for your
benefit having killed Ravana the cruel, destructively active, the cause of
fear to the divine sages, together with all his posterity, his courtiers
and counsellors, and his relations, and friends, protecting the earth, I
will remain incarnate among men for the space of eleven thousand years."

Having given this promise to the gods, the divine Vishnu, ardent in the
work, sought a birth-place among men. Dividing himself into four parts, he
whose eyes resemble the lotus and the pulasa, the lotus petal-eyed, chose
for his father Dasaratha the sovereign of men. The divine sages then with
the Gandharvas, the Rudras, and the (different sorts of) Apsaras, in the
most excellent strains, praised the destroyer of Madhu, (saying) "Root up
Ravana, of fervid energy, the devastator, the enemy of Indra swollen with
pride. Destroy him, who causes universal lamentation, the annoyer of the
holy ascetics, terrible, the terror of the devout Tapaswis. Having
destroyed Ravana, tremendously powerful, who causes universal weeping,
together with his army and friends, dismissing all sorrow, return to
heaven, the place free from stain and sin, and protected by the sovereign
of the celestial powers."

Thus far the Section, containing the plan for the death of Ravan.

CAREY AND MARSHMAN.




Caput XIV. RATIO NECANDI RAVANAE EXCOGITATA.


Prudens ille, voluminum sacrorum gnarus, responsum quod dederat aliquamdiu
meditatus, mente ad se revocata regem deuno est effatus: Parabo tibi aliud
sacrum, genitale, prolis masculae adipiscendae gratia, cum carminibus in
ATHARVANIS exordio expressis rite peragendum. Tum coepit modestus
Vibhandaci filius, regis commodis intentus, parare sacrum, quo eius
desiderium expleret. Iam'antea eo convenerant, ut suam quisque portionem
acciperent, Di cum fidicinum coelestium choris, Beatique cum Sapientibus;
Brachman Superum regnator, Sthanus nec non augustus Narayanus, Indrasque
almus, coram visendus Ventorum cohorte circumdatus, in magno isto
sacrificio equino regis magnanimi. Ibidem vates ille deos, qui portiones
suas accipiendi gratia advenerant, apprecatus, En inquit, hicce ex
Dasarathus filiorum desiderio castimoniis adstrictus, fidei plenus,
vestrum numen adoravit sacrificio equino. Nunc iterum accingit se ad aliud
sacrum peragendum: quamobrem aequum est, ut filios cupienti vos faveatis.
Ille ego, qui manus supplices tendo, vos universos pro eo apprecor:
nascantur ei filii quatuor, faina per triplicem mundum clari. Divi
supplicem vatis filium invicem affari: Fiat quod petis! Tu nobis,
virsancte, imprimis es venerandus, nee minus rex ille; compos fiet voti
sui egregii hominum princeps. Ita locuti Di Indra duce, ex oculis
evanuerunt.

Superi vero, legitime in concilio congregati. BRACHMANEM mundi creatorem
his verbis compellarunt: Tuo munere auctus, O Brachman! gigas nomine
Ravanas, prae superbia nos omnes vexat, pariterque Sapientes castimoniis
gaudentes. A te propitio olim ex voto ei hoc munus concessum fuit, ut ne a
diis, Danuidis, Geniisve necari posset. Nos, oraculum tuum reveriti,
facinora eius qualiacunque toleramus. At ille gigantum tyrannus ternos
mundos gravibus iniuriis vexat Deos, Sapientes, Genios, Fidicines
coelestes, Titanes, mortales denique, exsuperat ille aegre cohibendus,
tuoque munere demens. Non ibi calet sol, neque Ventus prae timore spirat,
nee flagrat ignis, ubi Ravanas versatur. Ipse oceanus, vagis fluctibus
redimitus, isto viso stat immotus; eiectus fuit e sede sua Cuverus, huius
robore vexatus. Ergo ingens nobis periculum imminet ab hoc gigante visu
horribili; tuum est, alme Parens! auxilium parare, quo hic deleatur. Ita
admonitus ille a diis universis, paulisper meditatus, Ehem! inquit, hancce
inveni rationem nefarium istum necandi. Petierat is a me, ut a Gandharvis,
a Geniis, a Divis, Danuibus Gigantibusque necari non posset et me annuente
voto suo potitus est. Prae contemptu vero monstrum illud homines non
commemoravit: ideo ab homine est necandus: nullum aliud exstat leti genus,
quod ei sit fatale. Postquam audiverant gratum hunc sermonem BRACHMANIS
ore prolatum, Di cum duce suo Indra summopere gaudio erecti sunt. Eodem
temporis momento Vishnus, istuc accessit, splendore insignis, concham,
discum et clavum manibus gestans, croceo vestitu, mundi dominus, vulturis
Vinateii dorso, sicuti sol nimbo, vectus, armillas ex auro candente
gerens, salutatus a Superum primoribus. Quem laudibus celebratum
reverenter Di universi compellarunt. Tu animantium afflictorum es vindex,
Madhus interfector! quamobrem nos afflicti te apprecamur. Sis praesidio
nobis numine tuo inconcusso. Dicite, inquit Vishnus, quid pro vobis facere
me oporteat. Audito eius sermone, Di hunc in modum respondent: Rex quidam,
nomine Dasarathus, austeris castimoniis sese castigavit, litavit
sacrificio equino, prolis cupidus et prole carens. Nostro hortatu tu,
Vishnus, conditionem natorum eius subeas: ex tribus eius uxoribus,
Pudicitiae, Venustatis et Famae similibus, nasci, velis, temetipsum
quadrifariam dividens. Ibi tu in humanam naturam conversus Ravanam,
gravissimam mundi pestem, diis insuperabilem, O Vishnus! proelio caede.
Gigas ille vecors Ravanas Deos cum Fidicinum choris, Beatos et Sapientes
praestantissimos vexat, audacia superbiens. Etenim ab hoc furioso
Sapientes Fidicines et nymphae, ludentes in Nandano viridario, sunt
proculcati. Tu es nostrum omnium summa salus, divine bellator! Ut deoram
hostes extinguas, ad sortem humanam animum converte. Augustus ille
Narayanus, diis hunc in modum coram hortantibus, eosdem apto hoc sermone
compellavit: Quare, quaeso, hac in re negotium vestrum a me potissimum,
corporea specie palam facto, est peragendum aut unde tantus vobis terror
fuit iniectus? His verbis a Vishnu interrogati Di talia proferre: Terror
nobis instat, O Vishnus! a Ravana mundi direptore; a quo nos vindicare,
corpore humano assumpto, tuum est. Nemo alius coelicoiarum praeter te hunc
scelestum enecare potis est. Nimirum ille, O hostium domitor! per
diuturnum tempus sese excruciaverat severissima abstinentia, qua magnus
hicce rerum Parens propitius ipsi redditus est. Itaque almus votorum
sponsor olim ei concessit securitatem ab ommibus animantibus, hominibus
tamen exceptis. Hinc ilium, voti compotem, non aliunde quam ab homine
necis periculum urget: tu ergo, humanitate assumpta eum intertice. Sic
monitus Vishnus, Superum princeps, quem mundus universus adorat, magnum
Parentem oeterosque deos, in concilio congregatos, recti auctores,
affatur: Mittite timorem; bene bobis eveniat! Vestrae salutis gratia,
postquam praelio necavero Ravanam cum filiis nepotibusque, cum amicis,
ministris, cognatis sociisque, crudelem istum aegre cohibendum, qui
divinis Sapientibus terrorem meutit, per decem millia annorum decies
centenis additis, commorabor in mortalium sedibus, orbem terrarum imperio
regens. Tum divini sapientes et Fidicines conjuncti cum Rudris
nympharumque choris celebravere Madhus interfectorem hymnis, quales sedem
aetheriam decent.

"Ravanam ilium insolentem, acri impetu actum, superbia elatum, Superum
hostem, tumultus cientem, bonorum piorumque pestem, humanitate assumpta
pessamdare tuum est."

SCHLEGEL.




Caput XIV. IL MEZZO STABILITO PER UCCIDERE RAVANO.


Ma Riseyasringo soggiunse poscia al re: Tapprestero io un altro rito
santissimo, genitale, onde tu conseguisca la prole che tu brami. E in quel
punto stesso il saggio figliulo di Vibhandaco, intento alla prosperita del
re, pose mano al sacro rito per condurre ad effetto il suo desiderio. Gia
erano prima, per ricevere ciascuno la sua parte, qui convenuti al gran
sacrifizio del re magnanimo l'Asvamedha, i Devi coi Gandharvi, i Siddhi e
i Muni, Brahma Signor dei Sari, Sthanu e l' Augusto Narayana, i quattio
custodi dell' universo e le Madri degli Iddu, i Yacsi insieme cogli Dei, e
il sovrano, venerando Indra, visibile, circondato dalla schiera dei
Maruti. Quivi cosi parlo Riscyasringo agli Dei venuti a partecipare del
sacrifizio: Questo e il re Dasaratha, che per desiderio di progenie gia s'
astrinse ad osservanze austere, e teste pieno di fede ha a voi, O eccelsi,
sacrificato con un Asvamedha. Ora egli, sollecito d' aver figli, si
dispone ad adempiere un nuovo rito; vogliate essere favorevole a lui che
sospira progenie. Io alzo a voi supplici le mani, e voi tutti per lui
imploro: nascano a lui quattro figli degni d'essere celebrati pei tre
mondi. Risposero gli Dei al supplichevole figliuolo del Risci: Sia fatto
cio che chiedi; a te ed al re parimente si debbe da noi, O Brahmano, sommo
pregio; canseguira il re per questo sacro rito il suo suppremo desiderio.
Cio detto disparvero i Numi preceduti da Indra.

Poiche videro gli Dei compiersi debitamente dal gran Risci l'oblazione,
venuti al cospetto di Brahma facitor del mondo, signor delle creature,
cosi parlarono reverenti a lui dator di grazie: O Brahma, un Racsaso per
nome Ravano, eui tu fosti largo del tuo favore, e per superbia infesto a
noi tutti e ai grandi Saggi penitenti. Un di, O Nume, augusto, tu propizio
a lui gli accordasti il favore, ch' egli bramava, di non poter essere
ucciso dagli Dei, dai Danavi ne dai Yacsi: noi venerando i tuoi oracoli,
ogni cosa sopportiamo da costui. Quindi il signor dei Racsasi infesta con
perpetue offese i tre mondi, i Devi, i Risci, i Yacsi ed i Gandharvi, gli
Asuri e gli uomini: tutti egli opprime indegnamente inorgoglito pel tuo
dono. Cola dove si trova Ravano, piu non isfavilla per timore il sole, piu
non spira il vento, piu non fiammeggia il fuoco: l' oceano stesso cui fan
corona i vasti flutti, veggendo costui, tutto si turba e si commuove.
Stretto dalla forza di costui e ridotto allo stremo dovette Vaisravano
abbandonare Lanca. Da questo Ravano, terror del mondo, tu ne proteggi, O
almo Nume: degna, O dator d'ogni bene, trovar modo ad estirpar costui.
Fatto di queste cose conscio dai Devi, stette alquanto meditando, poi
rispose Brahma: Orsu! e stabilito il modo onde distruggere questo iniquo.
Egli a me chiese, ed io gliel concessi, di non poter essere ucciso dai
Devi, dai Risci, dai Gandharvi, dai Yacsi, dai Racsasi ne dai Serpenti; ma
per disprezzo non fece menzione degli uomini quel Racso: or bene, sara
quell' empio ucciso da un uomo. Udite le fauste parole profferte da
Brahma, furono per ogni parte liete gli Iddii col loro duce Indra. In
questo mezzo qui sopravvenne raggiante d'immensa luce il venerando Visnu,
pensato da Brahma nell' immortal sua mente, siccome atto ad estirpar
colui; Allora Brahma colla schiera de' Celesti cosi parlo a Visnu: Tu sei
il conforto delle gente oppresse, O distruttor di Madhu: noi quindi a te
supplichiamo afflitti: sia tu nostro sostegno, O Aciuto. Dite, loro
rispose Visnu, quale cosa io debba far per voi; e gli Dei, udite queste
parole, cosi soggiunsero: Un re per nome Dasaratha, giusto, virtuoso,
veridico e pio, non ha progenie e la desidera: ei gia s' impose durissime
penitenze, ed ora ha sacrificato con un Asvamedha: tu, per nostro
consiglio, O Visnu, consenti a divenir suo figlio: fatte di te quattro
parti, ti manifesta, O invocato dalle genti, nel seno delle quattro sue
consorti, simili alla venusta Dea. Cosi esortato dagli Dei quivi presenti,
l'augusto Narayana loro rispose queste opportune parole: Quale opra s'ha
da me, fatto visible nel mondo, a compiere per voi, O Devi? e d'onde in
voi cotal terrore? Intese le parole di Visnu, cosi risposero gli Dei: Il
nostro terrore. O Visnu, nasce da un Racsaso per nome Ravano, spavento
dell' universo. Vestendo umano corpo, tu debbi esterminar costui. Nessuno
fra i Celesti, fuorche tu solo, e valevole ad uccidere quell' iniquo.
Egli, O domator de' tuoi nemici, sostenne per lungo tempo acerbissime
macerazioni: per esse fu di lui contento l'augusto sommo Genitore: e un di
gli accordo propizio la sicurezza da tutti gli esseri, eccettutine gli
uomini. Per questo favore a lui concesso nou ha egli a temere offesa da
alcuna parte, fuorche dall' uomo, percio, assumendo la natura umana,
costui tu uccidi. Egli, il peggior di tutti i Racsasi, insano per la forza
che gli infonde il dono avuto, da travaglio ai Devi ed ai Gaudharvi, ai
Risci, ai Muni ed ai mortali. Egli, sicuro da morte pel favore ottenuto, e
turbatore dei sacrifizj, nemico ed uccisor dei Brahmi, divoratore degli
uomini, peste del mondo. Da lui furono assaliti re coi loro carri ed
elefanti; altri percessi e fugati si dispersero per ogni dove. Da lui
furono divorati Risci ed Apsarase: egli insomma oltracotato continuamente
e quasi per ischerzo tutti travaglia i sette mondi. Percio, O terribile ai
nemici e stabilita la morte di costui per opra d'un uomo; poich' un di per
superbia del dono tutti sprezzo gli uomini. Tu, O supremo fra i Numi, dei,
umanandoti, estirpare questo tremendo, superbo Ravano, oltracotato, a noi
nemico, terrore e flagello dei penitenti.

GORRESIO.




XIV.


De nouveau Rishyacringa tint ce langage au Monarque: "Je vais celebrer un
autre sacrifice, afin que le ciel accorde a tes voeux les enfants que tu
souhaites." Cela dit, cherchant le bonheur du roi et pour
l'accomplissement de son desir, le fils puissant de Vibhandaka se mit a
celebrer ce nouveau sacrifice.

La auparavant, etaient venus deja recevoir une part de l' offrande les
Dieux, accompagnes des Gaudharvas, et les Siddhas avec les Mounis divins,
Brahma, le monarque des Souras, l' immuable Siva, et l' auguste Narayana,
et les quatre gardiens vigilants du monde, et les meres des Immortels, et
tous les Dieux, escortes des Yakshas, et le maitre eminent du ciel, Indra,
qui se manifestait aux yeux, environne par l' essaim des Maroutes. Alors
ce jeune anachorete avait supplie tous les Dieux, que le desir d'une part
dans l' offrande avait conduits a l' acwamedha, cette grande ceremonie de
ce roi magnanime; _et, dans ce moment, l' epoux de Santa les conjurait
ainsi pour la seconde fois_: "Cet homme _en prieres_, c'est le roi
Dacaratha, qui est prive de fils. Il est rempli d' une foi vive; il s'est
inflige de penibles austerites; il vous a deja servi, divinites augustes,
le sacrifice d'un acwa-medha, et maintenant il s'etudie encore a vous
plaire avec ce nouveau sacrifice dans l'esperance que vous lui donnerez
les fils, ou tendent ses desirs. Versez donc sur lui votre bienveillance
et daignez sourire a son voeu pour des fils. C'est pour lui que moi ici,
les mains jointes, je vous adresse a tous mes supplications: envoyez-lui
quatre fils, qui soient vantes dans les trois mondes!"

"Oui! repondirent les Dieux au fils suppliant du rishi; tu merites que
nous t'ecoutions avec faveur, toi, brahme saint, et meme, en premier lieu,
ce roi. Comme recompense de ces differents sacrifices, le monarque
obtendra cet objet le plus cher de ses desirs."

Ayant aussi parle et vu que le grand saint avait mis fin suivant les rites
a son _pieux_ sacrifice, les Dieux, Indra a leur tete, s'evanouissent dans
le vide des airs et se rendent vers l' architecte des mondes, le souverain
des creatures, le donateur des biens, vers Brahma enfin, auquel tous, les
mains jointes, ils adressent les paroles suivantes: "O Brahma, un
rakshasa, nomme Ravana, tourne su mal les graces, qu'il a recues de toi.
Dans son orgueil, il nous opprime tous; il opprime avec nous les grands
anchoretes, qui se font un bonheur des macerations: car jadis, ayant su te
plaire, O Bhagavat, il a recu de toi ce don incomparable. 'Oui, as-tu dit,
exaucant le voeu du mauvais Genie; Dieu. Yaksha ou Demon ne pourra jamais
causer ta mort!' Et nous, par qui ta parole est respectee, nous avons tout
supporte de ce roi des rakshasas, qui ecrase de sa tyrannie les trois
mondes, ou il promene l' injure impunement. Enorgueilli de ce don
victorieux, il opprime indignement les Dieux, les rishis, les Yakshas, les
Gandharvas, les Asouras et les enfants de Manou. La ou se tient Ravana, la
peur empeche le soleil d'echauffer, le vent craint de souffler, et le feu
n'ose flamboyer. A son aspect, la guirlande meme des grands flots tremble
au sein de la mer. Accable par sa vigueur indomptable, Kouvera defait lui
a cede Lanka. Suave-nous donc, o toi, qui reposes daus le bonheur absolu;
sauve-nous de Ravana, le fleau des mondes. Daigne, o toi, qui souris aux
voeux du suppliant, daigne imaginer un expedient pour oter la vie a ce
cruel Demon." Les Dieux ayant ainsi denonce leurs maux a Brahma, il
reflechit un instant et leur tint ce langage: "Bien, voici que j'ai
decouvert un moyen pour tuer ce Genie scelerat. Que ni les Dieux, a-t-il
dit, ni les rishis, ni les Gandharvas ni les Yakshas, ni les rakshasas, ni
les Nagas meme ne puissent me donner la mort! Soit lui ai-je repondu.
Mais, par dedain pour la force humaine, les hommes n'ont pas ete compris
daus sa demande. C'est donc par la main d' un homme, qu'il faut immoler ce
mechant." Ainsi tombee de la bouche du createur, cette parole salutaire
satisfit pleinement le roi des habitants du ciel et tous les Dieux avec
lui. La, dans ce meme instant, survint le fortune Visnou, revetu d' une
splendeur infinie; car c'etait a lui, que Brahma avait pense dans son ame
pour la mort du tyran. Celui-ci donc avec l'essaim des Immortels adresse a
Vishnou ces paroles: "Meurtrier de Madhou, comme tu aimes a tirer de
l'affliction les etres malheureux, nous te supplions, nous qui sommes
plonges dans la tristesse, Divinite auguste, sois notre asyle!" "Dites!
reprit Vishnou; que dois-je faire?" "Ayant oui les paroles de l'ineffable,
tous les Dieux repondirent: Il est un roi nomme Dacaratha; il a embrasse
une tres-dure penitence; il a celebre meme le sacrifice d'un acwa-medha,
parce qu'il n'a point de fils et qu'il veut en obtenir du ciel. Il est
inebranlable dans sa piete, il est vante pour ses vertus; la justice est
son caractere, la verite est sa parole. Acquiesce donc a notre demande, o
toi, Vishnou, et consens a naitre comme son fils. Divise en quatre
portions de toi-meme, daigne, o toi, qui foules aux pieds tes ennemis,
daigne t' incarner dans le sein de ses trois epouses, belles comme la
deesse de la beaute." Narayana, le maitre, _non perceptible aux sens, mais
qui alors s' etait rendu_ visible, Narayana repondit cette parole
salutaire aux Dieux, qui i invitaient a cet _heroique avatara_. Quelle
chose, une fois revetu de cette incarnation, faudra-t-il encore que je
fasse pour vous, et de quelle part vient la terreur, qui vous trouble
ainsi? A ces mots du grand Vishnou: "C'est le demon Ravana, reprirent les
Dieux; c'est lui, Vishnou, cette desolation des mondes, qui nous inspire
un tel effroi. Enveloppe-toi d'un corps, humain, et qu'il te plaise
arracher du monde cette blessante epine; car nul autre que toi parmi les
habitants du ciel n'est capable d'immoler ce pecheur. _Sache que_
longtemps il s'est impose la plus austere penitence, et _que_ par elle il
s'est rendu agreable au supreme ayeul de toutes les creatures. Aussi le
distributeur ineffable des graces lui a-t-il accorde ce don insigne d'etre
invulnerable a tous les etres, l' homme seul excepte. Puisque, doue ainsi
de cette faveur, la mort terrible et sure ne peut venir a lui de nulle
autre part que de l'homme, va, dompteur _puissant_ de tes ennemis, va dans
la condition humaine, et tue-le. Car ce don, auquel on ne peut resister,
elevant au plus haut point l'ivresse de sa force, le vil rakshasa
tourmente les Dieux, les rishis, les Gandharvas, les hommes sanctifies par
la penitence; et, quoique, destructeur des sacrifices, lacerateur des
Saintes Ecritures, ennemi des brahmes, devorateur des hommes, cette faveur
incomparable sauve de la mort Ravana le triste fleau des mondes. Il ose
attaquer les rois, que defendant les chars de guerre, que remparent les
elephants: d'autres blesses et mis en fuite, sont dissipes ca et la devant
lui. Il a devore des saints, il a devore meme une foule d'apsaras. Sans
cesse, dans son delire, il s'amuse a tourmenter les sept mondes. Comme _on
vient de nous apprendre qu'_ il n'a point daigne parler d'eux ce jour, que
lui fut donnee cette faveur, _dont il abuse_, entre dans un corps humain,
o toi, qui peux briser tes ennemis, et jette sans vie a tes pieds, roi
puissant des treize Dieux, ce Ravana superbe, d'une force epouvantable,
d'un orgueil immense, l'ennemi de tous les ascetes, ce ver, _qui les
ronge_, cette cause de leurs gemissements."

_Ici, dans le premier tome du saint Ramayana_, Finit le quatorzieme
chapitre, nomme: UN EXPEDIENT POUR TUER RAVANA.

HIPPOLYTE FAUCHE.




Uttarakanda.


The Ramayan ends, epically complete, with the triumphant return of Rama
and his rescued queen to Ayodhya and his consecration and coronation in
the capital of his forefathers. Even if the story were not complete, the
conclusion of the last Canto of the sixth Book, evidently the work of a
later hand than Valmiki's, which speaks of Rama's glorious and happy reign
and promises blessings to those who read and hear the Ramayan, would be
sufficient to show that, when these verses were added, the poem was
considered to be finished. The Uttarakanda or Last Book is merely an
appendix or a supplement and relates only events antecedent and subsequent
to those described in the original poem. Indian scholars however, led by
reverential love of tradition, unanimously ascribe this Last Book to
Valmiki, and regard it as part of the Ramayan.

Signor Gorresio has published an excellent translation of the Uttarakanda,
in Italian prose, from the recension current in Bengal;(1030) and Mr. Muir
has epitomized a portion of the book in the Appendix to the Fourth Part of
his Sanskrit Texts (1862). From these scholars I borrow freely in the
following pages, and give them my hearty thanks for saving me much
wearisome labour.

"After Rama had returned to Ayodhya and taken possession of the throne,
the rishis [saints] assembled to greet him, and Agastya, in answer to his
questions recounted many particulars regarding his old enemies. In the
Krita Yuga (or Golden Age) the austere and pious Brahman rishi Pulastya, a
son of Brahma, being teased with the visits of different damsels,
proclaimed that any one of them whom he again saw near his hermitage
should become pregnant. This had not been heard by the daughter of the
royal rishi Trinavindu, who one day came into Pulastya's neighbourhood,
and her pregnancy was the result (Sect. 2, vv. 14 ff.). After her return
home, her father, seeing her condition, took her to Pulastya, who accepted
her as his wife, and she bore a son who received the name of Visravas.
This son was, like his father, an austere and religious sage. He married
the daughter of the muni Bharadvaja, who bore him a son to whom Brahma
gave the name of Vaisravan-Kuvera (Sect. 3, vv. 1 ff.). He performed
austerities for thousands of years, when he obtained from Brahma as a boon
that he should be one of the guardians of the world (along with Indra,
Varuna, and Yama) and the god of riches. He afterwards consulted his
father Visravas about an abode, and at his suggestion took possession of
the city of Lanka, which had formerly been built by Visvakarman for the
Rakshasas, but had been abandoned by them through fear of Vishnu, and was
at that time unoccupied. Rama then (Sect. 4) says he is surprised to hear
that Lanka had formerly belonged to the Rakshasas, as he had always
understood that they were the descendants of Pulastya, and now he learns
that they had also another origin. He therefore asks who was their
ancestor, and what fault they had committed that they were chased away by
Vishnu. Agastya replies that when Brahma created the waters, he formed
certain beings,--some of whom received the name of Rakshasas,--to guard
them. The first Rakshasas kings were Heti and Praheti. Heti married a
sister of Kala (Time). She bore him a son Vidyutkesa, who in his turn took
for his wife Lankatanka[t.]a, the daughter of Sandhya (V. 21). She bore
him a son Sukesa, whom she abandoned, but he was seen by Siva as he was
passing by with his wife Parvati, who made the child as old as his mother,
and immortal, and gave him a celestial city. Sukesa married a Gandharvi
called Devavati who bore three sons, Malyavat, Sumali and Mali. These sons
practised intense austerities, when Brahma appeared and conferred on them
invincibility and long life. They then harassed the gods. Visvakarma gave
them a city, Lanka, on the mountain Trikuta, on the shore of the southern
ocean, which he had built at the command of Indra.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The three Rakshasa,
Malyavat and his two brothers, then began to oppress the gods, rishis,
etc.; who (Sect. 6, v. 1 ff.) in consequence resort for aid to Mahadeva,
who having regard to his protege Sukesa the father of Malyavat, says that
he cannot kill the Rakshasas, but advises the suppliants to go to Vishnu,
which they do, and receive from him a promise that he will destroy their
enemies. The three Rakshasa kings, hearing of this, consult together, and
proceed to heaven to attack the gods. Vishnu prepares to meet them. The
battle is described in the seventh section. The Rakshasas are defeated by
Vishnu with great slaughter, and driven back to Lanka, one of their
leaders, Mali, being slain. Malyavat remonstrates with Vishnu, who was
assaulting the rear of the fugitives, for his unwarrior-like conduct, and
wishes to renew the combat (Sect. 8, v. 3 ff.). Vishnu replies that he
must fulfil his promise to the gods by slaying the Rakshasas, and that he
would destroy them even if they fled to Patala. These Rakshasas, Agastya
says, were more powerful than Ravana, and, could only be destroyed by
Narayana, _i.e._ by Rama himself, the eternal, indestructible god. Sumali
with his family lived for along time in Patala, while Kuvera dwelt in
Lanka. In section 9 it is related that Sumali once happened to visit the
earth, when he observed Kuvera going in his chariot to see his father
Visravas. This leads him to consider how he might restore his own
fortunes. He consequently desires his daughter Kaikasi to go and woo
Visravas, who receives her graciously. She becomes the mother of the
dreadful Ravana, of the huge Kumbhakarna, of Surpanakha, and of the
righteous Vibhishana, who was the last son. These children grow up in the
forest. Kumbhakarna goes about eating rishis. Kuvera comes to visit his
father, when Kaikasi takes occasion to urge her son Ravana to strive to
become like his brother (Kuvera) in splendour. This Ravana promises to do.
He then goes to the hermitage of Gokarna with his brothers to perform
austerity. In section 10 their austere observances are described: after a
thousand years' penance Ravana throws his head into the fire. He repeats
this oblation nine times after equal intervals, and is about to do it the
tenth time, when Brahma appears, and offers a boon. Ravana asks
immortality, but is refused. He then asks that he may be indestructible by
all creatures more powerful than men; which boon is accorded by Brahma
together with the recovery of all the heads he had sacrificed and the
power of assuming any shape he pleased. Vibhishana asks as his boon that
even amid the greatest calamities he may think only of righteousness, and
that the weapon of Brahma may appear to him unlearnt, etc. The god grants
his request, and adds the gift of immortality. When Brahma is about to
offer a boon to Kumbhakarna, the gods interpose, as, they say, he had
eaten seven Apsarases and ten followers of Indra, besides rishis and men;
and beg that under the guise of a boon stupefaction may be inflicted on
him. Brahma thinks on Sarasvati, who arrives and, by Brahma's command,
enters into Kumbhakarna's mouth that she may speak for him. Under this
influence he asks that he may receive the boon of sleeping for many years,
which is granted. When however Sarasvati has left him, and he recovers his
own consciousness, he perceives that he has been deluded. Kuvera by his
father's advice, gives up the city of Lanka to Ravan."(1031) Ravana
marries (Sect. 12) Mandodari the beautiful daughter of the Asur Maya whose
name has several times occurred in the Ramayan as that of an artist of
wonderful skill. She bears a son Meghanada or the Roaring Cloud who was
afterwards named Indrajit from his victory over the sovereign of the
skies. The conquest of Kuvera, and the acquisition of the magic
self-moving chariot which has done much service in the Ramayan, form the
subject of sections XIII., XIV. and XV. "The rather pretty story of
Vedavati is related in the seventeenth section, as follows: Ravana in the
course of his progress through the world, comes to the forest on the
Himalaya, where he sees a damsel of brilliant beauty, but in ascetic garb,
of whom he straightway becomes enamoured. He tells her that such an
austere life is unsuited to her youth and attractions, and asks who she is
and why she is leading an ascetic existence. She answers that she is
called Vedavati, and is the vocal daughter of Vrihaspati's son, the rishi
Kusadhwaja, sprung from him during his constant study of the Veda. The
gods, gandharvas, etc., she says, wished that she should choose a husband,
but her father would give her to no one else than to Vishnu, the lord of
the world, whom he desired for his son-in-law. Vedavati then proceeds: 'In
order that I may fulfil this desire of my father in respect of Narayana, I
wed him with my heart. Having entered into this engagement I practise
great austerity. Narayana and no other than he, Purushottama, is my
husband. From the desire of obtaining him, I resort to this severe
observance.' Ravana's passion is not in the least diminished by this
explanation and he urges that it is the old alone who should seek to
become distinguished by accumulating merit through austerity, prays that
she who is so young and beautiful shall become his bride; and boasts that
he is superior to Vishnu. She rejoins that no one but he would thus
contemn that deity. On receiving this reply he touches the hair of her
head with the tip of his finger. She is greatly incensed, and forthwith
cuts off her hair and tells him that as he has so insulted her, she cannot
continue to live, but will enter into the fire before his eyes. She goes
on 'Since I have been insulted in the forest by thee who art
wicked-hearted, I shall be born again for thy destruction. For a man of
evil desire cannot be slain by a woman; and the merit of my austerity
would be lost if I were to launch a curse against thee. But if I have
performed or bestowed or sacrificed aught may I be born the virtuous
daughter, not produced from the womb, of a righteous man.' Having thus
spoken she entered the blazing fire. Then a shower of celestial flowers
fell (from every part of the sky). It is she, lord, who, having been
Vedavati in the Krita age, has been born (in the Treta age) as the
daughter of the king of the Janakas, and (has become) thy [Rama's] bride;
for thou art the eternal Vishnu. The mountain-like enemy who was
[virtually] destroyed before by her wrath, has now been slain by her
having recourse to thy superhuman energy." On this the commentator
remarks: "By this it is signified that Sita was the principal cause of
Ravana's death; but the function of destroying him is ascribed to Rama."
On the words, "thou art Vishnu," in the preceding verse the same
commentator remarks: "By this it is clearly affirmed that Sita was
Lakshmi." This is what Parasara says: "In the god's life as Rama, she
became Sita, and in his birth as Krishna [she became] Rukmini."(1032)

In the following section (XVIII.) "Ravana is described as violently
interrupting a sacrifice which is being performed by king Marutta, and the
assembled gods in terror assume different shapes to escape; Indra becomes
a peacock, Yama a crow, Kuvera a lizard, and Varuna a swan; and each deity
bestows a boon on the animal he had chosen. The peacock's tail recalls
Indra's thousand eyes; the swan's colour becomes white, like the foam of
the ocean (Varuna being its lord); the lizard obtains a golden colour; and
the crow is never to die except when killed by a violent death, and the
dead are to enjoy the funeral oblations when they have been devoured by
the crows."(1033)

Ravan then attacks Arjuna or Karttavirya the mighty king of Mahishmati on
the banks of the Narmada, and is defeated, captured and imprisoned by
Arjuna. At the intercession of Pulastya (Sect. XXII.) he is released from
his bonds. He then visits Kishkindha where he enters into alliance with
Bali the King of the Vanars: "We will have all things in common," says
Ravan, "dames, sons, cities and kingdoms, food, vesture, and all
delights." His next exploit is the invasion of the kingdom of departed
spirits and his terrific battle with the sovereign Yama. The poet in his
description of these regions with the detested river with waves of blood,
the dire lamentations, the cries for a drop of water, the devouring worm,
all the tortures of the guilty and the somewhat insipid pleasures of the
just, reminds one of the scenes in the under world so vividly described by
Homer, Virgil, and Dante. Yama is defeated (Sect. XXVI.) by the giant, not
so much by his superior power as because at the request of Brahma Yama
refrains from smiting with his deadly weapon the Rakshas enemy to whom
that God had once given the promise that preserved him. In the
twenty-seventh section Ravan goes "under the earth into Patala the
treasure-house of the waters inhabited by swarms of serpents and Daityas,
and well defended by Varun." He subdues Bhogavati the city ruled by Vasuki
and reduces the Nagas or serpents to subjection. He penetrates even to the
imperial seat of Varun. The God himself is absent, but his sons come forth
and do battle with the invader. The giant is victorious and departs
triumphant. The twenty-eighth section gives the details of a terrific
battle between Ravan and Mandhata King of Ayodhya, a distinguished
ancestor of Rama. Supernatural weapons are employed on both sides and the
issue of the conflict is long doubtful. But at last Mandhata prepares to
use the mighty weapon "acquired by severe austerities through the grace
and favour of Rudra." The giant would inevitably have been slain. But two
pre-eminent Munis Pulastya and Galava beheld the fight through the power
given by contemplation, and with words of exhortation they parted King
Mandhata and the sovereign of the Rakshases. Ravan at last (Sect. XXXII.)
returns homeward carrying with him in his car Pushpak the virgin daughters
of kings, of Rishis, of Daityas, and Gandharvas whom he has seized upon
his way. The thirty-sixth section describes a battle with Indra, in which
the victorious Meghanada son of the giant, makes the King of the Gods his
prisoner, binds him with his magic art, and carries him away (Sect.
XXVII.) in triumph to Lanka. Brahma intercedes (Sect. XXXVIII.) and
Indrajit releases his prisoner on obtaining in return the boon that
sacrifice to the Lord of Fire shall always make him invincible in the
coming battle. In sections XXXIX., XL, "we have a legend related to Rama
by the sage Agastya to account for the stupendous strength of the monkey
Hanuman, as it had been described in the _Ramayana_. Rama naturally
wonders (as perhaps many readers of the _Ramayana_ have done since) why a
monkey of such marvellous power and prowess had not easily overcome Bali
and secured the throne for his friend Sugriva. Agastya replies that
Hanuman was at that time under a curse from a Rishi, and consequently was
not conscious of his own might."(1034) The whole story of the marvellous
Vanar is here given at length, but nothing else of importance is added to
the tale already given in the Ramayana. The Rishis or saints then (Sect.
XL.) return to their celestial seats, and the Vanars, Rakshases and bears
also (Sect. XLIII.) take their departure. The chariot Pushpak is restored
to its original owner Kuvera, as has already been related in the Ramayan.

The story of Rama and Sita is then continued, and we meet with matter of
more human interest. The winter is past and the pleasant spring-time is
come, and Rama and Sita sit together in the shade of the Asoka trees happy
as Indra and Sachi when they drink in Paradise the nectar of the Gods.
"Tell me, my beloved," says Rama, "for thou wilt soon be a mother, hast
thou a wish in thy heart for me to gratify?" And Sita smiles and answers:
"I long, O son of Raghu, to visit the pure and holy hermitages on the
banks of the Ganges and to venerate the feet of the saints who there
perform their rigid austerities and live on roots and berries. This is my
chief desire, to stand within the hermits' grove were it but for a single
day." And Rama said: "Let not the thought trouble thee: thou shalt go to
the grove of the ascetics." But slanderous tongues have been busy in
Ayodhya, and Sita has not been spared. Rama hears that the people are
lamenting his blind folly in taking back to his bosom the wife who was so
long a captive in the palace of Ravan. Rama well knows her spotless purity
in thought, word, and deed, and her perfect love of him; but he cannot
endure the mockery and the shame and resolves to abandon his unsuspecting
wife. He orders the sad but still obedient Lakshman to convey her to the
hermitage which she wishes to visit and to leave her there, for he will
see her face again no more. They arrive at the hermitage, and Lakshman
tells her all. She falls fainting on the ground, and when she recovers her
consciousness sheds some natural tears and bewails her cruel and
undeserved lot. But she resolves to live for the sake of Rama and her
unborn son, and she sends by Lakshman a dignified message to the husband
who has forsaken her: "I grieve not for myself," she says "because I have
been abandoned on account of what the people say, and not for any evil
that I have done. The husband is the God of the wife, the husband is her
lord and guide; and what seems good unto him she should do even at the
cost of her life."

Sita is honourably received by the saint Valmiki himself, and the holy
women of the hermitage are charged to entertain and serve her. In this
calm retreat she gives birth to two boys who receive the names of Kusa and
Lava. They are carefully brought up and are taught by Valmiki himself to
recite the Ramayan. The years pass by: and Rama at length determines to
celebrate the Asvamedha or Sacrifice of the Steed. Valmiki, with his two
young pupils, attends the ceremony, and the unknown princes recite before
the delighted father the poem which recounts his deeds. Rama inquires into
their history and recognizes them as his sons. Sita is invited to return
and solemnly affirm her innocence before the great assembly.

"But Sita's heart was too full; this second ordeal was beyond even her
power to submit to, and the poet rose above the ordinary Hindu level of
women when he ventured to paint her conscious purity as rebelling:
'Beholding all the spectators, and clothed in red garments, Sita clasping
her hands and bending low her face, spoke thus in a voice choked with
tears: "as I, even in mind, have never thought of any other than Rama, so
may Madhavi the goddess of Earth, grant me a hiding-place." As Sita made
this oath, lo! a marvel appeared. Suddenly cleaving the earth, a divine
throne of marvellous beauty rose up, borne by resplendent dragons on their
heads: and seated on it, the goddess of Earth, raising Sita with her arm,
said to her, "Welcome to thee!" and placed her by her side. And as the
queen, seated on the throne, slowly descended to Hades, a continuous
shower of flowers fell down from heaven on her head.'(1035)"

"Both the great Hindu epics thus end in disappointment and sorrow. In the
_Mahabharata_ the five victorious brothers abandon the hardly won throne
to die one by one in a forlorn pilgrimage to the Himalaya; and in the same
way Rama only regains his wife, after all his toils, to lose her. It is
the same in the later Homeric cycle--the heroes of the _Iliad_ perish by
ill-fated deaths. And even Ulysses, after his return to Ithaca, sets sail
again to Thesprotia, and finally falls by the hand of his own son. But in
India and Greece alike this is an afterthought of a self-conscious time,
which has been subsequently added to cast a gloom on the strong
cheerfulness of the heroic age."(1036)

"The termination of Rama's terrestrial career is thus told in Sections 116
ff. of the Uttarakanda. Time, in the form of an ascetic, comes to his
palace gate, and asks, as the messenger of the great rishi (Brahma) to see
Rama. He is admitted and received with honour, but says, when he is asked
what he has to communicate, that his message must be delivered in private,
and that any one who witnesses the interview is to lose his life. Rama
informs Lakshman of all this, and desires him to stand outside. Time then
tells Rama that he has been sent by Brahma, to say that when he (Rama,
_i.e._ Vishnu) after destroying the worlds was sleeping on the ocean, he
had formed him (Brahma) from the lotus springing from his navel, and
committed to him the work of creation; that he (Brahma) had then entreated
Rama to assume the function of Preserver, and that the latter had in
consequence become Vishnu, being born as the son of Aditi, and had
determined to deliver mankind by destroying Ravana, and to live on earth
ten thousand and ten hundred years; that period, adds Time, was now on the
eve of expiration, and Rama could either at his pleasure prolong his stay
on earth, or ascend to heaven and rule over the gods. Rama replies, that
he had been born for the good of the three worlds, and would now return to
the place whence he had come, as it was his function to fulfil the
purposes of the gods. While they are speaking the irritable rishi Durvasas
comes, and insists on seeing Rama immediately, under a threat, if refused,
of cursing Rama and all his family."

Lakshman, preferring to save his kinsman, though knowing that his own
death must be the consequence of interrupting the interview of Rama with
Time, enters the palace and reports the rishi's message to Rama. Rama
comes out, and when Durvasas has got the food he wished, and departed,
Rama reflects with great distress on the words of Time, which require that
Lakshman should die. Lakshman however exhorts Rama not to grieve, but to
abandon him and not break his own promise. The counsellors concurring in
this advice, Rama abandons Lakshman, who goes to the river Sarayu,
suppresses all his senses, and is conveyed bodily by Indra to heaven. The
gods are delighted by the arrival of the fourth part of Vishnu. Rama then
resolves to install Bharata as his successor and retire to the forest and
follow Lakshman. Bharata however refuses the succession, and determines to
accompany his brother. Rama's subjects are filled with grief, and say they
also will follow him wherever he goes. Messengers are sent to Satrughna,
the other brother, and he also resolves to accompany Rama; who at length
sets out in procession from his capital with all the ceremonial
appropriate to the "great departure," silent, indifferent to external
objects, joyless, with Sri on his right, the goddess Earth on his left,
Energy in front, attended by all his weapons in human shapes, by the Vedas
in the forms of Brahmans, by the Gayatri, the Omkara, the Vashatkara, by
rishis, by his women, female slaves, eunuchs, and servants. Bharata with
his family, and Satrughna, follow together with Brahmans bearing the
sacred fire, and the whole of the people of the country, and even with
animals, etc., etc. Rama, with all these attendants, comes to the banks of
the Sarayu. Brahma, with all the gods and innumerable celestial cars, now
appears, and all the sky is refulgent with the divine splendour. Pure and
fragrant breezes blow, a shower of flowers falls. Rama enters the waters
of the Sarayu; and Brahma utters a voice from the sky, saying: "Approach,
Vishnu; Raghava, thou hast happily arrived, with thy godlike brothers.
Enter thine own body as Vishnu or the eternal ether. For thou art the
abode of the worlds: no one comprehends thee, the inconceivable and
imperishable, except the large-eyed Maya thy primeval spouse." Hearing
these words, Rama enters the glory of Vishnu with his body and his
followers. He then asks Brahma to find an abode for the people who had
accompanied him from devotion to his person, and Brahma appoints them a
celestial residence accordingly.(1037)





ADDITIONAL NOTES.




Queen Fortune.


"A curious festival is celebrated in honour of this divinity (Lakshmi) on
the fifth lunar day of the light half of the month Magha (February), when
she is identified with Saraswati the consort of Brahma, and the goddess of
learning. In his treatise on festivals, a great modern authority,
Raghunandana, mentions, on the faith of a work called
_Samvatsara-sandipa_, that Lakshmi is to be worshipped in the forenoon of
that day with flowers, perfumes, rice, and water; that due honour is to be
paid to inkstand and writing-reed, and no writing to be done. Wilson, in
his essay on the _Religious Festivals of the Hindus_ (works, vol. ii, p.
188. ff.) adds that on the morning of the 2nd February, the whole of the
pens and inkstands, and the books, if not too numerous and bulky, are
collected, the pens or reeds cleaned, the inkstands scoured, and the books
wrapped up in new cloth, are arranged upon a platform, or a sheet, and
strewn over with flowers and blades of young barley, and that no flowers
except white are to be offered. After performing the necessary rites, {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
all the members of the family assemble and make their prostrations; the
books, the pens, and ink having an entire holiday; and should any
emergency require a written communication on the day dedicated to the
divinity of scholarship, it is done with chalk or charcoal upon a black or
white board."

CHAMBERS'S ENCYCLOPAEDIA. _Lakshmi_.




Indra.


"The Hindu Jove or Jupiter Tonans, chief of the secondary deities. He
presides over swarga or paradise, and is more particularly the god of the
atmosphere and winds. He is also regent of the east quarter of the sky. As
chief of the deities he is called Devapati, Devadeva, Surapati, etc.; as
lord of the atmosphere Divaspati; as lord of the eight Vasus or demigods,
Fire, etc., Vasava; as breaking cities into fragments, Purandara, Puranda;
as lord of a hundred sacrifices (the performance of a hundred Asvamedhas
elevating the sacrificer to the rank of Indra) Satakratu, Satamakha; as
having a thousand eyes, Sahasraksha; as husband of Sachi, Sachipati. His
wife is called Sachi, Indrani, Sakrani, Maghoni, Indrasakti, Pulomaja, and
Paulomi. His son is Jayanta. His pleasure garden or elysium is Nandana;
his city, Amaravati; his palace, Vaijayanta; his horse, Uchchaihsravas,
his elephant, Airavata; his charioteer, Matali."

PROFESSOR M. WILLIAMS'S English-Sanskrit Dictionary. _Indra_.




Vishnu.


"The second person of the Hindu triad, and the most celebrated and popular
of all the Indian deities. He is the personification of the preserving
power, and became incarnate in nine different forms, for the preservation
of mankind in various emergencies. Before the creation of the universe,
and after its temporary annihilation, he is supposed to sleep on the
waters, floating on the serpent Sesha, and is then identified with
Narayana. Brahma, the creator, is fabled to spring at that time from a
lotus which grows from his navel, whilst thus asleep.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} His ten avatars or
incarnations are:

"1. The Matsya, or fish. In this avatar Vishnu descended in the form of a
fish to save the pious king Satyavrata, who with the seven Rishis and
their wives had taken refuge in the ark to escape the deluge which then
destroyed the earth. 2, The Kurma, or Tortoise. In this he descended in
the form of a tortoise, for the purpose of restoring to man some of the
comforts lost during the flood. To this end he stationed himself at the
bottom of the ocean, and allowed the point of the great mountain Mandara
to be placed upon his back, which served as a hard axis, whereon the gods
and demons, with the serpent Vasuki twisted round the mountain for a rope,
churned the waters for the recovery of the amrita or nectar, and fourteen
other sacred things. 3. The Varaha, or Boar. In this he descended in the
form of a boar to rescue the earth from the power of a demon called
'golden-eyed,' Hiranyaksha. This demon had seized on the earth and carried
it with him into the depths of the ocean. Vishnu dived into the abyss, and
after a contest of a thousand years slew the monster. 4. The Narasinha, or
Man-lion. In this monstrous shape of a creature half-man, half-lion,
Vishnu delivered the earth from the tyranny of an insolent demon called
Hiranyakasipu. 5. Vamana, or Dwarf. This avatar happened in the second age
of the Hindus or Tretayug, the four preceding are said to have occurred in
the first or Satyayug; the object of this avatar was to trick Bali out of
the dominion of the three worlds. Assuming the form of a wretched dwarf he
appeared before the king and asked, as a boon, as much land as he could
pace in three steps. This was granted; and Vishnu immediately expanding
himself till he filled the world, deprived Bali at two steps of heaven and
earth, but in consideration of some merit, left Patala still in his
dominion. 6. Parasurama. 7. Ramchandra. 8. Krishna, or according to some
Balarama. 9. Buddha. In this avatar Vishnu descended in the form of a sage
for the purpose of making some reform in the religion of the Brahmins, and
especially to reclaim them from their proneness to animal sacrifice. Many
of the Hindus will not allow this to have been an incarnation of their
favourite god. 10. Kalki, or White Horse. This is yet to come. Vishnu
mounted on a white horse, with a drawn scimitar, blazing like a comet,
will, according to prophecy, end this present age, viz. the fourth or
Kaliyug, by destroying the world, and then renovating creation by an age
of purity."

WILLIAM'S DICTIONARY. _Vishnu._




Siva.


"A celebrated Hindu God, the Destroyer of creation, and therefore the most
formidable of the Hindu Triad. He also personifies reproduction, since the
Hindu philosophy excludes the idea of total annihilation without
subsequent regeneration. Hence he is sometimes confounded with Brahma, the
creator or first person of the Triad. He is the particular God of the
Tantrikas, or followers of the books called Tantras. His worshippers are
termed Saivas, and although not so numerous as the Vaishnavas, exalt their
god to the highest place in the heavens, and combine in him many of the
attributes which properly belong to the other deities. According to them
Siva is Time, Justice, Fire, Water, the Sun, the Destroyer and Creator. As
presiding over generation, his type is the Linga, or Phallus, the origin
probably of the Phallic emblem of Egypt and Greece. As the God of
generation and justice, which latter character he shares with the god
Yama, he is represented riding a white bull. His own colour, as well as
that of the bull, is generally white, referring probably to the unsullied
purity of Justice. His throat is dark-blue; his hair of a light reddish
colour, and thickly matted together, and gathered above his head like the
hair of an ascetic. He is sometimes seen with two hands, sometimes with
four, eight, or ten, and with five faces. He has three eyes, one being in
the centre of his forehead, pointing up and down. These are said to denote
his view of the three divisions of time, past, present, and future. He
holds a trident in his hand to denote, as some say, his relationship to
water, or according to others, to show that the three great attributes of
Creator, Destroyer, and Regenerator are combined in him. His loins are
enveloped in a tiger's skin. In his character of Time, he not only
presides over its extinction, but also its astronomical regulation. A
crescent or half-moon on his forehead indicates the measure of time by the
phases of the moon; a serpent forms one of his necklaces to denote the
measure of time by years, and a second necklace of human skulls marks the
lapse and revolution of ages, and the extinction and succession of the
generations of mankind. He is often represented as entirely covered with
serpents, which are the emblems of immortality. They are bound in his
hair, round his neck, wrists, waist, arms and legs; they serve as rings
for his fingers, and earrings for his ears, and are his constant
companions. Siva has more than a thousand names which are detailed at
length in the sixty-ninth chapter of the Siva Purana."--WILLIAMS'S
DICTIONARY, _Siva_.




Apsarases.


"Originally these deities seem to have been personifications of the
vapours which are attracted by the sun, and form into mist or clouds:
their character may be thus interpreted in the few hymns of the Rigveda
where mention is made of them. At a subsequent period when the Gandharva
of the Rigveda who personifies there especially the Fire of the Sun,
expanded into the Fire of Lightning, the rays of the moon and other
attributes of the elementary life of heaven as well as into pious acts
referring to it, the Apsarasas become divinities which represent phenomena
or objects both of a physical and ethical kind closely associated with
that life; thus in the _Yajurveda_ Sunbeams are called the Apsarasas
associated with the Gandharva who is the Sun; Plants are termed the
Apsarasas connected with the Gandharva Fire: Constellations are the
Apsarasas of the Gandharva Moon: Waters the Apsarasas of the Gandharva
Wind, etc. etc.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} In the last Mythological epoch when the Gandharvas have
saved from their elementary nature merely so much as to be musicians in
the paradise of Indra, the Apsarasas appear among other subordinate
deities which share in the merry life of Indra's heaven, as the wives of
the Gandharvas, but more especially as wives of a licentious sort, and
they are promised therefore, too, as a reward to heroes fallen in battle
when they are received in the paradise of Indra; and while, in the
Rigveda, they assist Soma to pour down his floods, they descend in the
epic literature on earth merely to shake the virtue of penitent Sages and
to deprive them of the power they would otherwise have acquired through
unbroken austerities."--GOLDSTUeCKER'S _Sanskrit Dictionary_.




Vishnu's Incarnation As Rama.


"Here is described one of the _avatars_, descents or manifestations of
Vishnu in a visible form. The word _avatar_ signifies literally _descent_.
The _avatar_ which is here spoken of, that in which, according to Indian
traditions, Vishnu descended and appeared upon earth in the corporeal form
of Rama, the hero of the Ramayana, is the seventh in the series of Indian
_avatars_. Much has been said before now of these avatars, and through
deficient knowledge of the ideas and doctrines of India, they have been
compared to the sublime dogma of the Christian Incarnation. This is one of
the grossest errors that ignorance of the ideas and beliefs of a people
has produced. Between the _avatars_ of India and the Christian Incarnation
there is such an immensity of difference that it is impossible to find any
reasonable analogy that can approximate them. The idea of the _avatars_ is
intimately united with that of the Trimurti; the bond of connection
between these two ideas is an essential notion common to both, the notion
of Vishnu. What is the Trimurti? I have already said that it is composed
of three Gods, Brahma (masculine), Vishnu the God of _avatars_, and Siva.
These three Gods, who when reduced to their primitive and most simple
expression are but three cosmogonical personifications, three powers or
forces of nature, these Gods, I say, are here found, according to Indian
doctrines, entirely external to the true God of India, or Brahma in the
neuter gender. Brahma is alone, unchangeable in the midst of creation: all
emanates from him, he comprehends all, but he remains extraneous to all:
he is Being and the negation of beings. Brahma is never worshipped; the
indeterminate Being is never invoked; he is inaccessible to the prayers as
the actions of man; humanity, as well as nature, is extraneous to him.
External to Brahma rises the Trimurti, that is to say, Brahma (masculine)
the power which creates, Vishnu the power which preserves, and Siva the
power which destroys: theogony here commences at the same time with
cosmogony. The three divinities of the Trimurti govern the phenomena of
the universe and influence all nature. The real God of India is by himself
without power; real efficacious power is attributed only to three
divinities who exist externally to him. Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva,
possessed of qualities in part contradictory and attributes that are
mutually exclusive, have no other accord or harmony than that which
results from the power of things itself, and which is found external to
their own thoughts. Such is the Indian Trimurti. What an immense
difference between this Triad and the wonderful Trinity of Christianity!
Here there is only one God, who created all, provides for all, governs
all. He exists in three Persons equal to one another, and intimately
united in one only infinite and eternal substance. The Father represents
the eternal thought and the power which created, the Son infinite love,
the Holy Spirit universal sanctification. This one and triune God
completes by omnipotent power the great work of creation which, when it
has come forth from His hands, proceeds in obedience to the laws which He
has given it, governed with certain order by His infinite providence.

"The immense difference between the Trimurti of India and the Christian
Trinity is found again between the _avatars_ of Vishnu and the Incarnation
of Christ. The _avatar_ was effected altogether externally to the Being
who is in India regarded as the true God. The manifestation of one
essentially cosmogonical divinity wrought for the most part only material
and cosmogonical prodigies. At one time it takes the form of the gigantic
tortoise which sustains Mount Mandar from sinking in the ocean; at another
of the fish which raises the lost Veda from the bottom of the sea, and
saves mankind from the waters. When these _avatars_ are not cosmogonical
they consist in some protection accorded to men or Gods, a protection
which is neither universal nor permanent. The very manner in which the
_avatar_ is effected corresponds to its material nature, for instance the
mysterious vase and the magic liquor by means of which the _avatar_ here
spoken of takes place. What are the forms which Vishnu takes in his
descents? They are the simple forms of life; he becomes a tortoise, a
boar, a fish, but he is not obliged to take the form of intelligence and
liberty, that is to say, the form of man. In the _avatar_ of Vishnu is
discovered the inpress of pantheistic ideas which have always more or less
prevailed in India. Does the _avatar_ produce a permanent and definitive
result in the world? By no means. It is renewed at every catastrophe
either of nature or man, and its effects are only transitory.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} To sum up
then, the Indian _avatar_ is effected externally to the true God of India,
to Brahma; it has only a cosmogonical or historical mission which is
neither lasting nor decisive; it is accomplished by means of strange
prodigies and magic transformations; it may assume promiscuously all the
forms of life; it may be repeated indefinitely. Now let the whole of this
Indian idea taken from primitive tradition be compared with the
Incarnation of Christ and it will be seen that there is between the two an
irreconcilable difference. According to the doctrines of Christianity the
Everlasting Word, Infinite Love, the Son of God, and equal to Him, assumed
a human body, and being born as a man accomplished by his divine act the
great miracle of the spiritual redemption of man. His coming had for its
sole object to bring erring and lost humanity back to Him; this work being
accomplished, and the divine union of men with God being re-established,
redemption is complete and remains eternal.

"The superficial study of India produced in the last century many
erroneous ideas, many imaginary and false parallels between Christianity
and the Brahmanical religion. A profounder knowledge of Indian
civilization and religion, and philological studies enlarged and guided by
more certain principles have dissipated one by one all those errors. The
attributes of the Christian God, which by one of those intellectual
errors, which Vico attributes to the vanity of the learned, had been
transferred to Vishnu, have by a better inspired philosophy been reclaimed
for Christianity, and the result of the two religions, one immovable and
powerless, the other diffusing itself with all its inherent force and
energy, has shown further that there is a difference, a real opposition,
between the two principles."--GORRESIO.




Kusa and Lava.


As the story of the banishment of Sita and the subsequent birth in
Valmiki's hermitage of Kusa and Lava the rhapsodists of the Ramayan, is
intimately connected with the account in the introductory cantos of
Valmiki's composition of the poem, I shall, I trust, be pardoned for
extracting it from my rough translation of Kalidasa's Raghuvansa, parts
only of which have been offered to the public.

"Then, day by day, the husband's hope grew high,
Gazing with love on Sita's melting eye:
With anxious care he saw her pallid cheek,
And fondly bade her all her wishes speak.
"Once more I fain would see," the lady cried,
"The sacred groves that rise on Ganga's side,
Where holy grass is ever fresh and green,
And cattle feeding on the rice are seen:
There would I rest awhile, where once I strayed
Linked in sweet friendship to each hermit maid."
And Rama smiled upon his wife, and sware,
With many a tender oath, to grant her prayer.
It chanced, one evening, from a lofty seat
He viewed Ayodhya stretched before his feet:
He looked with pride upon the royal road
Lined with gay shops their glittering stores that showed,
He looked on Sarju's silver waves, that bore
The light barks flying with the sail and oar;
He saw the gardens near the town that lay,
Filled with glad citizens and boys at play.
Then swelled the monarch's bosom with delight,
And his heart triumphed at the happy sight.
He turned to Bhadra, standing by his side,--
Upon whose secret news the king relied.--
And bade him say what people said and thought
Of all the exploits that his arm had wrought.
The spy was silent, but, when questioned still,
Thus spake, obedient to his master's will:
"For all thy deeds in peace and battle done
The people praise thee, King, except for one:
This only act of all thy life they blame,--
Thy welcome home of her, thy ravished dame."
Like iron yielding to the iron's blow,
Sank Rama, smitten by those words of woe.
His breast, where love and fear for empire vied,
Swayed, like a rapid swing, from side to side.
Shall he this rumour scorn, which blots his life,
Or banish her, his dear and spotless wife?
But rigid Duty left no choice between
His perilled honour and his darling queen.
Called to his side, his brothers wept to trace
The marks of anguish in his altered face.
No longer bright and glorious as of old,
He thus addressed them when the tale was told:
"Alas! my brothers, that my life should blot
The fame of those the Sun himself begot:
As from the labouring cloud the driven rain
Leaves on the mirror's polished face a stain.
E'en as an elephant who loathes the stake
And the strong chain he has no power to break,
I cannot brook this cry on every side,
That spreads like oil upon the moving tide.
I leave the daughter of Videha's King,
And the fair blossom soon from her to spring,
As erst, obedient to my sire's command,
I left the empire of the sea-girt land.
Good is my queen, and spotless; but the blame
Is hard to bear, the mockery and the shame.
Men blame the pure Moon for the darkened ray,
When the black shadow takes the light away.
And, O my brothers, if ye wish to see
Rama live long from this reproach set free,
Let not your pity labour to control
The firm sad purpose of his changeless soul."

  Thus Rama spake. The sorrowing brothers heard
His stern resolve, without an answering word;
For none among them dared his voice to raise,
That will to question:--and they could not praise.
"Beloved brother," thus the monarch cried
To his dear Lakshman, whom he called aside.--
Lakshman, who knew no will save his alone
Whose hero deeds through all the world were known:--
"My queen has told me that she longs to rove
Beneath the shade of Saint Valmiki's grove:
Now mount thy car, away my lady bear;
Tell all, and leave her in the forest there."

  The car was brought, the gentle lady smiled,
As the glad news her trusting heart beguiled.
She mounted up: Sumantra held the reins;
And forth the coursers bounded o'er the plains.
She saw green fields in all their beauty dressed,
And thanked her husband in her loving breast.
Alas! deluded queen! she little knew
How changed was he whom she believed so true;
How one she worshipped like the Heavenly Tree
Could, in a moment's time, so deadly be.
Her right eye throbbed,--ill-omened sign, to tell
The endless loss of him she loved so well,
And to the lady's saddening heart revealed
The woe that Lakshman, in his love, concealed.
Pale grew the bloom of her sweet face,--as fade
The lotus blossoms,--by that sign dismayed.
"Oh, may this omen,"--was her silent prayer,--
"No grief to Rama or his brothers bear!"

  When Lakshman, faithful to his brother, stood
Prepared to leave her in the distant wood,
The holy Ganga, flowing by the way,
Raised all her hands of waves to bid him stay.
At length with sobs and burning tears that rolled
Down his sad face, the king's command he told;
As when a monstrous cloud, in evil hour,
Rains from its labouring womb a stony shower.
She heard, she swooned, she fell upon the earth,
Fell on that bosom whence she sprang to birth.
As, when the tempest in its fury flies,
Low in the dust the prostrate creeper lies,
So, struck with terror sank she on the ground,
And all her gems, like flowers, lay scattered round.
But Earth, her mother, closed her stony breast,
And, filled with doubt, denied her daughter rest.
She would not think the Chief of Raghu's race
Would thus his own dear guiltless wife disgrace.
Stunned and unconscious, long the lady lay,
And felt no grief, her senses all astray.
But gentle Lakshman, with a brother's care,
Brought back her sense, and with her sense, despair.
But not her wrongs, her shame, her grief, could wring
One angry word against her lord the King:
Upon herself alone the blame she laid,
For tears and sighs that would not yet be stayed.
To soothe her anguish Lakshman gently strove;
He showed the path to Saint Valmiki's grove;
And craved her pardon for the share of ill
He wrought, obedient to his brother's will.
"O, long and happy, dearest brother, live!
I have to praise," she cried, "and not forgive:
To do his will should be thy noblest praise;
As Vishnu ever Indra's will obeys.
Return, dear brother: on each royal dame
Bestow a blessing in poor Sita's name,
And bid them, in their love, kind pity take
Upon her offspring, for the father's sake.
And speak my message in the monarch's ear,
The last last words of mine that he shall hear:
"Say, was it worthy of thy noble race
Thy guiltless queen thus lightly to disgrace?
For idle tales to spurn thy faithful bride,
Whose constant truth the searching fire had tried?
Or may I hope thy soul refused consent,
And but thy voice decreed my banishment?
Hope that no care could turn, no love could stay
The lightning stroke that falls on me to-day?
That sins committed in the life that's fled
Have brought this evil on my guilty head?
Think not I value now my widowed life,
Worthless to her who once was Rama's wife.
I only live because I hope to see
The dear dear babe that will resemble thee.
And then my task of penance shall be done,
With eyes uplifted to the scorching sun;
So shall the life that is to come restore
Mine own dear husband, to be lost no more."
And Lakshman swore her every word to tell,
Then turned to go, and bade the queen farewell.
Alone with all her woes, her piteous cries
Rose like a butchered lamb's that struggling dies.
The reverend sage who from his dwelling came
For sacred grass and wood to feed the flame,
Heard her loud shrieks that rent the echoing wood,
And, quickly following, by the mourner stood.
Before the sage the lady bent her low,
Dried her poor eyes, and strove to calm her woe.
With blessings on her hopes the blameless man
In silver tones his soothing speech began:
"First of all faithful wives, O Queen, art thou;
And can I fail to mourn thy sorrows now?
Rest in this holy grove, nor harbour fear
Where dwell in safety e'en the timid deer.
Here shall thine offspring safely see the light,
And be partaker of each holy rite.
Here, near the hermits' dwellings, shall thou lave
Thy limbs in Tonse's sin-destroying wave,
And on her isles, by prayer and worship, gain
Sweet peace of mind, and rest from care and pain.
Each hermit maiden with her sweet soft voice,
Shall soothe thy woe, and bid thy heart rejoice:
With fruit and early flowers thy lap shall fill,
And offer grain that springs for us at will.
And here, with labour light, thy task shall be
To water carefully each tender tree,
And learn how sweet a nursing mother's joy
Ere on thy bosom rest thy darling boy.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}"

That very night the banished Sita bare
Two royal children, most divinely fair.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

The saint Valmiki, with a friend's delight,
Graced Sita's offspring with each holy rite.
Kusa and Lava--such the names they bore--
Learnt, e'en in childhood, all the Vedas' lore;
And then the bard, their minstrel souls to train,
Taught them to sing his own immortal strain.
And Rama's deeds her boys so sweetly sang,
That Sita's breast forgot her bitterest pang.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

Then Sita's children, by the saint's command,
Sang the Ramayan, wandering through the land.
How could the glorious poem fail to gain
Each heart, each ear that listened to the strain!
So sweet each minstrel's voice who sang the praise
Of Rama deathless in Valmiki's lays.
Rama himself amid the wondering throng
Marked their fair forms, and loved the noble song,
While, still and weeping, round the nobles stood,
As, on a windless morn, a dewy wood.
On the two minstrels all the people gazed,
Praised their fair looks and marvelled as they praised;
For every eye amid the throng could trace
Rama's own image in each youthful face.
Then spoke the king himself and bade them say
Who was their teacher, whose the wondrous lay.
Soon as Valmiki, mighty saint, he saw,
He bowed his head in reverential awe.
"These are thy children" cried the saint, "recall
Thine own dear Sita, pure and true through all."
"O holy father," thus the king replied,
"The faithful lady by the fire was tried;
But the foul demon's too successful arts
Raised light suspicions in my people's hearts.
Grant that their breasts may doubt her faith no more,
And thus my Sita and her sons restore."

_Raghuvansa Cantos XIV, XV._




Parasurama, Page 87.


"He cleared the earth thrice seven times of the Kshatriya caste, and
filled with their blood the five large lakes of Samanta, from which he
offered libations to the race of Bhrigu. Offering a solemn sacrifice to
the King of the Gods Parasurama presented the earth to the ministering
priests. Having given the earth to Kasyapa, the hero of immeasurable
prowess retired to the Mahendra mountain, where he still resides; and in
this manner was there enmity between him and the race of the Kshatriyas,
and thus was the whole earth conquered by Parasurama." The destruction of
the Kshatriyas by Parasurama had been provoked by the cruelty of the
Kshatriyas. _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol._ II. p. 334.

The scene in which he appears is probably interpolated for the sake of
making him declare Rama to be Vishnu. "Herr von Schlegel has often
remarked to me," says Lassen, "that without injuring the connexion of the
story all the chapters [of the Ramayan] might be omitted in which Rama is
regarded as an incarnation of Vishnu. In fact, where the incarnation of
Vishnu as the four sons of Dasaratha is described, the great sacrifice is
already ended, and all the priests remunerated at the termination, when
the new sacrifice begins at which the Gods appear, then withdraw, and then
first propose the incarnation to Vishnu. If it had been an original
circumstance of the story, the Gods would certainly have deliberated on
the matter earlier, and the celebration of the sacrifice would have
continued without interruption." LASSEN, _Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol.
I._ p. 489.




Yama, Page 68.


Son of Vivasvat=Jima son of Vivanghvat, the Jamshid of the later Persians.




Fate, Page 68.


"The idea of fate was different in India from that which prevailed in
Greece. In Greece fate was a mysterious, inexorable power which governed
men and human events, and from which it was impossible to escape. In India
Fate was rather an inevitable consequence of actions done in births
antecedent to one's present state of existence, and was therefore
connected with the doctrine of metempsychosis. A misfortune was for the
most part a punishment, an expiation of ancient faults not yet entirely
cancelled." GORRESIO.




Visvamitra, Page 76.


"Though of royal extraction, Visvamitra conquered for himself and his
family the privileges of a Brahman. He became a Brahman, and thus broke
through all the rules of caste. The Brahmans cannot deny the fact, because
it forms one of the principal subjects of their legendary poems. But they
have spared no pains to represent the exertions of Visvamitra, in his
struggle for Brahmanhood, as so superhuman that no one would easily be
tempted to follow his example. No mention is made of these monstrous
penances in the Veda, where the struggle between Visvamitra, the leader of
the Kusikas or Bharatas, and the Brahman Vasishtha, the leader of the
white-robed Tritsus, is represented as the struggle of two rivals for the
place of Purohita or chief priest and minister at the court of King Sudas,
the son of Pijavana." _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol. II._ p. 336.




Household Gods, Page 102.


"No house is supposed to be without its tutelary divinity, but the notion
attached to this character is now very far from precise. The deity who is
the object of hereditary and family worship, the _Kuladevata_, is always
one of the leading personages of the Hindu mythology, as Siva, Vishnu or
Durga, but the _Grihadevata_ rarely bears any distinct appellation. In
Bengal, the domestic god is sometimes the _Salagram_ stone, sometimes the
_tulasi_ plant, sometimes a basket with a little rice in it, and sometimes
a water-jar--to either of which a brief adoration is daily addressed, most
usually by the females of the family. Occasionally small images of Lakshmi
or Chandi fulfil the office, or should a snake appear, he is venerated as
the guardian of the dwelling. In general, however, in former times, the
household deities were regarded as the unseen spirits of ill, the ghosts
and goblins who hovered about every spot, and claimed some particular
sites as their own. Offerings were made to them in the open air, by
scattering a little rice with a short formula at the close of all
ceremonies to keep them in good humour.

"The household gods correspond better with the genii locorum than with the
lares or penates of autiquity."

H. H. WILSON.




Page 107.


_Saivya, a king whom earth obeyed,_
_Once to a hawk a promise made._

The following is a free version of this very ancient story which occurs
more than once in the _Mahabharat_:

THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

Chased by a hawk there came a dove
  With worn and weary wing,
And took her stand upon the hand
  Of Kasi's mighty king.
The monarch smoothed her ruffled plumes
  And laid her on his breast,
And cried, "No fear shall vex thee here,
  Rest, pretty egg-born, rest!
Fair Kasi's realm is rich and wide,
  With golden harvests gay,
But all that's mine will I resign
  Ere I my guest betray."
But panting for his half won spoil
  The hawk was close behind.
And with wild cry and eager eye
  Came swooping down the wind:
"This bird," he cried, "my destined prize,
  'Tis not for thee to shield:
'Tis mine by right and toilsome flight
  O'er hill and dale and field.
Hunger and thirst oppress me sore,
  And I am faint with toil:
Thou shouldst not stay a bird of prey
  Who claims his rightful spoil.
They say thou art a glorious king,
  And justice is thy care:
Then justly reign in thy domain,
  Nor rob the birds of air."
Then cried the king: "A cow or deer
  For thee shall straightway bleed,
Or let a ram or tender lamb
  Be slain, for thee to feed.
Mine oath forbids me to betray
  My little twice-born guest:
See how she clings with trembling wings
  To her protector's breast."
"No flesh of lambs," the hawk replied,
  "No blood of deer for me;
The falcon loves to feed on doves
  And such is Heaven's decree.
But if affection for the dove
  Thy pitying heart has stirred,
Let thine own flesh my maw refresh,
  Weighed down against the bird."
He carved the flesh from off his side,
  And threw it in the scale,
While women's cries smote on the skies
  With loud lament and wail.
He hacked the flesh from side and arm,
  From chest and back and thigh,
But still above the little dove
  The monarch's scale stood high.
He heaped the scale with piles of flesh,
  With sinews, blood and skin,
And when alone was left him bone
  He threw himself therein.
Then thundered voices through the air;
  The sky grew black as night;
And fever took the earth that shook
  To see that wondrous sight.
The blessed Gods, from every sphere,
  By Indra led, came nigh:
While drum and flute and shell and lute
  Made music in the sky.
They rained immortal chaplets down,
  Which hands celestial twine,
And softly shed upon his head
  Pure Amrit, drink divine.
Then God and Seraph, Bard and Nymph
  Their heavenly voices raised,
And a glad throng with dance and song
  The glorious monarch praised.
They set him on a golden car
  That blazed with many a gem;
Then swiftly through the air they flew,
  And bore him home with them.
Thus Kasi's lord, by noble deed,
  Won heaven and deathless fame:
And when the weak protection seek
  From thee, do thou the same.

_Scenes from the Ramayan, &c._




Page 108.


The ceremonies that attended the consecration of a king (_Abhikshepa lit.
Sprinkling over_) are fully described in Goldstuecker's Dictionary, from
which the following extract is made: "The type of the inauguration
ceremony as practised at the Epic period may probably be recognized in the
history of the inauguration of _Rama_, as told in the _Ramayana_, and in
that of the inauguration of _Yudhishthira_, as told in the _Mahabharatha_.
Neither ceremony is described in these poems with the full detail which is
given of the vaidik rite in the _Aitareya-Brahmanam_; but the allusion
that Rama was inaugurated by _Vasishtha_ and the other Brahmanas in the
same manner as Indra by the Vasus {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} and the observation which is made in
some passages that a certain rite of the inauguration was performed
'according to the sacred rule' {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} admit of the conclusion that the ceremony
was supposed to have taken place in conformity with the vaidik
injunction.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} As the inauguration of _Rama_ was intended and the necessary
preparations for it were made when his father Dasaratha was still alive,
but as the ceremony itself, through the intrigues of his step-mother
_Kaikeyi_, did not take place then, but fourteen years later, after the
death of _Dasaratha_, an account of the preparatory ceremonies is given in
the _Ayodhyakanda_ (Book II) as well as in the _Yuddha-Kanda_ (Book VI.)
of the Ramayana, but an account of the complete ceremony in the latter
book alone. According to the _Ayodhyakanda_, on the day preceding the
intended inauguration _Rama_ and his wife _Sita_ held a fast, and in the
night they performed this preliminary rite: _Rama_ having made his
ablutions, approached the idol of _Narayana_, took a cup of clarified
butter, as the religious law prescribes, made a libation of it into the
kindled fire, and drank the remainder while wishing what was agreeable to
his heart. Then, with his mind fixed on the divinity he lay, silent and
composed, together with _Sita_, on a bed of Kusa-grass, which was spread
before the altar of Vishnu, until the last watch of the night, when he
awoke and ordered the palace to be prepared for the solemnity. At
day-break reminded of the time by the voices of the bards, he performed
the usual morning devotion and praised the divinity. In the meantime the
town Ayodhya had assumed a festive appearance and the inauguration
implements had been arranged {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} golden water-jars, an ornamented
throne-seat, a chariot covered with a splendid tiger-skin, water taken
from the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna, as well as from other sacred
rivers, tanks, wells, lakes, and from all oceans, honey, curd, clarified
butter, fried grain, Kusa-grass, flowers, milk; besides, eight beautiful
damsels, and a splendid furious elephant, golden and silver jars, filled
with water, covered with _Udumbara_ branches and various lotus flowers,
besides a white jewelled _chourie_, a white splendid parasol, a white
bull, a white horse, all manner of musical instruments and bards.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} In the
preceding chapter {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} there are mentioned _two_ white _chouries_ instead of
one, and all kinds of seeds, perfumes and jewels, a scimitar, a bow, a
litter, a golden vase, and a blazing fire, and amongst the living
implements of the pageant, instead of the bards, gaudy courtesans, and
besides the eight damsels, professors of divinity, Brahmanas, cows and
pure kinds of wild beasts and birds, the chiefs of town and country-people
and the citizens with their train."




Page 109.


_Then with the royal chaplains they_
_Took each his place in long array._

_The twice born chiefs, with zealous heed,_
_Made ready what the rite would need._

"Now about the office of a Purohita (house priest). The gods do not eat
the food offered by a king, who has no house-priest (Purohita). Thence the
king even when (not) intending to bring a sacrifice, should appoint a
Brahman to the office of house-priest." HAUG'S _Autareya Brahmanam. Vol.
II. p. 528_.




Page 110.


_There by the gate the Saras screamed._

The Saras or Indian Crane is a magnificent bird easily domesticated and
speedily constituting himself the watchman of his master's house and
garden. Unfortunately he soon becomes a troublesome and even dangerous
dependent, attacking strangers with his long bill and powerful wings, and
warring especially upon "small infantry" with unrelenting ferocity.




Page 120.


_My mothers or my sire the king._

All the wives of the king his father are regarded and spoken of by Rama as
his mothers.




Page 125.


_Such blessings as the Gods o'erjoyed_
_Poured forth when Vritra was destroyed._

"Mythology regards Vritra as a demon or Asur, the implacable enemy of
Indra, but this is not the primitive idea contained in the name of Vritra.
In the hymns of the Veda Vritra appears to be the thick dark cloud which
Indra the God of the firmament attacks and disperses with his
thunderbolt." GORRESIO.

"In that class of Rig-veda hymns which there is reason to look upon as the
oldest portion of Vedic poetry, the character of Indra is that of a mighty
ruler of the firmament, and his principal feat is that of conquering the
demon _Vritra_, a symbolical personification of the cloud which obstructs
the clearness of the sky, and withholds the fructifying rain from the
earth. In his battles with Vritra he is therefore described as 'opening
the receptacles of the waters,' as 'cleaving the cloud' with his
'far-whirling thunderbolt,' as 'casting the waters down to earth,' and
'restoring the sun to the sky.' He is in consequence 'the upholder of
heaven, earth, and firmament,' and the god 'who has engendered the sun and
the dawn.' " CHAMBERS'S CYCLOPAEDIA, _Indra_.

"Throughout these hymns two images stand out before us with overpowering
distinctness. On one side is the bright god of the heaven, as beneficent
as he is irresistible: on the other the demon of night and of darkness, as
false and treachorous as he is malignant.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The latter (as his name Vritra,
from var, to veil, indicates) is pre-eminently the thief who hides away
the rain-clouds.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But the myth is yet in too early a state to allow of the
definite designations which are brought before us in the conflicts of Zeus
with Typhon and his monstrous progeny, of Apollon with the Python, of
Bellerophon with Chimaira of Oidipous with the Sphinx, of Hercules with
Cacus, of Sigurd with the dragon Fafnir; and thus not only is Vritra known
by many names, but he is opposed sometimes by Indra, sometimes by Agni the
fire-god, sometimes by Trita, Brihaspati, or other deities; or rather
these are all names of one and the same god." COX'S _Mythology of the
Aryan Nations. Vol. II. p. 326_.




Page 125.


_And that prized herb whose sovereign power_
_Preserves from dark misfortune's hour._
"And yet more medicinal is it than that Moly,
That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;
He called it Haemony, and gave it me,
And bade me keep it as of sovereign use
'Gainst all enchantment, mildew, blast, or damp,
Or ghastly furies' apparition." _Comus._

The _Moly_ of Homer, which Dierbach considers to have been the _Mandrake_,
is probably a corruption of the Sanskrit _Mula_ a root.




Page 136.


_True is the ancient saw: the Neem_
_Can ne'er distil a honeyed stream._

The Neem tree, especially in the Rains, emits a strong unpleasant smell
like that of onions. Its leaves however make an excellent cooling
poultice, and the Extract of Neem is an admirable remedy for cutaneous
disorders.




Page 152.


_Who of Nishada lineage came._

The following account of the origin of the Nishadas is taken from Wilson's
_Vishnu Purana_, Book I. Chap. 15. "Afterwards the Munis beheld a great
dust arise, and they said to the people who were nigh: 'What is this?' And
the people answered and said: 'Now that the kingdom is without a king, the
dishonest men have begun to seize the property of their neighbours. The
great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is raised by troops of
clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their prey.' The sages, hearing
this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh of the king (Vena), who had
left no offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, thus rubbed, came
forth a being of the complexion of a charred stake, with flattened
features like a negro, and of dwarfish stature. 'What am I to do,' cried
he eagerly to the Munis. 'Sit down (nishida),' said they. And thence his
name was Nishada. His descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhya
mountain, great Muni, are still called Nishadas and are characterized by
the exterior tokens of depravity." Professor Wilson adds, in his note on
the passage: "The Matsya says that there were born outcast or barbarous
races, Mlechchhas, as black as collyrium. The Bhagavata describes an
individual of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a complexion
as black as a crow, with projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and
tawny hair, whose descendants were mountaineers and foresters. The Padma
(Bhumi Khanda) has a similar deccription; adding to the dwarfish stature
and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly.
It also particularizes his posterity as Nishadas, Kiratas, Bhillas, and
other barbarians and Mlechchhas, living in woods and on mountains. These
passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of the
Gonds, Koles, Bhils, and other uncivilized tribes, scattered along the
forests and mountains of Central India from Behar to Khandesh, and who
are, not improbably, the predecessors of the present occupants of the
cultivated portions of the country. They are always very black,
ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have countenances of a very African
character."

Manu gives a different origin of the Nishadas as the offspring of a
Brahman father and a Sudra mother. See Muir's _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p.
481.




Page 157.


_Beneath a fig-tree's mighty shade,_
_With countless pendent shoots displayed._
"So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose
The fig-tree: not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High overarched, and echoing walks between."

_Paradise Lost_, Book IX.




Page 161.


_Now, Lakshman, as our cot is made,_
_Must sacrifice be duly paid._

The rites performed in India on the completion of a house are represented
in modern Europe by the familiar "house-warming."




Page 169.


_I longed with all my lawless will_
_Some elephant by night to kill._

One of the regal or military caste was forbidden to kill an elephant
except in battle.

_Thy hand has made no Brahman bleed._

"The punishment which the Code of Manu awards to the slayer of a Brahman
was to be branded in the forehead with the mark of a headless corpse, and
entirely banished from society; this being apparently commutable for a
fine. The poem is therefore in accordance with the Code regarding the
peculiar guilt of killing Brahmans; but in allowing a hermit who was not a
_Divija_ (twice-born) to go to heaven, the poem is far in advance of the
Code. The youth in the poem is allowed to read the Veda, and to accumulate
merit by his own as well as his father's pious acts; whereas the exclusive
Code reserves all such privileges to _Divijas_ invested with the sacred
cord." Mrs. SPEIR'S _Life in Ancient India_, p. 107.




Page 174. The Praise Of Kings


"Compare this magnificent eulogium of kings and kingly government with
what Samuel says of the king and his authority: And Samuel told all the
words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king.

And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over
you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots, and to be his horsemen: and some shall run before his chariots.

And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over
fifties, and will set them to work his ground, and to reap his harvest,
and to make his instrument of war, and instruments of his chariots.

And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks,
and to be bakers.

And he will take your fields, and your vineyards and your oliveyards, even
the best of them, and give them to his servants.

And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give
to his officers, and to his servants.

And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your
goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have
chosen you. I. _Samuel_, VIII.

In India kingly government was ancient and consecrated by tradition:
whence to change it seemed disorderly and revolutionary: in Judaea
theocracy was ancient and consecrated by tradition, and therefore the
innovation which would substitute a king was represented as full of
dangers." GORRESIO.




Page 176. Salmali.


According to the Bengal recension Salmali appears to have been another
name of the Vipasa. Salmali may be an epithet signifying rich in Bombax
heptaphyllon. The commentator makes another river out of the word.




Page 178. Bharat's Return.


"Two routes from Ayodhya to Rajagriha or Girivraja are described. That
taken by the envoys appears to have been the shorter one, and we are not
told why Bharat returned by a different road. The capital of the Kekayas
lay to the west of the Vipasa. Between it and the Satadru stretched the
country of the Bahikas. Upon the remaining portion of the road the two
recensions differ. According to that of Bengal there follow towards the
east the river Indamati, then the town Ajakala belonging to the Bodhi,
then Bhulinga, then the river Saradanda. According to the other instead of
the first river comes the Ikshumati {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} instead of the first town Abhikala,
instead of the second Kulinga, then the second river. According to the
direction of the route both the above-mentioned rivers must be tributaries
of the Satadru.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The road then crossed the Yamuna (Jumna), led beyond that
river through the country of the Panchalas, and reached the Ganges at
Hastinapura, where the ferry was. Thence it led over the Ramaganga and its
eastern tributaries, then over the Gomati, and then in a southern
direction along the Malini, beyond which it reached Ayodhya. In Bharat's
journey the following rivers are passed from west to east: _Kutikoshtika_,
_Uttanika_, _Kutika_, _Kapivati_, _Gomati_ according to Schlegel, and
_Hiranyavati_, _Uttarika_, _Kutila_, _Kapivati_, _Gomati_ according to
Gorresio. As these rivers are to be looked for on the east of the Ganges,
the first must be the modern _Koh_, a small affluent of the Ramaganga,
over which the highway cannot have gone as it bends too far to the north.
The Uttanika or Uttarika must be the Ramaganga, the Kutika or Kutila its
eastern tributary, Kosila, the Kapivati the next tributary which on the
maps has different names, _Gurra_ or above Kailas, lower down _Bhaigu_.
The Gomati (Goomtee) retains its old name. The Malini, mentioned only in
the envoys' journey, must have been the western tributary of the Sarayu
now called Chuka." LASSEN'S _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. II. P. 524.




Page 183.


_What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?_

"Indian belief divided the universe into several worlds (_lokah_). The
three principal worlds were heaven, earth, and hell. But according to
another division there were seven: Bhurloka or the earth, Bhuvarloka or
the space between the earth and the sun, the seat of the Munis, Siddhas,
&c., Svarloka or the heaven of Indra between the sun and the polar star,
and the seventh Brahmaloka or the world of Brahma. Spirits which reached
the last were exempt from being born again." GORRESIO.




Page 203.


_When from a million herbs a blaze_
_Of their own luminous glory plays._

This mention of lambent flames emitted by herbs at night may be compared
with Lucan's description of a similar phenomenon in the Druidical forest
near Marseilles, (_Pharsalia_, III. 420.).

_Non ardentis_ fulgere incendia silvae.

Seneca, speaking of Argolis, (Thyestes, Act IV), says:--

Tota solet

Micare flamma silva, et excelsae trabes
_Ardent sine igni_.

Thus also the bush at Horeb (Exod. II.) flamed, but was not consumed.

The Indian explanation of the phenomenon is, that the sun before he sets
deposits his rays for the night with the deciduous plants. See _Journal of
R. As. S. Bengal_, Vol. II. p. 339.




Page 219.


_We rank the Buddhist with the thief._

Schlegel says in his Preface: "Lubrico vestigio insistit V. Cl.
_Heerenius, prof. Gottingensis_, in libro suo de commerciis veterum
populorum (OPP. Vol. HIST. XII, pag. 129,) dum putat, ex mentione
sectatorum Buddhae secundo libro Rameidos iniecta de tempore, quo totum
carmen sit conditum, quicquam legitime concludi posse.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Sunt versus
spurii, reiecti a Bengalis in sola commentatorum recensione leguntur.
Buddhas quidem mille fere annis ante Christum natun vixit: sed post multa
demumsecula, odiointernecivo inter Brachmanos et Buddhae sectatores orto,
his denique ex India pulsis, fingi potuit iniquissima criminatio, eos
animi immortalitatem poenasque et praemia in vita futura negare. Praeterea
metrum, quo concinnati sunt hi versus, de quo metro mox disseram,
recentiorem aetatem arguit.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Poenitet me nunc mei consilii, quod non
statim ab initio, {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} eiecerim cuncta disticha diversis a sloco vulgari
metris composita. Metra sunt duo: pariter ambo constant quatuor
hemistichiis inter se aequalibus, alterum undenarum syllabarum, alterum
duodenarum, hunc in modum:

[-)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [-)]
[)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [)] [-)]

Cuius generis versus in primo et secundo Rameidos libro nusquam nisi ad
finem capitum apposita inveniuntur, et huic loco unice sunt accommodata,
quasi peroratio, lyricis numeris assurgens, quo magis canorae cadant
clausulae: sicut musici in concentibus extremis omnium vocum
instrumentorumque ictu fortiore aures percellere amant. Igitur disticha
illa non ante divisionem per capita illatam addi potuerunt: hanc autem
grammaticis deberi argumento est ipse recensionum dissensus, manifesto
inde ortus, quod singuli editores in ea constituenda suo quisque iudicio
usi sunt; praeterquam quod non credibile est, poetam artis suae peritum
narrationem continuam in membra tam minuta dissecuisse. Porro discolor est
dictio: magniloquentia affectatur, sed nimis turgida illa atque effusa,
nec sententiarum pondere satis suffulta. Denique nihil fere novi affertur:
ampli ficantur prius dicta, rarius aliquid ex capite sequente anticipatur.
Si quis appendices hosce legendo transiliat, sentiet slocum ultimum cum
primo capitis proximi apte coagmentatum, nec sine vi quadam inde avulsum.
Eiusmodi versus exhibet utraque recensio, sed modo haec modo illa plures
paucioresve numero, et lectio interdum magnopere variat."

"The narrative of Rama's exile in the jungle is one of the most obscure
portions of the Ramayana, inasmuch as it is difficult to discover any
trace of the original tradition, or any illustration of actual life and
manners, beyond the artificial life of self-mortification and selfdenial
said to have been led by the Brahman sages of olden time. At the same
time, however, the story throws some light upon the significance of the
poem, and upon the character in which the Brahmanical author desired to
represent Rama; and consequently it deserves more serious consideration
than the nature of the subject-matter would otherwise seem to imply.

"According to the Ramayana, the hero Rama spent more than thirteen years
of his exile in wandering amongst the different Brahmanical settlements,
which appear to have been scattered over the country between the Ganges
and the Godaveri; his wanderings extending from the hill of Chitra-kuta in
Bundelkund, to the modern town of Nasik on the western side of India, near
the source of the Godaveri river, and about seventy-five miles to the
north-west of Bombay. The appearance of these Brahmanical hermitages in
the country far away to the south of the Raj of Kasala, seems to call for
critical inquiry. Each hermitage is said to have belonged to some
particular sage, who is famous in Brahmanical tradition. But whether the
sages named were really contemporaries of Rama, or whether they could
possibly have flourished at one and the same period, is open to serious
question. It is of course impossible to fix with any degree of certainty
the relative chronology of the several sages, who are said to have been
visited by Rama; but still it seems tolerably clear that some belonged to
an age far anterior to that in which the Ramayana was composed, and
probably to an age anterior to that in which Rama existed as a real and
living personage; whilst, at least, one sage is to be found who could only
have existed in the age during which the Ramayana was produced in its
present form. The main proofs of these inferences are as follows. An
interval of many centuries seems to have elapsed between the composition
of the Rig-Veda and that of the Ramayana: a conclusion which has long been
proved by the evidence of language, and is generally accepted by Sanskrit
scholars. But three of the sages, said to have been contemporary with
Rama, namely, Visvamitra, Atri and Agastya, are frequently mentioned in
the hymns of the Rig-Veda; whilst Valmiki, the sage dwelling at
Chitra-kuta, is said to have been himself the composer of the Ramayana.
Again, the sage Atri, whom Rama visited immediately after his departure
from Chitra-kuta, appears in the genealogical list preserved in the Maha
Bharata, as the progenitor of the Moon, and consequently as the first
ancestor of the Lunar race: whilst his grandson Buddha [Budha] is said to
have married Ila, the daughter of Ikhsvaku who was himself the remote
ancestor of the Solar race of Ayodhya, from whom Rama was removed by many
generations. These conclusions are not perhaps based upon absolute proof,
because they are drawn from untrustworthy authorities; but still the
chronological difficulties have been fully apprehended by the Pundits, and
an attempt has been made to reconcile all contradictions by representing
the sages to have lived thousands of years, and to have often re-appeared
upon earth in different ages widely removed from each other. Modern
science refuses to accept such explanations; and consequently it is
impossible to escape the conclusion that if Valmiki composed the Ramayana
in the form of Sanskrit in which it has been preserved, he could not have
flourished in the same age as the sages who are named in the Rig-Veda."
WHEELER'S _History of India, Vol._ II, 229.




Page 249.


_And King Himalaya's Child._

Uma or Parvati, was the daughter of Himalaya and Mena. She is the heroine
of Kalidasa's _Kumara-Sambhava_ or _Birth of the War-God_.




Page 250.


_Strong Kumbhakarna slumbering deep_
_In chains of never-ending sleep._

"Kumbhakarna, the gigantic brother of the titanic Ravan,--named from the
size of his ears which could contain a _Kumbha_ or large water-jar--had
such an appetite that he used to consume six months' provisions in a
single day. Brahma, to relieve the alarm of the world, which had begun to
entertain serious apprehensions of being eaten up, decreed that the giant
should sleep six months at a time and wake for only one day during which
he might consume his six months' allowance without trespassing unduly on
the reproductive capabilities of the " _Scenes front the Ramayan_, p. 153,
2nd Edit.




Page 257.


_Like Siva when his angry might_
_Stayed Daksha's sacrificial rite._

The following spirited version of this old story is from the pen of Mr. W.
Waterfield:

"This is a favorite subject of Hindu sculpture, especially on the temples
of Shiva, such as the caves of Elephanta and Ellora. It, no doubt, is an
allegory of the contest between the followers of Shiva and the worshippers
of the Elements, who observed the old ritual of the Vedas; in which the
name of Shiva is never mentioned.

Daksha for devotion
  Made a mighty feast:
Milk and curds and butter,
  Flesh of bird and beast,
Rice and spice and honey,
  Sweetmeats ghi and gur,(1038)
Gifts for all the Brahmans,
  Food for all the poor.
At the gates of Ganga(1039)
  Daksha held his feast;
Called the gods unto it,
  Greatest as the least.
All the gods were gathered
  Round with one accord;
All the gods but Uma,
  All but Uma's lord.
Uma sat with Shiva
  On Kailasa hill:
Round them stood the Rudras
  Watching for their will.
Who is this that cometh
  Lilting to his lute?
All the birds of heaven
  Heard his music, mute.
Round his head a garland
  Rich of hue was wreathed:
Every sweetest odour
  From its blossoms breathed.
'Tis the Muni Narad;
  'Mong the gods he fares,
Ever making mischief
  By the tales he bears.
"Hail to lovely Uma!
  Hail to Uma's lord!
Wherefore are they absent
  For her father's board?
Multiplied his merits
  Would be truly thrice,
Could he gain your favour
  For his sacrifice."
Worth of heart was Uma;
  To her lord she spake:--
"Why dost thou, the mighty,
  Of no rite partake?
Straight I speed to Daksha
  Such a sight to see:
If he be my father,
  He must welcome thee."
Wondrous was in glory
  Daksha's holy rite;
Never had creation
  Viewed so brave a sight.
Gods, and nymphs, find fathers,
  Sages, Brahmans, sprites,--
Every diverge creature
  Wrought that rite of rites.
Quickly then a quaking
  Fell on all from far;
Uma stood among them
  On her lion car.
"Greeting, gods and sages,
  Greeting, father mine!
Work hath wondrous virtue,
  Where such aids combine.
Guest-hall never gathered
  Goodlier company:
Seemeth all are welcome.
  All the gods but me."
Spake the Muni Daksha,
  Stern and cold his tone:--
"Welcome thou, too, daughter,
  Since thou com'st alone.
But thy frenzied husband
  Suits another shrine;
He is no partaker
  Of this feast of mine.
He who walks in darkness
  Loves no deeds of light:
He who herds with demons
  Shuns each kindly sprite.
Let him wander naked.--
  Wizard weapons wield,--
Dance his frantic measure
  Round the funeral field.
Art thou yet delighted
  With the reeking hide,
Body smeared with ashes.
  Skulls in necklace tied?
Thou to love this monster?
  Thou to plead his part!
Know the moon and Ganga
  Share that faithless heart
Vainly art thou vying
  With thy rivals' charms.
Are not coils of serpents
  Softer than thine arms?"
Words like these from Daksha
  Daksha's daughter heard:
Then a sudden passion
  All her bosom stirred.
Eyes with fury flashing.
  Speechless in her ire,
Headlong did she hurl her
  'Mid the holy fire.
Then a trembling terror
  Overcame each one,
And their minds were troubled
  Like a darkened sun;
And a cruel Vision,
  Face of lurid flame,
Uma's Wrath incarnate,
  From the altar came.
Fiendlike forms by thousands
  Started from his side,
'Gainst the sacrificers
  All their might they plied:
Till the saints availed not
  Strength like theirs to stay,
And the gods distracted
  Turned and fled away.
Hushed were hymns and chanting,
  Priests were mocked and spurned;
Food defiled and scattered;
  Altars overturned.--
Then, to save the object
  Sought at such a price,
Like a deer in semblance
  Sped the sacrifice.
Soaring toward the heavens,
  Through the sky it fled?
But the Rudras chasing
  Smote away its head.
Prostrate on the pavement
  Daksha fell dismayed:--
"Mightiest, thou hast conquered
  Thee we ask for aid.
Let not our oblations
  All be rendered vain;
Let our toilsome labour
  Full fruition gain."
Bright the broken altars
  Shone with Shiva's form;
"Be it so!" His blessing
  Soothed that frantic storm.
Soon his anger ceases,
  Though it soon arise;--
But the Deer's Head ever
  Blazes in the skies."

_Indian Ballads and other Poems._




Page 286. Urvasi.


"The personification of Urvasi herself is as thin as that of Eos or
Selene. Her name is often found in the Veda as a mere name for the
morning, and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns which
passing over men bring them to old age and death. Urvasi is the bright
flush of light overspreading the heaven before the sun rises, and is but
another form of the many mythical beings of Greek mythology whose names
take us back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the Vedic
hymns is called Uruki, the far-going (Telephassa, Telephos), so is she
also Uruasi, the wide-existing or wide-spreading; as are Europe,
Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and many more of the sisters of Athene and
Aphrodite. As such she is the mother of Vasishtha, the bright being, as
Oidipous is the son of Iokaste; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous, has
become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of Mitra and Varuna, of
night and day. Her lover Pururavas is the counterpart of the Hellenic
Polydeukes; but the continuance of her union with him depends on the
condition that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas, impatient
of her long sojourn among mortal men resolved to bring her back to their
bright home; and Pururavas is thus led unwitingly to disregard her
warning. A ewe with two lambs was tied to her couch, and the Gandharvas
stole one of them; Urvasi said, 'They take away my darling, as if I lived
in a land where there is no hero and no man.' They stole the second, and
she upbraided her husband again. Then Pururavas looked and said, 'How can
that be a land without heroes or men where I am?' And naked he sprang up;
he thought it was too long to put on his dress. Then the Gandharvas sent a
flash of lighting, and Urvasi saw her husband naked as by daylight. Then
she vanished. 'I come back,' she said, and went. 'Then he bewailed his
vanished love in bitter grief.' Her promise to return was fulfilled, but
for a moment only, at the Lotos-lake, and Pururavas in vain beseeches her
to tarry longer. 'What shall I do with thy speech?' is the answer of
Urvasi. 'I am gone like the first of the dawns. Pururavas, go home again.
I am hard to be caught like the winds.' Her lover is in utter despair; but
when he lies down to die, the heart of Urvasi was melted, and she bids him
come to her on the last night of the year. On that night only he might be
with her; but a son should be born to him. On that day he went up to the
golden seats, and there Urvasi told him that the Gandharvas would grant
him one wish, and that he must make his choice. 'Choose thou for me,' he
said: and she answered, 'Say to them, Let me be one of you.' "

COX'S _Mythology of the Aryan Nations._ Vol. I. p. 397.




Page 324.


_The sovereign of the Vanar race._

"Vanar is one of the most frequently occurring names by which the poem
calls the monkeys of Rama's army. Among the two or three derivations of
which the word Vanar is susceptible, one is that which deduces it from
vana which signifies a wood, and thus Vanar would mean a forester, an
inhabitant of the wood. I have said elsewhere that the monkeys, the
Vanars, whom Rama led to the conquest of Ceylon were fierce woodland
tribes who occupied the mountainous regions of the south of India, where
their descendants may still be seen. I shall hence forth promiscuously
employ the word _Vanar_ to denote those monkeys, those fierce combatants
of Rama's army." GORRESIO.




Page 326.


_No change of hue, no pose of limb_
_Gave sign that aught was false in him._
_Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,_
_Without a word to pain the ear,_
_From chest to throat, nor high nor low,_
_His accents came in measured flow._

Somewhat similarly in _The Squire's Tale_:

"He with a manly voice said his message,
After the form used in his language,
Withouten vice of syllable or of letter.
And for his tale shoulde seem the better
Accordant to his wordes was his chere,
As teacheth art of speech them that it lere."




Page 329. Rama's Alliance With Sugriva.


"The literal interpretation of this portion of the Ramayana is indeed
deeply rooted in the mind of the Hindu. He implicitly believes that Rama
is Vishnu, who became incarnate for the purpose of destroying the demon
Ravana: that he permitted his wife to be captured by Ravana for the sake
of delivering the gods and Brahmans from the oppressions of the Rakshasa;
and that he ultimately assembled an army of monkeys, who were the progeny
of the gods, and led them against the strong-hold of Ravana at Lanka, and
delivered the world from the tyrant Rakshasa, whilst obtaining ample
revenge for his own personal wrongs.

One other point seems to demand consideration, namely, the possibility of
such an alliance as that which Rama is said to have concluded with the
monkeys. This possibility will of course be denied by modern critics, but
still it is interesting to trace out the circumstances which seem to have
led to the acceptance of such a wild belief by the dreamy and marvel
loving Hindi. The south of India swarms with monkeys of curious
intelligence and rare physical powers. Their wonderful instinct for
organization, their attachment to particular localities, their occasional
journeys in large numbers over mountains and across rivers, their
obstinate assertion of supposed rights, and the ridiculous caricature
which they exhibit of all that is animal and emotional in man, would
naturally create a deep impression.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Indeed the habits of monkeys well
deserve to be patiently studied; not as they appear in confinement, when
much that is revolting in their nature is developed, but as they appear
living in freedom amongst the trees of the forest, or in the streets of
crowded cities, or precincts of temples. Such a study would not fail to
awaken strange ideas; and although the European would not be prepared to
regard monkeys as sacred animals he might be led to speculate as to their
origin by the light of data, which are at present unknown to the
naturalist whose observations have been derived from the menagerie alone.

Whatever, however, may have been the train of ideas which led the Hindu to
regard the monkey as a being half human and half divine, there can be
little doubt that in the Ramayana the monkeys of southern India have been
confounded with what may be called the aboriginal people of the country.
The origin of this confusion may be easily conjectured. Perchance the
aborigines of the country may have been regarded as a superior kind of
monkeys; and to this day the features of the Marawars, who are supposed to
be the aborigines of the southern part of the Carnatic, are not only
different from those of their neighbours, but are of a character
calculated to confirm the conjecture. Again, it is probable that the army
of aborigines may have been accompanied by outlying bands of monkeys
impelled by that magpie-like curiosity and love of plunder which are the
peculiar characteristics of the monkey race; and this incident may have
given rise to the story that the army was composed of Monkeys."

WHEELER'S _History of India. Vol. II. pp. 316 ff._




Page 342. The Fall Of Bali.


"As regards the narrative, it certainly seems to refer to some real event
amongst the aboriginal tribes: namely, the quarrel between an elder and
younger brother for the possession of a Raj; and the subsequent alliance
of Rama with the younger brother. It is somewhat remarkable that Rama
appears to have formed an alliance with the wrong party, for the right of
Bali was evidently superior to that of Sugriva; and it is especially
worthy of note that Rama compassed the death of Bali by an act contrary to
all the laws of fair fighting. Again, Rama seems to have tacitly
sanctioned the transfer of Tara from Bali to Sugriva, which was directly
opposed to modern rule, although in conformity with the rude customs of a
barbarous age; and it is remarkable that to this day the marriage of both
widows and divorced women is practised by the Marawars, or aborigines of
the southern Carnatic, contrary to the deeply-rooted prejudice which
exists against such unions amongst the Hindus at large."

WHEELER'S _History of India, Vol. II. 324_.




Page 370. The Vanar Host.


"The splendid Marutas form the army of Indras, the red-haired monkeys and
bears that of Ramas; and the mythical and solar nature of the monkeys and
bears of the Ramayanam manifests itself several times. The king of the
monkeys is a sun-god. The ancient king was named Balin, and was the son of
Indras. His younger brother Sugrivas, he who changes his shape at pleasure
(Kamarupas), who, helped by Ramas, usurped his throne, is said to be own
child of the sun. Here it is evident that the Vedic antagonism between
Indras and Vishnus is reproduced in a zoological and entirely apish form.
The old Zeus must give way to the new, the moon to the sun, the evening to
the morning sun, the sun of winter to that of spring; the young son
betrays and overthrows the old one.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Ramas, who treacherously kills the
old king of the monkeys, Balin, is the equivalent of Vishnus, who hurls
his predecessor Indras from his throne; and Sugrivas, the new king of the
monkeys resembles Indras when he promises to find the ravished Sita, in
the same way as Vishnus in one of his incarnations finds again the lost
vedas. And there are other indications in the Ramayanam of opposition
between Indras and the monkeys who assist Ramas. The great monkey
Hanumant, of the reddish colour of gold, has his jaw broken, Indras having
struck him with his thunderbolt and caused him to fall upon a mountain,
because, while yet a child, he threw himself off a mountain into the air
in order to arrest the course of the sun, whose rays had no effect upon
him. (The cloud rises from the mountain and hides the sun, which is unable
of itself to disperse it; the tempest comes, and brings flashes of
lightning and thunder-bolts, which tear the cloud in pieces.)

The whole legend of the monkey Hanumant represents the sun entering into
the cloud or darkness, and coming out of it. His father is said to be now
the wind, now the elephant of the monkeys (Kapikunjaras), now Kesarin, the
long-haired sun, the sun with a mane, the lion sun (whence his name of
_Kesarinah putrah_). From this point of view, Hanumant would seem to be
the brother of Sugrivas, who is also the offspring of the sun.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

All the epic monkeys of the _Ramayanam_ are described in the twentieth
canto of the first book by expressions which very closely resemble those
applied in the Vedic hymns to the Marutas, as swift as the tempestuous
wind, changing their shape at pleasure, making a noise like clouds,
sounding like thunder, battling, hurling mountain-peaks, shaking great
uprooted trees, stirring up the deep waters, crushing the earth with their
arms, making the clouds fall. Thus Balin comes out of the cavern as the
sun out of the cloud.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

But the legend of the monkey Hanumant presents another curious resemblance
to that of Samson. Hanumant is bound with cords by Indrajit, son of
Ravanas; he could easily free himself, but does not wish to do so. Ravanas
to put him to shame, orders his tail to be burned, because the tail is the
part most prized by monkeys.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

The tail of Hanumant, which sets fire to the city of the monsters, is
probably a personification of the rays of the morning or spring sun, which
sets fire to the eastern heavens, and destroys the abode of the nocturnal
or winter monsters."

DE GUBERNATIS, _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. II. pp. 100 ff.

"The Jaitwas of Rajputana, a tribe politically reckoned as Rajputs,
nevertheless trace their descent from the monkey-god Hanuman, and confirm
it by alleging that their princes still bear its evidence in a tail-like
prolongation of the spine; a tradition which has probably a real
ethnological meaning, pointing out the Jaitwas as of non-Aryan
race."(1040) TYLOR'S _Primitive Culture_, Vol. I. p. 341.




Page 372.


The names of peoples occurring in the following _slokas_ are omitted in
the metrical translation:

"Go to the Brahmamalas,(1041) the Videhas,(1042) the Malavas,(1043) the
Kasikosalas,(1044) the Magadnas,(1045) the Pundras,(1046) and the
Angas,(1047) and the land of the weavers of silk, and the land of the
mines of silver, and the hills that stretch into the sea, and the towns
and the hamlets that are about the top of Mandar, and the
Karnapravaranas,(1048) and the Oshthakarnakas,(1049) and the
Ghoralohamukhas,(1050) and the swift Ekapadakas,(1051) and the strong
imperishable Eaters of Men, and the Kiratas(1052) with stiff hair-tufts,
men like gold and fair to look upon: And the Eaters of Raw Fish, and the
Kiratas who dwell in islands, and the fierce Tiger-men(1053) who live amid
the waters."




Page 374.


"Go to the Vidarbhas(1054) and the Rishtikas(1055) and the
Mahishikas,(1056) and the Matsyas(1057) and Kalingas(1058) and the
Kausikas(1059) {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} and the Andhras(1060) and the Pundras(1061) and the
Cholas(1062) and the Pandyas(1063) and the Keralas,(1064) Mlechchhas(1065)
and the Pulindas(1066) and the Surasenas,(1067) and the Prasthalas and the
Bharatas and Madrakas(1068) and the Kambojas(1069) and the Yavanas(1070)
and the towns of the Sakas(1071) and the Varadas."(1072)




Page 378. Northern Kurus.


Professor Lassen remarks in the Zeitschrift fuer die Kunde des
Morgenlandes, ii. 62: "At the furthest accessible extremity of the earth
appears Harivarsha with the northern Kurus. The region of Hari or Vishnu
belongs to the system of mythical geography; but the case is different
with the Uttara Kurus. Here there is a real basis of geographical fact; of
which fable has only taken advantage, without creating it. The Uttara
Kurus were formerly quite independent of the mythical system of _dvipas_,
though they were included in it at an early date." Again the same writer
says at p. 65: "That the conception of the Uttara Kurus is based upon an
actual country and not on mere invention, is proved (1) by the way in
which they are mentioned in the Vedas; (2) by the existence of Uttara Kuru
in historical times as a real country; and (3) by the way in which the
legend makes mention of that region as the home of primitive customs. To
begin with the last point the Mahabharata speaks as follows of the freer
mode of life which women led in the early world, Book I. verses 4719-22:
'Women were formerly unconfined and roved about at their pleasure,
independent. Though in their youthful innocence they abandoned their
husbands, they were guilty of no offence; for such was the rule in early
times. This ancient custom is even now the law for creatures born as
brutes, which are free from lust and anger. This custom is supported by
authority and is observed by great rishis, and it is _still practiced
among the northern Kurus_.'

"The idea which is here conveyed is that of the continuance in one part of
the world of that original blessedness which prevailed in the golden age.
To afford a conception of the happy condition of the southern Kurus it is
said in another place (M.-Bh, i. 4346.) 'The southern Kurus vied in
happiness with the northern Kurus and with the divine rishis and bards.'

Professor Lassen goes on to say: 'Ptolemy (vi. 16.) is also acquainted
with _Uttara Kuru_. He speaks of a mountain, a people, and a city called
_Ottorakorra_. Most of the other ancient authors who elsewhere mention
this name, have it from him. It is a part of the country which he calls
Serica; according to him the city lies twelve degrees west from the
metropolis of Sera, and the mountain extends from thence far to the
eastward. As Ptolemy has misplaced the whole of eastern Asia beyond the
Ganges, the _relative_ position which he assigns will guide us better that
the absolute one, which removes _Ottorakorra_ so far to the east that a
correction is inevitable. According to my opinion the _Ottorakorra_ of
Ptolemy must be sought for to the east of Kashgar.' Lassen also thinks
that Magasthenes had the Uttara Kurus in view when he referred to the
Hyperboreans who were fabled by Indian writers to live a thousand years.
In his Indian antiquities, (Ind. Alterthumskunde, i. 511, 512. and note,)
the same writer concludes that though the passages above cited relative to
the Uttara Kurus indicate a belief in the existence of a really existing
country of that name in the far north, yet that the descriptions there
given are to be taken as pictures of an ideal paradise, and not as founded
on any recollections of the northern origin of the Kurus. It is probable,
he thinks, that some such reminiscences originally existed, and still
survived in the Vedic era, though there is no trace of their existence in
latter times." MUIR'S _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. II. pp. 336, 337.




Page 428.


_Trust to these mighty Vanars._

The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has "these silvans in
the forms of monkeys, vanarah kapirupinah." "Here it manifestly appears,"
says Gorresio, "that these hosts of combatants whom Rama led to the
conquest of Lanka (Ceylon) the kingdom and seat of the Hamitic race, and
whom the poem calls monkeys, were in fact as I have elsewhere observed,
inhabitants of the mountainous and southern regions of India, who were
wild-looking and not altogether unlike monkeys. They were perhaps the
remote ancestors of the Malay races."




Page 431.


_"Art thou not he who slew of old_
_The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold."_

All these exploits of Ravan are detailed in the _Uttarakanda_, and
epitomized in the Appendix.




Page 434.


_Within the consecrated hall_.

The Brahman householder ought to maintain three sacred fires, the
_Garhapatya_, the _Ahavaniya_ and the _Dakshina_. These three fires were
made use of in many Brahmanical solemnities, for example in funeral rites
when the three fires were arranged in prescribed order.




Page 436.


_Fair Punjikasthala I met._

"I have not noticed in the Uttara Kanda any story about the daughter of
Varuna, but the commentator on the text (VI 60, 11) explains the allusion
to her thus:

"The daughter of Varuna was Punjikasthali. On her account, a curse of
Brahma, involving the penalty of death, [was pronounced] on the rape of
women." MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV. Appendix.




Page 452.


_"__Shall no funereal honours grace_
_The parted lord of Raghu's race?__"_

"Here are indicated those admirable rites and those funeral prayers which
Professor Mueller has described in his excellent work, _Die
Todtenbestattung bei den Brahmanen_, Sita laments that the body of Rama
will not be honoured with those rites and prayers, nor will the Brahman
priest while laying the ashes from the pile in the bosom of the earth,
pronounce over them those solemn and magnificent words: 'Go unto the
earth, thy mother, the ample, wide, and blessed earth.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} And do thou, O
Earth, open and receive him as a friend with sweet greeting: enfold him in
thy bosom as a mother wraps her child in her robes.' " GORRESIO.




Page 462.


                _Each glorious sign_
_That stamps the future queen is mine_.

We read in Josephus that Caesar was so well versed in chiromancy that when
one day a _soi-disant_ son of Herod had audience of him, he at once
detected the impostor because his hand was destitute of all marks of
royalty.




Page 466.


_In battle's wild Gandharva dance_.

"Here the commentator explains: 'the battle resembled the dance of the
Gandharvas,' in accordance with the notion of the Gandharvas entertained
in his day. They were regarded as celestial musicians enlivening with
their melodies Indra's heaven and the banquets of the Gods. But the
Gandharvas before becoming celestial musicians in popular tradition, were
in the primitive and true signification of the name heroes, spirited and
ardent warriors, followers of Indra, and combined the heroical character
with their atmospherical deity. Under this aspect the dance of the
Gandharvas may be a very different thing from what the commentator means,
and may signify the horrid dance of war." GORRESIO.

The Homeric expression is similar, "to dance a war-dance before Ares."




Page 470.


_By Anaranya's lips of old._

"The story of Anaranya is told in the Uttara Kanda of the Ramayana.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
Anaranya a descendant of Ixvaku and King of Ayodhya, when called upon to
fight with Ravana or acknowledge himself conquered, prefers the former
alternative; but his army is overcome, and he himself is thrown from his
chariot.

When Ravana triumphs over his prostrate foe, the latter says that he has
been vanquished not by him but by fate, and that Ravana is only the
instrument of his overthrow; and he predicts that Ravana shall one day be
slain by his descendant Rama." _Sanskrit Texts_, IV., Appendix.




Page 497.


"With regard to the magic image of Sita made by Indrajit, we may observe
that this thoroughly oriental idea is also found in Greece in Homer's
Iliad, where Apollo forms an image of AEneas to save that hero beloved by
the Gods: it occurs too in the AEneid of Virgil where Juno forms a
fictitious AEneas to save Turnus:

  Tum dea nube cava tenuem sine viribus umbram
In faciem AEneae (visu mirabile monstrum)
Dardaniis ornat telis; clipeumque jubasque
Divini assimulat capitis; dat inania verba;
Dat sine mente sonum, gressusque effingit euntis.

(_AEneidos_, lib. X.)" GORRESIO.




Page 489.


_"To Raghu's son my chariot lend."_

"Analogous to this passage of the Ramayana, where Indra sends to Rama his
own chariot, his own charioteer, and his own arms, is the passage in the
AEneid where Venus descending from heaven brings celestial arms to her son
AEneas when he is about to enter the battle:

  At Venus aethereos inter dea candida nimbos
Dona fereus aderat;{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
Arma sub adversa posuit radiantia quercum.
Ille, deae donis et tanto laetus honore,
Expleri nequit, atque oculus per singula volvit,
Miraturque, interque manus et brachia versat
Terribilem cristis galeam flammasque vomentem,
Fatiferumque ensem, loricam ex aere rigentem.

(_AEneidos_, lib. VIII)" GORRESIO.




Page 489.


_Agastya came and gently spake._

"The Muni or saint Agastya, author of several Vedic hymns, was celebrated
in Indo-Sanskrit tradition for having directed the first brahmanical
settlements in the southern regions of India; and the Mahabharata gives
him the credit of having subjected those countries, expelled the
Rakshases. and given security to the solitary ascetics, who were settled
there. Hence Agastya was regarded in ancient legend as the conqueror and
ruler of the southern country. This tradition refers to the earliest
migrations made by the Sanskrit Indians towards the south of India. To
Agastya are attributed many marvellous mythic deeds which adumbrate and
veil ancient events; some of which are alluded to here and there in the
Ramayana." GORRESIO.

The following is the literal translation of the Canto, text and
commentary, from the Calcutta edition:

Having found Rama weary with fighting and buried in deep thought, and
Ravan standing before him ready to engage in battle, the holy Agastya, who
had come to see the battle, approached Rama and spoke to him thus: "O
mighty Rama, listen to the old mystery by which thou wilt conquer all thy
foes in the battle. Having daily repeated the Adityahridaya (the delighter
of the mind of the Sun) the holy prayer which destroys all enemies (of him
who repeats it) gives victory, removes all sins, sorrows and distress,
increases life, and which is the blessing of all blessings, worship the
rising and splendid sun who is respected by both the Gods and demons, who
gives light to all bodies and who is the rich lord of all the worlds, (To
the question why this prayer claims so great reverence; the sage answers)
Since yonder(1073) sun is full of glory and all gods reside in him (he
being their material cause) and bestows being and the active principle on
all creatures by his rays; and since he protects all deities, demons and
men with his rays.

He is Brahma,(1074) Vishnu,(1075) Siva,(1076) Skanda,(1077)
Prajapati,(1078) Mahendra,(1079) Dhanada,(1080) Kala,(1081) Yama,(1082)
Soma,(1083) Apam Pati _i.e._ The lord of waters, Pitris,(1084)
Vasus,(1085) Sadhyas,(1086) Asvins,(1087) Maruts,(1088) Manu,(1089)
Vayu,(1090) Vahni,(1091) Praja,(1092) Prana,(1093) Ritukarta,(1094)
Prabhakara,(1095) (Thou,(1096) art) Aditya,(1097) Savita,(1098)
Surya,(1099) Khaga,(1100) Pushan,(1101) Gabhastiman,(1102)
Suvarnasadrisa,(1103) Bhanu,(1104) Hiranyaretas,(1105) Divakara,(1106)
Haridasva,(1107) Sahasrarchish,(1108) Saptasapti,(1109) Marichiman,(1110)
Timironmathana,(1111) Sambhu,(1112) Twashta,(1113) Martanda,(1114)
Ansuman,(1115) Hiranyagarbha,(1116) Sisira,(1117) Tapana,(1118)
Ahaskara,(1119) Ravi,(1120) Agnigarbha,(1121) Aditiputra,(1122)
Sankha,(1123) Sisiranasana,(1124) Vyomanatha,(1125) Tamobhedi,(1126)
Rigyajussamaparaga,(1127) Ghanavrishti,(1128) Apam-Mitra,(1129)
Vindhyavithiplavangama,(1130) Atapi,(1131) Mandali,(1132) Mrityu (death),
Pingala,(1133) Sarvatapana,(1134) Kavi,(1135) Visva,(1136)
Mahatejas,(1137) Rakta,(1138) Sarvabhavodbhava.(1139) The Lord of stars,
planets, and other luminous bodies, Visvabhavana,(1140)
Tejasvinam-Tejasvi,(1141) Dwadasatman:(1142) I salute thee. I salute thee
who art the eastern mountain. I salute thee who art the western mountain.
I salute thee who art the Lord of all the luminous bodies. I salute thee
who art the Lord of days.

I respectfully salute thee who art Jaya,(1143) Jayabhadra,(1144)
Haryasa,(1145) O Thou who hast a thousand rays, I repeatedly salute thee.
I repeatedly and respectfully salute thee who art Aditya, I repeatedly
salute thee who art Ugra,(1146) Vira,(1147) and Saranga.(1148) I salute
thee who openest the lotuses (or the lotus of the heart). I salute thee
who art furious. I salute thee who art the Lord of Brahma, Siva and
Vishnu. I salute thee who art the sun, Adityavarchas,(1149) splendid,
Sarvabhaksha,(1150)and Raudravapush.(1151)

I salute thee who destroyest darkness, cold and enemies: whose form is
boundless, who art the destroyer of the ungrateful; who art Deva;(1152)
who art the Lord of the luminous bodies, and who appearest like the heated
gold. I salute thee who art Hari,(1153) Visvakarman,(1154) the destroyer
of darkness, and who art splendid and Lokasakshin.(1155) Yonder sun
destroys the whole of the material world and also creates it. Yonder sun
dries (all earthly things), destroys them and causes rain with his rays.
He wakes when our senses are asleep; and resides within all beings. Yonder
sun is Agnihotra(1156) and also the fruit obtained by the performer of
Agnihotra. He is identified with the gods, sacrifices, and the fruit of
the sacrifices. He is the Lord of all the duties known to the world, if
any man, O Raghava, in calamities, miseries, forests and dangers, prays to
yonder sun, he is never overwhelmed by distress.

Worship, with close attention Him the God of gods and the Lord of the
world; and recite these verses thrice, whereby thou wilt be victorious in
the battle. O brave one, thou wilt kill Ravana this very instant."

Thereupon Agastya having said this went away as he came. The glorious Rama
having heard this became free from sorrow. Raghava whose senses were under
control, being pleased, committed the hymn to memory, recited it facing
the sun, and obtained great delight. The brave Rama having sipped water
thrice and become pure took his bow, and seeing Ravana, was delighted, and
meditated on the sun.




Page 492. Ravan's Funeral.


"In the funeral ceremonies of India the fire was placed on three sides of
the pyre; the _Dakshina_ on the south, the _Garhapatya_ on the west, and
the _Ahavaniya_ on the east. The funeral rites are not described in detail
here, and it is therefore difficult to elucidate and explain them. The
poem assigns the funeral ceremonies of Aryan Brahmans to the Rakshases, a
race different from them in origin and religion, in the same way as Homer
sometimes introduces into Troy the rites of the Grecian cult." GORRESIO.

Mr. Muir translates the description of the funeral from the Calcutta
edition, as follows: "They formed, with Vedic rites, a funeral pile of
faggots of sandal-wood, with _padmaka_ wood, _usira_ grass, and sandal,
and covered with a quilt of deer's hair. They then performed an unrivalled
obsequial ceremony for the Raxasa prince, placing the sacrificial ground
to the S.E. and the fire in the proper situation. They cast the ladle
filled with curds and ghee on the shoulder(1157) of the deceased; he (?)
placed the car on the feet, and the mortar between the thighs. Having
deposited all the wooden vessels, the [upper] and lower fire-wood, and the
other pestle, in their proper places, they departed. The Raxasas having
then slain a victim to their prince in the manner prescribed in the
Sastras, and enjoined by great rishis, cast [into the fire] the coverlet
of the king saturated with ghee. They then, Vibhishana included, with
afflicted hearts, adorned Ravana with perfumes and garlands, and with
various vestments, and besprinkled him with fried grain. Vibhishana having
bathed, and having, with his clothes wet, scattered in proper form _tila_
seeds mixed with _darbha_ grass, and moistened with water, applied the
fire [to the pile]."




Page 496.


The following is a literal translation of Brahma's address to Rama
according to the Calcutta edition, text and commentary:

"O Rama, how dost thou, being the creator of all the world, best of all
those who have profound knowledge of the Upanishads and all-powerful as
thou art, suffer Sita to fall in the fire? How dost thou not know thyself
as the best of the gods? Thou art one of the primeval Vasus,(1158) and
also their lord and creator. Thou art thyself the lord and first creator
of the three worlds. Thou art the eighth (that is Mahadeva) of the
Rudras,(1159) and also the fifth(1160) of the Sadhyas.(1161) (The poet
describes Rama as made of the following gods) The Asvinikumaras (the twin
divine physicians of the gods) are thy ears; the sun and the moon are thy
eyes; and thou hast been seen in the beginning and at the end of creation.
How dost thou neglect the daughter of Videha (Janaka} like a man whose
actions are directed by the dictates of nature?" Thus addressed by Indra,
Brahma and the other gods, Rama the descendant of Raghu, lord of the world
and the best of the virtuous, spoke to the chief of the gods. "As I take
myself to be a man of the name of Rama and son of Dasaratha, therefore,
sir, please tell me who I am and whence have I come." "O thou whose might
is never failing," said Brahma to Kakutstha the foremost of those who
thoroughly know Brahma, "Thou art Narayana,(1162) almighty, possessed of
fortune, and armed with the discus. Thou art the boar(1163) with one tusk;
the conqueror of thy past and future foes. Thou art Brahma true and
eternal or undecaying. Thou art Visvaksena,(1164) having four arms; Thou
art Hrishikesa,(1165) whose bow is made of horn; Thou art Purusha,(1166)
the best of all beings; Thou art one who is never defeated by any body;
Thou art the holder of the sword (named Nandaka). Thou art Vishnu (the
pervader of all); blue in colour: of great might; the commander of armies;
and lord of villages. Thou art truth. Thou art embodied intelligence,
forgiveness, control over the senses, creation, and destruction. Thou art
Upendra(1167) and Madhusudana.(1168) Thou art the creator of Indra, the
ruler over all the world, Padmanabha,(1169) and destroyer of enemies in
the battle. The divine Rishis call thee shelter of refugees, as well as
the giver of shelter. Thou hast a thousand horns,(1170) a hundred
heads.(1171) Thou art respected of the respected; and the lord and first
creator of the three worlds. Thou art the forefather and shelter of
Siddhas,(1172) and Sadhyas.(1173) Thou art sacrifices; Vashatkara,(1174)
Omkara.(1175) Thou art beyond those who are beyond our senses. There is
none who knows who thou art and who knows thy beginning and end. Thou art
seen in all material objects, in Brahmans, in cows, and also in all the
quarters, sky and streams. Thou hast a thousand feet, a hundred heads, and
a thousand eyes. Thou hast borne the material objects and the earth with
the mountains; and at the bottom of the ocean thou art seen the great
serpent. O Rama, Thou hast borne the three worlds, gods, Gandharvas,(1176)
and demons. I am, O Rama, thy heart; the goddess of learning is thy
tongue; the gods are the hairs of thy body; the closing of thy eyelids is
called the night: and their opening is called the day. The Vedas are thy
Sanskaras.(1177) Nothing can exist without thee. The whole world is thy
body; the surface of the earth is thy stability."

O Srivatsalakshana, fire is thy anger, and the moon is thy favour. In the
time of thy incarnation named Vamana, thou didst pervade the three worlds
with thy three steps; and Mahendra was made the king of paradise by thee
having confined the fearful Bali.(1178) Sita (thy wife) is Lakshmi; and
thou art the God Vishnu,(1179) Krishna,(1180) and Prajapati. To kill Ravan
thou hast assumed the form of a man; therefore, O best of the virtuous,
thou hast completed this task imposed by us (gods). O Rama, Ravana has
been killed by thee: now being joyful (i.e. having for some time reigned
in the kingdom of Ayodhya,) go to paradise. O glorious Rama, thy power and
thy valour are never failing. The visit to thee and the prayers made to
thee are never fruitless. Thy devotees will never be unsuccessful. Thy
devotees who obtain thee (thy favour) who art first and best of mankind,
shall obtain their desires in this world as well as in the next. They who
recite this prayer, founded on the Vedas (or first uttered by the sages),
and the old and divine account of (Rama) shall never suffer defeat."




Page 503. The Meeting.


The _Bharat-Milap_ or meeting with Bharat, is the closing scene of the
dramatic representation of Rama's great victory and triumphant return
which takes place annually in October in many of the cities of Northern
India. The Ram-Lala or Play of Rama, as the great drama is called, is
performed in the open air and lasts with one day's break through fifteen
successive days. At Benares there are three nearly simultaneous
performances, one provided by H. H. the Maharajah of Benares near his
palace at Ramnaggur, one by H. H. the Maharajah of Vizianagram near the
Missionary settlement at Sigra and at other places in the city, and one by
the leading gentry of the city at Chowka Ghat near the College. The scene
especially on the great day when the brothers meet is most interesting:
the procession of elephants with their gorgeous howdahs of silver and gold
and their magnificently dressed riders with priceless jewels sparkling in
their turbans, the enthusiasm of the thousands of spectators who fill the
streets and squares, the balconies and the housetops, the flowers that are
rained down upon the advancing car, the wild music, the shouting and the
joy, make an impression that is not easily forgotten.

_Still on his head, well trained in lore_
_Of duty, Rama's shoes he bore._

Rama's shoes are here regarded as the emblems of royalty or possession. We
may compare the Hebrew "Over Edom will I cast forth my shoe." A curiously
similar passage occurs in LYSCHANDER'S _Chronicon Greenlandiae Rhythmicon_:

"Han sendte til Irland sin skiden skoe,
Og boed den Konge. Som der monne boe,
Han skulde dem haederlig baere
Pan Juuledag i sin kongelig Pragt,
Og kjende han havde sit Rige og Magt
Af Norges og Quernes Herre."

He sent to Ireland his dirty shoes,
And commanded the king who lived there
To wear them with honour
On Christmas Day in his royal state,
And to own that he had his kingdom and power
From the Lord of Norway and the Isles.
_Notes & Queries, March 30, 1872._




Final Notes.


I end these notes with an extract which I translate from Signor Gorresio's
Preface to the tenth volume of his Ramayan, and I take this opportunity of
again thankfully acknowledging my great obligations to this eminent
Sanskritist from whom I have so frequently borrowed. As Mr. Muir has
observed, the Bengal recension which Signor Gorresio has most ably edited
is throughout an admirable commentary on the genuine Ramayan of northern
India, and I have made constant reference to the faithful and elegant
translation which accompanies the text for assistance and confirmation in
difficulties:

"Towards the southern extremity and in the island of Lanka (Ceylon) there
existed undoubtedly a black and ferocious race, averse to the Aryans and
hostile to their mode of worship: their ramifications extended through the
islands of the Archipelago, and some traces of them remain in Java to this
day.

The Sanskrit-Indians, applying to this race a name expressive of hatred
which occurs in the Vedas as the name of hostile, savage and detested
beings, called it the Rakshas race: it is against these Rakshases that the
expedition of Rama which the Ramayan celebrates is directed. The
Sanskrit-Indians certainly altered in their traditions the real character
of this race: they attributed to it physical and moral qualities not found
in human nature; they transformed it into a race of giants; they
represented it as monstrous, hideous, truculent, changing forms at will,
blood-thirsty and ravenous, just as the Semites represented the races that
opposed them as impious, horrible and of monstrous size. But
notwithstanding these mythical exaggerations, which are partly due to the
genius of the Aryans so prone to magnify everything without measure, the
Ramayan in the course of its epic narration has still preserved and noted
here and there some traits and peculiarities of the race which reveal its
true character. It represents the Rakshases as black of hue, and compares
them with black clouds and masses of black collyrium; it attributes to
them curly woolly hair and thick lips, it depicts them as loaded with
chains, collars and girdles of gold, and the other bright ornaments which
their race has always loved, and in which the kindred races of the Soudan
still delight. It describes them as worshippers of matter and force. They
are hostile to the religion of the Aryans whose rites and sacrifices they
disturb and ruin {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Such is the Rakshas race as represented in the Ramayan;
and the war of the Aryan Rama forms the subject of the epic, a subject
certainly real and historical as far as regards its substance, but greatly
exaggerated by the ancient myth. In Sanskrit-Indian tradition are found
traces of another struggle of the Aryans with the Rakshas races, which
preceded the war of Rama. According to some pauranic legends, Karttavirya,
a descendant of the royal tribe of the Yadavas, contemporary with
Parasurama and a little anterior to Rama, attacked Lanka and took Ravan
prisoner. This well shows how ancient and how deeply rooted in the Aryan
race is the thought of this war which the Ramayan celebrates.

"But," says an eminent Indianist(1181) whose learning I highly appreciate,
"the Ramayan is an allegorical epic, and no precise and historical value
can be assigned to it. Sita signifies the furrow made by the plough, and
under this symbolical aspect has already appeared honoured with worship in
the hymns of the Rig-veda; Rama is the bearer of the plough (this
assertion is entirely gratuitous); these two allegorical personages
represented agriculture introduced to the southern regions of India by the
race of the Kosalas from whom Rama was descended; the Rakshases on whom he
makes war are races of demons and giants who have little or nothing human
about them; allegory therefore predominates in the poem, and the exact
reality of an historical event must not be looked for in it." Such is
Professor Weber's opinion. If he means to say that mythical fictions are
mingled with real events,

Forsan in alcun vero suo arco percuote,

as Dante says, and I fully concede the point. The interweaving of the myth
with the historical truth belongs to the essence, so to speak, of the
primitive epopeia. If Sita is born, as the Ramayan feigns, from the furrow
which King Janak opened when he ploughed the earth, not a whit more real
is the origin of Helen and AEneas as related in Homer and Virgil, and if
the characters in the Ramayan exceed human nature, and in a greater degree
perhaps than is the case in analogous epics, this springs in part from the
nature of the subject and still more from the symbol-loving genius of the
orient. Still the characters of the Ramayan, although they exceed more or
less the limits of human nature, act notwithstanding in the course of the
poem, speak, feel, rejoice and grieve according to the natural impulse of
human passions. But if by saying that the Ramayan is an allegorical epic,
it is meant that its fundamental subject is nothing but allegory, that the
war of the Aryan Rama against the Rakshas race is an allegory, that the
conquest of the southern region and of the island of Lanka is an allegory,
I do not hesitate to answer that such a presumption cannot be admitted and
that the thing is in my opinion impossible. Father Paolino da S.
Bartolommeo,(1182) had already, together with other strange opinions of
his own on Indian matters, brought forward a similar idea, that is to say
that the exploit of Rama which is the subject of the Ramayan was a symbol
and represented the course of the sun: thus he imagined that Brahma was
the earth, Vishnu the water, and that his avatars were the blessings
brought by the fertilizing waters, etc. But such ideas, born at a time
when Indo-sanskrit antiquities were enveloped in darkness, have been
dissipated by the light of new studies. How could an epic so dear in India
to the memory of the people, so deeply rooted for many centuries in the
minds of all, so propagated and diffused through all the dialects and
languages of those regions, which had become the source of many dramas
which are still represented in India, which is itself represented every
year with such magnificence and to such crowds of people in the
neighbourhood of Ayodhya, a poem welcomed at its very birth with such
favour, as the legend relates, that the recitation of it by the first
wandering Rhapsodists has consecrated and made famous all the places
celebrated by them, and where Rama made a shorter or longer stay, how, I
ask, could such an epic have been purely allegorical? How, upon a pure
invention, upon a simple allegory, could a poem have been composed of
about fifty thousand verses, relating with such force and power the
events, and giving details with such exactness? On a theme purely
allegorical there may easily be composed a short mythical poem, as for
example a poem on Proserpine or Psyche: but never an epic so full of
traditions and historical memories, so intimately connected with the life
of the people, as the Ramayan.(1183) Excessive readiness to find allegory
whenever some traces of symbolism occur, where the myth partly veils the
historical reality, may lead and often has led to error. What poetical
work of mythical times could stand this mode of trial? could there not be
made, or rather has there not been made a work altogether allegorical, out
of the Homeric poems? We have all heard of the ingenious idea of the
anonymous writer, who in order to prove how easily we may pass beyond the
truth in our wish to seek and find allegory everywhere, undertook with
keen subtlety to prove that the great personality of Napoleon I. was
altogether allegorical and represented the sun. Napoleon was born in an
island, his course was from west to east, his twelve marshals were the
twelve signs of the zodiac, etc.

I conclude then, that the fundamental theme of the Ramayan, that is to say
the war of the Aryan Rama against the Rakshases, an Hamitic race settled
in the south, ought to be regarded as real and historical as far as
regards its substance, although the mythic element intermingled with the
true sometimes alters its natural and genuine aspect.

How then did the Indo-Sanskrit epopeia form and complete itself? What
elements did it interweave in its progress? How did it embody, how did it
clothe the naked and simple primitive datum? We must first of all remember
that the Indo-European races possessed the epic genius in the highest
degree, and that they alone in the different regions they occupied
produced epic poetry {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But other causes and particular influences combined
to nourish and develop the epic germ of the Sanskrit-Indians. Already in
the Rig-veda are found hymns in which the Aryan genius preluded, so to
speak, to the future epopeia, in songs that celebrated the heroic deeds of
Indra, the combats and the victories of the tutelary Gods of the Aryan
races over enemies secret or open, human or superhuman, the exploits and
the memories of ancient heroes. More recently, at certain solemn
occasions, as the very learned A. Weber remarks, at the solemnity, for
example of the Asvamedha or sacrifice of the horse, the praises of the
king who ordained the great rite were sung by bards and minstrels in songs
composed for the purpose, the memories of past times were recalled and
honourable mention was made of the just and pious kings of old. In the
_Brahmanas_, a sort of prose commentaries annexed to the Vedas, are found
recorded stories and legends which allude to historical events of the past
ages, to ancient memories, and to mythical events. Such popular legends
which the _Brahmanas_ undoubtedly gathered from tradition admirably suited
the epic tissue with which they were interwoven by successive hands.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Many
and various mythico-historical traditions, suitable for epic development,
were diffused among the Aryan races, those for example which are related
in the four chapters containing the description of the earth, the Descent
of the Ganges, etc. The epic genius however sometimes created beings of
its own and gave body and life to ideal conceptions. Some of the persons
in the Ramayan must be, in my opinion, either personifications of the
forces of nature like those which are described with such vigour in the
_Shahnamah_, or if not exactly created, exaggerated beyond human
proportions; others, vedic personages much more ancient than Rama, were
introduced into the epic and woven into its narrations, to bring together
men who lived in different and distant ages, as has been the case in times
nearer to our own, in the epics, I mean, of the middle ages.

In the introduction I have discussed the antiquity of the Ramayan; and by
means of those critical and inductive proofs which are all that an
antiquity without precise historical dates can furnish I have endeavoured
to establish with all the certainty that the subject admitted, that the
original composition of the Ramayan is to be assigned to about the twelfth
century before the Christian era. Not that I believe that the epic then
sprang to life in the form in which we now possess it; I think, and I have
elsewhere expressed the opinion, that the poem during the course of its
rhapsodical and oral propagation appropriated by way of episodes,
traditions, legends and ancient myths.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But as far as regards the epic
poem properly so called which celebrates the expedition of Rama against
the Rakshases I think that I have sufficiently shown that its origin and
first appearance should be placed about the twelfth century B.C.; nor have
I hitherto met with anything to oppose this chronological result, or to
oblige me to rectify or reject it.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But an eminent philologist already
quoted, deeply versed in these studies, A. Weber, has expressed in some of
his writings a totally different opinion; and the authority of his name,
if not the number and cogency of his arguments, compels me to say
something on the subject. From the fact or rather the assumption that
Megasthenes(1184) who lived some time in India has made no mention either
of the Mahabharat or the Ramayan Professor Weber argues that neither of
these poems could have existed at that time; as regards the Ramayan, the
unity of its composition, the chain that binds together its different
parts, and its allegorical character, show it, says Professor Weber, to be
much more recent than the age to which I have assigned it, near to our own
era, and according to him, later than the Mahabharat. As for Megasthenes
it should be observed, that he did not write a history of India, much less
a literary history or anything at all resembling one, but a simple
description, in great part physical, of India: whence, from his silence on
literary matters to draw inferences regarding the history of Sanskrit
literature would be the same thing as from the silence of a geologist with
respect to the literature of a country whose valleys, mountains, and
internal structure he is exploring, to conjecture that such and such a
poem or history not mentioned by him did not exist at his time. We have
only to look at the fragments of Megasthenes collected and published by
Schwanbeck to see what was the nature and scope of his _Indica_.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But only
a few fragments of Megasthenes are extant; and to pretend that they should
be argument and proof enough to judge the antiquity of a poem is to press
the laws of criticism too far. To Professor Weber's argument as to the
more or less recent age of the Ramayan from the unity of its composition,
I will make one sole reply, which is that if unity of composition were
really a proof of a more recent age, it would be necessary to reduce by a
thousand years at least the age of Homer and bring him down to the age of
Augustus and Virgil; for certainly there is much more unity of
composition, a greater accord and harmony of parts in the Iliad and the
Odyssey than in the Ramayan. But in the fine arts perfection is no proof
of a recent age: while the experience and the continuous labour of
successive ages are necessary to extend and perfect the physical or
natural sciences, art which is spontaneous in its nature can produce and
has produced in remote times works of such perfection as later ages have
not been able to equal."




INDEX OF PRINCIPAL NAMES


Abhijit, 24.

Abhikala, 176.

Abhira, 444.

Abravanti, 374.

Aditi, 31, 57, 58, 125, 201, 245, 246.

Adityas, 246, 403.

Agastya, 5, 9, 40, 132, 151, 239, 240, 242, 244, 262, 265, 280, 375, 480,
491, 500.

Agneya, 178.

Agni, 28, 74, 109, 132, 240, 243, 276.

Agnivarna, 82, 220.

Agniketu, 433 note, 459.

Ahalya, 60, 61, 62.

Ailadhana, 178.

Air, 2, 28, 203.

Airavat, 14, 110, 178, 246, 256, 267, 335, 399, 402, 415, 429, 437, 472.

Aja, 82, 220, 465.

Ajas, 270, 271.

Akampan, 265, 266, 468, 481.

Aksha, 6, 420, 469, 471.

Akurvati, 178.

Alaka, 203 note.

Alambusha, 59, 198, 199.

Alarka, 104, 107.

Amaravati, 13, 203 note, 286.

Ambarisha, 72, 73, 74, 82, 220.

Amurtarajas, 46.

Anala, 455 note.

Anala, 245, 246.

Ananta, 373.

Anaranya, 81, 219, 470.

Anasuya, 9, 226, 227, 228.

Andhak, 264.

Andhras, 549.

Anga, 38.

Angad, 342, 348, 350, 352 ff., 363, 364 note, 367, 374, 379 ff, 391, 402,
425 ff., 439, 442, 445, 448, 456, 458, 459, 475, 479 ff, 505.

Angas, 15, 18, 19, 21, 102.

Angiras, 133, 245.

Anjan, 14, 368, 369.

Anjana, 392.

Ansudhana, 179.

Ansuman, 50, 53, 56, 82, 220.

Anuhlada, 370.

Aparparyat, 178.

Apartala, 175.

Apsarases, 57, 198, 199, 229, 378.

Aptoryam, 24.

Arishta, 424, 425.

Arishtanemi, 49, 245, 392.

Arjun, 86.

Arjuna, 518.

Arthasadhak, 14.

Arun, 246,

Arundhati, 19, 244, 413.

Aryaman, 124.

Aryan, 92.

Asamanj, 50, 53, 82, 138, 220.

Asit, 81, 219.

Asok, 14, 175.

Asoka, 6, 10, 101, 205, 278, 296, 297, 300, 318, 321, 357, 403, 444, 452,
456.

Asta, 377, 379 note.

Asurs, 57, 58, 380, 381, 387, 394, 407, 413, 420.

Asvagriva, 246.

Asvamedh, 29, 236 note.

Asvapati, 89, 131, 178, 183.

Asvatari, 346.

Asvin, 371.

Asvini, 343.

Asvins, 28, 36, 60, 62, 163, 246, 339, 343, 403, 490.

Atikaya, 468, 478 ff.

Atiratra, 24.

Atri, 245, 561.

Aurva, 373 note.

Avanti, 374.

Avindhya, 415.

Ayodhya, 4, 6, 11, 12, 14, 19, 32, 33, 38, 49, 70, 72, 79, 81, 83, 84, 85,
88, 95, 96, _passim_.

Ayomukh, 374.

Ayomukhi, 310.

Bahika, 176.

Bahuputra, 245.

Bala, 264.

Balakhilyas, 63, 235, 270, 271, 374.

Bali, 43, 59, 107, 275, 302, 421.

Bali, 5, 9, 29, 318, 324, 328, 329, 333 ff., 344, 356 ff., 362, 364, 366,
367, 379, 380, 391, 404, 412, 420, 440, 442, 448, 456, 458, 475, 478, 500,
503, 505.

Barbars, 66.

Beauty, 26, 29, 58, 88, 283, 455.

Bhadamadra, 246.

Bhadra, 52.

Bhaga, 124, 243.

Bhagirath, 53, 54, 55, 82, 220, 372.

Bhagirathi, 56.

Bharadvaja, 4, 7, 9, 10, 158, 159, 193, 196, 197, 199, 200, 201, 501.

Bharat, 4, 9, 10, 32, 81, 83, 84, 88, 89, 94, 97, _passim_.

Bharatas, 550.

Bharunda, 178.

Bhasi, 246.

Bhasakarna, 420.

Bhava, 78.

Bhima, 198.

Bhogavati, 12 note, 267, 375.

Bhrigu, 40, 63, 73, 81, 85, 86, 88, 133, 220.

Brahma, 6, 7, 10, 19, 25, 26, 33, 38, 39, 42, 46, 48, 54, 56, 59, 61, 63,
65, 67, 68, 74, 75, 77, 81, _passim_.

Brahmadatta, 46, 47.

Brahmadikas, 133 note.

Bhrahmamalas, 548.

Budha, 287.

Buddhist, 219.

Cancer, 109.

Ceylon, 375 note.

Chaitra, 91.

Chaitraratha, 41, 178, 199, 267, 279, 315, 493.

Chakravan, 376.

Champa, 30.

Chanda, 448.

Chandala, 69, 70.

Chandra, 464.

Chatushtom, 24.

Chitra, 111, 250, 283.

Chitrakuta, 4, 9, 160, 161, 197, 200, 201, 202, 209, 235, 236, 317, 416,
501.

Chitraratha, 132.

Cholas, 549.

Chuli, 47.

Chyavan, 81, 220.

Dadhimukh, 426.

Dadhivakra, 364 note.

Daitya, 125, 152, 211, 246, 289, 306, 371, 418.

Daksha, 36, 78, 228, 245, 257, 396.

Danav, 255, 270, 306, 307, 311, 371, 372, 382, 432, 443, 477.

Dandak, 9, 99, 103, 117, 124, 126, 130, 166, 181, 199, 211, 238, 271, 374.

Dandaka, 5.

Danu, 245, 246, 313.

Dapple skin, 64, 65.

Dardar, 110, 198.

Dardur, 448.

Darimukha, 371.

Dasarna, 374.

Dasaratha, 3, 9, 12, 14, 16, 18 ff., 25, 26, 29, 30, 32, 34, 41, 61, 62,
77, 79, 80 ff., 91, 92, 95, _passim_.

Dasyus, 444.

Devamidha, 82.

Devantak, 479, 480.

Devarat, 77, 82, 86.

Devasakha, 378.

Devavati, 515.

Dhanvantari, 57 note.

Dhanyamalini, 481.

Dharmabhrit, 240.

Dharmapal, 14.

Dharmaranya, 46.

Dharmavardhan, 179.

Dhritarashtri, 246.

Dhrishtaketu, 82.

Dhrishti, 14, 202.

Dhruvasandhi, 81, 219.

Dhumra, 371, 448.

Dhumraksha, 433 note, 465, 466.

Dhumrasva, 60, 481.

Dhundhumar, 81, 171, 219.

Diksha, 44.

Dilipa, 5 note, 53, 54, 56, 82, 171, 190, 220.

Diti, 58, 59, 245, 246, 323.

Dragon, 101.

Dridhanetra, 68.

Drishti, 202.

Drona, 464.

Drumakulya, 444.

Dundubhi, 333, 335, 338.

Durdhar, 420.

Durdharsha, 433 note.

Durjaya, 256 note.

Durmukha, 432, 433 note.

Durvasas, 521.

Dushan, 5, 250, 254, 255, 256, 258, 259, 261, 264, 265, 267-271, 294, 461,
502.

Dwida, 364 note.

Dwijihva, 474.

Dwivid, 371, 428, 430, 449, 451, 475, 483, 484.

Dwivida, 28.

Dyumatsena, 129.

Ekapadakas, 549.

Ekasala, 179.

Fame, 26, 283.

Fate, 42, 68, 70, 71, 81, 119, 122, 123, 130, 181, 182, 195, 256, 293,
296, 309, 343, 349, 351, 354, 386, 404, 415, 439, 492.

Fire, 2, 30, 45, 49, 218, 374.

Fortune, 2, 58, 90, 94, 124, 146, 160, 188, 242, 244, 283, 449, 453.

Fire-god, 74, 124, 328.

Gadhi, 40, 48, 63, 64, 67, 68.

Gaja, 364 note, 371, 429, 449, 459.

Galava, 518.

Gandhamadan, 28, 159, 381, 429, 446, 476.

Gandharva, 199, 256, 258, 259, 278, 285, 351, 396, 425, 437, 441, 454,
466, 468, 491.

Gandharvas, 267, 270, 281, 283, 306, 307, 308, 318, 364, 370, 375, 377,
388, 394, 409, 420, 432, 449, 455, 472.

Gandharvi, 246, 265.

Ganga, 7, 9, 37, 38, 45, 48, 49, _passim_.

Garga, 133.

Garud, 28, 29, 53, 246, 271, 373, 453, 465, 470, 475.

Gautam, 60, 61, 62, 505.

Gautama, 236.

Gavaksha, 364 note, 429, 449, 468, 475, 476.

Gavaya, 364 note, 371, 429, 448, 468.

Gaya, 482.

Gaya, 216.

Gayatri, 243.

Ghoralohamukhas, 548.

Ghritachi, 46, 198, 367.

Girivraja, 46, 176.

Glory, 301.

Godavari, 245, 247, 248, 249, 282, 303, 310, 374, 500.

Gokarna, 54.

Golabh, 351.

Gomati, 151, 179, 448, 502, 503.

Gopa, 199.

Guha, 4, 9, 152-156, 162, 192, 193, 194, 208, 501.

Guhyakas, 378.

Haha, 198.

Haihayas, 81, 219.

Hanuman, 5, 9, 10, 28, 324 ff., 328, 332, 337, 340, 350, 355, 359, 360,
363, 364 note, 368, 371, 374, 378 ff., 392 ff., 411 ff., 424 ff., 449,
456.

Hara, 448.

Hari, 246.

Haritas, 66.

Haryasva, 82.

Hastinapura, 176.

Hastiprishthak, 179.

Havishyand, 68.

Hayagriva, 346, 376.

Hema, 198, 382.

Hemachandra, 60.

Heti, 515.

Himalaya, 3, 14, 45, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 61, 67, 76, 81, 88.

Himavau, 380.

Hiranyakasipu, 391 note, 407.

Hiranyanabha, 500.

Hladini, 55, 178.

Honour, 283.

Hotri, 24.

Hrasvaroma, 82.

Huhu, 198.

Ikshumati, 80, 176.

Ikshvaku, 2, 11, 13, 18, 24, 25, 35, 59, 60, 69, 70, 71, 73, 81, 82, 83,
90, 94, 96, 103, 219, 390.

Ilval, 241.

Indra, 2, 5, 13, 14, 25, 28, 29, 36, 39, 40, 43 ff., 50, 56, _passim_.

Indrajanu, 371 note.

Indrajit, 420, 432, 436, 437, 441, 455, 459 ff., 482, 485.

Indrasatru, 433 note.

Indrasira, 178.

Iravati, 246.

Jabali, 505.

Jahnu, 55.

Jahnavi, 49, 55, 154.

Jamadagni, 85, 86, 87, 119.

Jambavan, 371, 374, 388, 391, 393, 402, 425, 428, 429, 439, 446, 448, 456,
464, 483, 503.

Jambudvip, 51, 373.

Jambumali, 418, 419, 420, 459, 460.

Jambuprastha, 179.

Jambuvatu, 364 note.

Janak, 4, 8, 9, 21, 45, 60, 61, 62, 77-85, 88, 090, _passim_.

Janamejaya, 171.

Janasthan, 225, 251, 254, 255, 264, 265, 271, 281, 282, 294, 295, 298,
308, 404, 439, 454, 463, 474, 493, 500.

Jatarupa, 373.

Jatayu, 5.

Jatayus, 245, 247, 280, 288, 290, 308, 385 ff., 500, 502.

Java, 231.

Javali, 20, 80, 174, 217, 218, 219, 222.

Jaya, 36.

Jayanta, 14, 175.

Jumna, 109, 501, 502.

Jupiter, 144.

Justice, 3, 35, 42, 149, 243, 346, 454.

Jyotishtom, 24.

Kabandha, 5, 9, 310-316, 446, 500.

Kadru, 246.

Kadruma, 246.

Kaikasi, 516.

Kaikeyi, 3, 4, 9, 27, 32, 88, 96-103, _passim_.

Kailasa, 38, 85, 92, 96, 110, 111, 267, 286, 357, 364, 368, 369, 373, 378,
421, 431.

Kakustha, 35, 37, 82, 109, 110, 123, 137, 142, 147, 149, 151, 153, 192,
208, 211, 220, 311.

Kala, 378.

Kalak, 246.

Kalaka, 245, 246.

Kalakamuka, 256 note.

Kalamahi, 372.

Kalinda, 178.

Kalindi, 81, 160, 220.

Kalinga, 179.

Kalingas, 549,

Kalmashapada, 82, 220.

Kama 37, 38, 42, 283, 286, 296.

Kamboja, 13, 66.

Kambojas, 66.

Kampili, 47

Kandu, 118, 380, 440.

Kandarpa, 37, 74, 75, 76, 250, 269.

Kanva, 440.

Kanyakubja, 47.

Kapil, 51, 52, 53.

Kapivati, 179.

Kardam, 245.

Karnapravaranas, 548.

Kartikeya, 243.

Karttavirya, 518.

Kasi, 21, 102.

Kasikosalas, 548.

Kasyap, 15, 16, 20, 30, 57-59, 80, 81, 86, 87, 91, 92, 118, 219, 215,
passim.

Katyayan, 505.

Katyayana, 80, 174.

Kausalya, 3, 23, 27, 30, 31, 79, 84, 88, 93, 94, 97, 98, 100, _passim_.

Kausambi, 46.

Kausikas, 549.

Kausiki, 48, 372.

Kaveri, 375.

Kaustubha, 58.

Kavya, 40.

Kekaya, 21, 84, 88, 90, 137, 139, 174, 175.

Kerala, 190.

Keralas, 549.

Kesari, 371.

Kesini, 49, 50.

Khara, 9, 225, 250 ff., 281, 288, 290, 294, 295, 433, 446, 451, 461, 477,
493.

Kinnars, 270, 306, 308, 318, 321, 373, 425.

Kimpurushas, 28 note.

Kiratas, 66, 549.

Kirtirat, 82.

Kirtiratha, 82.

Kishkindha, 5, 333, 334, 336, 338, 339, 351, 357, 362, 369, 385, 449, 464,
500.

Kosal, 11, 102, 273, 307, 359, 418.

Kosala, 151, 173.

Krathan, 448.

Kratu, 245.

Krauncha, 310, 378, 476.

Kraunchi, 246.

Krisasva, 36, 41, 43.

Krishna, 497.

Krishnagiri, 448.

Krishnveni, 374.

Krita, 57, 395.

Krodhavasa, 245, 246.

Kshatriyas, 246, 346.

Kukshi, 81, 219.

Kulinga, 176.

Kumbha, 484.

Kumbhakarna, 10, 250, 399, 411, 435 ff., 441, 470 ff.

Kumuda, 364 note, 448.

Kunjar, 375, 392.

Kuru(s), North, 198, 203, 315.

Kurujangal, 176.

Kusa, 10, 46, 48, 63, 526.

Kusadhwaj, 80, 82, 88.

Kusamba, 46.

Kusanabha, 46, 47, 48, 63.

Kusasva, 60.

Kusik, 33, 35, 36, 38, 44, 56, 62, 63, 68, 70 ff., 83.

Kutika, 179.

Kutikoshtika, 179.

Kuvera, 23, 88, 109, 110, 111, 112, 198, 199, 204, 232, 267, 378, 422,
431, 432, 483.

Lakshman, 4, 8, 11, 32, 36, 38, 40, 41, 44, 45, 56, 61, 79, 80, 82-84, 88,
91, 94, 97, 98, _passim_.

Lakshmi, 88, 116, 146, 227, 400, 453, 462, 497.

Lamba, 397.

Lanka, 5, 10, 265, 267, 284, 286, 293, 295-297, 367, 387, 397, 411, 423
ff., 439, 456 ff.

Lankatankata, 515.

Lava, 10, 526.

Lohitya, 179.

Lokapalas, 485.

Lomapad, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 30.

Madhavi, 520.

Madhu, 26, 51, 57, 87, 95.

Madhuka, 245.

Madhushyand, 68, 74.

Madrakas, 550.

Magadh, 46, 102.

Magadnas, 548.

Magha, 83.

Mahabir, 82.

Mahabala, 433 note.

Mahabharat, 520, 524, 551, 554.

Mahadeva, 61, 515.

Mahakapala, 256 note, 260.

Mahamali, 256 note.

Mahandhrak, 82.

Mahapadma, 14, 52.

Mahaparasva, 433, 436, 455, 478, 480, 487.

Maharath, 68.

Maharoma, 82.

Maharun, 368.

Mahasaila, 368.

Mahendra, 28, 59, 86, 87, 88, 140, 167, 213, 243, 244, 307, 336, 344, 364,
368, 370, 375, 490, 531, 554.

Maheswar, 369, 498.

Mahi, 372.

Mahishmati, 518.

Mahishikas, 549.

Mahodar, 433 note, 450, 455, 474, 478 ff.

Mahodaya, 46, 70, 71, 488.

Mainaka, 10, 394, 500 note.

Mainda, 28, 364 note, 371, 428, 430, 439, 449, 451, 458, 482, 483.

Makaraksha, 485 note.

Malaja, 39.

Malavas, 548.

Malaya, 198, 324, 328, 375, 379, 430.

Mali, 515, 516.

Malini, 175, 539.

Malyavan, 454, 455.

Malyavat, 515, 516.

Manas, 38.

Mandakarni, 240.

Mandakini, 200, 201, 203, 209, 234, 235, 304, 322, 416 note.

Mandali, 556.

Mandar, 57, 163, 285, 362, 368, 372, 399, 402, 421, 485, 491, 493, 525.

Mandari, 444.

Mandhata, 81, 219, 347, 518.

Mandavi, 84.

Mandavya, 226 note.

Mandehas, 373.

Mandodari, 402, 492, 500, 516.

Mandra, 14.

Manibhadra, 441.

Manthara, 40, 96, 97, 99, 187.

Manu, 11, 12, 13, 81, 103, 151, 179, 219, 245, 246, 347, 490, 505, 537,
555.

Maricha, 58.

Maricha, 5, 9, 35, 39, 40, 44, 266, 271-280, 298.

Marichi, 81, 91, 219, 245.

Marichipas, 270, 271.

Markandeya, 80, 174.

Mars, 93, 144, 339, 404, 445, 467, 489.

Maru, 82, 220.

Maruts, 25, 54, 59, 403, 517, 547, 555.

Mashas, 270, 271.

Matali, 109, 142, 489, 491, 493.

Matanga, 14, 246, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 336, 337, 380.

Matangi, 246.

Matarisva, 389.

Matsya, 102, 523, 537, 549.

Maya, 293, 382, 432, 488.

Maya, 293, 521.

Mayavi, 333, 334, 379.

Meghamali, 256 note.

Meghanada, 10.

Mekhal, 374.

Mena, 49, 394 note.

Menaka, 74.

Mercury, 144, 339, 467.

Meru, 4, 49, 92, 109, 110, 142, 182, 232, 236, 254, 291, 315, 368, 370,
377, 380, 418, 493.

Merusavarni, 382.

Mina, 32.

Misrakesi, 199.

Mithi, 82.

Mithila, 9 note, 21, 45, 60, 61, 78, 81, 83, 84, 85.

Mitraghna, 459.

Mlechchhas, 66, 537, 550.

Modesty, 26.

Moon, 30, 42, 58, 109 ff., 124, 218, 227, 243, 276, 367, 413, 414, 488.

Mriga, 14.

Mrigamanda, 246.

Mrigi, 246.

Mudgalya, 174.

Nabhag, 82, 220.

Nagadanta, 198.

Nagas, 12, 55, 66, 68, 145, 270, 273, 395, 409, 413, 420, 427, 518.

Nahush, 82, 95, 171, 190, 220, 307.

Nairrit, 430.

Nala, 10, 340, 364 note, 428, 444, 445, 448, 449, 468, 475, 483.

Nala, 246.

Nalini, 55, 203, 204, 267, 436.

Namuchi, 39, 261, 264, 275, 336.

Nanda, 415.

Nandan, 26, 175, 200, 267, 279, 315, 316, 426.

Nandi, 249, 421.

Nandigrama, 4, 6, 9, 224, 502, 503.

Nandisvara, 471.

Nandivardhan, 82.

Narad, 1, 2, 8, 9, 124, 199, 543.

Narak, 479.

Narantak, 479.

Narayan, 25, 26, 95, 393, 474, 497, 516, 517, 522, 535, 559.

Narmada, 374, 448, 518.

Nikumbha, 432, 433 note, 437, 459, 484.

Nila, 28, 340, 352, 360, 364 note, 371, 374, 428, 429, 430, 446, 448, 449,
456, 458, 459, 469, 472, 475, 482.

Nimi, 77, 82.

Nisakar, 389, 390.

Nishadas, 4, 152, 192, 196, 271, 501, 537.

Ocean, 10, 95, 144, 285, 286, 336, 346, 387.

Oshthakarnakas, 548.

Pahlavas, 66.

Paka, 252, 297, 498.

Pampa, 5, 9, 235, 293, 314-321, 327.

Panas, 371, 428, 448, 464.

Panasa, 455 note.

Panchajan, 376.

Panchala, 176, 539.

Panchapsaras, 240.

Panchavata, 9.

Panchavati, 244, 245, 247.

Pandyas, 375, 549.

Parasara, 517.

Parasurama, 119 note, 523, 531.

Paraviraksha, 256 note.

Pariyatra, 376, 448.

Parjanya, 112, 174, 261, 448.

Parvati, 249 note, 515, 542.

Paulastya, 472.

Paulomi, 29, 370.

Pavani, 55.

Phalguni, 83.

Pinaka, 67.

Pitris, 550.

Prabhava, 363.

Prachetas, 1, 245.

Praghas, 420, 459, 460.

Pragvat, 179.

Prahasta, 399, 418, 419, 421, 422, 432 ff., 441, 451, 452, 455, 456, 471,
481.

Praheti, 515.

Prahlada, 391.

Prajangha, 459, 460.

Prajapati, 133 note, 554, 560.

Pralamba, 175.

Pramatha, 256 note.

Pramathi, 260, 448.

Pramati, 455 note.

Prasenajit, 81, 219.

Prasravan, 304, 357, 380, 383, 415, 426.

Prasthalas, 550.

Prasussruka, 82, 220.

Pratindhak, 82.

Pravargya, 22.

Prayag, 158, 159, 196.

Prithu, 81, 219.

Prithusyama, 256 note.

Proshthapada, 32.

Pulah, 245.

Pulastya, 35, 245, 254, 268, 288, 408, 515.

Pulindas, 550.

Puloma, 370.

Punarvasu, 93.

Pundarika, 199.

Pundras, 548, 549.

Punjikasthala, 436, 552.

Puranda, 522.

Purandara, 384, 522.

Pururavas, 286, 544, 545.

Purusha, 256 note, 559.

Purushadak, 82, 220.

Purushottam, 498, 517.

Pusha, 124.

Pushpak, 10, 80, 286, 499, 519.

Pushya, 32, 90, 92, 94, 96, 98, 109, 126.

Rabhasa, 433 note.

Raghava, 5 note.

Raghu, 5, 9, 22, 32 ff., 50, 56, 61, _passim_.

Raghunandana, 522.

Rahu, 93, 223, 261, 272, 303, 351, 480.

Rain, Lord of, 92, 222.

Rajagriha, 174, 175.

Rama, _passim_.

Ramayana, 8 note, 10, 11, 541, 542.

Rambha, 75, 232, 448.

Ramana, 199.

Rasmiketu, 433 note, 459.

Ravan, 5, 9, 10, 25, 26, 32, 35, _passim_.

Renuka, 63, 119.

Richika, 48, 73, 86.

Right, 42, 68.

Riksharajas, 386, 442.

Rikshavan, 448.

Rishabh, 373, 375, 429, 446, 476, 483.

Rishtikas, 549.

Rishyamuka, 9, 314, 315, 316, 318 ff., 332, 335, 339, 340, 353, 380, 500.

Rishyasring, 15-24, 29, 30.

Rohini, 4, 112, 223, 227, 246, 251, 282, 287, 367, 404, 413, 445.

Rohitas, 376, 558.

Rudhirasana, 256 note.

Rudra, 49, 57, 67, 77, 78, 162, 249, 257, 264, 283, 296, 378, 413, 483.

Rudras, 246, 558.

Rukmini, 517.

Ruma, 346, 349, 350, 363, 366, 367, 371, 385, 403.

Ruman, 371.

Sachi, 29, 202, 234, 238, 276, 286, 297, 370, 408, 415, 494, 519, 522.

Sadhyas, 490, 555, 558, 559.

Sagar, 11, 50 ff., 82, 119, 137, 171, 441.

Sahadeva, 60.

Sahya, 429, 430.

Saivya, 104, 107, 171, 533.

Sakas, 66, 550.

Sakra, 75, 234, 307, 313, 336, 344, 448, 464.

Salmali, 176, 539.

Salyakartan, 178.

Saman, 186, 326, 359.

Sambar, 479.

Sambara, 99, 100.

Sampati, 5, 9, 246, 364 note, 385, 387 ff., 412, 455 note, 459, 460, 464.

Samprakshalas, 235.

Sanatkumar, 15, 16.

Sandhya, 515.

Sanharas, 36.

Sanhrada, 474.

Sanischar, 283.

Sankan, 82.

Sankar, 57, 335.

Sankasya, 80, 81, 82, 83.

Sankha, 555.

Sankhan, 220, 432.

Sanrochan, 448.

Sansray, 245.

Santa, 16, 19, 29, 30, 31.

Sarabh, 364 note, 439, 476.

Sarabhanga, 9, 233, 234, 235, 236, 265, 502.

Saradanda, 176, 539.

Sarama, 452, 453.

Saran, 446, 447, 455.

Sarandib, 375 note.

Saranga, 556.

Sarasvati, 178, 372, 516, 522.

Sardula, 441, 449, 450.

Sarduli, 246.

Sarju, 11, 20, 22, 36, 37, 38, 50, _passim_.

Sarvabhauma, 429.

Sarvartirtha, 179.

Sasivindhus, 81, 219.

Satabali, 371, 377, 379, 380.

Satadru, 178, 539.

Satahrada, 231.

Satananda, 62, 63, 77, 79, 80, 81, 84.

Satrughna, 32, 83, 84, 88, 89, 97, _passim_.

Satrunjay, 504.

Satyavan, 129.

Satyavati, 48.

Savitri, 129, 227.

Savari, 315, 316, 317.

Saumanas, 373.

Savarni, 377.

Seven Rishis, 23.

Sesha, 245.

Siddharth, 14, 137, 138, 175.

Siddhas, 28 note, 540, 559.

Sighraga, 82, 220.

Sila, 178.

Silavaha, 178.

Sindhu, 13, 21, 55, 102, 372, 376, 443.

Sinhika, 10, 396.

Sisir(a), 372, 555.

Sita, 4 ff., 55, 78, 79, 83, 84, 88, 93, _passim_.

Siva, 4, 36, 42, 54, 55, 57, 67, 78, 82, 85, 86, 109, 110, 205, 523, 524,
543, 554.

Skanda, 554.

Soma, 52, 58, 198, 267, 378, 554.

Somadatta, 60.

Somada, 47.

Somagiri, 376, 378.

Sona, 45, 48, 372.

Sringavera, 4, 192, 196, 223, 501, 502.

Srinjay, 60.

Srutakirti, 84.

Sthanu, 25, 37, 245.

Sthanumati, 179.

Sthulaksha, 256 note, 260.

Sthulasiras, 313.

Subahu, 364 note.

Suchakshu, 55.

Suchandra, 60.

Suchi, 238.

Sudama, 178.

Sudaman, 81, 176.

Sudarsan, 82, 83, 220, 373, 378, 448.

Sudarsandwip, 374.

Sudhanva, 82.

Sudhriti, 82.

Sudras, 6, 13, 246.

Sugriva, 5, 6, 9, 28, 29, 314, 316, 318, 324 ff., 337, 339, 344, 346 ff.,
371, 375 ff., 412, 414, 422, 424, 430, 439 ff., 446, 450, 519, 545.

Suka, 442, 446, 447, 455 ff.

Sukesa, 515, 516.

Suketu, 39, 82.

Suki, 246.

Sukra, 124, 210, 279, 384, 429.

Sumali, 515, 516.

Sumagadhi, 46.

Sumantra, 15, 16, 19, 21, 80, 92, _passim_.

Sumati, 49, 50, 59, 60.

Sumitra, 27, 30, 32, 88, 94, _passim_.

Sun, 93, 109, 110, 124, 243.

Sunabha, 425.

Sunahsepha, 72, 73, 74

Sunda, 35, 39.

Sunetra, 364 note.

Suparna, 53, 125, 231, 343, 349, 388.

Suparsva, 388.

Supatala, 364 note.

Suptaghna, 433 note.

Sura, 58.

Surabhi, 183, 246.

Surapati, 522.

Suras, 58.

Surasa, 246, 395.

Surashtra, 21, 102, 376.

Surasenas, 550.

Surpanakha, 5, 9, 249 ff., 267 ff., 288, 502.

Surya, 555.

Suryaksha, 364 note.

Suryasatru, 433 note.

Suryavan, 375.

Susandhi, 81, 219.

Sushen, 28, 351, 364 note, 376, 379, 380.

Sutanu, 199.

Sutikshna, 9, 234, 236, 237, 240, 241.

Suvahu, 35, 44, 45, 146.

Suvarat, 220.

Suvela, 450, 456, 457.

Suvira, 21, 102.

Suyajna, 20, 132.

Svayambhu, 394.

Svayamprabha, 382.

Svetaranya, 264.

Swarga, 54, 101, 202, 493.

Swarnaroma, 82.

Sweta, 448.

Syama, 160.

Syandika, 151.

Syenagami, 256 note, 260.

Syeni, 246.

Tadaka, 38, 39, 40, 41.

Tadakeya, 266.

Taittiriya, 132.

Takshak, 432.

Takshaka, 267.

Talajanghas, 81, 219.

Tamasa, 7, 147, 148, 149.

Tamra, 245, 246.

Tamraparni, 375.

Tapan, 459, 555.

Tara, 364 note, 379 ff.

Tara, 9, 336, 349 ff., 355, 359, 362, 363, 366, 367, 369, 371, 385, 403,
449, 546.

Tarak, 430.

Tarkshya, 214.

Ten-necked, 250.

Thirty-three Gods, 51.

Thousand-eyed, 41, 59, 60, 74, 75, 76, 86, 90, 112, 252, 297, 504.

Three-eyed God, 86.

Thunderer, 234.

Titan, 58, 67, 72, 79, 109, 114, 124.

Toran, 179.

Town-Destroyer, 59, 60.

Trident, 68.

Trident-wielding, 54, 57.

Trijat, 133.

Trijata, 410, 463.

Trikuta, 456, 457, 500, 515.

Trinavindu, 515.

Tripathaga, 56.

Tripur, 306.

Tripura, 85, 86.

Trisanku, 68-72, 81, 144, 219, 429.

Trisira, 9.

Trisiras, 256 note, 260, 261, 264, 267, 271, 478, 479, 480, 502.

Tumburu, 198, 199, 232.

Uchchaihsravas, 58, 522.

Udayagiri, 379 note.

Udavasu, 82.

Ujjihana, 179.

Ukthya, 24.

Uma, 49, 54, 205, 249 note, 471, 542, 543.

Upasad, 22.

Upasunda, 35.

Upendra, 74, 559.

Urmila, 47, 83, 84, 88, 228.

Urvasi, 286, 544, 545.

Usanas, 382.

Utkal, 374.

Uttanika, 179, 539.

Vahli, 13.

Vahlika, 376.

Vahni, 555.

Vaidyut, 375.

Vaijayanta, 99, 179, 522.

Vaikhanasas, 270, 271, 374.

Vainateya, 388.

Vaisravan, 265, 285, 378, 414, 515.

Vaisyas, 246.

Vaitarani, 293.

Vajra, 376.

Vajradanshtra, 432, 433 note, 466, 467.

Valmiki, 1, 7-11, 161, 519, 542.

Vamadeva, 14, 79, 80, 91, 174, 222, 505.

Vamana, 14, 523.

Vana, 81, 219.

Vanayu, 13.

Vangas, 102.

Varadas, 550.

Varun, 1 note, 28, 42, 67, 88, 109, 124, 228, 243, 272, 293, 338, 377,
383, 448, 471, 518.

Varasya, 256 note.

Varutha, 179.

Vasav, 92.

Vasava, 236, 522.

Vasishtha, 14, 15, 19-22, 25, 32, _passim_.

Vasudeva, 51, 52.

Vasuki, 57, 267, 375, 432, 518, 522.

Vasus, 14, 46, 246, 283, 377, 403, 522, 554.

Vasvaukasara, 203.

Vatapi, 241, 280.

Vayu, 59, 243, 369, 427, 428, 555.

Vedas, 1 note, 3, 12, 22, 70, 89, 109, 125, 147, 184, 229, 559.

Vedasruti, 151.

Vedavati, 470, 517.

Vegadarsi, 429, 446, 483.

Vena, 448, 537.

Vibhandak, 15, 16, 17, 18, 25.

Vibhishan, 6, 10, 250, 273, 415, 422, 423, 433 ff., 449 ff., 472, 483, 487
ff., 516.

Vibudh, 82.

Vidarbha, 46, 49.

Vidarbhas, 549.

Videha, 79 ff., 129, 130, 142, 166, 195, 227.

Videhan, 9, 79, 95, 104, 119, 125, _passim_.

Videhas, 548.

Vidyadhari, 203 note.

Vidyujjihva, 450.

Vidyunmali, 364 note.

Vidyutkesa, 515.

Vihangama, 256 note.

Vijay, 14, 36, 175, 505.

Vikata, 409.

Vikrit, 245.

Vikukshi, 81, 219.

Vinata, 179, 379, 380, 388, 448.

Vinata, 53, 125, 246.

Vindhya, 14, 51, 242, 364, 370, 374, 380.

Vindu, 55.

Vipasa, 176, 539.

Virabahu, 364 note.

Viradha, 5, 9, 229, 232, 404, 446, 502.

Viraj, 124.

Viramatsya, 178.

Virochan, 40, 43.

Virtue, 223, 272.

Virupaksha, 52, 420, 433, 459, 460, 487.

Visakhas, 144, 430.

Visala, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62.

Vishnu, 1 note, 2, 3, 25, 32, 40, _passim_.

Visravas, 35, 309, 408, 515, 516.

Visvachi, 198.

Visvajit, 24.

Visvakarma, 28, 42, 198, 376, 387, 444, 445, 448, 499, 500, 515, 556.

Visvamitra, 9, 32 ff., 39, 41, 44, 45, _passim_.

Visvarupa, 353.

Visvas, 377.

Visvavasu, 198.

Visvedevas, 162.

Vitardan, 474.

Vivasvat, 81, 171, 219, 245, 386, 532.

Vrana, 444.

Vrihadratha, 82.

Vrihaspati, 28, 31, 95, 124, 210, 307, 464, 517.

Vritra, 125, 264, 288, 387, 487, 491, 536.

Vulture-king, 9.

War-god, 124, 476.

Wind, 30, 218.

Wind-god, 10, 36, 42, 68, 325, 326, 379, 392 ff., 417 ff., 449, 470, 478,
481, 488, 502, 503.

Yavadwipa, 372.

Yajnakopa, 433 note, 459.

Yajush, 326.

Yajnasatru, 256 note.

Yaksha, 236 note, 306, 318, 363, 375, 394, 420, 422, 425, 431, 454, 458,
468.

Yama, 68, 71, 112, 117, 124, 140, 166, 171, 241, 248, 262, 275, 287, 313,
343 ff., 432, 437, 449, 472, 475, 496, 518, 554.

Yamuna, 158, 159, 160, 178, 214, 223, 372.

Yamun, 372.

Yavanas, 66, 550.

Yayati, 82, 95, 107, 119, 163, 186, 307, 344.

Yudhajit, 84, 88, 180, 190.

Yupaksha, 420, 472.

Yuvanasva, 81, 219.






FOOTNOTES


    1 The MSS. vary very considerably in these stanzas of invocation: many
      lines are generally prefixed in which not only the poet, but those
      who play the chief parts in the poem are panegyrized. It is
      self-apparent that they are not by the author of the Ramayan
      himself.

    2 "Valmiki was the son of Varuna, the regent of the waters, one of
      whose names is Prachetas. According to the _Adhyatma Ramayana_, the
      sage, although a Brahman by birth, associated with foresters and
      robbers. Attacking on one occasion the seven Rishis, they
      expostulated with him successfully, and taught him the _mantra_ of
      Rama reversed, or _Mara, Mara_, in the inaudible repetition of which
      he remained immovable for thousands of years, so that when the sages
      returned to the same spot they found him still there, converted into
      a _valmik_ or ant-hill, by the nests of the termites, whence his
      name of Valmiki."

      WILSON. _Specimens of the Hindu Theatre, Vol. I. p. 313_.

      "Valmiki is said to have lived a solitary life in the woods: he is
      called both a _muni_ and a _rishi_. The former word properly
      signifies an anchorite or hermit; the latter has reference chiefly
      to wisdom. The two words are frequently used promiscuously, and may
      both be rendered by the Latin _vates_ in its earliest meaning of
      _seer_: Valmiki was both poet and seer, as he is said to have sung
      the exploits of Rama by the aid of divining insight rather than of
      knowledge naturally acquired." SCHLEGEL.

    3 Literally, _Kokila_, the Koil, or Indian Cuckoo. Schlegel translates
      "luscinium."

    4 Comparison with the Ganges is implied, that river being called the
      purifier of the world.

    5 "This name may have been given to the father of Valmiki
      allegorically. If we look at the derivation of the word (_pra_,
      before, and _chetas_, mind) it is as if the poet were called the son
      of Prometheus, the Forethinker." SCHLEGEL.

    6 Called in Sanskrit also _Bala-Kanda_, and in Hindi _Bal-Kand_,
      _i.e._ the Book describing Rama's childhood, _bala_ meaning a boy up
      to his sixteenth year.

    7 A divine saint, son of Brahma. He is the eloquent messenger of the
      Gods, a musician of exquisite skill, and the inventor of the _vina_
      or Indian lute. He bears a strong resemblance to Hermes or Mercury.

    8 This mystic syllable, said to typify the supreme Deity, the Gods
      collectively, the Vedas, the three spheres of the world, the three
      holy fires, the three steps of Vishnu etc., prefaces the prayers and
      most venerated writings of the Hindus.

    9 This colloquy is supposed to have taken place about sixteen years
      after Rama's return from his wanderings and occupation of his
      ancestral throne.

   10 Called also Sri and Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, the Queen of
      Beauty as well as the Dea Fortuna. Her birth "from the full-flushed
      wave" is described in Canto XLV of this Book.

   11 One of the most prominent objects of worship in the Rig-veda, Indra
      was superseded in later times by the more popular deities Vishnu and
      Siva. He is the God of the firmament, and answers in many respects
      to the Jupiter Pluvius of the Romans. See _Additional Notes_.

   12 The second God of the Trimurti or Indian Trinity. Derived from the
      root _vis_ to penetrate, the meaning of the name appears to be _he
      who penetrates or pervades all things_. An embodiment of the
      preserving power of nature, he is worshipped as a Saviour who has
      nine times been incarnate for the good of the world and will descend
      on earth once more. See _Additional Notes_ and Muir's Sanskrit Texts
      _passim_.

   13 In Sanskrit _devarshi_. Rishi is the general appellation of sages,
      and another word is frequently prefixed to distinguish the degrees.
      A _Brahmarshi_ is a theologian or Brahmanical sage; a Rajarshi is a
      royal sage or sainted king; a _Devarshi_ is a divine or deified sage
      or saint.

_   14 Trikalajna_. Literally _knower of the three times_. Both Schlegel
      and Gorresio quote Homer's.

      {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH PSILI AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}, {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~},
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}.

      "That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
      The past, the present, and the future knew."

      The Bombay edition reads _trilokajna,_ _who knows the three worlds_
      (earth, air and heaven.) "It is by _tapas_ (austere fervour) that
      rishis of subdued souls, subsisting on roots, fruits and air, obtain
      a vision of the three worlds with all things moving and stationary."
      MANU, XI. 236.

   15 Son of Manu, the first king of Kosala and founder of the solar
      dynasty or family of the Children of the Sun, the God of that
      luminary being the father of Manu.

   16 The Indians paid great attention to the art of physiognomy and
      believed that character and fortune could be foretold not from the
      face only but from marks upon the neck and hands. Three lines under
      the chin like those at the mouth of a conch (_Sankha_) were regarded
      as a peculiarly auspicious sign indicating, as did also the mark of
      Vishnu's discus on the hand, one born to be a _chakravartin_ or
      universal emperor. In the palmistry of Europe the line of fortune,
      as well as the line of life, is in the hand. Cardan says that marks
      on the nails and teeth also show what is to happen to us: "Sunt
      etiam in nobis vestigia quaedam futurorum eventuum in unguibus atque
      etiam in dentibus." Though the palmy days of Indian chiromancy have
      passed away, the art is still to some extent studied and believed
      in.

   17 Long arms were regarded as a sign of heroic strength.

   18 "Veda means originally knowing or knowledge, and this name is given
      by the Brahmans not to one work, but to the whole body of their most
      ancient sacred literature. Veda is the same word which appears in
      the Greek {~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}, I know, and in the English wise, wisdom, to wit. The
      name of Veda is commonly given to four collections of hymns, which
      are respectively known by the names of Rig-veda, Yajur-veda,
      Sama-veda, and Atharva-veda."

      "As the language of the Veda, the Sanskrit, is the most ancient type
      of the English of the present day, (Sanskrit and English are but
      varieties of one and the same language,) so its thoughts and
      feelings contain in reality the first roots and germs of that
      intellectual growth which by an unbroken chain connects our own
      generation with the ancestors of the Aryan race,--with those very
      people who at the rising and setting of the sun listened with
      trembling hearts to the songs of the Veda, that told them of bright
      powers above, and of a life to come after the sun of their own lives
      had set in the clouds of the evening. These men were the true
      ancestors of our race, and the Veda is the oldest book we have in
      which to study the first beginnings of our language, and of all that
      is embodied in language. We are by nature Aryan, Indo-European, not
      Semitic: our spiritual kith and kin are to be found in India,
      Persia, Greece, Italy, Germany: not in Mesopotamia, Egypt, or
      Palestine."

      _Chips from a German Workshop_, Vol. I. pp. 8. 4.

   19 As with the ancient Persians and Scythians, Indian princes were
      carefully instructed in archery which stands for military science in
      general, of which, among Hindu heroes, it was the most important
      branch.

   20 Chief of the three queens of Dasaratha and mother of Rama.

   21 From _hima_ snow, (Greek {~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}-{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}, Latin hiems) and _alaya_ abode,
      the Mansion of snow.

   22 The moon (_Soma_, _Indu_, _Chandra_ _etc._) is masculine with the
      Indians as with the Germans.

   23 Kuvera, the Indian Plutus, or God of Wealth.

   24 The events here briefly mentioned will be related fully in the
      course of the poem. The first four cantos are introductory, and are
      evidently the work of a later hand than Valmiki's.

   25 "Chandra, or the Moon, is fabled to have been married to the
      twenty-seven daughters of the patriarch Daksha, or Asvini and the
      rest, who are in fact personifications of the Lunar Asterisms. His
      favourite amongst them was Rohini to whom he so wholly devoted
      himself as to neglect the rest. They complained to their father, and
      Daksha repeatedly interposed, till, finding his remonstrances vain,
      he denounced a curse upon his son-in-law, in consequence of which he
      remained childless and became affected by consumption. The wives of
      Chandra having interceded in his behalf with their father, Daksha
      modified an imprecation which he could not recall, and pronounced
      that the decay should be periodical only, not permanent, and that it
      should alternate with periods of recovery. Hence the successive wane
      and increase of the Moon. _Padma_, _Purana_, _Swarga-Khanda,_ Sec.
      II. _Rohini_ in Astronomy is the fourth lunar mansion, containing
      five stars, the principal of which is Aldebaran." WILSON, _Specimens
      of the Hindu Theatre. Vol. I. p._ 234.

      The Bengal recension has a different reading:

      "Shone with her husband like the light
      Attendant on the Lord of Night."

   26 The garb prescribed for ascetics by Manu.

   27 "Mount Meru, situated like Kailasa in the lofty regions to the north
      of the Himalayas, is celebrated in the traditions and myths of
      India. Meru and Kailasa are the two Indian Olympi. Perhaps they were
      held in such veneration because the Sanskrit-speaking Indians
      remembered the ancient home where they dwelt with the other
      primitive peoples of their family before they descended to occupy
      the vast plains which extend between the Indus and the Ganges."
      GORRESIO.

   28 The third God of the Indian Triad, the God of destruction and
      reproduction. See _Additional Notes_.

   29 The epithet _dwija_, or _twice-born_, is usually appropriate to
      Brahmans, but is applicable to the three higher castes. Investiture
      with the sacred thread and initiation of the neophyte into certain
      religious mysteries are regarded as his regeneration or second
      birth.

   30 His shoes to be a memorial of the absent heir and to maintain his
      right. Kalidasa (Raghuvansa, XII. 17.) says that they were to be
      _adhidevate_ or guardian deities of the kingdom.

   31 Jatayu, a semi-divine bird, the friend of Rama, who fought in
      defence of Sita.

   32 Raghu was one of the most celebrated ancestors of Rama whose
      commonest appellation is, therefore, Raghava or descendant of Raghu.
      Kalidasa in the _Raghuransa_ makes him the son of Dilipa and
      great-grandfather of Rama. See _Idylls from the Sanskrit_, "Aja" and
      "Dilipa."

   33 Dundhubi.

   34 Literally _ten yojanas_. The yojana is a measure of uncertain length
      variously reckoned as equal to nine miles, five, and a little less.

   35 Ceylon.

   36 The Jonesia Asoka is a most beautiful tree bearing a profusion of
      red blossoms.

_   37 Brahma_, the Creator, is usually regarded as the first God of the
      Indian Trinity, although, as Kalidasa says:

      "Of Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, each may be
      First, second, third, amid the blessed Three."

      Brahma had guaranteed Ravan's life against all enemies except man.

   38 Ocean personified.

   39 The rocks lying between Ceylon and the mainland are still called
      Rama's Bridge by the Hindus.

   40 "The Brahmans, with a system rather cosmogonical than chronological,
      divide the present mundane period into four ages or _yugas_ as they
      call them: the Krita, the Treta, the Dwapara, and the Kali. The
      Krita, called also the Deva-yuga or that of the Gods, is the age of
      truth, the perfect age, the Treta is the age of the three sacred
      fires, domestic and sacrificial; the Dwapara is the age of doubt;
      the Kali, the present age, is the age of evil." GORRESIO.

   41 The ancient kings of India enjoyed lives of more than patriarchal
      length as will appear in the course of the poem.

   42 Sudras, men of the fourth and lowest pure caste, were not allowed to
      read the poem, but might hear it recited.

   43 The three _slokes_ or distichs which these twelve lines represent
      are evidently a still later and very awkward addition to the
      introduction.

   44 There are several rivers in India of this name, now corrupted into
      _Tonse_. The river here spoken of is that which falls into the
      Ganges a little below Allahabad.

   45 "In Book II, Canto LIV, we meet with a saint of this name presiding
      over a convent of disciples in his hermitage at the confluence of
      the Ganges and the Jumna. Thence the later author of these
      introductory cantos has borrowed the name and person, inconsistently
      indeed, but with the intention of enhancing the dignity of the poet
      by ascribing to him so celebrated a disciple." SCHLEGEL.

   46 The poet plays upon the similarity in sound of the two words:
      _soka_, means grief, _sloka_, the heroic measure in which the poem
      is composed. It need scarcely be said that the derivation is
      fanciful.

   47 Brahma, the Creator, is usually regarded as the first person of the
      divine triad of India. The four heads with which he is represented
      are supposed to have allusion to the four corners of the earth which
      he is sometimes considered to personify. As an object of adoration
      Brahma has been entirely superseded by Siva and Vishnu. In the whole
      of India there is, I believe, but one temple dedicated to his
      worship. In this point the first of the Indian triad curiously
      resembles the last of the divine fraternity of Greece, Aides the
      brother of Zeus and Poseidon. "In all Greece, says Pausanias, there
      is no single temple of Aides, except at a single spot in Elis." See
      Gladstone's Juventus Mundi, p. 253.

   48 The _argha_ or _arghya_ was a libation or offering to a deity, a
      Brahman, or other venerable personage. According to one authority it
      consisted of water, milk, the points of Kusa-grass, curds, clarified
      butter, rice, barley, and white mustard, according to another, of
      saffron, bel, unbroken grain, flowers, curds, durba-grass,
      kusa-grass, and sesamum.

   49 Sita, daughter of Janak king of Mithila.

   50 "I congratulate myself," says Schlegel in the preface to his, alas,
      unfinished edition of the Ramayan, "that, by the favour of the
      Supreme Deity, I have been allowed to begin so great a work; I glory
      and make my boast that I too after so many ages have helped to
      confirm that ancient oracle declared to Valmiki by the Father of
      Gods and men:

      Dum stabunt montes, campis dum flumina current,
      Usque tuum toto carmen celebrabitur orbe."

   51 "The sipping of water is a requisite introduction of all rites:
      without it, says the Samha Purana, all acts of religion are vain."
      COLEBROOKE.

   52 The _darhha_ or _kusa_ (Pea cynosuroides), a kind of grass used in
      sacrifice by the Hindus as _cerbena_ was by the Romans.

   53 The direction in which the grass should be placed upon the ground as
      a seat for the Gods, on occasion of offerings made to them.

   54 Parasurama or Rama with the Axe. See Canto LXXIV.

   55 Sita. Videha was the country of which Mithila was the capital.

   56 The twin sons of Rama and Sita, born after Rama had repudiated Sita,
      and brought up in the hermitage of Valmiki. As they were the first
      rhapsodists the combined name Kusilava signifies a reciter of poems,
      or an improvisatore, even to the present day.

   57 Perhaps the bass, tenor, and treble, or quick, slow and middle
      times. we know but little of the ancient music of the Hindus.

   58 Eight flavours or sentiments are usually enumerated, love, mirth,
      tenderness, anger, heroism, terror, disgust, and surprise;
      tranquility or content, or paternal tenderness, is sometimes
      considered the ninth. WILSON. See the _Sahitya Darpana_ or _Mirror
      of Composition_ translated by Dr. Ballantyne and Babu Pramadadasa
      Mittra in the _Bibliotheca Indica._

   59 Saccharum Munja is a plant from whose fibres is twisted the sacred
      string which a Brahman wears over one shoulder after he has been
      initiated by a rite which in some respects answers to confirmation.

   60 A description of an Asvamedha or Horse Sacrifice is given in Canto
      XIII. of this Book.

   61 This exploit is related in Canto XL.

   62 The Sarju or Ghaghra, anciently called Sarayu, rises in the
      Himalayas, and after flowing through the province of Oudh, falls
      into the Ganges.

   63 The ruins of the ancient capital of Rama and the Children of the Sun
      may still be traced in the present Ajudhya near Fyzabad. Ajudhya is
      the Jerusalem or Mecca of the Hindus.

   64 A legislator and saint, the son of Brahma or a personification of
      Brahma himself, the creator of the world, and progenitor of mankind.
      Derived from the root _man_ to think, the word means originally
      _man_, the thinker, and is found in this sense in the Rig-veda.

      Manu as a legislator is identified with the Cretan Minos, as
      progenitor of mankind with the German Mannus: "Celebrant carminibus
      antiquis, quod unum apud illos memoriae et annalium genus est,
      Tuisconem deum terra editum, et filium Mannum, originem gentis
      conditoresque." TACITUS, _Germania_, Cap. II.

   65 The Sal (Shorea Robusta) is a valuable timber tree of considerable
      height.

   66 The city of Indra is called Amaravati or Home of the Immortals.

   67 Schlegel thinks that this refers to the marble of different colours
      with which the houses were adorned. It seems more natural to
      understand it as implying the regularity of the streets and houses.

   68 The _Sataghni_ _i.e. centicide_, or slayer of a hundred, is
      generally supposed to be a sort of fire-arms, or the ancient Indian
      rocket; but it is also described as a stone set round with iron
      spikes.

   69 The Nagas (serpents) are demigods with a human face and serpent
      body. They inhabit Patala or the regions under the earth. Bhogavati
      is the name of their capital city. Serpents are still worshipped in
      India. See Fergusson's _Tree and Serpent Worship_.

   70 The fourth and lowest pure caste whose duty was to serve the three
      first classes.

   71 By forbidden marriages between persons of different castes.

   72 Vahli or Vahlika is Bactriana; its name is preserved in the modern
      Balkh.

   73 The Sanskrit word Sindhu is in the singular the name of the river
      Indus, in the plural of the people and territories on its banks. The
      name appears as _Hidku_ in the cuneiform inscription of Darius' son
      of Hystaspes, in which the nations tributary to that king are
      enumerated.

      The Hebrew form is _Hodda_ (Esther, I. 1.). In Zend it appears as
      _Hendu_ in a somewhat wider sense. With the Persians later the
      signification of _Hind_ seems to have co-extended with their
      increasing acquaintance with the country. The weak Ionic dialect
      omitted the Persian _h_, and we find in Hecataeus and Herodotus {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA WITH PSILI AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}
      and {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH DASIA~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH OXIA~}. In this form the Romans received the names and
      transmitted them to us. The Arabian geographers in their ignorance
      that Hind and Sind are two forms of the same word have made of them
      two brothers and traced their decent from Noah. See Lassen's
      Indische Alterthumskunde Vol. I. pp. 2, 3.

   74 The situation of Vanayu is not exactly determined: it seems to have
      lain to the north-west of India.

   75 Kamboja was probably still further to the north-west. Lassen thinks
      that the name is etymologically connected with _Cambyses_ which in
      the cuneiform inscription of Behistun is written Ka(m)bujia.

   76 The elephants of Indra and other deities who preside over the four
      points of the compass.

   77 "There are four kinds of elephants. 1 _Bhaddar_. It is well
      proportioned, has an erect head, a broad chest, large ears, a long
      tail, and is bold and can bear fatigue. 2 _Mand_. It is black, has
      yellow eyes, a uniformly sized body, and is wild and ungovernable. 3
      _Mirg_. It has a whitish skin, with black spots. 4 _Mir_. It has a
      small head, and obeys readily. It gets frightened when it thunders."
      _Ain-i-Akbari._. Translated by H. Blochmann, Ain 41, _The Imperial
      Elephant Stables_.

   78 Ayodhya means _not to be fought against_.

   79 Attendants of Indra, eight Gods whose names signify fire, light and
      its phenomena.

   80 Kasyap was a grandson of the God Brahma. He is supposed to have
      given his name to Kashmir = Kasyapa-mira, Kasyap's Lake.

   81 The people of Anga. "Anga is said in the lexicons to be Bengal; but
      here certainly another region is intended situated at the confluence
      of the Sarju with the Ganges, and not far distant from Dasaratha's
      dominions." GORRESIO. It comprised part of Behar and Bhagulpur.

   82 The Koil or _kokila_ (Cuculus Indicus) as the harbinger of spring
      and love is a universal favourite with Indian poets. His voice when
      first heard in a glorious spring morning is not unpleasant, but
      becomes in the hot season intolerably wearisome to European ears.

   83 "Sons and Paradise are intimately connected in Indian belief. A man
      desires above every thing to have a son to perpetuate his race, and
      to assist with sacrifices and funeral rites to make him worthy to
      obtain a lofty seat in heaven or to preserve that which he has
      already obtained." GORRESIO.

   84 One of the Pleiades and generally regarded as the model of wifely
      excellence.

   85 The Hindu year is divided into six seasons of two months each,
      spring, summer, rains, autumn, winter, and dews.

   86 It was essential that the horse should wander free for a year before
      immolation, as a sign that his master's paramount sovereignty was
      acknowledged by all neighbouring princes.

   87 Called also Vidcha, later Tirabhukti, corrupted into the modern
      Tirhut, a province bounded on the west and east by the Gaudaki and
      Kausiki rivers, on the south by the Ganges, and on the north by the
      skirts of the Himalayas.

   88 The celebrated city of Benares. See Dr. Hall's learned and
      exhaustive Monograph in the _Sacred City of the Hindus_, by the Rev.
      M. A. Sherring.

   89 Kekaya is supposed to have been in the Panjab. The name of the king
      was Asvapati (Lord of Horses), father of Dasaratha's wife Kaikeyi.

   90 Surat.

   91 Apparently in the west of India not far from the Indus.

   92 "The Pravargya ceremony lasts for three days, and is always
      performed twice a day, in the forenoon and afternoon. It precedes
      the animal and Soma sacrifices. For without having undergone it, no
      one is allowed to take part in the solemn Soma feast prepared for
      the gods." Haug's _Aitareya Brahmanam_. Vol. II. p. 41. note _q.v._

_   93 Upasads_. "The Gods said, Let us perform the burnt offerings called
      Upasads (_i.e._ besieging). For by means of an _Upasad_, _i.e._
      besieging, they conquer a large (fortified) town."--_Ibid._ p. 32.

   94 The Soma plant, or Asclepias Acida. Its fermented juice was drunk in
      sacrifice by the priests and offered to the Gods who enjoyed the
      intoxicating draught.

   95 "Tum in caerimoniarum intervallis Brachmanae facundi, sollertes,
      crebros sermones de rerum causis instituebant, alter alterum
      vincendi cupidi. This public disputation in the assembly of Brahmans
      on the nature of things, and the almost fraternal connexion between
      theology and philosophy deserves some notice; whereas the priests of
      some religions are generally but little inclined to show favour to
      philosophers, nay, sometimes persecute them with the most rancorous
      hatred, as we are taught both by history and experience.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} This sloka
      is found in the MSS. of different recensions of the Ramayan, and we
      have, therefore, the most trustworthy testimony to the antiquity of
      philosophy among the Indians." SCHLEGEL.

   96 The _Angas_ or appendices of the Vedas, pronunciation, prosody,
      grammar, ritual, astronomy, and explanation of obscurities.

   97 In Sanskrit _vilva_, the _AEgle Marmelos_. "He who desires food and
      wishes to grow fat, ought to make his Yupa (sacrificial post) of
      Bilva wood." Haug's _Aitareya Brahmanam. Vol. II._ p. 73.

   98 The _Mimosa Catechu_. "He who desires heaven ought to make his Yupa
      of Khadira wood."--_Ibid._

   99 The _Butea Frondosa_. "He who desires beauty and sacred knowledge
      ought to make his Yupa of Palasa wood."--_Ibid._

  100 The _Cardia Latifolia_.

  101 A kind of pine. The word means literally the tree of the Gods.
      Compare the Hebrew {~HEBREW LETTER AYIN~}{~HEBREW LETTER TSADI~}{~HEBREW LETTER YOD~} {~HEBREW LETTER YOD~}{~HEBREW LETTER HE~}{~HEBREW LETTER VAV~}{~HEBREW LETTER HE~} "trees of the Lord."

  102 The Hindus call the constellation of Ursa Major the Seven Rishis or
      Saints.

  103 A minute account of these ancient ceremonies would be out of place
      here. "Agnishtoma is the name of a sacrifice, or rather a series of
      offerings to fire for five days. It is the first and principal part
      of the Jyotishtoma, one of the great sacrifices in which especially
      the juice of the Soma plant is offered for the purpose of obtaining
      Swarga or heaven." GOLDSTUeCKER'S DICTIONARY. "The _Agnishtoma_ is
      Agni. It is called so because they (the gods) praised him with this
      Stoma. They called it so to hide the proper meaning of the word: for
      the gods like to hide the proper meaning of words."

      "On account of four classes of gods having praised Agni with four
      Stomas, the whole was called _Chatushtoma_ (containing four
      Stomas)."

      "It (the Agnishtoma) is called _Jyotishtoma_, for they praised Agni
      when he had risen up (to the sky) in the shape of a light
      (_jyotis_)."

      "This (Agnishtoma) is a sacrificial performance which has no
      beginning and no end." HAUG'S _Aitareya Brahmanam_.

      The Atiratra, literally _lasting through the night_, is a division
      of the service of the Jyotishtoma.

      The Abhijit, _the everywhere victorious_, is the name of a
      sub-division of the great sacrifice of the Gavamanaya.

      The Visvajit, or _the all-conquering_, is a similar sub-division.

      Ayus is the name of a service forming a division of the Abhiplava
      sacrifice.

      The _Aptoryam_, is the seventh or last part of the Jyotishtoma, for
      the performance of which it is not essentially necessary, but a
      voluntary sacrifice instituted for the attainment of a specific
      desire. The literal meaning of the word would be in conformity with
      the _Praudhamanorama_, "a sacrifice which procures the attainment of
      the desired object." GOLDSTUeCKER'S DICTIONARY.

      "The _Ukthya_ is a slight modification of the Agnishtoma sacrifice.
      The noun to be supplied to it is _kratu_. It is a Soma sacrifice
      also, and one of the seven Sansthas or component parts of the
      Jyotishtoma. Its name indicates its nature. For _Ukthya_ means 'what
      refers to the Uktha,' which is an older name for Shastra, _i.e._
      recitation of one of the Hotri priests at the time of the Soma
      libations. Thus this sacrifice is only a kind of supplement to the
      Agnishtoma." HAUG. _Ai. B._

  104 "Four classes of priests were required in India at the most solemn
      sacrifices. 1. The officiating priests, manual labourers, and
      acolytes, who had chiefly to prepare the sacrificial ground, to
      dress the altar, slay the victims, and pour out the libations. 2.
      The choristers, who chant the sacred hymns. 3. The reciters or
      readers, who repeat certain hymns. 4. The overseers or bishops, who
      watch and superintend the proceedings of the other priests, and
      ought to be familiar with all the Vedas. The formulas and verses to
      be muttered by the first class are contained in the
      Yajur-veda-sanhita. The hymns to be sung by the second class are in
      the Sama-veda-sanhita. The Atharva-veda is said to be intended for
      the Brahman or overseer, who is to watch the proceedings of the
      sacrifice, and to remedy any mistake that may occur. The hymns to be
      recited by the third class are contained in the Rigveda," _Chips
      from a German Workshop._

  105 The Maruts are the winds, deified in the religion of the Veda like
      other mighty powers and phenomena of nature.

  106 A Titan or fiend whose destruction has given Vishnu one of his
      well-known titles, Madhava.

  107 The garden of Indra.

  108 One of the most ancient and popular of the numerous names of Vishnu.
      The word has been derived in several ways, and may mean _he who
      moved on the (primordial) waters_, or _he who pervades or influences
      men or their thoughts_.

  109 The Horse-Sacrifice, just described.

  110 To walk round an object keeping the right side towards it is a mark
      of great respect. The Sanskrit word for the observance is
      _pradakshina_, from pra pro, and _daksha_ right, Greek {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER XI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}, Latin
      dexter, Gaelic deas-il. A similar ceremony is observed by the Gaels.

      "In the meantime she traced around him, with wavering steps, the
      propitiation, which some have thought has been derived from the
      Druidical mythology. It consists, as is well known, in the person
      who makes the _deasil_ walking three times round the person who is
      the object of the ceremony, taking care to move according to the
      course of the sun."

      SCOTT. _The Two Drovers._

  111 The _Amrit_, the nectar of the Indian Gods.

_  112 Gandharvas_ (Southey's Glendoveers) are celestial musicians
      inhabiting Indra's heaven and forming the orchestra at all the
      banquets of the principal deities.

_  113 Yakshas_, demigods attendant especially on Kuvera, and employed by
      him in the care of his garden and treasures.

_  114 Kimpurushas_, demigods attached also to the service of Kuvera,
      celestial musicians, represented like centaurs reversed with human
      figures and horses' heads.

_  115 Siddhas_, demigods or spirits of undefined attributes, occupying
      with the _Vidyadharas_ the middle air or region between the earth
      and the sun.

      Schlegel translates: "Divi, Sapientes, Fidicines, Praepetes,
      illustres Genii, Praeconesque procrearunt natos, masculos,
      silvicolas; angues porro, Hippocephali Beati, Aligeri, Serpentesque
      frequentes alacriter generavere prolem innumerabilem."

  116 A mountain in the south of India.

  117 The preceptor of the Gods and regent of the planet Jupiter.

  118 The celestial architect, the Indian Hephaestus, Mulciber, or Vulcan.

  119 The God of Fire.

  120 Twin children of the Sun, the physicians of Swarga or Indra's
      heaven.

  121 The deity of the waters.

  122 Parjanya, sometimes confounded with Indra.

  123 The bird and vehicle of Vishnu. He is generally represented as a
      being something between a man and a bird and considered as the
      sovereign of the feathered race. He may be compared with the Simurgh
      of the Persians, the 'Anka of the Arabs, the Griffin of chivalry,
      the Phoenix of Egypt, and the bird that sits upon the ash Yggdrasil
      of the Edda.

  124 This Canto will appear ridiculous to the European reader. But it
      should be remembered that the monkeys of an Indian forest, the
      "bough-deer" as the poets call them, are very different animals from
      the "turpissima bestia" that accompanies the itinerant organ-grinder
      or grins in the Zoological Gardens of London. Milton has made his
      hero, Satan, assume the forms of a cormorant, a toad, and a serpent,
      and I cannot see that this creation of semi-divine Vanars, or
      monkeys, is more ridiculous or undignified.

  125 The consort of Indra, called also Sachi and Indrani.

  126 The _Michelia champaca_. It bears a scented yellow blossom:

      "The maid of India blest again to hold
      In her full lap the Champac's leaves of gold."

      _Lallah Rookh._

  127 Vibhandak, the father of Rishyasring

  128 A hemisloka is wanting in Schlegel's text, which he thus fills up in
      his Latin translation.

  129 Rishyasring, a Brahman, had married Santa who was of the Kshatriya
      or Warrior caste and an expiatory ceremony was necessary on account
      of this violation of the law.

  130 "The poet no doubt intended to indicate the vernal equinox as the
      birthday of Rama. For the month _Chaitra_ is the first of the two
      months assigned to the spring; it corresponds with the latter half
      of March and the former half of April in our division of the year.
      _Aditi_, the mother of the Gods, is lady of the seventh lunar
      mansion which is called _Punarvasu_. The five planets and their
      positions in the Zodiac are thus enumerated by both commentators:
      the Sun in Aries, Mars in Capricorn, Saturn in Libra, Jupiter in
      Cancer, Venus in Pisces.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} I leave to astronomers to examine whether
      the parts of the description agree with one another, and, if this be
      the case, thence to deduce the date. The Indians place the nativity
      of Rama in the confines of the second age (treta) and the third
      (dwapara): but it seems that this should be taken in an allegorical
      sense.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} We may consider that the poet had an eye to the time in
      which, immediately before his own age, the aspects of the heavenly
      bodies were such as he has described." SCHLEGEL.

  131 The regent of the planet Jupiter.

  132 Indra = Jupiter Tonans.

  133 "_Pushya_ is the name of a month; but here it means the eighth
      mansion. The ninth is called _Aslesha_, or the snake. It is evident
      from this that Bharat, though his birth is mentioned before that of
      the twins, was the youngest of the four brothers and Rama's junior
      by eleven months." SCHLEGEL.

  134 A fish, the Zodiacal sign _Pisces_.

  135 One of the constellations, containing stars in the wing of Pegasus.

  136 Rama means the Delight (of the World); Bharat, the Supporter;
      Lakshman, the Auspicious; Satrughna, the Slayer of Foes.

  137 Schlegel, in the _Indische Bibliothek_, remarks that the proficiency
      of the Indians in this art early attracted the attention of
      Alexander's successors, and natives of India were so long
      exclusively employed in this service that the name Indian was
      applied to any elephant-driver, to whatever country he might belong.

  138 The story of this famous saint is given at sufficient length in
      Cantos LI-LV.

      This saint has given his name to the district and city to the east
      of Benares. The original name, preserved in a land-grant on copper
      now in the Museum of the Benares College, has been Moslemized into
      Ghazeepore (the City of the Soldier-martyr).

  139 The son of Kusik is Visvamitra.

  140 At the recollection of their former enmity, to be described
      hereafter.

  141 The Indian nectar or drink of the Gods.

  142 Great joy, according to the Hindu belief, has this effect, not
      causing each particular hair to stand on end, but gently raising all
      the down upon the body.

  143 The Rakshasas, giants, or fiends who are represented as disturbing
      the sacrifice, signify here, as often elsewhere, merely the savage
      tribes which placed themselves in hostile opposition to Brahmanical
      institutions.

  144 Consisting of horse, foot, chariots, and elephants.

  145 "The Gandharvas, or heavenly bards, had originally a warlike
      character but were afterwards reduced to the office of celestial
      musicians cheering the banquets of the Gods. Dr. Kuhn has shown
      their identity with the Centaurs in name, origin and attributes."
      GORRESIO.

  146 These mysterious animated weapons are enumerated in Cantos XXIX and
      XXX. Daksha was the son of Brahma and one of the Prajapatis,
      Demiurgi, or secondary authors of creation.

  147 Youths of the Kshatriya class used to leave unshorn the side locks
      of their hair. These were called _Kaka-paksha_, or raven's wings.

  148 The Rakshas or giant Ravan, king of Lanka.

  149 "The meaning of Asvins (from _asva_ a horse, Persian asp, Greek
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}, Latin _equus_, Welsh ech) is Horsemen. They were twin deities
      of whom frequent mention is made in the Vedas and the Indian myths.
      The Asvins have much in common with the Dioscuri of Greece, and
      their mythical genealogy seems to indicate that their origin was
      astronomical. They were, perhaps, at first the morning star and
      evening star. They are said to be the children of the sun and the
      nymph Asvini, who is one of the lunar asterisms personified. In the
      popular mythology they are regarded as the physicians of the Gods."
      GORRESIO.

  150 The word Kumara (a young prince, a Childe) is also a proper name of
      Skanda or Kartikeya God of War, the son of Siva and Uma. The babe
      was matured in the fire.

  151 "At the rising of the sun as well as at noon certain observances,
      invocations, and prayers were prescribed which might under no
      circumstances be omitted. One of these observances was the
      recitation of the Savitri, a Vedic hymn to the Sun of wonderful
      beauty." GORRESIO.

_  152 Tripathaga_, _Three-path-go,_ flowing in heaven, on earth, and
      under the earth. See Canto XLV.

  153 Tennyson's "Indian Cama," the God of Love, known also by many other
      names.

_  154 Uma_, or _Parvati_, was daughter of Himalaya, Monarch of mountains,
      and wife of Siva. See Kalidasa's _Kumara Sambhava_, or _Birth of the
      War-God_.

_  155 Sthanu_. The Unmoving one, a name of Siva.

  156 "The practice of austerities, voluntary tortures, and mortifications
      was anciently universal in India, and was held by the Indians to be
      of immense efficacy. Hence they mortified themselves to expiate
      sins, to acquire merits, and to obtain superhuman gifts and powers;
      the Gods themselves sometimes exercised themselves in such
      austerities, either to raise themselves to greater power and
      grandeur, or to counteract the austerities of man which threatened
      to prevail over them and to deprive them of heaven.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Such
      austerities were called in India _tapas_ (burning ardour, fervent
      devotion) and he who practised them _tapasvin_." GORRESIO.

_  157 The Bodiless one._

  158 "A celebrated lake regarded in India as sacred. It lies in the lofty
      region between the northern highlands of the Himalayas and mount
      Kailasa, the region of the sacred lakes. The poem, following the
      popular Indian belief, makes the river Sarayu (now Sarju) flow from
      the Manasa lake; the sources of the river are a little to the south
      about a day's journey from the lake. See Lassen, _Indische
      Alterthumshunde_, page 34." GORRESIO. _Manas_ means mind; _manasa_,
      mental, mind-born.

_  159 Sarovar_ means best of lakes. This is another of the poet's
      fanciful etymologies.

  160 The confluence of two or more rivers is often a venerated and holy
      place. The most famous is Prayag or Allahabad, where the Sarasvati
      by an underground course is believed to join the Jumna and the
      Ganges.

  161 The botanical names of the trees mentioned in the text are Grislea
      Tormentosa, Shorea Robusta, Echites Antidysenterica, Bignonia
      Suaveolens, OEgle Marmelos, and Diospyrus Glutinosa. I have omitted
      the _Kutaja_ (Echites) and the _Tinduka_ (Diospyrus).

  162 Here we meet with a fresh myth to account for the name of these
      regions. _Malaja_ is probably a non-Aryan word signifying a hilly
      country: taken as a Sanskrit compound it means _sprung from
      defilement_. The word _Karusha_ appears to have a somewhat similar
      meaning.

  163 "This is one of those indefinable mythic personages who are found in
      the ancient traditions of many nations, and in whom cosmogonical or
      astronomical notions are generally figured. Thus it is related of
      Agastya that the Vindhyan mountains prostrated themselves before
      him; and yet the same Agastya is believed to be regent of the star
      Canopus." GORRESIO.

      He will appear as the friend and helper of Rama farther on in the
      poem.

  164 The famous pleasure-garden of Kuvera the God of Wealth.

  165 "The whole of this Canto together with the following one, regards
      the belief, formerly prevalent in India, that by virtue of certain
      spells, to be learnt and muttered, secret knowledge and superhuman
      powers might be acquired. To this the poet has already alluded in
      Canto xxiii. These incorporeal weapons are partly represented
      according to the fashion of those ascribed to the Gods and the
      different orders of demi-gods, partly are the mere creations of
      fancy; and it would not be easy to say what idea the poet had of
      them in his own mind, or what powers he meant to assign to each."
      SCHLEGEL.

  166 "In Sanskrit _Sankara_, a word which has various significations but
      the primary meaning of which is _the act of seizing_. A magical
      power seems to be implied of employing the weapons when and where
      required. The remarks I have made on the preceding Canto apply with
      still greater force to this. The MSS. greatly vary in the
      enumeration of these _Sankaras_, and it is not surprising that
      copyists have incorrectly written the names which they did not well
      understand. The commentators throw no light upon the subject."
      SCHLEGEL. I have taken the liberty of omitting four of these which
      Schlegel translates "Scleromphalum, Euomphalum, Centiventrem, and
      Chrysomphalum."

  167 I omit, after this line, eight _slokes_ which, as Schlegel allows,
      are quite out of place.

  168 This is the fifth of the _avatars_, descents or incarnations of
      Vishnu.

  169 This is a solar allegory. Vishnu is the sun, the three steps being
      his rising, culmination, and setting.

  170 Certain ceremonies preliminary to a sacrifice.

  171 A river which rises in Budelcund and falls into the Ganges near
      Patna. It is called also _Hiranyarahu_, Golden-armed, and
      _Hiranyaraha_, Auriferous.

  172 The modern Berar.

  173 According to the Bengal recension the first (Kusamba) is called
      Kusasva, and his city Kausasvi. This name does not occur elsewhere.
      The reading of the northern recension is confirmed by Foe Koue Ki;
      p. 385, where the city _Kiaoshangmi_ is mentioned. It lay 500 _lis_
      to the south-west of _Prayaga_, on the south bank of the Jumna.
      _Mahodaya_ is another name of Kanyakubja: _Dharmaranya_, the wood to
      which the God of Justice is said to have fled through fear of Soma
      the Moon-God was in Magadh. Girivraja was in the same neighbourhood.
      See Lasson's I, A. Vol. I. p. 604.

  174 That is, the City of the Bent Virgins, the modern Kanauj or Canouge.

  175 Literally, Given by _Brahma_ or devout contemplation.

  176 Now called Kosi (Cosy) corrupted from Kausiki, daughter of Kus]a.

      "This is one of those personifications of rivers so frequent in the
      Grecian mythology, but in the similar myths is seen the impress of
      the genius of each people, austere and profoundly religious in
      India, graceful and devoted to the worship of external beauty in
      Greece." GORRESIO.

  177 One of the names of the Ganges considered as the daughter of Jahnu.
      See Canto XLIV.

  178 The Indian Crane.

  179 Or, rather, geese.

  180 A name of the God Siva.

  181 Garuda.

  182 Ikshvaku, the name of a king of Ayodhya who is regarded as the
      founder of the Solar race, means also a _gourd_. Hence, perhaps, the
      myth.

  183 "The region here spoken of is called in the Laws of Manu
      _Madhyadesa_ or the middle region. 'The region situated between the
      Himalaya and the Vindhya Mountains {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} is called _Madhyadesa_, or the
      middle region; the space comprised between these two mountains from
      the eastern to the western sea is called by sages Aryavartta, _the
      seat of honourable men_.' (MANU, II, 21, 22.) The Sanskrit Indians
      called themselves Aryans, which means _honourable_, _noble_, to
      distinguish themselves from the surrounding nations of different
      origin." GORRESIO.

  184 Said to be so called from the Jambu, or Rose Apple, abounding in it,
      and signifying according to the Puranas the central division of the
      world, the known world.

  185 Here used as a name of Vishnu.

  186 Kings are called the husbands of their kingdoms or of the earth;
      "She and his kingdom were his only brides." _Raghuvansa._

        "Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
      A double marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,
      And then between me and my married wife."

      King Richard II. Act V. Sc. I.

  187 The thirty-three Gods are said in the _Aitareya Brahmana_, Book I.
      ch. II. 10. to be the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve
      Adityas, Prajapati, either Brahma or Daksha, and Vashatkara or
      deified oblation. This must have been the actual number at the
      beginning of the Vedic religion gradually increased by successive
      mythical and religious creations till the Indian Pantheon was
      crowded with abstractions of every kind. Through the reverence with
      which the words of the Veda were regarded, the immense host of
      multiplied divinities, in later times, still bore the name of the
      Thirty-three Gods.

  188 "One of the elephants which, according to an ancient belief popular
      in India, supported the earth with their enormous backs; when one of
      these elephants shook his wearied head the earth trembled with its
      woods and hills. An idea, or rather a mythical fancy, similar to
      this, but reduced to proportions less grand, is found in Virgil when
      he speaks of Enceladus buried under AEtna:"

      "adi semiustum fulmine corpus
      Urgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper AEtnam
      Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;
      Et fessum quoties mutat latus, intre mere omnem
      iam, et coelum subtexere fumo."

      AEneid. Lib. III. GORRESIO.

  189 "The Devas and Asuras (Gods and Titans) fought in the east, the
      south, the west, and the north, and the Devas were defeated by the
      Asuras in all these directions. They then fought in the
      north-eastern direction; there the Devas did not sustain defeat.
      This direction is _aparajita_, _i.e._ unconquerable. Thence one
      should do work in this direction, and have it done there; for such a
      one (alone) is able to clear off his debts." HAUG'S _Aitareya
      Brahmanam_, Vol. II, p. 33.

      The debts here spoken of are a man's religious obligations to the
      Gods, the Pitaras or Manes, and men.

  190 Vishnu.

  191 "It appears to me that this mythical story has reference to the
      volcanic phenomena of nature. Kapil may very possibly be that hidden
      fiery force which suddenly unprisons itself and bursts forth in
      volcanic effects. Kapil is, moreover, one of the names of Agni the
      God of Fire." GORRESIO.

  192 Garud was the son of Kasyap and Vinata.

  193 Garud.

  194 A famous and venerated region near the Malabar coast.

  195 That is four fires and the sun.

  196 Heaven.

  197 Wind-Gods.

  198 Siva.

  199 The lake Vindu does not exist. Of the seven rivers here mentioned
      two only, the Ganges and the Sindhu or Indus, are known to
      geographers. Hladini means the Gladdener, Pavani the Purifier,
      Nalini the Lotus-Clad, and Suchakshu the Fair-eyed.

  200 The First or Golden Age.

  201 Diti and Aditi were wives of Kasyap, and mothers respectively of
      Titans and Gods.

  202 One of the seven seas surrounding as many worlds in concentric
      rings.

  203 Sankar and Rudra are names of Siva.

  204 "Sarngin, literally _carrying a bow of horn_, is a constantly
      recurring name of Vishnu. The Indians also, therefore, knew the art
      of making bows out of the hons of antelopes or wild goats, which
      Homer ascribes to the Trojans of the heroic age." SCHLEGEL.

  205 Dhanvantari, the physician of the Gods.

  206 The poet plays upon the word and fancifully derives it from _apsu_,
      the locative case plural of _ap_, water, and _rasa_, taste.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The
      word is probably derived from _ap_, water, and _sri_, to go, and
      seems to signify _inhabitants of the water_, nymphs of the stream;
      or, as Goldstuecker thinks (Dict. s.v.) these divinities were
      originally personifications of the vapours which are attracted by
      the sun and form into mist or clouds.

  207 "_Sura_, in the feminine comprehends all sorts of intoxicating
      liquors, many kinds of which the Indians from the earliest times
      distilled and prepared from rice, sugar-cane, the palm tree, and
      various flowers and plants. Nothing is considered more disgraceful
      among orthodox Hindus than drunkenness, and the use of wine is
      forbidden not only to Brahmans but the two other orders as well.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} So
      it clearly appears derogatory to the dignity of the Gods to have
      received a nymph so pernicious, who ought rather to have been made
      over to the Titans. However the etymological fancy has prevailed.
      The word _Sura_, a God, is derived from the indeclinable _Swar_
      heaven." SCHLEGEL.

  208 Literally, high-eared, the horse of Indra. Compare the production of
      the horse from the sea by Neptune.

        209 "And Kaustubha the best
      Of gems that burns with living light
      Upon Lord Vishnu's breast."

      _Churning of the Ocean._

  210 "That this story of the birth of Lakshmi is of considerable
      antiquity is evident from one of her names _Kshirabdhi-tanaya_,
      daughter of the Milky Sea, which is found in _Amarasinha_ the most
      ancient of Indian lexicographers. The similarity to the Greek myth
      of Venus being born from the foam of the sea is remarkable."

      "In this description of Lakshmi one thing only offends me, that she
      is said to have four arms. Each of Vishnu's arms, single, as far as
      the elbow, there branches into two; but Lakshmi in all the brass
      seals that I possess or remember to have seen has two arms only. Nor
      does this deformity of redundant limbs suit the pattern of perfect
      beauty." SCHLEGEL. I have omitted the offensive epithet.

  211 Purandhar, a common title of Indra.

  212 A few verses are here left untranslated on account of the subject
      and language being offensive to modern taste.

  213 "In this myth of Indra destroying the unborn fruit of Diti with his
      thunderbolt, from which afterwards came the Maruts or Gods of Wind
      and Storm, geological phenomena are, it seems, represented under
      mythical images. In the great Mother of the Gods is, perhaps,
      figured the dry earth: Indra the God of thunder rends it open, and
      there issue from its rent bosom the Maruts or exhalations of the
      earth. But such ancient myths are difficult to interpret with
      absolute certainty." GORRESIO.

  214 Wind.

  215 Indra, with _maha_, great, prefixed.

  216 The Heavenly Twins.

  217 Not banished from heaven as the inferior Gods and demigods sometimes
      were.

  218 Kumarila says: "In the same manner, if it is said that Indra was the
      seducer of Ahalya this does not imply that the God Indra committed
      such a crime, but Indra means the sun, and Ahalya (from ahan and li)
      the night; and as the night is seduced and ruined by the sun of the
      morning, therefore is Indra called the paramour of Ahalya." MAX
      MULLER, _History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 530_.

  219 "The preceding sixteen lines have occurred before in Canto XLVIII.
      This Homeric custom of repeating a passage of several lines is
      strange to our poet. This is the only instance I remember. The
      repetition of single lines is common enough." SCHLEGEL.

  220 Divine personages of minute size produced from the hair of Brahma,
      and probably the origin of

            "That small infantry
      Warred on by cranes."

  221 Sweet, salt, pungent, bitter, acid, and astringent.

  222 "Of old hoards and minerals in the earth, the king is entitled to
      half by reason of his general protection, and because he is the lord
      paramount of the soil." MANU, Book VIII. 39.

  223 Ghi or clarified butter, "holy oil," being one of the essentials of
      sacrifice.

  224 "A Brahman had five principal duties to discharge every day: study
      and teaching the Veda, oblations to the manes or spirits of the
      departed, sacrifice to the Gods, hospitable offerings to men, and _a
      gift of food to all creatures_. The last consisted of rice or other
      grain which the Brahman was to offer every day outside his house in
      the open air. MANU, Book III. 70." GORRESIO.

  225 These were certain sacred words of invocation such a _svaha_,
      _vashat_, etc., pronounced at the time of sacrifice.

  226 "It is well known that the Persians were called Pahlavas by the
      Indians. The _Sakas_ are nomad tribes inhabiting Central Asia, the
      Scythes of the Greeks, whom the Persians also, as Herodotus tells
      us, called Sakae just as the Indians did. Lib. VII 64 {~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER GAMMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH VARIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH VARIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}. The name Yavans seems to be used
      rather indefinitely for nations situated beyond Persia to the west.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
      After the time of Alexander the Great the Indians as well as the
      Persians called the Greeks also Yavans." SCHLEGEL.

      Lassen thinks that the Pahlavas were the same people as the {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}
      of Herodotus, and that this non-Indian people dwelt on the
      north-west confines of India.

  227 See page 13, note 6.

  228 Barbarians, non-Sanskrit-speaking tribes.

  229 A comprehensive term for foreign or outcast races of different faith
      and language from the Hindus.

  230 The Kiratas and Haritas are savage aborigines of India who occupy
      hills and jungles and are altogether different in race and character
      from the Hindus. Dr. Muir remarks in his Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I. p.
      488 (second edition) that it does not appear that it is the object
      of this legend to represent this miraculous creation as the origin
      of these tribes, and that nothing more may have been intended than
      that the cow called into existence large armies, of the same stock
      with particular tribes previously existing.

  231 The Great God, Siva.

  232 Nandi, the snow-white bull, the attendant and favourite vehicle of
      Siva.

  233 "The names of many of these weapons which are mythical and partly
      allegorical have occurred in Canto XXIX. The general signification
      of the story is clear enough. It is a contest for supremacy between
      the regal or military order and Brahmanical or priestly authority,
      like one of those struggles which our own Europe saw in the middle
      ages when without employing warlike weapons the priesthood
      frequently gained the victory." SCHLEGEL.

      For a full account of the early contests between the Brahmans and
      the Kshattriyas, see Muir's Original Sanskrit Texts (Second edition)
      Vol. I. Ch. IV.

  234 "Trisanku, king of Ayodhya, was seventh in descent from Ikshvaku,
      and Dasaratha holds the thirty-fourth place in the same genealogy.
      See Canto LXX. We are thrown back, therefore, to very ancient times,
      and it occasions some surprise to find Vasishtha and Visvamitra,
      actors in these occurences, still alive in Rama's time."

  235 "It does not appear how Trisanku, in asking the aid of Vasishtha's
      sons after applying in vain to their father, could be charged with
      resorting to another _sakha_ (School) in the ordinary sense of that
      word; as it is not conceivable that the sons should have been of
      another Sakha from the father, whose cause they espouse with so much
      warmth. The commentator in the Bombay edition explains the word
      _Sakhantaram_ as Yajanadina rakshantaram, 'one who by sacrificing
      for thee, etc., will be another protector.' Gorresio's Gauda text,
      which may often be used as a commentary on the older one, has the
      following paraphrase of the words in question, ch. 60, 3. Mulam
      utsrijya kasmat tvam sakhasv ichhasi lambitum. 'Why, forsaking the
      root, dost thou desire to hang upon the branches?' " MUIR, Sanskrit
      Texts, Vol. I., p. 401.

  236 A Chandala was a man born of the illegal and impure union of a Sudra
      with a woman of one of the three higher castes.

  237 "The Chandala was regarded as the vilest and most abject of the men
      sprung from wedlock forbidden by the law (Manavadharmasastra, Lib.
      X. 12.); a kind of social malediction weighed upon his head and
      rejected him from human society." GORRESIO.

  238 This appellation, occuring nowhere else in the poem except as the
      name of a city, appears twice in this Canto as a name of Vasishtha.

  239 "The seven ancient rishis or saints, as has been said before, were
      the seven stars of Ursa Major. The seven other new saints which are
      here said to have been created by Visvamitra should be seven new
      southern stars, a sort of new Ursa. Von Schlegel thinks that this
      mythical fiction of new stars created by Visvamitra may signify that
      these southern stars, unknown to the Indians as long as they
      remained in the neighbourhood of the Ganges, became known to them at
      a later date when they colonized the southern regions of India."
      GORRESIO.

  240 "This cannot refer to the events just related: for Visvamitra was
      successful in the sacrifice performed for Trisanku. And yet no other
      impediment is mentioned. Still his restless mind would not allow him
      to remain longer in the same spot. So the character of Visvamitra is
      ingeniously and skilfully shadowed forth: as he had been formerly a
      most warlike king, loving battle and glory, bold, active, sometimes
      unjust, and more frequently magnanimous, such also he always shows
      himself in his character of anchorite and ascetic." SCHLEGEL.

  241 Near the modern city of Ajmere. The place is sacred still, and the
      name is preserved in the Hindi. Lassen, however, says that this
      Pushkala or Pushkara, called by the Grecian writers {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}, the
      earliest place of pilgrimage mentioned by name, is not to be
      confounded with the modern Pushkara in Ajmere.

  242 "Ambarisha is the twenty-ninth in descent from Ikshvaku, and is
      therefore separated by an immense space of time from Trisanku in
      whose story Visvamitra had played so important a part. Yet Richika,
      who is represented as having young sons while Ambarisha was yet
      reigning being himself the son of Bhrigu and to be numbered with the
      most ancient sages, is said to have married the younger sister of
      Visvamitra. But I need not again remark that there is a perpetual
      anachronism in Indian mythology." SCHLEGEL..

      "In the mythical story related in this and the following Canto we
      may discover, I think, some indication of the epoch at which the
      immolation of lower animals was substituted for human sacrifice.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} So
      when Iphigenia was about to be sacrificed at Aulis, one legend tells
      us that a hind was substituted for the virgin." GORRESIO.

      So the ram caught in the thicket took the place of Isaac, or, as the
      Musalmans say, of Ishmael.

  243 The Indian Cupid.

  244 "The same as she whose praises Visvamitra has already sung in Canto
      XXXV, and whom the poet brings yet alive upon the scene in Canto
      LXI. Her proper name was _Satyavati_ (Truthful); the patronymic,
      Kausiki was preserved by the river into which she is said to have
      been changed, and is still recognized in the corrupted forms Kusa
      and Kusi. The river flows from the heights of the Himalaya towards
      the Ganges, bounding on the east the country of Videha (Behar). The
      name is no doubt half hidden in the _Cosoagus_ of Pliny and the
      _Kossounos_ of Arrian. But each author has fallen into the same
      error in his enumeration of these rivers (Condochatem, Erannoboam,
      Cosoagum, Sonum). The Erannoboas, (Hiranyavaha) and the Sone are not
      different streams, but well-known names of the same river. Moreover
      the order is disturbed, in which on the right and left they fall
      into the Ganges. To be consistent with geography it should be
      written: Erannoboam sive Sonum, Condochatem (Gandaki), Cosoagum."
      SCHLEGEL.

  245 "Daksha was one of the ancient Progenitors or Prajapatis created by
      Brahma. The sacrifice which is here spoken of and in which Sankar or
      Siva (called also here Rudra and Bhava) smote the Gods because he
      had not been invited to share the sacred oblations with them, seems
      to refer to the origin of the worship of Siva, to its increase and
      to the struggle it maintained with other older forms of worship."
      GORRESIO.

  246 Sita means a furrow.

            "Great Erectheus swayed,
      That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
      But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
      The mighty offspring of the foodful earth."

      Iliad, Book II.

  247 "The whole story of Sita, as will be seen in the course of the poem
      has a great analogy with the ancient myth of Proserpine." GORRESIO.

  248 A different lady from the Goddess of the Jumna who bears the same
      name.

  249 This is another fanciful derivation, _Sa_--with, and _gara_--poison.

_  250 Purushadak_ means a cannibal. First called _Kalmashapada_ on
      account of his spotted feet he is said to have been turned into a
      cannibal for killing the son of Vasishtha.

  251 "In the setting forth of these royal genealogies the Bengal
      recension varies but slightly from the Northern. The first six names
      of the genealogy of the Kings of Ayodhya are partly theogonical and
      partly cosmogonical; the other names are no doubt in accordance with
      tradition and deserve the same amount of credence as the ancient
      traditional genealogies of other nations." GORRESIO.

  252 The tenth of the lunar asterisms, composed of five stars.

  253 There are two lunar asterisms of this name, one following the other
      immediately, forming the eleventh and twelfth of the lunar mansions.

  254 This is another Rama, son of Jamadagni, called Parasurama, or Rama
      with the axe, from the weapon which he carried. He was while he
      lived the terror of the Warrior caste, and his name recalls long and
      fierce struggles between the sacerdotal and military order in which
      the latter suffered severely at the hands of their implacable enemy.

  255 "The author of the _Raghuvansa_ places the mountain Mahendra in the
      territory of the king of the Kalingans, whose palace commanded a
      view of the ocean. It is well known that the country along the coast
      to the south of the mouths of the Ganges was the seat of this
      people. Hence it may be suspected that this Mahendra is what Pliny
      calls 'promontorium Calingon.' The modern name, _Cape Palmyras_,
      from the palmyras Borassus flabelliformis, which abound there agrees
      remarkably with the description of the poet who speaks of the groves
      of these trees. _Raghuvansa_, VI. 51." SCHLEGEL.

  256 Siva.

  257 Siva. God of the Azure Neck.

  258 Satrughna means slayer of foes, and the word is repeated as an
      intensive epithet.

  259 Alluding to the images of Vishnu, which have four arms, the four
      princes being portions of the substance of that God.

  260 Chief of the insignia of imperial dignity.

  261 Whisks, usually made of the long tails of the Yak.

  262 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  263 The Chandrakanta or Moonstone, a sort of crystal supposed to be
      composed of congealed moonbeams.

  264 A customary mark of respect to a superior.

  265 Rahu, the ascending node, is in mythology a demon with the tail of a
      dragon whose head was severed from his body by Vishnu, but being
      immortal, the head and tail retained their separate existence and
      being transferred to the stellar sphere became the authors of
      eclipses; the first especially by endeavouring to swallow the sun
      and moon.

  266 In eclipse.

  267 The seventh of the lunar asterisms.

  268 Kausalya and Sumitra.

  269 A king of the Lunar race, and father of Yayati.

  270 Literally _the chamber of wrath,_ a "_growlery_," a small, dark,
      unfurnished room to which it seems, the wives and ladies of the king
      betook themselves when offended and sulky.

  271 In these four lines I do not translate faithfully, and I do not
      venture to follow Kaikeyi farther in her eulogy of the hump-back's
      charms.

  272 These verses are evidently an interpolation. They contain nothing
      that has not been already related: the words only are altered. As
      the whole poem could not be recited at once, the rhapsodists at the
      beginning of a fresh recitation would naturally remind their hearers
      of the events immediately preceding.

  273 The _sloka_ or distich which I have been forced to expand into these
      nine lines is evidently spurious, but is found in all the commented
      MSS. which Schlegel consulted.

  274 Manmatha, Mind-disturber, a name of Kama or Love.

  275 This story is told in the Mahabharat. A free version of it may be
      found in _Scenes from the Ramayan, etc._

  276 Only the highest merit obtains a home in heaven for ever. Minor
      degrees of merit procure only leases of heavenly mansions terminable
      after periods proportioned to the fund which buys them. King Yayati
      went to heaven and when his term expired was unceremoniously
      ejected, and thrown down to earth.

  277 See _Additional Notes_, THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

  278 Indra, called also Purandara, Town-destroyer.

  279 Indra's charioteer.

  280 The elephant of Indra.

  281 A star in the spike of Virgo: hence the name of the mouth Chaitra or
      Chait.

  282 The Rain-God.

  283 In a former life.

  284 One of the lunar asterisms, represented as the favourite wife of the
      Moon. See p. 4, note.

  285 The Sea.

  286 The Moon.

  287 The comparison may to a European reader seem a homely one. But
      Spenser likens an infuriate woman to a cow "That is berobbed of her
      youngling dere." Shakspeare also makes King Henry VI compare himself
      to the calf's mother that "Runs lowing up and down, Looking the way
      her harmless young one went." "Cows," says De Quincey, "are amongst
      the gentlest of breathing creatures; none show more passionate
      tenderness to their young, when deprived of them, and, in short, I
      am not ashamed to profess a deep love for these gentle creatures."

  288 The commentators say that, in a former creation, Ocean grieved his
      mother and suffered in consequence the pains of hell.

  289 As described in Book I Canto XL.

  290 Parasurama.

  291 The Sanskrit word _hasta_ signifies both _hand_, and the trunk of
      "The beast that bears between his eyes a serpent for a head."

  292 See P. 41.

  293 The first progeny of Brahma or Brahma himself.

  294 These are three names of the Sun.

  295 See P. 1.

  296 The saints who form the constellation of Ursa Major.

  297 The regent of the planet Venus.

  298 Kuvera.

_  299 Bali_, or the presentation of food to all created beings, is one of
      the five great sacraments of the Hindu religion: it consists in
      throwing a small parcel of the offering, _Ghee_, or rice, or the
      like, into the open air at the back of the house.

  300 In mythology, a demon slain by Indra.

  301 Called also Garud, the King of the birds, offspring of Vinata. See
      p. 53.

  302 See P. 56.

  303 See P. 43.

  304 The story of Savitri, told in the Mahabharat, has been admirably
      translated by Rueckert, and elegantly epitomized by Mrs. Manning in
      _India, Ancient and Mediaeval_. There is a free rendering of the
      story in _Idylls from the Sanskrit_.

  305 Fire for sacrificial purposes is produced by the attrition of two
      pieces of wood.

  306 Kaikeyi.

  307 The chapel where the sacred fire used in worship is kept.

  308 The students and teachers of the Taittiriya portion of the Yajur
      Veda.

  309 Two of the divine personages called _Prajapatis_ and _Brahmadikas_
      who were first created by Brahma.

  310 It was the custom of the kings of the solar dynasty to resign in
      their extreme old age the kingdom to the heir, and spend the
      remainder of their days in holy meditation in the forest:

      "For such through ages in their life's decline
      Is the good custom of Ikshvaku's line."

      _Raghuransa._

  311 See Book I, Canto XXXIX. An Indian prince in more modern times
      appears to have diverted himself in a similar way.

      It is still reported in Belgaum that Appay Deasy was wont to amuse
      himself "by making several young and beautiful women stand side by
      side on a narrow balcony, without a parapet, overhanging the deep
      reservoir at the new palace in Nipani. He used then to pass along
      the line of trembling creatures, and suddenly thrusting one of them
      headlong into the water below, he used to watch her drowning, and
      derive pleasure from her dying agonies."--History of the Belgaum
      District. By H. J. Stokes, M. S. C.

  312 Chitraratha, King of the celestial choristers.

  313 It is said that the bamboo dies after flowering.

  314 "Thirty centuries have passed since he began this memorable journey.
      Every step of it is known and is annually traversed by thousands:
      hero worship is not extinct. What can Faith do! How strong are the
      ties of religion when entwined with the legends of a country! How
      many a cart creeps creaking and weary along the road from Ayodhya to
      Chitrakut. It is this that gives the Ramayan a strange interest, the
      story still lives." _Calcutta Review: Vol. XXIII._

  315 See p. 72.

  316 Four stars of the sixteenth lunar asterism.

  317 In the marriage service.

  318 The husks and chaff of the rice offered to the Gods.

  319 An important sacrifice at which seventeen victims were immolated.

  320 The great pilgrimage to the Himalayas, in order to die there.

  321 Known to Europeans as the Goomtee.

  322 A tree, commonly called _Ingua_.

  323 Sacrificial posts to which the victims were tied.

  324 Daughter of Jahnu, a name of the Ganges. See p. 55.

  325 The _Maina_ or Gracula religiosa, a favourite cage-bird, easily
      taught to talk.

  326 The Jumna.

  327 The Hindu name of Allahabad.

  328 The Langur is a large monkey.

  329 A mountain said to lie to the east of Meru.

  330 Another name of the Jumna, daughter of the Sun.

  331 "We have often looked on that green hill: it is the holiest spot of
      that sect of the Hindu faith who devote themselves to this
      incarnation of Vishnu. The whole neighbourhood is Rama's country.
      Every headland has some legend, every cavern is connected with his
      name; some of the wild fruits are still called _Sitaphal_, being the
      reputed food of the exile. Thousands and thousands annually visit
      the spot, and round the hill is a raised foot-path, on which the
      devotee, with naked feet, treads full of pious awe." _Calcutta
      Review_, Vol. XXIII.

  332 Deities of a particular class in which five or ten are enumerated.
      They are worshipped particularly at the funeral obsequies in honour
      of deceased progenitors.

  333 "So in Homer the horses of Achilles lamented with many bitter tears
      the death of Patroclus slain by Hector:"

      "{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}' {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}, {~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~},
      {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PERISPOMENI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}, {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH VARIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA WITH PERISPOMENI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}
      {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PHI~}' {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER EPSILON WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}"

      ILIAD. XVII. 426.

      "Ancient poesy frequently associated nature with the joys and
      sorrows of man." GORRESIO.

  334 The lines containing this heap of forced metaphors are marked as
      spurious by Schlegel.

  335 The southern region is the abode of Yama the Indian Pluto, and of
      departed spirits.

  336 The five elements of which the body consists, and to which it
      returns.

  337 So dying York cries over the body of Suffolk:

          "Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk!
      My soul shall thine keep company to heaven:
      Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast."

      _King Henry V, Act IV, 6._

  338 Kausalya, daughter of the king of another Kosal.

  339 Rajagriha, or Girivraja was the capital of Asvapati, Bharat's
      maternal grandfather.

  340 The Kekayas or Kaikayas in the Punjab appear amongst the chief
      nations in the war of the Mahabharata; their king being a kinsman of
      Krishna.

  341 Hastinapura was the capital of the kingdom of Kuru, near the modern
      Delhi.

  342 The Panchalas occupied the upper part of the Doab.

  343 "Kurujangala and its inhabitants are frequently mentioned in the
      _Mahabharata_, as in the _Adi-parv._ 3789, 4337, _et al._" WILSON'S
      _Vishnu Purana,_ Vol. II. p. 176. DR. HALL'S Note.

  344 "The {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER XI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} of Arrian. See _As. Res._ Vol. XV. p. 420, 421, also
      _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. I. p. 602, first footnote."
      WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. I. p. 421. DR. HALL'S Edition. The
      Ikshumati was a river in Kurukshetra.

  345 "The Bahikas are described in the Mahabharata, Karna Parvan, with
      some detail, and comprehend the different nations of the Punjab from
      the Sutlej to the Indus." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. I. p. 167.

  346 The Beas, Hyphasis, or Bibasis.

  347 It would be lost labour to attempt to verify all the towns and
      streams mentioned in Cantos LXVIII and LXXII. Professor Wilson
      observes (_Vishnu Purana_, p. 139. Dr. Hall's Edition) "States, and
      tribes, and cities have disappeared, even from recollection; and
      some of the natural features of the country, especially the rivers,
      have undergone a total alteration.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Notwithstanding these
      impediments, however, we should be able to identify at least
      mountains and rivers, to a much greater extent than is now
      practicable, if our maps were not so miserably defective in their
      nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers have been
      oriental scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been
      conversant with the spoken language of the country. They have,
      consequently, put down names at random, according to their own
      inaccurate appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and
      corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with
      appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to past or
      present denominations. We need not wonder that we cannot discover
      Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of
      Calcutta, Barnagore represents Barahanagar, Dakshineswar is
      metamorphosed into Duckinsore, Ulubaria into Willoughbury.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} There is
      scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of
      extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an
      incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is, in some degree,
      perhaps, a national defect."

      For further information regarding the road from Ayodhya to
      Rajagriha, see _Additional Notes_.

  348 "The Satadru, 'the hundred-channeled'--the Zaradrus of Ptolemy,
      Hesydrus of Pliny--is the Sutlej." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II.
      p. 130.

  349 The Sarasvati or Sursooty is a tributary of the Caggar or Guggur in
      Sirhind.

_  350 Suryamcha pratimehatu_, adversus solem mingat. An offence expressly
      forbidden by the Laws of Manu.

  351 Bharat does not intend these curses for any particular person: he
      merely wishes to prove his own innocence by invoking them on his own
      head if he had any share in banishing Rama.

  352 The Sama-veda, the hymns of which are chanted aloud.

  353 Walking from right to left.

  354 Birth and death, pleasure and pain, loss and gain.

  355 Erected upon a tree or high staff in honour of Indra.

  356 I follow in this stanza the Bombay edition in preference to
      Schlegel's which gives the tears of joy to the courtiers.

  357 The commentator says "Satrughna accompanied by the other sons of the
      king."

  358 Not Bharat's uncle, but some councillor.

_  359 Satakratu_, Lord of a hundred sacrifices, the performance of a
      hundred _Asvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse entitling the
      sacrificer to this exalted dignity.

  360 The modern Malabar.

  361 Now Sungroor, in the Allahabad district.

  362 Rama, Lakshman, and Sumantra.

  363 The _svastika_, a little cross with a transverse line at each
      extremity.

  364 When an army marched it was customary to burn the huts in which it
      had spent the night.

  365 Yama, Varuna, and Kuvera.

  366 "A happy land in the remote north where the inhabitants enjoy a
      natural pefection attended with complete happiness obtained without
      exertion. There is there no vicissitude, nor decrepitude, nor death,
      nor fear: no distinction of virtue and vice, none of the
      inequalities denoted by the words best, worst, and intermediate, nor
      any change resulting from the succession of the four Yugas." See
      MUIR'S _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p. 492.

  367 The Moon.

  368 The poet does not tell us what these lakes contained.

  369 These ten lines are a substitution for, and not a translation of the
      text which Carey and Marshman thus render: "This mountain adorned
      with mango, jumboo, usuna, lodhra, piala, punusa, dhava, unkotha,
      bhuvya, tinisha, vilwa, tindooka, bamboo, kashmaree, urista, uruna,
      madhooka, tilaka, vuduree, amluka, nipa, vetra, dhunwuna, veejaka,
      and other trees affording flowers, and fruits, and the most
      delightful shade, how charming does it appear!"

_  370 Vidyadharis_, Spirits of Air, sylphs.

  371 A lake attached either to Amaravati the residence of Indra, or Alaka
      that of Kuvera.

  372 The Ganges of heaven.

  373 Nalini, as here, may be the name of any lake covered with lotuses.

  374 This canto is allowed, by Indian commentators, to be an
      interpolation. It cannot be the work of Valmiki.

  375 A fine bird with a strong, sweet note, and great imitative powers.

  376 Bauhinea variegata, a species of ebony.

  377 The rainbow is called the bow of Indra.

  378 Bhogavati, the abode of the Nagas or Serpent race.

  379 "The order of the procession on these occasions is that the children
      precede according to age, then the women and after that the men
      according to age, the youngest first and the eldest last: when they
      descend into the water this is reversed and resumed when they come
      out of it." CAREY AND MARSHMAN.

  380 Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the Gods.

  381 Garud, the king of birds.

  382 To be won by virtue.

  383 The four religious orders, referable to different times of life are,
      that of the student, that of the householder, that of the anchorite,
      and that of the mendicant.

  384 To Gods, men, and Manes.

  385 Gaya is a very holy city in Behar. Every good Hindu ought once in
      his life to make funeral offerings in Gaya in honour of his
      ancestors.

_  386 Put_ is the name of that region of hell to which men are doomed who
      leave no son to perform the funeral rites which are necessary to
      assure the happiness of the departed. _Putra_, the common word for a
      son is said by the highest authority to be derived from _Put_ and
      _tra_ deliverer.

  387 It was the custom of Indian women when mourning for their absent
      husbands to bind their hair in a long single braid.

      Carey and Marshman translate, "the one-tailed city."

  388 The verses in a different metre with which some cantos end are all
      to be regarded with suspicion. Schlegel regrets that he did not
      exclude them all from his edition. These lines are manifestly
      spurious. See _Additional Notes_.

  389 This genealogy is a repetition with slight variation of that given
      in Book I, Canto LXX.

  390 In Gorresio's recension identified with Vishnu. See Muir's _Sanskrit
      Texts, Vol. IV. pp 29, 30_.

  391 From _sa_ with, and _gara_ poison.

  392 See Book I. Canto XL.

  393 A practice which has frequently been described, under the name of
      _dherna_, by European travellers in India.

  394 Compare Milton's "_beseeching or beseiging_."

  395 Ten-headed, ten-necked, ten faced, are common epithets of Ravan the
      giant king of Lanka.

  396 The spouse of Rohini is the Moon: Rahu is the demon who causes
      eclipses.

  397 "Once," says the Commentator Tirtha, "in the battle between the Gods
      and demons the Gods were vanquished, and the sun was overthrown by
      Rahu. At the request of the Gods Atri undertook the management of
      the sun for a week."

  398 Now Nundgaon, in Oudh.

  399 A part of the great Dandak forest.

  400 When the saint Mandavya had doomed some saint's wife, who was
      Anasuya's friend, to become a widow on the morrow.

  401 Heavenly nymphs.

  402 The _ball_ or present of food to all created beings.

  403 The clarified butter &c. cast into the sacred fire.

  404 The Moon-God: "he is," says the commentator, "the special deity of
      Brahmans."

  405 "Because he was an incarnation of the deity," says the commentator,
      "otherwise such honour paid by men of the sacerdotal caste to one of
      the military would be improper."

  406 The king of birds.

_  407 Kalantakayamopamam_, resembling Yama the destroyer.

  408 Somewhat inconsistently with this part of the story Tumburu is
      mentioned in Book II, Canto XII as one of the Gandharvas or heavenly
      minstrels summoned to perform at Bharadvaja's feast.

  409 Rambha appears in Book I Canto LXIV as the temptress of Visvamitra.

  410 The conclusion of this Canto is all a vain repetition: it is
      manifestly spurious and a very feeble imitation of Valmiki's style.
      See _Additional Notes_.

  411 "Even when he had alighted," says the commentator: The feet of Gods
      do not touch the ground.

  412 A name of Indra.

  413 Sachi is the consort of Indra.

  414 The spheres or mansions gained by those who have duly performed the
      sacrifices required of them. Different situations are assigned to
      these spheres, some placing them near the sun, others near the moon.

  415 Hermits who live upon roots which they dig out of the earth:
      literally _diggers_, derived from the prefix _vi_ and _khan_ to dig.

  416 Generally, divine personages of the height of a man's thumb,
      produced from Brahma's hair: here, according to the commentator
      followed by Gorresio, hermits who when they have obtained fresh food
      throw away what they had laid up before.

  417 Sprung from the washings of Vishnuu's feet.

  418 Four fires burning round them, and the sun above.

  419 The tax allowed to the king by the Laws of Manu.

  420 Near the celebrated Ramagiri or Rama's Hill, now Ram-tek, near
      Nagpore--the scene of the Yaksha's exile in the _Messenger Cloud_.

  421 A hundred _Asvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse raise the sacrificer
      to the dignity of Indra.

  422 Indra.

  423 Gorresio observes that Dasaratha was dead and that Sita had been
      informed of his death. In his translation he substitutes for the
      words of the text "thy relations and mine." This is quite
      superfluous. Dasaratha though in heaven still took a loving interest
      in the fortunes of his son.

  424 One of the hermits who had followed Rama.

  425 The lake of the five nymphs.

  426 The holy fig-tree.

  427 The bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus integrifolia.

  428 A fine timber tree, Shorea robusta.

  429 The God of fire.

  430 Kuvera, the God of riches.

  431 The Sun.

  432 Brahma, the creator.

  433 Siva.

  434 The Wind-God.

  435 The God of the sea.

  436 A class of demi-gods, eight in number.

  437 The holiest text of the Vedas, deified.

  438 Vasuki.

  439 Garud.

  440 The War-God.

  441 One of the Pleiades generally regarded as the model of wifely
      excellence.

  442 The Madhuka, or, as it is now called, Mahuwa, is the Bassia
      latifolia, a tree from whose blossoms a spirit is extracted.

  443 "I should have doubted whether Manu could have been the right
      reading here, but that it occurs again in verse 29, where it is in
      like manner followed in verse 31 by Anala, so that it would
      certainly seem that the name Manu is intended to stand for a female,
      the daughter of Daksha. The Gauda recension, followed by Signor
      Gorresio (III 20, 12), adopts an entirely different reading at the
      end of the line, viz. _Balam Atibalam api_, 'Bala and Atibila,'
      instead of Manu and Anala. I see that Professor Roth s.v. adduces
      the authority of the Amara Kosha and of the Commentator on Panini
      for stating that the word sometimes means 'the wife of Manu.' In the
      following text of the Mahabharata I. 2553. also, Manu appears to be
      the name of a female: '_Anaradyam_, _Manum_, _Vansam_, _Asuram_,
      _Marganapriyam_, _Anupam_, _Subhagam_, _Bhasim iti_, _Pradha
      vyajayata_. Pradha (daughter of Daksha) bore Anavadya, Manu, Vansa,
      Marganapriya, Anupa, Subhaga. and Bhasi.' " _Muir's Sanskrit Text_,
      Vol. I. p. 116.

  444 The elephant of Indra.

_  445 Golangulas_, described as a kind of monkey, of a black colour, and
      having a tail like a cow.

  446 Eight elephants attached to the four quarters and intermediate
      points of the compass, to support and guard the earth.

  447 Some scholars identify the centaurs with the Gandharvas.

  448 The hooded serpents, says the commentator Tirtha, were the offspring
      of Surasa: all others of Kadru.

  449 The text reads Kasyapa, "a descendant of Kasyapa," who according to
      Ram. II. l0, 6, ought to be Vivasvat. But as it is stated in the
      preceding part of this passage III. 14, 11 f. that Manu was one of
      Kasyapa's eight wives, we must here read Kasyap. The Ganda recension
      reads (III, 20, 30) _Manur manushyams cha tatha janayamasa Raghana_,
      instead of the corresponding line in the Bombay edition. _Muir's
      Sanskrit Text, Vol I, p. 117._

  450 The original verses merely name the trees. I have been obliged to
      amplify slightly and to omit some quas versu dicere non est; _e.g._
      the _tinisa_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis), _punnaga_ (Rottleria
      tinctoria), _tilaka_ (not named), _syandana_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis
      again), _vandana_ (unknown), _nipa_ (Nauclea Kadamba), _lakucha_
      (Artoearpus lacucha), _dhava_ (Grislea tomentosa), Asvakarna (another
      name for the Sal), _Sami_ (Acacia Suma), _khadira_ (Mimosa catechu),
      _kinsuka_ (Butea frondosa), _patala_ (Bignonia suaveolens).

  451 Acacia Suma.

  452 The south is supposed to be the residence of the departed.

  453 The sun.

  454 The night is divided into three watches of four hours each.

  455 The chief chamberlain and attendant of Siva or Rudra.

  456 Uma or Parvati, the consort of Siva.

  457 A star, one of the favourites of the Moon.

  458 The God of love.

  459 A demon slain by Indra.

  460 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  461 Titanic.

  462 The Sarika is the Maina, a bird like a starling.

  463 Mahakapala, Sthulaksha, Pramatha, Trisiras.

  464 Vishnu, who bears a _chakra_ or discus.

  465 Siva.

  466 See _Additional Notes_--DAKSHA'S SACRIFICE.

  467 Himalaya.

  468 One of the mysterious weapons given to Rama.

  469 A periphrasis for the body.

  470 Trisiras.

  471 The Three-headed.

  472 The demon who causes eclipses.

  473 "This Asura was a friend of Indra, and taking advantage of his
      friend's confidence, he drank up Indra's strength along with a
      draught of wine and Soma. Indra then told the Asvins and Sarasvati
      that Namuchi had drunk up his strength. The Asvins in consequence
      gave Indra a thunderbolt in the form of a foam, with which he smote
      off the head of Namuchi." GARRETT'S _Classical Dictionary of India_.
      See also Book I. p. 39.

  474 Indra.

  475 Popularly supposed to cause death.

  476 Garud, the King of Birds, carried off the Amrit or drink of Paradise
      from Indra's custody.

  477 A demon, son of Kasyap and Diti, slain by Rudra or Siva when he
      attempted to carry off the tree of Paradise.

  478 Namuchi and Vritra were two demons slain by Indra. Vritra
      personifies drought, the enemy of Indra, who imprisons the rain in
      the cloud.

  479 Another demon slain by Indra.

  480 The capital of the giant king Ravan.

  481 Kuvera, the God of gold.

  482 In the great deluge.

  483 The giant Maricha, son of Tadaka. Tadaka was slain by Rama. See p.
      39.

  484 Indra's elephant.

  485 Bhogavati, in Patala in the regions under the earth, is the capital
      of the serpent race whose king is Vasuki.

  486 the grove of Indra.

  487 Pulastya is considered as the ancestor of the Rakshases or giants,
      as he is the father of Visravas, the father of Ravan and his
      brethren.

  488 Beings with the body of a man and the head of a horse.

  489 Ajas, Marichipas, Vaikhanasas, Mashas, and Balakhilyas are classes
      of supernatural beings who lead the lives of hermits.

  490 "The younger brother of the giant Ravan; when he and his brother had
      practiced austerities for a long series of years, Brahma appeared to
      offer them boons: Vibhishana asked that he might never meditate any
      unrighteousness.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} On the death of Ravan Vibhishana was installed as
      Raja of Lanka." GARRETT'S _Classical Dictionary of India_.

  491 Serpent-gods.

  492 See p. 33.

  493 The Sanskrit words for car and jewels begin with _ra_.

  494 A race of beings of human shape but with the heads of horses, like
      centaurs reversed.

  495 The favourite wife of the Moon.

  496 The planet Saturn.

  497 Another favourite of the Moon; one of the lunar mansions.

  498 The Rudras, agents in creation, are eight in number; they sprang
      from the forehead of Brahma.

  499 Maruts, the attendants of Indra.

  500 Radiant demi-gods.

  501 The mountain which was used by the Gods as a churning stick at the
      Churning of the Ocean.

  502 The story will be found in GARRETT'S _Classical Dictionary_. See
      ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  503 Mercury: to be carefully distinguished from Buddha.

  504 The spirits of the good dwell in heaven until their store of
      accumulated merit is exhausted. Then they redescend to earth in the
      form of falling stars.

  505 See The Descent of Ganga, Book I Canto XLIV.

  506 See Book I Canto XXV.

_  507 Asoka_ is compounded of _a_ not and _soka_ grief.

  508 See Book I Canto XXXI.

  509 An Asur or demon, king of Tripura, the modern Tipperah.

  510 Siva.

  511 See Book I, Canto LIX.

  512 The preceptor of the Gods.

  513 From the root _vid_, to find.

  514 Ravan.

  515 Or Curlews' Wood.

  516 Iron-faced.

  517 Kabandha means a trunk.

  518 A class of mythological giants. In the Epic period they were
      probably personifications of the aborigines of India.

  519 Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing dissensions, and seeking
      protection.

  520 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  521 Or as the commentator Tirtha says, Silapidhana, rock-covered, may be
      the name of the cavern.

  522 Pampa is said by the commentator to be the name both of a lake and a
      brook which flows into it. The brook is said to rise in the hill
      Rishyamuka.

  523 Who was acting as Regent for Rama and leading an ascetic life while
      he mourned for his absent brother.

  524 The Indian Cuckoo.

  525 The Cassia Fistula or Amaltas is a splendid tree like a giant
      laburnum covered with a profusion of chains and tassels of gold. Dr.
      Roxburgh well describes it as "uncommonly beautiful when in flower,
      few trees surpassing it in the elegance of its numerous long
      pendulous racemes of large bright-yellow flowers intermixed with the
      young lively green foliage." It is remarkable also for its curious
      cylindrical black seed-pods about two feet long, which are called
      monkeys' walking-sticks.

  526 "The Jonesia Asoca is a tree of considerable size, native of
      southern India. It blossoms in February and March with large erect
      compact clusters of flowers, varying in colour from pale-orange to
      scarlet, almost to be mistaken, on a hasty glance, for immense
      trusses of bloom of an Ixora. Mr. Fortune considered this tree, when
      in full bloom, superior in beauty even to the Amherstia.

      The first time I saw the Asoc in flower was on the hill where the
      famous rock-cut temple of Karli is situated, and a large concourse
      of natives had assembled for the celebration of some Hindoo
      festival. Before proceeding to the temple the Mahratta women
      gathered from two trees, which were flowering somewhat below, each a
      fine truss of blossom, and inserted it in the hair at the back of
      her head.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} As they moved about in groups it is impossible to imagine
      a more delightful effect than the rich scarlet bunches of flowers
      presented on their fine glossy jet-black hair." FIRMINGER,
      _Gardening for India_.

  527 No other word can express the movements of peafowl under the
      influence of pleasing excitement, especially when after the long
      drought they hear the welcome roar of the thunder and feel that the
      rain is near.

  528 The Dewy Season is one of the six ancient seasons of the Indian
      year, lasting from the middle of January to the middle of March.

  529 Rama appears to mean that on a former occasion a crow flying high
      overhead was an omen that indicated his approaching separation from
      Sita; and that now the same bird's perching on a tree near him may
      be regarded as a happy augury that she will soon be restored to her
      husband.

  530 A tree with beautiful and fragrant blossoms.

  531 A race of semi-divine musicians attached to the service of Kuvera,
      represented as centaurs reversed with human figures and horses'
      heads.

  532 Butea Frondosa. A tree that bears a profusion of brilliant red
      flowers which appear before the leaves.

  533 I omit five _slokas_ which contain nothing but a list of trees for
      which, with one or two exceptions, there are no equivalent names in
      English. The following is Gorresio's translation of the
      corresponding passage in the Bengal recension:--

      "Oh come risplendono in questa stagione di primavera i vitici, le
      galedupe, le bassie, le dalbergie, i diospyri {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} le tile, le
      michelie, le rottlerie, le pentaptere ed i pterospermi, i bombaci,
      le grislee, gli abri, gli amaranti e le dalbergie; i sirii, le
      galedupe, le barringtonie ed i palmizi, i xanthocymi, il pepebetel,
      le verbosine e le ticaie, le nauclee le erythrine, gli asochi, e le
      tapie fanno d'ogni intorno pompa de' lor fiori."

  534 A sacred stream often mentioned in the course of the poem. See Book
      II, Canto XCV.

  535 A daughter of Daksha who became one of the wives of Kasyapa and
      mother of the Daityas. She is termed the general mother of Titans
      and malignant beings. See Book I Cantos XLV, XLVI.

  536 Sugriva, the ex-king of the Vanars, foresters, or monkeys, an exile
      from his home, wandering about the mountain Rishyamuka with his four
      faithful ex-ministers.

  537 The hermitage of the Saint Matanga which his curse prevented Bali,
      the present king of the Vanars, from entering. The story is told at
      length in Canto XI of this Book.

  538 Hanuman, Sugriva's chief general, was the son of the God of Wind.
      See Book I, Canto XVI.

  539 A range of hills in Malabar; the Western Ghats in the Deccan.

  540 Valmiki makes the second vowel in this name long or short to suit
      the exigencies of the verse. Other Indian poets have followed his
      example, and the same licence will be used in this translation.

  541 I omit a recapitulatory and interpolated verse in a different metre,
      which is as follows:--Reverencing with the words, So be it, the
      speech of the greatly terrified and unequalled monkey king, the
      magnanimous Hanuman then went where (stood) the very mighty Rama
      with Lakshman.

  542 The semi divine Hanuman possesses, like the Gods and demons, the
      power of wearing all shapes at will. He is one of the _Kamarupis_.

      Like Milton's good and bad angels "as they please
        They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size
        Assume as likes them best, condense or rare."

  543 Himalaya is of course _par excellence_ the Monarch of mountains, but
      the complimentary title is frequently given to other hills as here
      to Malaya.

  544 Twisted up in a matted coil as was the custom of ascetics.

  545 The sun and moon.

  546 The rainbow.

  547 The Vedas are four in number, the Rich or Rig-veda, the Yajush or
      Yajur-veda; the Saman or Sama-veda, and the Atharvan or
      Atharva-veda. See p. 3. Note.

  548 The chest, the throat, and the head.

  549 "In our own metrical romances, or wherever a poem is meant not for
      readers but for chanters and oral reciters, these _formulae_, to meet
      the same recurring case, exist by scores. Thus every woman in these
      metrical romances who happens to be young, is described as 'so
      bright of ble,' or complexion; always a man goes 'the mountenance of
      a mile' before he overtakes or is overtaken. And so on through a
      vast bead-roll of cases. In the same spirit Homer has his eternal
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}'{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}, or {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}'{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~}, &c.

      To a reader of sensibility, such recurrences wear an air of
      child-like simplicity, beautifully recalling the features of Homer's
      primitive age. But they would have appeared faults to all
      commonplace critics in literary ages."

      DE QUINCEY. _Homer and the Homeridae_.

  550 Brahmans the sacerdotal caste. Kshatriyas the royal and military,
      Vaisyas the mercantile, and Sudras the servile.

  551 A protracted sacrifice extending over several days. See Book I, p.
      24 Note.

  552 Possessed of all the auspicious personal marks that indicate
      capacity of universal sovereignty. See Book I. p. 2, and Note 3.

  553 Kabandha. See Book III. Canto LXXIII.

  554 Fire for sacred purposes is produced by the attrition of two pieces
      of wood. In marriage and other solemn covenants fire is regarded as
      the holy witness in whose presence the agreement is made. Spenser in
      a description of a marriage, has borrowed from the Roman rite what
      he calls the housling, or "matrimonial rite."

      "His owne two hands the holy knots did knit
      That none but death forever can divide.
      His owne two hands, for such a turn most fit,
      The housling fire did kindle and provide."

      Faery Queen, Book I. XII. 37.

  555 Indra.

  556 Bali the king _de facto_.

  557 With the Indians, as with the ancient Greeks, the throbbing of the
      right eye in a man is an auspicious sign, the throbbing of the left
      eye is the opposite. In a woman the significations of signs are
      reversed.

  558 The Vedas stolen by the demons Madhu and Kaitabha.

      "The text has [Sanskrit text] which signifies literally 'the lost
      vedic tradition.' It seems that allusion is here made to the Vedas
      submerged in the depth of the sea, but promptly recovered by Vishnu
      in one of his incarnations, as the brahmanic legend relates, with
      which the orthodoxy of the Brahmans intended perhaps to allude to
      the prompt restoration and uninterrupted continuity of the ancient
      vedic tradition."

      GORRESIO.

  559 Like the wife of a Naga or Serpent-God carried off by an eagle. The
      enmity between the King of birds and the serpent is of very frequent
      occurrence. It seems to be a modification of the strife between the
      Vedic Indra and the Ahi, the serpent or drought-fiend; between
      Apollon and the Python, Adam and the Serpent.

  560 He means that he has never ventured to raise his eyes to her arms
      and face, though he has ever been her devoted servant.

  561 The wood in which Skanda or Kartikeva was brought up:

                      "The Warrior-God
      Whose infant steps amid the thickets strayed
      Where the reeds wave over the holy sod."

      See also Book I, Canto XXIX.

  562 "Sugriva's story paints in vivid colours the manners, customs and
      ideas of the wild mountain tribes which inhabited Kishkindhya or the
      southern hills of the Deccan, of the people whom the poem calls
      monkeys, tribes altogether different in origin and civilization from
      the Indo-Sanskrit race." GORRESIO.

  563 A fiend slain by Bali.

  564 Bali's mountain city.

  565 The canopy or royal umbrella, one of the usual Indian regalia.

  566 Whisks made of the hair of the Yak or Bos grunniers, also regal
      insignia.

  567 Righteous because he never transgresses his bounds, and

        "over his great tides
        Fidelity presides."

  568 Himalaya, the Lord of Snow, is the father of Uma the wife of Siva or
      Sankar.

  569 Indra's celestial elephant.

  570 Bali was the son of Indra. See p. 28.

  571 An Asur slain by Indra. See p. 261 Note. He is, like Vritra, a form
      of the demon of drought destroyed by the beneficent God of the
      firmament.

  572 Another name of Indra or Mahendra.

  573 The Bengal recension makes it return in the form of a swan.

  574 Varuna is one of the oldest of the Vedic Gods, corresponding in name
      and partly in character to the {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} of the Greeks and is often
      regarded as the supreme deity. He upholds heaven and earth,
      possesses extraordinary power and wisdom, sends his messengers
      through both worlds, numbers the very winkings of men's eyes,
      punishes transgressors whom he seizes with his deadly noose, and
      pardons the sins of those who are penitent. In later mythology he
      has become the God of the sea.

  575 Budha, not to be confounded with the great reformer Buddha, is the
      son of Soma or the Moon, and regent of the planet Mercury. Angara is
      the regent of Mars who is called the red or the fiery planet. The
      encounter between Michael and Satan is similarly said to have been
      as if

      "Two planets rushing from aspect malign
      Of fiercest opposition in midsky
      Should combat, and their jarring spheres compound."

      _Paradise Lost._ Book VI.

  576 The Asvins or Heavenly Twins, the Dioskuri or Castor and Pollux of
      the Hindus, have frequently been mentioned. See p. 36, Note.

  577 Called respectively Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, and Dakshina, household,
      sacrificial, and southern.

  578 The store of merit accumulated by a holy or austere life secures
      only a temporary seat in the mansion of bliss. When by the lapse of
      time this store is exhausted, return to earth is unavoidable.

  579 The conflagration which destroys the world at the end of a Yuga or
      age.

  580 Himalaya.

  581 Tara means "star." The poet plays upon the name by comparing her
      beauty to that of the Lord of stars, the Moon.

  582 Suparna, the Well-winged, is another name of Garuda the King of
      Birds. See p. 28, Note.

  583 The God of Death.

  584 The flag-staff erected in honour of the God Indra is lowered when
      the festival is over. Asvini in astronomy is the head of Aries or
      the first of the twenty-eight lunar mansions or asterisms.

  585 Indra the father of Bali.

  586 It is believed that every creature killed by Rama obtained in
      consequence immediate beatitude.

      "And blessed the hand that gave so dear a death."

  587 "Yayati was invited to heaven by Indra, and conveyed on the way
      thither by Matali, Indra's charioteer. He afterwards returned to
      earth where, by his virtuous administration he rendered all his
      subjects exempt from passion and decay." GARRETT'S C. D. OF INDIA.

  588 The ascetic's dress which he wore during his exile.

  589 There is much inconsistency in the passages of the poem in which the
      Vanars are spoken of, which seems to point to two widely different
      legends. The Vanars are generally represented as semi-divine beings
      with preternatural powers, living in houses and eating and drinking
      like men sometimes as here, as monkeys pure and simple, living is
      woods and eating fruit and roots.

  590 For a younger brother to marry before the elder is a gross violation
      of Indian law and duty. The same law applied to daughters with the
      Hebrews: "It must not be so done in our country to give the younger
      before the first-born." GENESIS xix. 26.

  591 "The hedgehog and porcupine, the lizard, the rhinoceros, the
      tortoise, and the rabbit or hare, wise legislators declare lawful
      food among five-toed animals." MANU, v. 18.

        592 "He can not buckle his distempered cause
      Within the belt of rule."

      MACBETH.

  593 The _Ankus_ or iron hook with which an elephant is driven and
      guided.

  594 Hayagriva, Horse-necked, is a form of Vishnu.

  595 "Asvatara is the name of a chief of the Nagas or serpents which
      inhabit the regions under the earth; it is also the name of a
      Gandharva. Asvatari ought to be the wife of one of the two, but I am
      not sure that this conjecture is right. The commentator does not say
      who this Asvatari is, or what tradition or myth is alluded to.
      Vimalabodha reads Asvatari in the nominative case, and explains,
      Asvatari is the sun, and as the sun with his rays brings back the
      moon which has been sunk in the ocean and the infernal regions, so
      will I bring back Sita." GORRESIO.

  596 That is, "Consider what answer you can give to your accusers when
      they charge you with injustice in killing me."

  597 Manu, Book VIII. 318. "But men who have committed offences and have
      received from kings the punishment due to them, go pure to heaven
      and become as clear as those who have done well."

  598 Mandhata was one of the earlier descendants of Ikshvaku. His name is
      mentioned in Rama's genealogy, p. 81.

  599 I cannot understand how Valmiki could put such an excuse as this
      into Rama's mouth. Rama with all solemn ceremony, has made a league
      of alliance with Bali's younger brother whom he regards as a dear
      friend and almost as an equal, and now he winds up his reasons for
      killing Bali by coolly saying: "Besides you are only a monkey, you
      know, after all, and as such I have every right to kill you how,
      when, and where I like."

  600 A name of Garuda the king of birds, the great enemy of the Serpents.

  601 Sugriva's wife.

  602 "Our deeds still follow with us from afar. And what we have been
      makes us what we are."

  603 Sugriva and Angad.

  604 Angad himself, being too young to govern, would be Yuvaraja or
      heir-apparent.

  605 Sushena was the son of Varuna the God of the sea.

  606 A demon with the tail of a dragon, that causes eclipses by
      endeavouring to swallow the sun and moon.

  607 The Lord of Stars is the Moon.

  608 Or the passage may be interpreted: "Be neither too obsequious or
      affectionate, nor wanting in due respect or love."

  609 Sacrifices and all religious rites begin and end with ablution, and
      the wife of the officiating Brahman takes an important part in the
      performance of the holy ceremonies.

  610 Visvarupa, a son of Twashtri or Visvakarma the heavenly architect,
      was a three-headed monster slain by Indra.

  611 The Vanar chief, not to be confounded with Tara.

  612 Sravan: July-August. But the rains begin a month earlier, and what
      follows must not be taken literally. The text has _purvo' yam
      varshiko masah Sravanah salilagamdh_. The Bengal recension has the
      same, and Gorresio translates: "Equesto ilmese Sravana
      (luglio-agosto) primo della stagione piovosa, in cui dilagano le
      acque."

  613 Kartik: October-November.

  614 "Indras, as the nocturnal sun, hides himself, transformed, in the
      starry heavens: the stars are his eyes. The hundred-eyed or
      all-seeing (panoptes) Argos placed as a spy over the actions of the
      cow beloved by Zeus, in the Hellenic equivalent of this form of
      Indras." DE GUBERNATIS, _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. I, p. 418.

  615 Baudhayana and others.

  616 Sugriva appears to have been consecrated with all the ceremonies
      that attended the _Abhisheka_ or coronation of an Indian prince of
      the Aryan race. Compare the preparations made for Rama's
      consecration, Book II, Canto III. Thus Homer frequently introduces
      into Troy the rites of Hellenic worship.

  617 Vitex Negundo.

  618 Malyavat: "The name of this mountain appears to me to be erroneous,
      and I think that instead of Malyavat should be read Malayavat,
      Malaya is a group of mountains situated exactly in that southern
      part of India where Rama now was, while Malyavat is placed to the
      north east." GORRESIO.

  619 Mantles of the skin of the black antelope were the prescribed dress
      of ascetics and religious students.

  620 The sacred cord worn as the badge of religious initiation by men of
      the three twice-born castes.

  621 The hum with which students conduct their tasks.

  622 I omit here a long general description of the rainy season which is
      not found in the Bengal recension and appears to have been
      interpolated by a far inferior and much later hand than Valmiki's.
      It is composed in a metre different from that of the rest of the
      Canto, and contains figures of poetical rhetoric and common-places
      which are the delight of more recent poets.

  623 Praushthapada or Bhadra, the modern Bhadon, corresponds to half of
      August and half of September.

  624 The Saman or Sama-veda, the third of the four Vedas, is really
      merely a reproduction of parts of the Rig-veda, transposed and
      scattered about piece-meal, only 78 verses in the whole being, it is
      said, untraceable to the present recension of the Rig-veda.

  625 Ashadha is the month corresponding to parts of June and July.

  626 Bharat, who was regent during Rama's absence.

  627 Or with Gorresio, following the gloss of another commentary: "Has
      completed every holy rite and accumulated stores of merit."

  628 The river on which Ayodhya was built.

  629 I omit a _sloka_ or four lines on gratitude and ingratitude repeated
      word for word from the last Canto.

  630 The Indian crane; a magnificent bird easily domesticated.

  631 The troops who guard the frontiers on the north, south, east and
      west.

  632 The Chataka, Cuculus, Melanoleucus, is supposed to drink nothing but
      the water for the clouds.

  633 The time for warlike expeditions began when the rains had ceased.

  634 The rainbow.

  635 Indra's associates in arms, and musicians of his heaven.

  636 Maireya, a spirituous liquor from the blossoms of the Lythrum
      fruticosum, with sugar, &c.

  637 Their names are as follows: Angad, Mainda, Dwida, Gavaya, Gavaksha,
      Gaja, Sarabha, Vidyunmali, Sampati, Suryaksa, Hanuman, Virabahu,
      Subahu, Nala, Kumuda, Sushena, Tara, Jambuvatu, Dadhivakra, Nila,
      Supatala, and Sunetra.

  638 The Kalpadruma or Wishing-tree is one of the trees of Svarga or
      Indra's Paradise: it has the power of granting all desires.

  639 The meaning is that if a man promises to give a horse and then
      breaks his word he commits a sin as great as if he had killed a
      hundred horses.

  640 The story is told in Book I, Canto LXIII, but the charmer there is
      called Menaka.

  641 Rohini is the name of the ninth Nakshatra or lunar asterism
      personified as a daughter of Daksha, and the favourite wife of the
      Moon. Aldebaran is the principal star in the constellation.

  642 Valmiki and succeeding poets make the second vowel in this name long
      or short at their pleasure.

  643 Some of the mountains here mentioned are fabulous and others it is
      impossible to identify. Sugriva means to include all the mountains
      of India from Kailas the residence of the God Kuvera, regarded as
      one of the loftiest peaks of the Himalayas, to Mahendra in the
      extreme south, from the mountain in the east where the sun is said
      to rise to Astachal or the western mountain where he sets. The
      commentators give little assistance: that Mahasaila, &c. are certain
      mountains is about all the information they give.

  644 One of the celestial elephants of the Gods who protect the four
      quarters and intermediate points of the compass.

  645 Vayu or the Wind was the father of Hanuman.

  646 The path or station of Vishnu is the space between the seven Rishis
      or Ursa Major, and Dhruva or the polar star.

  647 One of the seven seas which surround the earth in concentric
      circles.

  648 The title of Mahesvar or Mighty Lord is sometimes given to Indra,
      but more generally to Siva whom it here denotes.

  649 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  650 The numbers are unmanageable in English verse. The poet speaks of
      hundreds of _arbudas_; and an _arbuda_ is a hundred millions.

  651 Anuhlada or Anuhrada is one of the four sons of the mighty
      Hiranyakasipu, an Asur or a Daitya son of Kasyapa and Diti and
      killed by Vishnu in his incarnation of the Man-Lion _Narasinha_.
      According to the Bhagavata Purana the Daitya or Asur Hiranyakasipu
      and Hiranyaksha his brother, both killed by Vishnu, were born again
      as Ravan and Kumbhakarna his brother.

  652 Puloma, a demon, was the father-in-law of Indra who destroyed him in
      order to avert an imprecation. Paulomi is a patronymic denoting
      Sachi the daughter of Puloma.

  653 "Observe the variety of colours which the poem attributes to all
      these inhabitants of the different mountainous regions, some white,
      others yellow, &c. Such different colours were perhaps peculiar and
      distinctive characteristics of those various races." GORRESSIO.

  654 Sushen.

  655 Tara.

  656 Kesari was the husband of Hanuman's mother, and is here called his
      father.

  657 "I here unite under one heading two animals of very diverse nature
      and race, but which from some gross resemblances, probably helped by
      an equivoque in the language, are closely affiliated in the Hindoo
      myth {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} a reddish colour of the skin, want of symmetry and
      ungainliness of form, strength in hugging with the fore paws or
      arms, the faculty of climbing, shortness of tail(?), sensuality,
      capacity of instruction in dancing and in music, are all
      characteristics which more or less distinguish and meet in bears as
      well as in monkeys. In the _Ramayanam_, the wise Jamnavant, the
      Odysseus of the expedition of Lanka, is called now king of the bears
      (rikshaparthivah), now great monkey (_Mahakapih_)." DE GUBERNATIS:
      _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. II. p. 97.

  658 Gandhamadana, Angad, Tara, Indrajanu, Rambha, Durmukha, Hanuman,
      Nala, Da mukha, Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni.

  659 Daityas and Danavas are fiends and enemies of the Gods, like the
      Titans of Greek mythology.

  660 I reduce the unwieldy numbers of the original to more modest
      figures.

  661 Sarayu now Sarju is the river on which Ayodhya was built.

  662 Kausiki is a river which flows through Behar, commonly called Kosi.

  663 Bhagirath's daughter is Ganga or the Ganges. The legend is told at
      length in Book I Canto XLIV. _The Descent of Ganga_.

  664 A mountain not identified.

  665 The Jumna. The river is personified as the twin sister of Yama, and
      hence regarded as the daughter of the Sun.

  666 The Sarasvati (corruptly called Sursooty, is supposed to join the
      Ganges and Jumna at Prayag or Allahabad. It rises in the mountains
      bounding the north-east part of the province of Delhi, and running
      in a south-westerly direction becomes lost in the sands of the great
      desert.

  667 The Sindhu is the Indus, the Sanskrit _s_ becoming _h_ in Persian
      and being in this instance dropped by the Greeks.

  668 The Sone which rises in the district of Nagpore and falls into the
      Ganges above Patna.

  669 Mahi is a river rising in Malwa and falling into the gulf of Cambay
      after a westerly course of 280 miles.

  670 There is nothing to show what parts of the country the poet intended
      to denote as silk-producing and silver-producing.

  671 Yavadwipa means the island of Yava, wherever that may be.

  672 Sisir is said to be a mountain ridge projecting from the base of
      Meru on the south. Wilson's _Vishnu Purana_, ed. Hall, Vol. II. p.
      117.

  673 This appears to be some mythical stream and not the well-known Sone.
      The name means red-coloured.

  674 A fabulous thorny rod of the cotton tree used for torturing the
      wicked in hell. The tree gives its name, Salmali, to one of the
      seven Dwipas, or great divisions of the known continent: and also to
      a hell where the wicked are tormented with the pickles of the tree.

  675 The king of the feathered creation.

  676 Visvakarma, the Mulciber of the Indian heaven.

  677 "The terrific fiends named Mandehas attempt to devour the sun: for
      Brahma denounced this curse upon them, that without the power to
      perish they should die every day (and revive by night) and therefore
      a fierce contest occurs (daily) between them and the sun." WILSON'S
      Vishnu Purana. Vol. II. p. 250.

  678 Said in the _Vishnu Purana_ to be a ridge projecting from the base
      of Meru to the north.

  679 Kinnars are centaurs reversed, beings with equine head and human
      bodies.

  680 Yakshas are demi-gods attendant on Kuvera the God of wealth.

  681 Aurva was one of the descendants of Bhrigu. From his wrath proceeded
      a flame that threatened to destroy the world, had not Aurva cast it
      into the ocean where it remained concealed, and having the face of a
      horse. The legend is told in the _Mahabharat_. I. 6802.

  682 The word Jatarupa means gold.

  683 The celebrated mythological serpent king Sesha, called also Ananta
      or the infinite, represented as bearing the earth on one of his
      thousand heads.

  684 Jambudwipa is in the centre of the seven great _dwipas_ or
      continents into which the world is divided, and in the centre of
      Jambudwipa is the golden mountain Meru 84,000 yojans high, and
      crowned by the great city of Brahma. See WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_,
      Vol. II. p. 110.

  685 Vaikhanases are a race of hermit saints said to have sprung from the
      nails of Prajapati.

  686 "The wife of Kratu, Samnati, brought forth the sixty thousand
      Valakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger than a joint of the thumb,
      chaste, pious, resplendent as the rays of the Sun." WILSON'S _Vishnu
      Purana_.

  687 The continent in which Sudarsan or Meru stands, _i.e._ Jambudwip.

  688 The names of some historical peoples which occur in this Canto and
      in the Cantos describing the south and north will be found in the
      ADDITIONAL NOTES. They are bare lists, not susceptible of a metrical
      version.

  689 Suhotra, Sarari, Saragulma, Gaya, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena,
      Gandhamadana, Ulkamukha, and Ananga.

  690 The modern Nerbudda.

  691 Krishnaveni is mentioned in the _Vishnu Purana_ as "the deep
      Krishnaveni" but there appears to be no clue to its identification.

  692 The modern Godavery.

  693 The Mekhalas or Mekalas according to the Paranas live in the Vindhya
      hills, but here they appear among the peoples of the south.

  694 Utkal is still the native name of Orissa.

  695 The land of the people of the "ten forts." Professor Hall in a note
      on WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 160 says: "The oral
      traditions of the vicinity to this day assign the name of Dasarna to
      a region lying to the east of the District of Chundeyree."

  696 Avanti is one of the ancient names of the celebrated Ujjayin or
      Oujein in Central India.

  697 Not identified.

  698 Ayomukh means iron faced. The mountain is not identified.

  699 The Kaveri or modern Cauvery is well known and has always borne the
      same appellation, being the Chaberis of Ptolemy.

  700 One of the seven principal mountain chains: the southern portion of
      the Western Ghats.

  701 Agastya is the great sage who has already frequently appeared as
      Rama's friend and benefactor.

  702 Tamraparni is a river rising in Malaya.

  703 The Pandyas are a people of the Deccan.

  704 Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa and the
      northern Sircars to Gondwana, part of which near Ganjam is still
      called Mahendra Malay or hills of Mahendra.

  705 Lanka, Sinhaladvipa, Sarandib, or Ceylon.

  706 The Flowery Hill of course is mythical.

  707 The whole of the geography south of Lanka is of course mythical.
      Suryavan means Sunny.

  708 Vaidyut means connected with lightning.

  709 Agastya is here placed far to the south of Lanka. Earlier in this
      Canto he was said to dwell on Malaya.

  710 Bhogavati has been frequently mentioned: it is the capital of the
      serpent Gods or demons, and usually represented as being in the
      regions under the earth.

  711 Vasuki is according to some accounts the king of the Nagas or
      serpent Gods.

  712 Sailusha, Gramini, Siksha, Suka, Babhru.

  713 The distant south beyond the confines of the earth is the home of
      departed spirits and the city of Yama the God of Death.

  714 Surashtra, the "good country," is the modern Sura

  715 A country north-west of Afghanistan, Baikh.

  716 The Moon-mountain here is mythical.

  717 Sindhu is the Indus.

  718 Pariyatra, or as more usually written Paripatra, is the central or
      western portion of the Vindhya chain which skirts the province of
      Malwa.

  719 Vajra means both diamond and thunderbolt, the two substances being
      supposed to be identical.

  720 Chakravan means the discus-bearer.

  721 The discus is the favourite weapon of Vishnu.

  722 The Indian Hephaistos or Vulcan.

  723 Panchajan was a demon who lived in the sea in the form of a conch
      shell. WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, V. 21.

  724 Hayagriva, Horse-necked, is the name of a Daitya who at the
      dissolution of the universe caused by Brahma's sleep, seized and
      carried off the Vedas. Vishnu slew him and recovered the sacred
      treasures.

  725 Meru stands in the centre of Jambudwipa and consequently of the
      earth. "The sun travels round the world, keeping Meru always on his
      right. To the spectator who fronts him, therefore, as he rises Meru
      must be always on the north; and as the sun's rays do not penetrate
      beyond the centre of the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the
      north of it must be in darkness, whilst those on the south of it
      must be in light: north and south being relative, not absolute,
      terms, depending on the position of the spectator with regard to the
      Sun and Meru." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 243. Note.

  726 The Visvadevas are a class of deities to whom sacrifices should be
      daily offered, as part of the ordinary worship of the householder.
      According to the _Vayu Purana_, this is a privilege conferred on
      them by Brahma and the Pitris as a reward for religious austerities
      practised by them upon Himalaya.

  727 The eight Vasus were originally personifications like other Vedic
      deities, of natural phenomena, such as Fire, Wind, &c. Their
      appellations are variously given by different authorities.

  728 The Maruts or Storm-Gods, frequently addressed and worshipped as the
      attendants and allies of Indra.

  729 The mountain behind which the sun sets.

  730 One of the oldest and mightiest of the Vedic deities; in later
      mythology regarded as the God of the sea.

  731 The knotted noose with which he seizes and punishes transgressors.

  732 Savarni is a Manu, offspring of the Sun by Chhaya.

  733 The poet has not said who the sons of Yama are.

  734 The Lodhra or Lodh (Symplocos Racemosa) and the Devadaru or Deodar
      are well known trees.

  735 The hills mentioned are not identifiable. Soma means the Moon. Kala,
      black; Sudarasan, fair to see; and Devasakha friend of the Gods.

  736 The God of Wealth.

  737 The nymphs of Paradise.

  738 Kuvera the son of Visravas.

  739 A class of demigods who, like the Yakshas, are the attendants of
      Kuvera, and the guardians of his treasures.

  740 Situated in the eastern part of the Himalaya chain, on the north of
      Assam. The mountain was torn asunder and the pass formed by the
      War-God Kartikeya and Parasurama.

  741 "The Uttara Kurus, it should be remarked, may have been a real
      people, as they are mentioned in the Aitareya Brahmana, VIII. 14.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
      Wherefore the several nations who dwell in this northern quarter,
      beyond the Himavat, the Uttara Kurus and the Uttara Madras are
      consecrated to glorious dominion, and people term them the glorious.
      In another passage of the same work, however, the Uttara Kurus are
      treated as belonging to the domain of mythology." MUIR'S _Sanskrit
      Texts_. Vol. I. p. 494. See ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  742 The Moon-mountain.

  743 The Rudras are the same as the storm winds, more usually called
      Maruts, and are often associated with Indra. In the later mythology
      the Rudras are regarded as inferior manifestations of Siva, and most
      of their names are also names of Siva.

  744 Canto IX.

  745 Udayagiri or the hill from which the sun rises.

  746 Asta is the mountain behind which the sun sets.

  747 Himalaya, the Hills of Snow.

  748 Canto XI.

  749 Hanuman was the leader of the army of the south which was under the
      nominal command of Angad the heir apparent.

  750 The Bengal recension--Gorresio's edition--calls this Asur or demon the
      son of Maricha.

  751 The skin of the black antelope was the ascetic's proper garb.

  752 Usanas is the name of a sage mentioned in the Vedas. In the epic
      poems he is identified with Sukra, the regent of the planet Venus,
      and described as the preceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and
      possessor of vast knowledge.

  753 Hema is one of the nymphs of Paradise.

  754 Merusavarni is a general name for the last four of the fourteen
      Manus.

  755 Svayamprabha, the "self-luminous," is according to DE GUBERNATIS the
      moon: "In the _Svayamprabha_ too, we meet with the moon as a good
      fairy who, from the golden palace which she reserves for her friend
      Hema (the golden one:) is during a month the guide, in the vast
      cavern of Hanumant and his companions, who have lost their way in
      the search of the dawn Sita." This is is not quite accurate: Hanuman
      and his companions wander for a month in the cavern without a guide,
      and then Svayamprabha leads them out.

  756 Purandara, the destroyer of cities; the cities being the clouds
      which the God of the firmament bursts open with his thunderbolts, to
      release the waters imprisoned in these fortresses of the demons of
      drought.

  757 Perceived that Angad had secured, through the love of the Vanars,
      the reversion of Sugriva's kingdom; or, as another commentator
      explains it, perceived that Angad had obtained a new kingdom in the
      enchanted cave which the Vanars, through love of him, would consent
      to occupy.

  758 Vrihaspati, Lord of Speech, the Preceptor of the Gods.

  759 Sukra is the regent of the planet Venus, and the preceptor of the
      Daityas.

  760 The name of various kinds of grass used at sacrificial ceremonies,
      especially, of the Kusa grass, Poa cynosuroides, which was used to
      strew the ground in preparing for a sacrifice, the officiating
      Brahmans being purified by sitting on it.

  761 Sampati is the eldest son of the celebrated Garuda the king of
      birds.

  762 Vivasvat or the Sun is the father of Yama the God of Death.

  763 Book III, Canto LI.

  764 Dasaratha's rash oath and fatal promise to his wife Kaikeyi.

  765 Vritra, "the coverer, hider, obstructer (of rain)" is the name of
      the Vedic personification of an imaginary malignant influence or
      demon of darkness and drought supposed to take possession of the
      clouds, causing them to obstruct the clearness of the sky and keep
      back the waters. Indra is represented as battling with this evil
      influence, and the pent-up clouds being practically represented as
      mountains or castles are shattered by his thunderbolt and made to
      open their receptacles.

  766 Frequent mention has been made of the three steps of Vishnu
      typifying the rising, culmination, and setting of the sun.

  767 For the _Churning of the Sea_, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  768 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

  769 The architect of the gods.

  770 Garuda, son of Vinata, the sovereign of the birds.

  771 "The well winged one," Garuda.

  772 The god of the sea.

  773 Mahendra is chain of mountains generally identified with part of the
      Ghats of the Peninsula.

  774 Matarisva is identified with Vayu, the wind.

  775 Of course not equal to the whole earth, says the Commentator, but
      equal to Janasthan.

  776 This appears to be the Indian form of the stories of Phaethon and
      Daedalus and Icarus.

  777 According to the promise, given him by Brahma. See Book I, Canto
      XIV.

  778 In the Bengal recension the fourth Book ends here, the remaining
      Cantos being placed in the fifth.

  779 Each chief comes forward and says how far he can leap. Gaja says he
      can leap ten yojans. Gavaksha can leap twenty. Gavaya thirty, and so
      on up to ninety.

  780 Prahlada, the son of Hiranyakasipu, was a pious Datya remarkable for
      his devotion to Vishnu, and was on this account persecuted by his
      father.

  781 The Bengal recension calls him Arishtanemi's brother. "The
      commentator says 'Arishtanemi is Aruna.' Aruna the charioteer of the
      sun is the son of Kasyapa and Vinata and by consequence brother of
      Garuda, called Vainateya from Vinata, his mother." GORRESSIO.

  782 A nymph of Paradise.

  783 Hanu or Hanu means jaw. Hanuman or Hanuman means properly one with a
      large jaw.

  784 Vishnu, the God of the Three Steps.

  785 Narayan, "He who moved upon the waters," is Vishnu. The allusion is
      to the famous three steps of that God.

  786 The Milky Way.

  787 This Book is called Sundar or the Beatiful. To a European taste it
      is the most intolerably tedious of the whole poem, abounding in
      repetition, overloaded description, and long and useless speeches
      which impede the action of the poem. Manifest interpolations of
      whole Cantos also occur. I have omitted none of the action of the
      Book, but have occasionally omitted long passages of common-place
      description, lamentation, and long stories which have been again and
      again repeated.

  788 Brahma the Self-Existent.

  789 Mainaka was the son of Himalaya and Mena or Menaka.

  790 Thus Milton makes the hills of heaven self-moving at command:

      "At his command the uprooted hills retired
      Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
      Obsequious"

  791 The spirit of the mountain is separable from the mountain. Himalaya
      has also been represented as standing in human form on one of his
      own peaks.

  792 Sagar or the Sea is said to have derived its name from Sagar. The
      story is fully told in Book I, Cantos XLII, XLIII, and XLIV.

  793 Kritu is the first of the four ages of the world, the golden age,
      also called Satya.

_  794 Parvata_ means a mountain and in the Vedas a cloud. Hence in later
      mythology the mountains have taken the place of the clouds as the
      objects of the attacks of Indra the Sun-God. The feathered king is
      Garuda.

  795 "The children of Surasa were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents,
      traversing the sky." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 73.

  796 She means, says the Commentator, pursue thy journey if thou can.

  797 If Milton's spirits are allowed the power of infinite self-extension
      and compression the same must be conceded to Valmiki's supernatural
      beings. Given the power as in Milton the result in Valmiki is
      perfectly consistent.

  798 "Daksha is the son of Brahma and one of the Prajapatis or divine
      progenitors. He had sixty daughters, twenty-seven of whom married to
      Kasyapa produced, according to one of the Indian cosmogonies, all
      mundane beings. Does the epithet, Descendant of Daksha, given to
      Surasa, mean that she is one of those daughters? I think not. This
      epithet is perhaps an appellation common to all created beings as
      having sprung from Daksha." GORRESSIO.

  799 Sinhika is the mother of Rahu the dragon's head or ascending node,
      the chief agent in eclipses.

  800 According to De Gubernatis, the author of the very learned,
      ingenious, and interesting though too fanciful _Zoological
      Mythology_. Hanuman here represents the sun entering into and
      escaping from a cloud. The biblical Jonah, according to him,
      typifies the same phenomenon. Sa'di, speaking of sunset, says _Yunas
      andar-i-dihan-imahi shud_: Jonas was within the fish's mouth. See
      ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  801 The Buchanania Latifolia.

  802 The Bauhinia Variegata.

  803 Through the power that Ravan's stern mortifications had won for him
      his trees bore flowers and fruit simultaneously.

  804 Visvakarma is the architect of the Gods.

  805 So in Paradise Lost Satan when he has stealthily entered the garden
      of Eden assumes the form of a cormorant.

  806 Priests who fought only with the weapons of religion, the sacred
      grass used like the verbena of the Romans at sacred rites and the
      consecrated fire to consume the offering of ghee.

  807 One of the Rakshas lords.

  808 The brother Ravan.

  809 Indra's elephant.

  810 Ravan's palace appears to have occupied the whole extent of ground,
      and to have contained within its outer walls the mansions of all the
      great Rakshas chiefs. Ravan's own dwelling seems to have been
      situated within the enchanted chariot Pushpak: but the description
      is involved and confused, and it is difficult to say whether the
      chariot was inside the palace or the palace inside the chariot.

  811 Pushpak from _pushpa_ a flower. The car has been mentioned before in
      Ravan's expedition to carry off Sita, Book III, Canto XXXV.

  812 Lakshmi is the wife of Vishnu and the Goddess of Beauty and
      Felicity. She rose, like Aphrodite, from the foam of the sea. For an
      account of her birth and beauty, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  813 Visvakarma is the architect of the Gods, the Hephaestos or Mulciber
      of the Indian heaven.

  814 Ravan in the resistless power which his long austerities had endowed
      him with, had conquered his brother Kuvera the God of Gold and taken
      from him his greatest treasure this enchanted car.

  815 Like Milton's heavenly car, "Itself instinct with spirit."

  816 Women, says Valmiki. But the Commentator says that automatic figures
      only are meant. Women would have seen Hanuman and given the alarm.

  817 Ravan had fought against Indra and the Gods, and his body was still
      scarred by the wounds inflicted by the tusks of Indra's elephant and
      by the fiery bolts of the Thunderer.

  818 The Vasus are a class of eight deities, originally personifications
      of natural phenomena.

  819 The Maruts are the winds or Storm-Gods.

  820 The Adityas originally seven deities of the heavenly sphere of whom
      Varuna is the chief. The name Aditya was afterwards given to any
      God, specially to Surya the Sun.

  821 The Asvins are the Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the
      Hindus.

  822 The poet forgets that Hanuman has reduced himself to the size of a
      cat.

  823 Sita "not of woman born," was found by King Janak as he was turning
      up the ground in preparation for a sacrifice. See Book II, Canto
      CXVIII.

  824 The six _Angas_ or subordinate branches of the Vedas are 1.
      _Siksha_, the science of proper articulation and pronunciation: 2.
      _Chhandas_, metre: 3. _Vyakarana_, linguistic analysis or grammar:
      4. _Nirukta_, explanation of difficult Vedic words: 5. _Jyotishtom_,
      Astronomy, or rather the Vedic Calendar: 6. _Kalpa_, ceremonial.

  825 There appears to be some confusion of time here. It was already
      morning when Hanuman entered the grove, and the torches would be
      needless.

  826 Ravan is one of those beings who can "climb them as they will," and
      can of course assume the loveliest form to please human eyes as well
      as the terrific shape that suits the king of the Rakshases.

  827 White and lovely as the Arant or nectar recovered from the depths of
      the Milky Sea when churned by the assembled Gods. See Book I, Canto
      XLV.

  828 Ravan in his magic car carrying off the most beautiful women reminds
      us of the magician in _Orlando Furioso_, possesor of the flying
      horse.

      "Volando talor s'alza ne le stelle,
      E poi quasi talor la terra rade;
      E ne porta con lui tutte le belle
      Donne che trova per quelle contrade."

  829 Indian women twisted their long hair in a single braid as a sign of
      mourning for their absent husbands.

  830 Janak, king of Mithila, was Sita's father.

  831 Hiranyakasipu was a king of the Daityas celebrated for his
      blasphemous impieties. When his pious son Prahlada praised Vishnu
      the Daitya tried to kill him, when the God appeared in the
      incarnation of the man-lion and tore the tyrant to pieces.

  832 Do unto others as thou wouldst they should do unto thee, is a
      precept frequently occurring in the old Indian poems. This charity
      is to embrace not human beings only, but bird and beast as well: "He
      prayeth best who loveth best all things both great and small."

  833 It was the custom of Indian warriors to mark their arrows with their
      ciphers or names, and it seems to have been regarded as a point of
      honour to give an enemy the satisfaction of knowing who had shot at
      him. This passage however contains, if my memory serves me well, the
      first mention in the poem of this practice, and as arrows have been
      so frequently mentioned and described with almost every conceivable
      epithet, its occurrence here seems suspicious. No mention of, or
      allusion to writing has hitherto occurred in the poem.

  834 This threat in the same words occurs in Book III, Canto LVI.

  835 Ravan carried off and kept in his palace not only earthly princesses
      but the daughters of Gods and Gandharvas.

  836 The wife of Indra.

  837 These four lines have occurred before. Book III, Canto LVI.

  838 Prajapatis are the ten lords of created beings first created by
      Brahma; somewhat like the Demiurgi of the Gnostics.

  839 "This is the number of the Vedic divinities mentioned in the
      Rig-veda. In Ashtaka I. Sukta XXXIV, the Rishi Hiranyastupa invoking
      the Asvins says: A Nasatya tribhirekadasairiha devebniryatam: 'O
      Nasatyas (Asvins) come hither with the thrice eleven Gods.' And in
      Sukta XLV, the Rishi Praskanva addressing his hymn to Agni (ignis,
      fire), thus invokes him: 'Lord of the red steeds, propitiated by our
      prayers lead hither the thirty-three Gods.' This number must
      certainly have been the actual number in the early days of the Vedic
      religion: although it appears probable enough that the thirty-three
      Vedic divinities could not then be found co-ordinated in so
      systematic a way as they were arranged more recently by the authors
      of the Upanishads. In the later ages of Bramanism the number went on
      increasing without measure by successive mythical and religious
      creations which peopled the Indian Olympus with abstract beings of
      every kind. But through lasting veneration of the word of the Veda
      the custom regained of giving the name of 'the thirty-three Gods' to
      the immense phalanx of the multiplied deities." GORRESIO.

  840 Serpent-Gods who dwell in the regions under the earth.

  841 In the mythology of the epics the Gandharvas are the heavenly
      singers or musicians who form the orchestra at the banquets of the
      Gods, and they belong to the heaven of India in whose battles they
      share.

  842 The mother of Rama.

  843 The mother of Lakshman.

  844 In the south is the region of Yama the God of Death, the place of
      departed spirits.

  845 Kumbhakarna was one of Ravan's brothers.

  846 The guards are still in the grove, but they are asleep; and Sita has
      crept to a tree at some distance from them.

  847 "As the reason assigned in these passages for not addressing Sita in
      Sanskrit such as a Brahman would use is not that she would not
      understand it, but that it would alarm her and be unsuitable to the
      speaker, we must take them as indicating that Sanskrit, if not
      spoken by women of the upper classes at the time when the Ramayana
      was written (whenever that may have been), was at least understood
      by them, and was commonly spoken by men of the priestly class, and
      other educated persons. By the Sanskrit proper to an [ordinary] man,
      alluded to in the second passage, may perhaps be understood not a
      language in which words different from Sanskrit were used, but the
      employment of formal and elaborate diction." MUIR'S _Sanskrit
      Texts_, Part II. p. 166.

  848 Svayambhu, the Self-existent, Brahma.

  849 Vrihaspati or Vachaspati, the Lord of Speech and preceptor of the
      Gods.

  850 The Asurs were the fierce enemies of the Gods.

  851 The Rudras are manifestations of Siva.

  852 The Maruts or Storm Gods.

  853 Rohini is an asterism personified as the daughter of Daksha and the
      favourite wife of the Moon. The chief star in the constellation is
      Aldebaran.

  854 Arundhati was the wife of the great sage Vasishtha, and regarded as
      the pattern of conjugal excellence. She was raised to the heavens as
      one of the Pleiades.

  855 The Gods do not shed tears; nor do they touch the ground when they
      walk or stand. Similarly Milton's angels marched above the ground
      and "the passive air upbore their nimble tread." Virgil's "vera
      incessu patuit dea" may refer to the same belief.

  856 That a friend of Rama would praise him as he should be praised, and
      that if the stranger were Ravan in disguise he would avoid the
      subject.

  857 Kuvera the God of Gold.

  858 Sita of course knows nothing of what has happened to Rama since the
      time when she was carried away by Ravan. The poet therefore thinks
      it necessary to repeat the whole story of the meeting between Rama
      and Sugriva, the defeat of Bali, and subsequent events. I give the
      briefest possible outline of the story.

  859 DE GUBERNATIS thinks that this ring which the Sun Rama sends to the
      Dawn Sita is a symbol of the sun's disc.

  860 Sachi is the loved and lovely wife of Indra, and she is taken as the
      type of a woman protected by a jealous and all-powerful husband.

  861 The mountain near Kishkindha.

  862 Airavat is the mighty elephant on which Indra delights to ride.

  863 Vibhishan is the wicked Ravan's good brother.

  864 Her name is Kala, or in the Bengal recension Nanda.

  865 One of Ravan's chief councillors.

  866 Hanuman when he entered the city had in order to escape observation
      condensed himself to the size of a cat.

  867 The brook Mandakini, not far from Chitrakuta where Rama sojourned
      for a time.

  868 The poet here changes from the second person to the third.

  869 The whole long story is repeated with some slight variations and
      additions from Book II, Canto XCVI. I give here only the outline.

  870 The expedients to vanquish an enemy or to make him come to terms are
      said to be four: conciliation, gifts, disunion, and force or
      punishment. Hanuman considers it useless to employ the first three
      and resolves to punish Ravan by destroying his pleasure-grounds.

  871 Kinkar means the special servant of a sovereign, who receives his
      orders immediately from his master. The Bengal recension gives these
      Rakshases an epithet which the Commentator explains "as generated in
      the mind of Brahma."

  872 Rama _de jure_ King of Kosal of which Ayodhya was the capital.

_  873 Chaityaprasada_ is explained by the Commentator as the place where
      the Gods of the Rakshases were kept. Gorresio translates it by "un
      grande edificio."

  874 The bow of Indra is the rainbow.

  875 We were told a few lines before that the chariot of Jambumali was
      drawn by asses. Here horses are spoken of. The Commentator notices
      the discrepancy and says that by horses asses are meant.

  876 Armed with the bow of Indra, the rainbow.

  877 Ravan's son.

  878 Conqueror of Indra, another of Ravan's sons.

  879 The _sloka_ which follows is probably an interpolation, as it is
      inconsistent with the questioning in Canto L.:

      He looked on Ravan in his pride,
      And boldly to the monarch cried:
      "I came an envoy to this place
      From him who rules the Vanar race."

  880 The ten heads of Ravan have provoked much ridicule from European
      critics. It should be remembered that Spenser tells us of "two
      brethren giants, the one of which had two heads, the other three;"
      and Milton speaks of the "four-fold visaged Four," the four Cherubic
      shapes each of whom had four faces.

  881 Durdhar, or as the Bengal recension reads Mahodara, Prahasta,
      Mahaparsva, and Nikumbha.

  882 The chief attendant of Siva.

  883 Bali, not to be confounded with Bali the Vanar, was a celebrated
      Daitya or demon who had usurped the empire of the three worlds, and
      who was deprived of two thirds of his dominions by Vishnu in the
      Dwarf-incarnation.

  884 When Hanuman was bound with cords, Indrajit released his captive
      from the spell laid upon him by the magic weapon.

  885 "One who murders an ambassador (_raja bhata_) goes to Taptakumbha,
      the hell of heated caldrons." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p.
      217.

  886 The fire which is supposed to burn beneath the sea.

  887 Sita is likened to the fire which is an emblem of purity.

  888 I omit two stanzas which continue the metaphor of the sea or lake of
      air. The moon is its lotus, the sun its wild-duck, the clouds are
      its water-weeds, Mars is its shark and so on. Gorresio remarks:
      "This comparison of a great lake to the sky and of celestial to
      aquatic objects is one of those ideas which the view and qualities
      of natural scenery awake in lively fancies. Imagine one of those
      grand and splendid lakes of India covered with lotus blossoms,
      furrowed by wild-ducks of the most vivid colours, mantled over here
      and there with flowers and water weeds &c. and it will be understood
      how the fancy of the poet could readily compare to the sky radiant
      with celestial azure the blue expanse of the water, to the soft
      light of the moon the inner hue of the lotus, to the splendour of
      the sun the brilliant colours of the wild-fowl, to the stars the
      flowers, to the cloud the weeds that float upon the water &c."

  889 Sunabha is the mountain that rose from the sea when Hanuman passed
      over to Lanka.

  890 Three Cantos of repetition are omitted.

_  891 Madhuvan_ the "honey-wood."

  892 Indra's pleasure-ground or elysium.

  893 Janak was king of Videha or Mithila in Behar.

  894 The original contains two more Cantos which end the Book. Canto
      LXVII begins thus: "Hanuman thus addressed by the great-souled son
      of Raghu related to the son of Raghu all that Sita had said." And
      the two Cantos contain nothing but Hanuman's account of his
      interview with Sita, and the report of his own speeches as well as
      of hers.

  895 The Sixth Book is called in Sanskrit _Yuddha-Kanda_ or _The War_,
      and _Lanka-Kanda_. It is generally known at the present day by the
      latter title.

  896 Vayu is the God of Wind.

  897 Garuda the King of Birds.

  898 Serpent-Gods.

  899 The God of the sea.

  900 Indra's elephant.

  901 Kuvera, God of wealth.

  902 Kuvera's elephant.

  903 The planet Venus, or its regent who is regarded as the son of Bhrigu
      and preceptor of the Daityas.

  904 The seven _rishis_ or saints who form the constellation of the Great
      Bear.

  905 Trisanku was raised to the skies to form a constellation in the
      southern hemisphere. The story in told in Book I, Canto LX.

  906 The sage Visvamitra, who performed for Trisanku the great sacrifice
      which raised him to the heavens.

  907 One of the lunar asterisms containing four or originally two stars
      under the regency of a dual divinity Indragni, Indra and Agni.

  908 The lunar asterism Mula, belonging to the Rakshases.

  909 The Asurs or demons dwell imprisoned in the depths beneath the sea.

  910 The God of Riches, brother and enemy of Ravan and first possessor of
      Pushpak the flying car.

  911 King of the Serpents. Sankha and Takshak are two of the eight
      Serpent Chiefs.

  912 The God of Death, the Pluto of the Hindus.

  913 Literally Indra's conqueror, so called from his victory over that
      God.

  914 Their names are Nikumbha, Rabhasa, Suryasatru, Suptaghna, Yajnakopa,
      Mahaparsva, Mahodara, Agniketu, Rasmiketu, Durdharsha, Indrasatru,
      Prahasta, Virupaksha, Vajradanshtra, Dhumraksha, Durmukha, Mahabala.

  915 Similarly Antenor urges the restoration of Helen:

      "Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,
      And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
      As this advice ye practise or reject,
      So hope success, or dread the dire effect,"

      POPE'S _Homer's Iliad_, Book VII.

  916 The _Agnisala_ or room where the sacrificial fire was kept.

  917 The exudation of a fragrant fluid from the male elephant's temples,
      especially at certain seasons, is frequently spoken of in Sanskrit
      poetry. It is said to deceive and attract the bees, and is regarded
      as a sign of health and masculine vigour.

  918 Consisting of warriors on elephants, warriors in chariots,
      charioteers, and infantry.

  919 Indra, generally represented as surrounded by the Maruts or
      Storm-Gods.

  920 Janasthan, where Rama lived as an ascetic.

  921 Maya, regarded as the paragon of female beauty, was the creation of
      Maya the chief artificer of the Daityas or Danavs.

  922 One of the Nymphs of Indra's heaven.

  923 The Lotus River, a branch of the heavenly Ganga.

_  924 Trilokanatha_, Lord of the Three Worlds, is a title of Indra.

  925 The celestial elephant that carries Indra.

  926 As producers of the _ghi_, clarified butter or sacrificial oil, used
      in fire-offerings.

  927 This desertion to the enemy is somewhat abrupt, and is narrated with
      brevity not usual with Valmiki. In the Bengal recension the
      preceding speakers and speeches differ considerably from those given
      in the text which I follow. Vibhishan is kicked from his seat by
      Ravan, and then, after telling his mother what has happened, he
      flies to Mount Kailasa where he has an interview with Siva, and by
      his advice seeks Rama and the Vanar army.

  928 Vrihaspati the preceptor of the Gods.

  929 In Book II, Canto XXI, Kandu is mentioned by Rama as an example of
      filial obedience. At the command of his father he is said to have
      killed a cow.

  930 A King of the Yakshas, or Kuvera himself, the God of Gold.

  931 The brace protects the left arm from injury from the bow-string, and
      the guard protects the fingers of the right hand.

  932 The story is told in Book I, Cantos XL, XLI, XLII.

  933 Fiends and enemies of the Gods.

  934 The Indus.

  935 Cowherds, sprung from a Brahman and a woman of the medical tribe,
      the modern Ahirs.

  936 Barbarians or outcasts.

_  937 Vrana_ means wound or rent.

  938 Here in the Bengal recension (Gorresio's edition), begins Book VI.

  939 The Goomtee.

  940 The Anglicized Nerbudda.

  941 According to a Pauranik legend Kesari Hanuman's putative father had
      killed an Asur or demon who appeared in the form of an elephant, and
      hence arose the hostility between Vanars and elephants.

  942 Here follows the enumeration of Sugriva's forces which I do not
      attempt to follow. It soon reaches a hundred thousand billions.

  943 I omit the rest of this canto, which is mere repetition. Ravan gives
      in the same words his former answer that the Gods, Gandharvas and
      fiends combined shall not force him to give up Sita. He then orders
      Sardula to tell him the names of the Vanar chieftains whom he has
      seen in Rama's army. These have already been mentioned by Suka and
      Saran.

  944 Lakshmi is the Goddess both of beauty and fortune, and is
      represented with a lotus in her hand.

  945 The poet appears to have forgotten that Suka and Saran were
      dismissed with ignominy in Canto XXIX, and have not been reinstated.

  946 The four who fled with him. Their names are Anala, Panasa, Sampati,
      and Pramati.

  947 The numbers here are comparatively moderate: ten thousand elephants,
      ten thousand chariots, twenty thousand horses and ten million
      giants.

  948 The Kinsuk, also called Palasa, is Butea Frondosa, a tree that bears
      beautiful red crescent shaped blossoms and is deservedly a favorite
      with poets. The Seemal or Salmali is the silk cotton tree which also
      bears red blossoms.

  949 Varuna.

  950 The duty of a king to save the lives of his people and avoid
      bloodshed until milder methods have been tried in vain.

  951 I have omitted several of these single combats, as there is little
      variety in the details and each duel results in the victory of the
      Vanar or his ally.

  952 Yajnasatru, Mahaparsva, Mahodar, Vajradanshtra, Suka, and Saran.

  953 Angad.

  954 A mysterious weapon consisting of serpents transformed to arrows
      which deprived the wounded object of all sense and power of motion.

  955 On each foot, and at the root of each finger.

  956 Varun.

  957 The name of one of the mystical weapons the command over which was
      given by Visvamitra to Rama, as related in Book I.

  958 One of Sita's guard, and her comforter on a former occasion also.

  959 The preceptor of the Gods.

  960 Rama's grandfather.

  961 The Gandharvas are warriors and Minstrels of Indra's heaven.

  962 "It is to be understood," says the commentator, "that this is not
      the Akampan who has already been slain."

  963 Ravan's son, whom Hanuman killed when he first visited Lanka.

  964 Nila was the son of Agni the God of Fire, and possessed, like
      Milton's demons, the power of dilating and condensing his form at
      pleasure.

  965 An ancient king of Ayodhya said by some to have been Prithu's
      father.

  966 The daughter of King Kusadhwaja. She became an ascetic, and being
      insulted by Ravan in the woods where she was performing penance,
      destroyed herself by entering fire, but was born again as Sita to be
      in turn the destruction of him who had insulted her.

  967 Nandisvara was Siva's chief attendant. Ravan had despised and
      laughed at him for appearing in the form of a monkey and the
      irritated Nandisvara cursed him and foretold his destruction by
      monkeys.

  968 Ravan once upheaved and shook Mount Kailasa the favourite dwelling
      place of Siva the consort of Uma, and was cursed in consequence by
      the offended Goddess.

  969 Rambha, who has several times been mentioned in the course of the
      poem, was one of the nymphs of heaven, and had been insulted by
      Ravan.

  970 Punjikasthala was the daughter of Varun. Ravan himself has mentioned
      in this book his insult to her, and the curse pronounced in
      consequence by Brahma.

  971 Pulastya was the son of Brahma and father of Visravas or Paulastya
      the father of Ravan and Kumbhakarna.

  972 I omit a tedious sermon on the danger of rashness and the advantages
      of prudence, sufficient to irritate a less passionate hearer than
      Ravan.

  973 The Bengal recension assigns a very different speech to Kumbhakarna
      and makes him say that Narad the messenger of the Gods had formerly
      told him that Vishnu himself incarnate as Dasaratha's son should
      come to destroy Ravan.

  974 Mahodar, Dwijihva, Sanhrada, and Vitardan.

  975 A name of Vishnu.

  976 There is so much commonplace repetition in these Sallies of the
      Rakshas chieftains that omissions are frequently necessary. The
      usual ill omens attend the sally of Kumbhakarna, and the Canto ends
      with a description of the terrified Vanars' flight which is briefly
      repeated in different words at the beginning of the next Canto.

  977 Kartikeya the God of War, and the hero and incarnation Parasurama
      are said to have cut a passage through the mountain Krauncha, a part
      of the Himalayan range, in the same way as the immense gorge that
      splits the Pyrenees under the towers of Marbore was cloven at one
      blow of Roland's sword Durandal.

  978 Rishabh, Sarabh, Nila, Gavaksha, and Gandhamadan.

  979 Angad. The text calls him the son of the son of him who holds the
      thunderbolt, _i.e._ the grandson of Indra.

  980 Literally, weighing a thousand _bharas_. The _bhara_ is a weight
      equal to 2000 _palas_, the _pala_ is equal to four _karsas_, and the
      _karsa_ to 11375 French grammes or about 176 grains troy. The spear
      seems very light for a warrior of Kumbhakarna's strength and stature
      and the work performed with it.

  981 The custom of throwing parched or roasted grain, with wreaths and
      flowers, on the heads of kings and conquerors when they go forth to
      battle and return is frequently mentioned by Indian poets.

  982 Lakshman.

  983 I have abridged this long Canto by omitting some vain repetitions,
      commonplace epithets and similes and other unimportant matter. There
      are many verses in this Canto which European scholars would rigidly
      exclude as unmistakeably the work of later rhapsodists. Even the
      reverent Commentator whom I follow ventures to remark once or twice:
      _Ayam sloka prak shipta iti bahavah_, "This _sloka_ or verse is in
      the opinion of many interpolated."

  984 Narak was a demon, son of Bhumi or Earth, who haunted the city
      Pragjyotisha.

  985 Sambar was a demon of drought.

  986 Indra.

  987 Devantak (Slayer of Gods) Narantak (Slayer of Men) Atikaya (Huge of
      Frame) and Trisiras (Three Headed) were all sons of Ravan.

  988 The demon of eclipse who seizes the Sun and Moon.

  989 Lakshman.

  990 In such cases as this I am not careful to reproduce the numbers of
      the poet, which in the text which I follow are 670000000; the Bengal
      recension being content with thirty million less.

  991 The discus or quoit, a sharp-edged circular missile is the favourite
      weapon of Vishnu.

  992 To destroy Tripura the triple city in the sky, air and earth, built
      by Maya for a celebrated Asur or demon, or as another commentator
      explains, to destroy Kandarpa or Love.

  993 The Lokapalas are sometimes regarded as deities appointed by Brahma
      at the creation of the word to act as guardians of different orders
      of beings, but more commonly they are identified with the deities
      presiding over the four cardinal and four intermediate points of the
      compass, which, according to Manu V. 96, are 1, Indra, guardian of
      the East; 2, Agni, of the South-east; 3, Yama, of the South; 4,
      Surya, of the South-west; 5, Varuna, of the West; 6, Pavana or Vayu,
      of the North-west; 7, Kuvera, of the North; 8, Soma or Chandra, of
      the North-east.

  994 The chariots of Ravan's present army are said to have been one
      hundred and fifty million in number with three hundred million
      elephants, and twelve hundred million horses and asses. The footmen
      are merely said to have been "unnumbered."

  995 It is not very easy to see the advantage of having arrows headed in
      the way mentioned. Fanciful names for war-engines and weapons
      derived from their resemblance to various animals are not confined
      to India. The "War-wolf" was used by Edward I. at the siege of
      Brechin, the "Cat-house" and the "Sow" were used by Edward III. at
      the siege of Dunbar.

  996 Apparently a peak of the Himalaya chain.

  997 This exploit of Hanuman is related with inordinate prolixity in the
      Bengal recension (Gortesio's text). Among other adventures he
      narrowly escapes being shot by Bharat as he passes over Nandigrama
      near Ayodhya. Hanuman stays Bharat in time, and gives him an account
      of what has befallen Rama and Sita in the forest and in Lanka.

  998 As Garud the king of birds is the mortal enemy of serpents the
      weapon sacred to him is of course best calculated to destroy the
      serpent arrows of Ravan.

  999 The celebrated saint who has on former occasions assisted Rama with
      his gifts and counsel.

 1000 Indra.

 1001 Yama.

 1002 Kartikeya.

 1003 Kubera.

 1004 Varun.

 1005 The Pitris, forefathers or spirits of the dead, are of two kinds,
      either the spirits of the father, grandfathers and
      great-grandfathers of an individual or the progenitors of mankind
      generally, to both of whom obsequial worship is paid and oblations
      of food are presented.

 1006 The Maruts or Storm-Gods.

 1007 The Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the Hindus.

 1008 The Man _par excellence_, the representative man and father of the
      human race regarded also as God.

 1009 The Vasus, a class of deities originally personifications of natural
      phenomena.

 1010 A class of celestial beings who dwell between the earth and the sun.

 1011 The seven horses are supposed to symbolize the seven days of the
      week.

 1012 One for each month in the year.

 1013 The garden of Kuvera, the God of Riches.

 1014 The consort of Indra.

 1015 The Swayamvara, Self-choice or election of a husband by a princess
      or daughter of a Kshatriya at a public assembly of suitors held for
      the purpose. For a description of the ceremony see _Nala and
      Damayanti_ an episode of the Mahabharat translated by the late Dean
      Milman, and _Idylls from the Sanskrit_.

 1016 The Pitris or Manes, the spirits of the dead.

 1017 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

 1018 Varun, God of the sea.

 1019 Mahadeva or Siva whose ensign is a bull.

 1020 The Address to Rama, both text and commentary, will be found
      literally translated in the Additional Notes. A paraphrase of a
      portion is all that I have attempted here.

 1021 Ravan's queen.

 1022 Or Mainaka.

 1023 Here, in the North-west recension, Sita expresses a wish that Tara
      and the wives of the Vanar chiefs should be invited to accompany her
      to Ayodhya. The car decends, and the Vanar matrons are added to the
      party. The Bengal recension ignores this palpable interruption.

 1024 The _arghya_, a respectful offering to Gods and venerable men
      consisting of rice, duiva grass, flowers etc., with water.

 1025 I have abridged Hanuman's outline of Rama's adventures, with the
      details of which we are already sufficiently acquainted.

 1026 In these respectful salutations the person who salutes his superior
      mentions his own name even when it is well known to the person whom
      he salutes.

 1027 I have omitted the chieftains' names as they could not be introduced
      without padding. They are Mainda, Dwivid, Nila, Rishabh, Sushen,
      Nala, Gavaksha, Gandhamadan, Sarabh, and Panas.

 1028 The following addition is found in the Bengal recension: But
      Vaisravan (Kuvera) when he beheld his chariot said unto it: "Go, and
      carry Rama, and come unto me when my thought shall call thee, And
      the chariot returned unto Rama;" and he honoured it when he had
      heard what had passed.

 1029 Here follows in the original an enumeration of the chief blessings
      which will attend the man or woman who reads or hears read this tale
      of Rama. These blessings are briefly mentioned at the end of the
      first Canto of the first book, and it appears unnecessary to repeat
      them here in their amplified form. The Bengal recension (Gorresio's
      edition) gives them more concisely as follows: "This is the great
      first poem blessed and glorious, which gives long life to men and
      victory to kings, the poem which Valmiki made. He who listens to
      this wondrous tale of Rama unwearied in action shall be absolved
      from all his sins. By listening to the deeds of Rama he who wishes
      for sons shall obtain his heart's desire, and to him who longs for
      riches shall riches be given. The virgin who asks for a husband
      shall obtain a husband suited to her mind, and shall meet again her
      dear kinsfolk who are far away. They who hear this poem which
      Valmiki made shall obtain all their desires and all their prayers
      shall be fulfilled."

_ 1030 The Academy_, Vol. III., No 43, contains an able and interesting
      notice of this work from the pen of the Professor of Sanskrit in the
      University of Cambridge: "The _Uttarakanda_," Mr. Cowell remarks,
      "bears the same relation to the _Ramayana_ as the Cyclic poems to
      the _Iliad_. Just as the _Cypria_ of Stasinus, the _AEthiopis_ of
      Arctinus, and the little _Iliad_ of Lesches completed the story of
      the _Iliad_, and not only added the series of events which preceded
      and followed it, but also founded episodes of their own on isolated
      allusions in Homer, so the _Uttarakanda_ is intended to complete the
      _Ramayana_, and at the same time to supplement it by intervening
      episodes to explain casual allusions or isolated incidents which
      occur in it. Thus the early history of the giant Ravana and his
      family fills nearly forty Chapters, and we have a full account of
      his wars with the gods and his conquest of Lanka, which all happened
      long before the action of the poem commences, just as the _Cypria_
      narrated the birth and early history of Helen, and the two
      expeditions of the Greeks against Troy; and the latter chapters
      continue the history of the hero Rama after his triumphant return to
      his paternal kingdom, and the poem closes with his death and that of
      his brothers, and the founding by their descendants of various
      kingdoms in different parts of India."

 1031 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts,_ Part IV., pp. 414 ff.

 1032 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV., 391, 392.

 1033 See _Academy_, III., 43.

_ 1034 Academy_, Vol. III., No. 43.

 1035 E. B. Cowell. _Academy_, No. 43. The story of Sita's banishment will
      be found roughly translated from the _Raghuvansa_, in the Additional
      Notes.

 1036 E. B. Cowell. _Academy_, Vol, III, No. 43.

 1037 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV., Appendix.

 1038 Ghi: clarified butter. Gur: molasses.

 1039 Haridwar (Anglice Hurdwar) where the Ganges enters the plain
      country.

 1040 Campbell in "Journ. As. Soc. Bengal," 1866, Part ii. p. 132; Latham,
      "Descr. Eth." Vol. ii. p. 456; Tod, "Annals of Rajasthan," Vol. i.
      p. 114.

 1041 Said by the commentator to be an eastern people between the
      Himalayan and Vindhyan chains.

 1042 Videha was a district in the province of Behar, the ancient Mithila
      or the modern Tirhoot.

 1043 The people of Malwa.

 1044 "The Kasikosalas are a central nation in the Vayu Purana. The
      Ramayana places them in the east. The combination indicates the
      country between Benares and Oude.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Kosala is a name variously
      applied. Its earliest and most celebrated application is to the
      country on the banks of the Sarayu, the kingdom of Rama, of which
      Ayodhya was the capital.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} In the Mahabharata we have one Kosala in
      the east and another in the south, besides the Prak-Kosalas and
      Uttara Kosalas in the east and north. The Puranas place the Kosalas
      amongst the people on the back of Vindhya; and it would appear from
      the Vayu that Kusa the son of Rama transferred his kingdom to a more
      central position; he ruled over Kosala at his capital of Kusasthali
      of Kusavati, built upon the Vindhyan precipices." WILSON'S _Vishnnu
      Purana_, Vol. II. pp. 157, 172.

 1045 The people of south Behar.

 1046 The Pundras are said to be the inhabitants of the western provinces
      of Bengal. "In the _Aitareyabrahmana_, VII. 18, it is said that the
      elder sons of Visvamitra were cursed to become progenitors of most
      abject races, such as Andhras, Pundras, Sabaras, Pulindas, and
      Mutibas." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_ Vol. II. 170.

 1047 Anga is the country about Bhagulpore, of which Champa was the
      capital.

 1048 A fabulous people, "men who use their ears as a covering." So Sir
      John Maundevile says: "And in another Yle ben folk that han gret
      Eres and long, that hangen down to here knees," and Pliny, lib. iv.
      c. 13: "In quibus nuda alioquin corpora praegrandes ipsorum aures
      tota contegunt." Isidore calls them Panotii.

 1049 "Those whose ears hang down to their lips."

 1050 "The Iron-faces."

 1051 "The One-footed."

      "In that Contree," says Sir John Maundevile, "ben folk, that han but
      o foot and thei gon so fast that it is marvaylle: and the foot is so
      large that it schadeweth alle the Body azen the Sonne, when thei
      wole lye and rest hem." So Pliny, Natural History, lib. vii. c. 2:
      speaks of "Hominumn gens {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} singulis cruribus, mirae pernicitatis ad
      saltum; eosdemque Sciopodas vocari, quod in majori aestu, humi
      jacentes resupini, umbra se pedum protegant."

      These epithets are, as Professor Wilson remarks, "exaggerations of
      national ugliness, or allusions to peculiar customs, which were not
      literally intended, although they may have furnished the Mandevilles
      of ancient and modern times."

      _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 162.

 1052 The Kirrhadae of Arrian: a general name for savage tribes living in
      woods and mountains.

 1053 Said by the commentator to be half tigers half men.

 1054 The kingdom seems to have corresponded with the greater part of
      Berar and Khandesh.

 1055 The Bengal recension has Kishikas, and places them both in the south
      and the north.

 1056 The people of Mysore.

 1057 "There are two Matsyas, one of which, according to the Yantra
      Samraj, is identifiable with Jeypoor. In the Digvijaya of Nakula he
      subdues the Matsyas further to the west, or Gujerat." WILSON'S
      _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. 158. Dr. Hall observes: "In the
      _Mahabharata Sabha-parwan_, 1105 and 1108, notice is taken of the
      king of Matsya and of the Aparamatsyas; and, at 1082, the Matsyas
      figure as an eastern people. They are placed among the nations of
      the south in the _Ramayana Kishkindha-kanda_, XLI., II, while the
      Bengal recension, _Kishkindha-kanda_, XLIV., 12, locates them in the
      north."

 1058 The Kalingas were the people of the upper part of the Coromandel
      Coast, well known, in the traditions of the Eastern Archipelago, as
      Kling. Ptolemy has a city in that part, called Caliga; and Pliny
      Calingae proximi mari. WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. 156, Note.

 1059 The Kausikas do not appear to be identifiable.

 1060 The Andhras probably occupied the modern Telingana.

 1061 The Pundras have already been mentioned in Canto XL.

 1062 The inhabitants of the lower part of the Coromandel Coast; so
      called, after them, Cholamandala.

 1063 A people in the Deccan.

 1064 The Keralas were the people of Malabar proper.

 1065 A generic term for persons speaking any language but Sanskrit and
      not conforming to the usual Hindu institutions.

 1066 "Pulinda is applied to any wild or barbarous tribe. Those here named
      are some of the people of the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas
      are met with in many other positions, especially in the mountains
      and forests across Central India, the haunts of the Bheels and
      Gonds. So Ptolemy places the Pulindas along the banks of the
      Narmada, to the frontiers of Larice, the Lata or Lar of the
      Hindus,--Khandesh and part of Gujerat." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_,
      Vol. II. 159, Note.

      Dr. Hall observes that "in the Bengal recension of the _Ramayana_
      the Pulindas appear both in the south and in the north. The real
      _Ramayana_ K.-k., XLIII., speaks of the northern Pulindas."

 1067 The Surasenas were the inhabitants of Mathura, the Suraseni of
      Arrian.

 1068 These the Mardi of the Greeks and the two preceding tribes appear to
      have dwelt in the north-west of Hindustan.

 1069 The Kambojas are said to be the people of Arachosia. They are always
      mentioned with the north-western tribes.

 1070 "The term Yavanas, although, in later times, applied to the
      Mohammedans, designated formerly the Greeks.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The Greeks were known
      throughout Western Asia by the term Yavan, or Ion. That the
      Macedonian or Bactrian Greeks were most usually intended is not only
      probable from their position and relations with India, but from
      their being usually named in concurrence with the north-western
      tribes, Kambojas, Daradas, Paradas, Bahlikas, Sakas &c., in the
      Ramayana. Mahabharata, Puranas, Manu, and in various poems and
      plays." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_ Vol. II. p. 181, Note.

 1071 These people, the Sakai and Sacae of classical writers, the
      Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended, about the commencement of our
      era, along the west of India, from the Hindu Kosh to the mouths of
      the Indus.

 1072 The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has instead of
      Varadas Daradas the Dards or inhabitants of the modern Dardistan
      along the course of the Indus, above the Himalayas, just before it
      descends to India.

 1073 From the word yonder it would appear that the prayer is to be
      repeated at the rising of the Sun.

 1074 The creator of the world and the first of the Hindu triad.

 1075 He who pervades all beings; or the second of the Hindu triad who
      preserves the world.

 1076 The bestower of blessings; the third of the Hindu triad and the
      destroyer of the world.

 1077 A name of the War-God; also one who urges the senses to action.

 1078 The lord of creatures; or the God of sacrifices.

 1079 A name of the King of Gods; also all-powerful.

 1080 The giver of wealth. A name of the God of riches.

 1081 One who directly urges the mental faculties to action.

 1082 One who moderates the senses, also the God of the regions of the
      dead.

 1083 One who produces nectar (amrita) or one who is always possessed of
      light; or one together with Uma (Ardhanarisvara).

 1084 The names or spirits of departed ancestors.

 1085 Name of a class of eight Gods, also wealthy.

 1086 They who are to be served by Yogis; or a class of Gods named
      Sadhyas.

 1087 The two physicians of the Gods: or they who pervade all beings.

 1088 They who are immortal; or a class of Gods forty-nine in number.

 1089 Omniscient; or the first king of the world.

 1090 He that moves; life; or the God of wind.

 1091 The God of fire.

 1092 Lord of creatures.

 1093 One who prolongs our lives.

 1094 The material cause of knowledge and of the seasons.

 1095 One who shines. The giver of light.

 1096 The hymn entitled the Adityahridaya begins from this verse and the
      words, thou art, are understood in the beginning of this verse.

 1097 One who enjoys all (pleasurable) objects; The son of Aditi, the lord
      of the solar disk.

 1098 One who creates the world, i.e., endows beings with life or soul,
      and by his rays causes rain and thereby produces corn.

 1099 One who urges the world to action or puts the world in motion, who
      is omnipresent.

 1100 One who walks through the sky; or pervades the soul.

 1101 One who nourishes the world, i.e., is the supporter.

 1102 One having rays (Gabhasti) or he who is possessed of the
      all-pervading goddess Lakshmi.

 1103 One resembling gold.

 1104 One who is resplendent or who gives light to other objects.

 1105 One whose seed (Retas) is gold; or quicksilver, the material cause
      of gold.

 1106 One who is the cause of day.

 1107 One whose horses are of tawny colour; or one who pervades the whole
      space or quarters.

 1108 One whose knowledge is boundless or who has a thousand rays.

 1109 One who urges the seven (Pranas) that is the two eyes, the two ears,
      the nostrils and the organ of speech, or whose chariot, is drawn by
      seven horses.

 1110 Vide Gabhastiman.

 1111 One who destroys darkness, or ignorance.

 1112 One from whom our blessings or the enjoyments of Paradise come.

 1113 The architect of the gods; or one who lessens the miseries of our
      birth and death.

 1114 One who gives life to the lifeless world.

 1115 One who pervades the internal and external worlds; or one who is
      resplendent.

 1116 He who is identified with the Hindu triad, i.e. the creator (Brahma)
      the supporter (Vishnu) and the destroyer (Siva).

 1117 Cold or good natured. He is so called because he allays the three
      sorts of pain.

 1118 One who is the lord of all.

 1119 Vide Divakara.

 1120 One who teaches Brahma and others the Vedas.

 1121 One from whom Rudra the destroyer or the third of the Hindu triad
      springs.

 1122 One who is knowable through Aditi, i.e., the eternal Brahmavidya.

 1123 Great happiness or the sky.

 1124 The destroyer of cold or stupidity.

 1125 The Lord of the sky.

 1126 Vide Timironmathana.

 1127 One who is known through the Upanishads.

 1128 He who is the cause of heavy rain.

 1129 He who is a friend to the good, or who is the cause of water.

 1130 One who moves in the solar orbit.

 1131 One who determines the creation of the world; or who is possessed of
      heat.

 1132 One who has a mass of rays; or who has Kaustubha and other precious
      stones as his ornaments.

 1133 He who urges all to action; or who is yellow in colour.

 1134 One who is the destroyer of all.

 1135 One who is omniscient; or a poet.

 1136 One who is identified with the whole world.

 1137 One who is of huge form.

 1138 One who pleases all by giving nourishment; or who is red in colour.

 1139 One who is the cause of the whole world.

 1140 One who protects the whole world.

 1141 The most glorious of all that are glorious.

 1142 One who is identical with the twelve months.

 1143 One who gives victory over all the worlds to those who are
      faithfully devoted to him; or the porter of Brahma, named Jaya.

 1144 One who is identical with the blessing which can be obtained by
      conquering all the worlds; or with the porter of Brahma named
      Jayabhadra.

 1145 One who has Hanuman as his conveyance.

 1146 One who controls the senses; or is furious with those who are not
      his devotees.

 1147 He who is free in moving the senses; or urges all beings to action.

 1148 He who can be known through the Pranava (the mystical Om-kara.)

 1149 One who is the knowledge of Brahma.

 1150 One who devours all things.

 1151 He who is the destroyer of all pains; and of love, and hate, the
      causes of pain; and ignorance which is the cause of love and hate.

 1152 One who is bliss; or the mover.

 1153 One who destroys ignorance and its effects.

 1154 The doer of all actions.

 1155 One who beholds the universe; who is a witness of good and bad
      actions.

 1156 Sacrifice of the five sensual fires.

 1157 According to Apastamba (says the commentator) "it should have been
      placed on the nose: this must therefore have been done in conformity
      with some other Sutras."

 1158 A class of eight gods.

 1159 A class of eleven gods called Rudras.

 1160 Named Viryavan.

 1161 A class of divine devotees named Sadhyas.

 1162 One who resides in the water.

 1163 The third incarnation of Vishnu, that bore the earth on his tusk.

 1164 One whose armies are everywhere.

 1165 One who controls the senses.

 1166 He who resides in the heart, or who is full, or all-pervading.

 1167 Vamana, or the Dwarf incarnation of Vishnu.

 1168 The killer of Madhu, a demon.

 1169 He from whose navel, the lotus, from which Brahma was born, springs.

 1170 He who has a thousand horns. The horns are here the Sakhas of the
      Sama-veda.

 1171 One who has a hundred heads. The heads are here meant to devote a
      hundred commandments of the Vedas.

 1172 Siddhas are those who have already gained the summit of their
      desires.

 1173 Sadhyas are those that are still trying to gain the summit.

 1174 A mystic syllable uttered in Mantras.

 1175 A mystic syllable made of the letters which respectively denote
      Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva.

 1176 A class of divine gods.

 1177 Sanskaras are those sacred writings through which the divine
      commands and prohibitions are known.

 1178 Bali, a demon whom Vamana confined in Patala.

 1179 Vishnu, the second of the Hindu triad.

 1180 Krishna, (black coloured) one of the ten incarnations of Vishnu.

 1181 A. Weber, _Akademische Vorlesungen_, p. 181.

 1182 Systema brahmanicum, liturgicum, mythologicum, civile, exmonumentis
      Indicis, etc.

 1183 Not only have the races of India translated or epitomized it, but
      foreign nations have appropriated it wholly or in part, Persia,
      Java, and Japan itself.

 1184 In the third century B.C.

