Canto VI. The King.


There reigned a king of name revered,
To country and to town endeared,
Great Dasaratha, good and sage,
Well read in Scripture's holy page:
Upon his kingdom's weal intent,
Mighty and brave and provident;
The pride of old Ikshvaku's seed
For lofty thought and righteous deed.
Peer of the saints, for virtues famed,
For foes subdued and passions tamed:
A rival in his wealth untold
Of Indra and the Lord of Gold.
Like Manu first of kings, he reigned,
And worthily his state maintained.
For firm and just and ever true
Love, duty, gain he kept in view,
And ruled his city rich and free,
Like Indra's Amaravati.
And worthy of so fair a place
There dwelt a just and happy race
  With troops of children blest.
Each man contented sought no more,
Nor longed with envy for the store
  By richer friends possessed.
For poverty was there unknown,
And each man counted as his own
  Kine, steeds, and gold, and grain.
All dressed in raiment bright and clean,
And every townsman might be seen
  With earrings, wreath, or chain.
None deigned to feed on broken fare,
And none was false or stingy there.
A piece of gold, the smallest pay,
Was earned by labour for a day.
On every arm were bracelets worn,
And none was faithless or forsworn,
  A braggart or unkind.
None lived upon another's wealth,
None pined with dread or broken health,
  Or dark disease of mind.
High-souled were all. The slanderous word,
The boastful lie, were never heard.
Each man was constant to his vows,
And lived devoted to his spouse.
No other love his fancy knew,
And she was tender, kind, and true.
Her dames were fair of form and face,
With charm of wit and gentle grace,
With modest raiment simply neat,
And winning manners soft and sweet.
The twice-born sages, whose delight
Was Scripture's page and holy rite,
Their calm and settled course pursued,
Nor sought the menial multitude.
In many a Scripture each was versed,
And each the flame of worship nursed,
  And gave with lavish hand.
Each paid to Heaven the offerings due,
And none was godless or untrue
  In all that holy band.
To Brahmans, as the laws ordain,
The Warrior caste were ever fain
  The reverence due to pay;
And these the Vaisyas' peaceful crowd,
Who trade and toil for gain, were proud
  To honour and obey;
And all were by the Sudras(70) served,
Who never from their duty swerved,
Their proper worship all addressed
To Brahman, spirits, God, and guest.
Pure and unmixt their rites remained,
Their race's honour ne'er was stained.(71)
Cheered by his grandsons, sons, and wife,
Each passed a long and happy life.
Thus was that famous city held
By one who all his race excelled,
  Blest in his gentle reign,
As the whole land aforetime swayed
By Manu, prince of men, obeyed
  Her king from main to main.
And heroes kept her, strong and brave,
As lions guard their mountain cave:
Fierce as devouring flame they burned,
And fought till death, but never turned.
Horses had she of noblest breed,
Like Indra's for their form and speed,
From Vahli's(72) hills and Sindhu's(73) sand,
Vanayu(74) and Kamboja's land.(75)
Her noble elephants had strayed
Through Vindhyan and Himalayan shade,
Gigantic in their bulk and height,
Yet gentle in their matchless might.
They rivalled well the world-spread fame
Of the great stock from which they came,
  Of Vaman, vast of size,
Of Mahapadma's glorious line,
Thine, Anjan, and, Airavat, thine.(76)
  Upholders of the skies.
With those, enrolled in fourfold class,
Who all their mighty kin surpass,
  Whom men Matangas name,
And Mrigas spotted black and white,
And Bhadras of unwearied might,
And Mandras hard to tame.(77)
Thus, worthy of the name she bore,(78)
Ayodhya for a league or more
  Cast a bright glory round,
Where Dasaratha wise and great
Governed his fair ancestral state,
  With every virtue crowned.
Like Indra in the skies he reigned
In that good town whose wall contained
  High domes and turrets proud,
With gates and arcs of triumph decked,
And sturdy barriers to protect
  Her gay and countless crowd.





