Canto LXXVII. Bharat's Departure.


Then Rama with a cheerful mind
The bow to Varun's hand resigned.
Due reverence to the saints he paid,
And thus addressed his sire dismayed:
"As Bhrigu's son is far from view,
Now let the host its march pursue,
And to Ayodhya's town proceed
In four-fold bands, with thee to lead."

  King Dasaratha thus addressed
His lips to Rama's forehead pressed,
And held him to his aged breast.
Rejoiced in sooth was he to know
That Bhrigu's son had parted so,
And hailed a second life begun
For him and his victorious son.
He urged the host to speed renewed,
And soon Ayodhya's gates he viewed.
High o'er the roofs gay pennons played;
Tabour and drum loud music made;
Fresh water cooled the royal road,
And flowers in bright profusion glowed.
Glad crowds with garlands thronged the ways
Rejoicing on their king to gaze
And all the town was bright and gay
Exalting in the festive day.
People and Brahmans flocked to meet
Their monarch ere he gained the street.
The glorious king amid the throng
Rode with his glorious sons along,
And passed within his dear abode
That like Himalaya's mountain showed.
And there Kausalya, noble queen,
Sumitra with her lovely mien,
Kaikeyi of the dainty waist,
And other dames his bowers who graced,
Stood in the palace side by side
And welcomed home each youthful bride:
Fair Sita, lofty-fated dame,
Urmila of the glorious fame,
And Kusadhwaj's children fair,
With joyous greeting and with prayer,
As all in linen robes arrayed
With offerings at the altars prayed.
Due reverence paid to God above,
Each princess gave her soul to love,
And hidden in her inmost bower
Passed with her lord each blissful hour.
The royal youths, of spirit high,
With whom in valor none could vie,
Lived each within his palace bounds
Bright as Kuvera's pleasure-grounds,
With riches, troops of faithful friends,
And bliss that wedded life attends:
Brave princes trained in warlike skill,
And duteous to their father's will.
At length the monarch called one morn
Prince Bharat, of Kaikeyi born,
And cried: "My son, within our gates
Lord Yudhajit thine uncle waits.
The son of Kekaya's king is he,
And came, my child, to summon thee."

  Then Bharat for the road prepared,
And with Satrughna forth he fared.
First to his sire he bade adieu,
Brave Rama, and his mothers too.
Lord Yudhajit with joyful pride
Went forth, the brothers by his side,
And reached the city where he dwelt:
And mighty joy his father felt.

  Rama and Lakshman honoured still
Their godlike sire with duteous will.
Two constant guides for Rama stood,
His father's wish, the people's good.
Attentive to the general weal
He thought and wrought to please and heal.
His mothers too he strove to please
With love and sonly courtesies.
At every time, in every spot,
His holy guides he ne'er forgot.
So for his virtues kind and true
Dearer and dearer Rama grew
To Dasaratha, Brahmans, all
In town and country, great and small.
And Rama by his darling's side
Saw many a blissful season glide,
Lodged in her soul, each thought on her,
Lover, and friend, and worshipper.
He loved her for his father's voice
Had given her and approved the choice:
He loved her for each charm she wore
And her sweet virtues more and more.
So he her lord and second life
Dwelt in the bosom of his wife,
In double form, that, e'en apart,
Each heart could commune free with heart.

  Still grew that child of Janak's race,
More goddess-fair in form and face,
The loveliest wife that e'er was seen,
In mortal mould sweet Beauty's Queen.
Then shone the son Kausalya bore,
  With this bright dame allied,
Like Vishnu whom the Gods adore,
  With Lakshmi by his side.






