BOOK VI. Canto I. Rama's Speech.

(895)

The son of Raghu heard, consoled,
The wondrous tale Hanuman told;
And, as his joyous hope grew high,
In friendly words he made reply:

  "Behold a mighty task achieved,
Which never heart but his conceived.
Who else across the sea can spring,
Save Vayu(896) and the Feathered King?(897)
Who, pass the portals strong and high
Which Nagas,(898) Gods, and fiends defy,
Where Ravan's hosts their station keep,--
And come uninjured o'er the deep?
By such a deed the Wind-God's son
Good service to the king has done,
And saved from ruin and disgrace
Lakshman and me and Raghu's race.
Well has he planned and bravely fought,
And with due care my lady sought.
But of the sea I sadly think,
And the sweet hopes that cheered me sink.
How can we cross the leagues of foam
That keep us from the giant's home?
What can the Vanar legions more
Than muster on the ocean shore?"





Canto II. Sugriva's Speech.


He ceased: and King Sugriva tried
To calm his grief, and thus replied:
"'Be to thy nobler nature true,
Nor let despair thy soul subdue.
This cloud of causeless woe dispel,
For all as yet has prospered well,
And we have traced thy queen, and know
The dwelling of our Rakshas foe.
Arise, consult: thy task must be
To cast a bridge athwart the sea,
The city of our foe to reach
That crowns the mountain by the beach;
And when our feet that isle shall tread,
Rejoice and deem thy foeman dead.
The sea unbridged, his walls defy
Both fiends and children of the sky,
Though at the fierce battalions' head
Lord Indra's self the onset led.
Yea, victory is thine before
The long bridge touch the farther shore,
So fleet and fierce and strong are these
Who limb them as their fancies please.
Away with grief and sad surmise
That mar the noblest enterprise,
And with their weak suspicion blight
The sage's plan, the hero's might.
Come, this degenerate weakness spurn,
And bid thy dauntless heart return,
For each fair hope by grief is crossed
When those we love are dead or lost.
Arise, O best of those who know,
Arm for the giant's overthrow.
None in the triple world I see
Who in the fight may equal thee;
None who before thy face may stand
And brave the bow that arms thy hand,
Trust to these mighty Vanars: they
With full success thy trust will pay,
When thou shalt reach the robber's hold,
And loving arms round Sita fold."





Canto III. Lanka.


He ceased: and Raghu's son gave heed,
Attentive to his prudent rede:
Then turned again, with hope inspired,
To Hanuman, and thus inquired:

  "Light were the task for thee, I ween,
To bridge the sea that gleams between
The mainland and the island shore.
Or dry the deep and guide as o'er.
Fain would I learn from thee whose feet
Have trod the stones of every street,
Of fenced Lanka's towers and forts,
And walls and moats and guarded ports,
And castles where the giants dwell,
And battlemented citadel.
O Vayu's son, describe it all,
With palace, fort, and gate, and wall."

  He ceased: and, skilled in arts that guide
The eloquent, the chief replied:

  "Vast is the city, gay and strong,
Where elephants unnumbered throng,
And countless hosts of Rakshas breed
Stand ready by the car and steed.
Four massive gates, securely barred,
All entrance to the city guard,
With murderous engines fixt to throw
Bolt, arrow, rock to check the foe,
And many a mace with iron head
That strikes at once a hundred dead.
Her golden ramparts wide and high
With massy strength the foe defy,
Where inner walls their rich inlay
Of coral, turkis, pearl display.
Her circling moats are broad and deep,
Where ravening monsters dart and leap.
By four great piers each moat is spanned
Where lines of deadly engines stand.
In sleepless watch at every gate
Unnumbered hosts of giants wait,
And, masters of each weapon, rear
The threatening pike and sword and spear.
My fury hurled those ramparts down,
Filled up the moats that gird the town,
The piers and portals overturned,
And stately Lanka spoiled and burned.
Howe'er we Vanars force our way
O'er the wide seat of Varun's(899) sway,
Be sure that city of the foe
Is doomed to sudden overthrow,
Nay, why so vast an army lead?
Brave Angad, Dwivid good at need,
Fierce Mainda, Panas famed in fight,
And Nila's skill and Nala's might,
And Jambavan the strong and wise,
Will dare the easy enterprise.
Assailed by these shall Lanka fall
With gate and rampart, tower and wall.
Command the gathering, chief: and they
In happy hour will haste away."





Canto IV. The March.


He ceased; and spurred by warlike pride
The impetuous son of Raghu cried:
"Soon shall mine arm with wrathful joy
That city of the foe destroy.
Now, chieftain, now collect the host,
And onward to the southern coast!
The sun in his meridian tower
Gives glory to the Vanar power.
The demon lord who stole my queen
By timely flight his life may screen.
She, when she knows her lord is near,
Will cling to hope and banish fear,
Saved like a dying wretch who sips
The drink of Gods with fevered lips.
Arise, thy troops to battle lead:
All happy omens counsel speed.
The Lord of Stars in favouring skies
Bodes glory to our enterprise.
This arm shall slay the fiend; and she,
My consort, shall again be free.
Mine upward-throbbing eye foreshows
The longed-for triumph o'er my foes.
Far in the van be Nila's post,
To scan the pathway for the host,
And let thy bravest and thy best,
A hundred thousand, wait his hest.
Go forth, O warrior Nila, lead
The legions on through wood and mead
Where pleasant waters cool the ground,
And honey, flowers, and fruit abound.
Go, and with timely care prevent
The Rakshas foeman's dark intent.
With watchful troops each valley guard
Ere brooks and fruits and roots be marred
And search each glen and leafy shade
For hostile troops in ambuscade.
But let the weaklings stay behind:
For heroes is our task designed.
Let thousands of the Vanar breed
The vanguard of the armies lead:
Fierce and terrific must it be
As billows of the stormy sea.
There be the hill-huge Gaja's place,
And Gavaya's, strongest of his race,
And, like the bull that leads the herd,
Gavaksha's, by no fears deterred
Let Rishabh, matchless in the might
Of warlike arms, protect our right,
And Gandhamadan next in rank
Defend and guide the other flank.
I, like the God who rules the sky
Borne on Airavat(900) mounted high
On stout Hanuman's back will ride,
The central host to cheer and guide.
Fierce as the God who rules below,
On Angad's back let Lakshman show
Like him who wealth to mortals shares,(901)
The lord whom Sarvabhauma(902) bears.
The bold Sushen's impetuous might,
And Vegadarsi's piercing sight,
And Jambavan whom bears revere,
Illustrious three, shall guard the rear."

  He ceased, the royal Vanar heard,
And swift, obedient to his word,
Sprang forth in numbers none might tell
From mountain, cave, and bosky dell,
From rocky ledge and breezy height,
Fierce Vanars burning for the fight.
And Rama's course was southward bent
Amid the mighty armament.
On, joyous, pressed in close array
The hosts who owned Sugriva's sway,
With nimble feet, with rapid bound
Exploring, ere they passed, the ground,
While from ten myriad throats rang out
The challenge and the battle shout.
On roots and honeycomb they fed,
And clusters from the boughs o'erhead,
Or from the ground the tall trees tore
Rich with the flowery load they bore.
Some carried comrades, wild with mirth,
Then cast their riders to the earth,
Who swiftly to their feet arose
And overthrew their laughing foes.
While still rang out the general cry,
"King Ravan and his fiends shall die,"
Still on, exulting in the pride
Of conscious strength, the Vanars hied,
And gazed where noble Sahya, best
Of mountains, raised each towering crest.
They looked on lake and streamlet, where
The lotus bloom was bright and fair,
Nor marched--for Rama's hest they feared
Where town or haunt of men appeared.
Still onward, fearful as the waves
Of Ocean when he roars and raves,
Led by their eager chieftains, went
The Vanars' countless armament.
Each captain, like a noble steed
Urged by the lash to double speed.
Pressed onward, filled with zeal and pride,
By Rama's and his brother's side,
Who high above the Vanar throng
On mighty backs were borne along,
Like the great Lords of Day and Night
Seized by eclipsing planets might.
Then Lakshman radiant as the morn,
On Angad's shoulders high upborne.
With sweet consoling words that woke
New ardour, to his brother spoke:
"Soon shalt thou turn, thy queen regained
And impious Ravan's life-blood drained,
In happiness and high renown
To dear Ayodhya's happy town.
I see around exceeding fair
All omens of the earth and air.
Auspicious breezes sweet and low
To greet the Vanar army blow,
And softly to my listening ear
Come the glad cries of bird and deer.
Bright is the sky around us, bright
Without a cloud the Lord of Light,
And Sukra(903) with propitious love
Looks on thee from his throne above.
The pole-star and the Sainted Seven(904)
Shine brightly in the northern heaven,
And great Trisanku,(905) glorious king,
Ikshvaku's son from whom we spring,
Beams in unclouded glory near
His holy priest(906) whom all revere.
Undimmed the two Visakhas(907) shine,
The strength and glory of our line,
And Nairrit's(908) influence that aids
Our Rakshas foemen faints and fades.
The running brooks are fresh and fair,
The boughs their ripening clusters bear,
And scented breezes gently sway
The leaflet of the tender spray.
See, with a glory half divine
The Vanars' ordered legions shine,
Bright as the Gods' exultant train
Who saw the demon Tarak slain.
O let thine eyes these signs behold,
And bid thy heart be glad and bold."

  The Vanar squadrons densely spread
O'er all the country onward sped,
While rising from the rapid beat
Of bears' and monkeys' hastening feet.
Dust hid the earth with thickest veil,
And made the struggling sunbeams pale.
Now where Mahendra's peaks arise
Came Rama of the lotus eyes
And the long arm's resistless might,
And clomb the mountain's wood-crowned height.
Thence Dasaratha's son beheld
Where billowy Ocean rose and swelled,
Past Malaya's peaks and Sahya's chain
The Vanar legions reached the main,
And stood in many a marshalled band
On loud-resounding Ocean's strand.
To the fair wood that fringed the tide
Came Dasaratha's son, and cried:
"At length, my lord Sugriva, we
Have reached King Varun's realm the sea,
And one great thought, still-vexing, how
To cross the flood, awaits us now.
The broad deep ocean, that denies
A passage, stretched before us lies.
Then let us halt and plan the while
How best to storm the giant's isle."

  He ceased: Sugriva on the coast
By trees o'ershadowed stayed the host,
That seemed in glittering lines to be
The bright waves of a second sea.
Then from the shore the captains gazed
On billows which the breezes raised
To fury, as they dashed in foam
O'er Varun's realm, the Asurs' home:(909)
The sea that laughed with foam, and danced
With waves whereon the sunbeams glanced:
Where, when the light began to fade,
Huge crocodiles and monsters played;
And, when the moon went up the sky,
The troubled billows rose on high
From the wild watery world whereon
A thousand moons reflected shone:
Where awful serpents swam and showed
Their fiery crests which flashed and glowed,
Illumining the depths of hell,
The prison where the demons dwell.
The eye, bewildered, sought in vain
The bounding line of sky and main:
Alike in shade, alike in glow
Were sky above and sea below.
There wave-like clouds by clouds were chased,
Here cloud-like billows roared and raced:
Then shone the stars, and many a gem
That lit the waters answered them.
They saw the great-souled Ocean stirred
To frenzy by the winds, and heard,
Loud as ten thousand drums, the roar
Of wild waves dashing on the shore.
They saw him mounting to defy
With deafening voice the troubled sky.
And the deep bed beneath him swell
In fury as the billows fell.





Canto V. Rama's Lament.


There on the coast in long array
The Vanars' marshalled legions lay,
Where Nila's care had ordered well
The watch of guard and sentinel,
And Mainda moved from post to post
With Dwivid to protect the host.

  Then Rama stood by Lakshman's side,
And mastered by his sorrow cried:
"My brother dear, the heart's distress,
As days wear on, grows less and less.
But my deep-seated grief, alas,
Grows fiercer as the seasons pass.
Though for my queen my spirit longs,
And broods indignant o'er my wrongs,
Still wilder is my grief to know
That her young life is passed in woe.
Breathe, gentle gale, O breathe where she
Lies prisoned, and then breathe on me,
And, though my love I may not meet,
Thy kiss shall be divinely sweet.
Ah, by the giant's shape appalled,
On her dear lord for help she called,
Still in mine ears the sad cry rings
And tears my heart with poison stings.
Through the long daylight and the gloom
Of night wild thoughts of her consume
My spirit, and my love supplies
The torturing flame which never dies.
Leave me, my brother; I will sleep
Couched on the bosom of the deep,
For the cold wave may bring me peace
And bid the fire of passion cease.
One only thought my stay must be,
That earth, one earth, holds her and me,
To hear, to know my darling lives
Some life-supporting comfort gives,
As streams from distant fountains run
O'er meadows parching in the sun.
Ah when, my foeman at my feet,
Shall I my queen, my glory, meet,
The blossom of her dear face raise
And on her eyes enraptured gaze,
Press her soft lips to mine again,
And drink a balm to banish pain!
Alas, alas! where lies she now,
My darling of the lovely brow?
On the cold earth, no help at hand,
Forlorn amid the Rakshas band,
King Janak's child still calls on me,
Her lord and love, to set her free.
But soon in glory will she rise
A crescent moon in autumn skies,
And those dark rovers of the night,
Like scattered clouds shall turn in flight."





Canto VI. Ravan's Speech.


But when the giant king surveyed
His glorious town in ruin laid,
And each dire sign of victory won
By Hanuman the Wind-God's son,
He vailed his angry eyes oppressed
By shame, and thus his lords addressed:
"The Vanar spy has passed the gate
Of Lanka long inviolate,
Eluded watch and ward, and seen
With his bold eyes the captive queen.
My royal roof with flames is red,
The bravest of my lords are dead,
And the fierce Vanar in his hate
Has left our city desolate.
Now ponder well the work that lies
Before us, ponder and advise.
With deep-observing judgment scan
The peril, and mature a plan.
From counsel, sages say, the root,
Springs victory, most glorious fruit.
First ranks the king, when woe impends
Who seeks the counsel of his friends,
Of kinsmen ever faithful found,
Or those whose hopes with his are bound,
Then with their aid his strength applies,
And triumphs in his enterprise.
Next ranks the prince who plans alone,
No counsel seeks to aid his own,
Weighs loss and gain and wrong and right,
And seeks success with earnest might.
Unwisest he who spurns delays,
Who counts no cost, no peril weighs,
Speeds to his aim, defying fate,
And risks his all, precipitate.
Thus too in counsel sages find
A best, a worst, a middle kind.
When gathered counsellors explore
The way by light of holy lore,
And all from first to last agree,
Is the best counsel of the three.
Next, if debate first waxes high,
And each his chosen plan would try
Till all agree at last, we deem
This counsel second in esteem.
Worst of the three is this, when each
Assails with taunt his fellow's speech;
When all debate, and no consent
Concludes the angry argument.
Consult then, lords; my task shall be
To crown with act your wise decree.
With thousands of his wild allies
The vengeful Rama hither hies;
With unresisted might and speed
Across the flood his troops will lead,
Or for the Vanar host will drain
The channels of the conquered main."





Canto VII. Ravan Encouraged.


He ceased: they scorned, with blinded eyes,
The foeman and his bold allies,
Raised reverent hands with one accord,
And thus made answer to their lord:
"Why yield thee, King, to causeless fear?
A mighty host with sword and spear
And mace and axe and pike and lance
Waits but thy signal to advance.
Art thou not he who slew of old
The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold;
Scaled Mount Kailasa and o'erthrew
Kuvera(910) and his Yaksha crew,
Compelling Siva's haughty friend
Beneath a mightier arm to bend?
Didst thou not bring from realms afar
The marvel of the magic car,
When they who served Kuvera fell
Crushed in their mountain citadel?
Attracted by thy matchless fame
To thee, a suppliant, Maya came,
The lord of every Danav band,
And won thee with his daughter's hand.
Thy arm in hell itself was felt,
Where Vasuki(911) and Sankha dwelt,
And they and Takshak, overthrown,
Were forced thy conquering might to own.
The Gods in vain their blessing gave
To heroes bravest of the brave,
Who strove a year and, sorely pressed,
Their victor's peerless might confessed.
In vain their magic arts they tried,
In vain thy matchless arm defied
King Varun's sons with fourfold force,
Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse,
But for a while thy power withstood,
And, conquered, mourned their hardihood.
Thou hast encountered, face to face,
King Yama(912) with his murdering mace.
Fierce as the wild tempestuous sea,
What terror had his wrath for thee,
Though death in every threatening form,
And woe and torment, urged the storm?
Thine arm a glorious victory won
O'er the dread king who pities none;
And the three worlds, from terror freed,
In joyful wonder praised thy deed.
The tribe of Warriors, strong and dread
As Indra's self, o'er earth had spread;
As giant trees that towering stand
In mountain glens, they filled the land.
Can Raghu's son encounter foes
Fierce, numerous, and strong as those?
Yet, trained in war and practised well,
O'ermatched by thee, they fought and fell,
Stay in thy royal home, nor care
The battle and the toil to share;
But let the easy fight be won
By Indrajit(913) thy matchless son.
All, all shall die, if thou permit,
Slain by the hand of Indrajit."





Canto VIII. Prahasta's Speech.


Dark as a cloud of autumn, dread
Prahasta joined his palms and said:

  "Gandharvas, Gods, the hosts who dwell
In heaven, in air, in earth, in hell,
Have yielded to thy might, and how
Shall two weak men oppose thee now?
Hanuman came, a foe disguised,
And mocked us heedless and surprised,
Or never had he lived to flee
And boast that he has fought with me.
Command, O King, and this right hand
Shall sweep the Vanars from the land,
And hill and dale, to Ocean's shore,
Shall know the death-doomed race no more.
But let my care the means devise
To guard thy city from surprise."

  Then Durmukh cried, of Rakshas race:
"Too long we brook the dire disgrace.
He gave our city to the flames,
He trod the chambers of thy dames.
Ne'er shall so weak and vile a thing
Unpunished brave the giants' king.
Now shall this single arm attack
And drive the daring Vanars back,
Till to the winds of heaven they flee,
Or seek the depths of earth and sea."

  Then, brandishing the mace he bore,
Whose horrid spikes were stained with gore,
While fury made his eyeballs red,
Impetuous Vajradanshtra said:

  "Why waste a thought on one so vile
As Hanuman the Vanar, while
Sugriva, Lakshman, yet remain,
And Rama mightier still, unslain?
This mace to-day shall crush the three,
And all the host will turn and flee.
Listen, and I will speak: incline,
O King, to hear these words of mine,
For the deep plan that I propose
Will swiftly rid thee of thy foes.
Let thousands of thy host assume
The forms of men in youthful bloom,
In war's magnificent array
Draw near to Raghu's son, and say:
"Thy younger brother Bharat sends
This army, and thy cause befriends."
Then let our legions hasten near
With bow and mace and sword and spear,
And on the Vanar army rain
Our steel and stone till all be slain.
If Raghu's sons will fain believe,
Entangled in the net we weave,
The penalty they both must pay,
And lose their forfeit lives to-day."
Then with his warrior soul on fire,
Nikumbha spoke in burning ire:

  "I, only I, will take the field,
And Raghu's son his life shall yield.
Within these walls, O Chiefs, abide,
Nor part ye from our monarch's side."





Canto IX. Vibhishan's Counsel.


A score of warriors(914) forward sprang,
And loud the clashing iron rang
Of mace and axe and spear and sword,
As thus they spake unto their lord:
"Their king Sugriva will we slay,
And Raghu's sons, ere close of day,
And strike the wretch Hanuman down,
The spoiler of our golden town."

  But sage Vibhishan strove to calm
The chieftains' fury; palm to palm
He joined in lowly reverence, pressed(915)
Before them, and the throng addressed:

  "Dismiss the hope of conquering one
So stern and strong as Raghu's son.
In due control each sense he keeps
With constant care that never sleeps.
Whose daring heart has e'er conceived
The exploit Hanuman achieved,
Across the fearful sea to spring,
The tributary rivers' king?
O Rakshas lords, in time be wise,
Nor Rama's matchless power despise.
And say, what evil had the son
Of Raghu to our monarch done,
Who stole the dame he loved so well
And keeps her in his citadel;
If Khara in his foolish pride
Encountered Rama, fought, and died,
May not the meanest love his life
And guard it in the deadly strife?
The Maithil dame, O Rakshas King,
Sore peril to thy realm will bring.
Restore her while there yet is time,
Nor let us perish for thy crime.
O, let the Maithil lady go
Ere the avenger bend his bow
To ruin with his arrowy showers
Our Lanka with her gates and towers.
Let Janak's child again be free
Ere the wild Vanars cross the sea,
In their resistless might assail
Our city and her ramparts scale.
Ah, I conjure thee by the ties
Of brotherhood, be just and wise.
In all my thoughts thy good I seek,
And thus my prudent counsel speak.
Let captive Sita be restored
Ere, fierce as autumn's sun, her lord
Send his keen arrows from the string
To drink the life-blood of our king.
This fury from thy soul dismiss,
The bane of duty, peace, and bliss.
Seek duty's path and walk therein,
And joy and endless glory win.
Restore the captive, ere we feel
The piercing point of Rama's steel.
O spare thy city, spare the lives
Of us, our friends, our sons and wives."

  Thus spake Vibhishan wise and brave:
The Rakshas king no answer gave,
But bade his lords the council close,
And sought his chamber for repose.





Canto X. Vibhishan's Counsel.


Soon as the light of morning broke,
Vibhishan from his slumber woke,
And, duty guiding every thought,
The palace of his brother sought.
Vast as a towering hill that shows
His peaks afar, that palace rose.
Here stood within the monarch's gate
Sage nobles skilful in debate.
There strayed in glittering raiment through
The courts his royal retinue,
Where in wild measure rose and fell
The music of the drum and shell,
And talk grew loud, and many a dame
Of fairest feature went and came
Through doors a marvel to behold,
With pearl inlaid on burning gold:
Therein Gandharvas or the fleet
Lords of the storm might joy to meet.
He passed within the wondrous pile,
Chief glory of the giants' isle:
Thus, ere his fiery course be done,
An autumn cloud admits the sun.
He heard auspicious voices raise
With loud accord the note of praise,
And sages, deep in Scripture, sing
Each glorious triumph of the king.
He saw the priests in order stand,
Curd, oil, in every sacred hand;
And by them flowers were laid and grain,
Due offerings to the holy train.
Vibhishan to the monarch bowed,
Raised on a throne above the crowd:
Then, skilled in arts of soft address,
He raised his voice the king to bless,
And sate him on a seat where he
Full in his brother's sight should be.
The chieftain there, while none could hear,
Spoke his true speech for Ravan's ear,
And to his words of wisdom lent
The force of weightiest argument:

  "O brother, hear! since Rama's queen
A captive in thy house has been,
Disastrous omens day by day
Have struck our souls with wild dismay.
No longer still and strong and clear
The flames of sacrifice appear,
But, restless with the frequent spark,
Neath clouds of smoke grow faint and dark.
Our ministering priests turn pale
To see their wonted offerings fail,
And ants and serpents creep and crawl
Within the consecrated hall.(916)
Dried are the udders of our cows,
Our elephants have juiceless brows,(917)
Nor can the sweetest pasture stay
The charger's long unquiet neigh.
Big tears from mules and camels flow
Whose staring coats their trouble show,
Nor can the leech's art restore
Their health and vigour as before.
Rapacious birds are fierce and bold:
Not single hunters as of old,
In banded troops they chase the prey,
Or gathering on our temples stay.
Through twilight hours with shriek and howl
Around the city jackals prowl,
And wolves and foul hyaenas wait
Athirst for blood at every gate.
One sole atonement still may cure
These evils, and our weal assure.
Restore the Maithil dame, and win
An easy pardon for thy sin."

  The Rakshas monarch heard, and moved
To sudden wrath his speech reproved:

  "No danger, brother, can I see:
The Maithil dame I will not free.
Though all the Gods for Rama fight,
He yields to my superior might."
Thus the tremendous king who broke
The ranks of heavenly warriors spoke,
And, sternly purposed to resist,
His brother from the hall dismissed.





Canto XI. The Summons.


Still Ravan's haughty heart rebelled,
The counsel of the wise repelled,
And, as his breast with passion burned,
His thoughts again to Sita turned.
Thus, to each sign of danger blind,
To love and war he still inclined.
Then mounted he his car that glowed
With gems and golden net, and rode
Where, gathered at the monarch's call,
The nobles filled the council hall.
A host of warriors bright and gay
With coloured robes and rich array,
With shield and mace and spear and sword,
Followed the chariot of their lord.
Mid the loud voice of shells and beat
Of drums he raced along the street,
And, ere he came, was heard afar
The rolling thunder of his car.
He reached the doors: the nobles bent
Their heads before him reverent:
And, welcomed with their loud acclaim,
Within the glorious hall he came.
He sat upon a royal seat
With golden steps beneath his feet,
And bade the heralds summon all
His captains to the council hall.
The heralds heard the words he spake,
And sped from house to house to wake
The giants where they slept or spent
The careless hours in merriment.
These heard the summons and obeyed:
From chamber, grove, and colonnade,
On elephants or cars they rode,
Or through the streets impatient strode.
As birds on rustling pinions fly
Through regions of the darkened sky,
Thus cars and mettled coursers through
The crowded streets of Lanka flew.
The council hall was reached, and then,
As lions seek their mountain den,
Through massy doors that opened wide,
With martial stalk the captains hied.
Welcomed with honour as was meet
They stooped to press their monarch's feet,
And each a place in order found
On stool, on cushion, or the ground.
Nor did the sage Vibhishan long
Delay to join the noble throng.
High on a car that shone like flame
With gold and flashing gems he came,
Drew near and spoke his name aloud,
And reverent to his brother bowed.





Canto XII. Ravan's Speech.


The king in counsel unsurpassed
His eye around the synod cast,
And fierce Prahasta, first and best
Of all his captains, thus addressed:

  "Brave master of each warlike art,
Arouse thee and perform thy part.
Array thy fourfold forces(918) well
To guard our isle and citadel."

  The captain of the hosts obeyed,
The troops with prudent skill arrayed;
Then to the hall again he hied,
And stood before the king and cried:
"Each inlet to the town is closed
Without, within, are troops disposed.
With fearless heart thine aim pursue
And do the deed thou hast in view."

  Thus spoke Prahasta in the zeal
That moved him for the kingdom's weal.
And thus the monarch, who pursued
His own delight, his speech renewed:
"In ease and bliss, in toil and pain,
In doubts of duty, pleasure, gain,
Your proper path I need not tell,
For of yourselves ye know it well.
The Storm-Gods, Moon, and planets bring
New glory to their heavenly king,(919)
And, ranged about your monarch, ye
Give joy and endless fame to me.
My secret counsel have I kept,
While senseless Kumbhakarna slept.
Six months the warrior's slumbers last
And bind his torpid senses fast;
But now his deep repose he breaks,
The best of all our champions wakes.
I captured, Rama's heart to wring,
This daughter of Videha's king.
And brought her from that distant land(920)
Where wandered many a Rakshas band.
Disdainful still my love she spurns,
Still from each prayer and offering turns,
Yet in all lands beneath the sun
No dame may rival Sita, none,
Her dainty waist is round and slight,
Her cheek like autumn's moon is bright,
And she like fruit in graven gold
Mocks her(921) whom Maya framed of old.
Faultless in form, how firmly tread
Her feet whose soles are rosy red!
Ah, as I gaze her beauty takes
My spirit, and my passion wakes.
Looking for Rama far away
She sought with tears a year's delay
Nor gazing on her love-lit eye
Could I that earnest prayer deny.
But baffled hopes and vain desire
At length my patient spirit tire.
How shall the sons of Raghu sweep
To vengeance o'er the pathless deep?
How shall they lead the Vanar train
Across the monster-teeming main?
One Vanar yet could find a way
To Lanka's town, and burn and slay.
Take counsel then, remembering still
That we from men need fear no ill;
And give your sentence in debate,
For matchless is the power of fate.
Assailed by you the Gods who dwell
In heaven beneath our fury fell.
And shall we fear these creatures bred
In forests, by Sugriva led?
E'en now on ocean's farther strand,
The sons of Dasaratha stand,
And follow, burning to attack
Their giant foes, on Sita's track.
Consult then, lords for ye are wise:
A seasonable plan devise.
The captive lady to retain,
And triumph when the foes are slain.
No power can bring across the foam
Those Vanars to our island home;
Or if they madly will defy
Our conquering might, they needs must die."

  Then Kumbhakarna's anger woke,
And wroth at Ravan's words he spoke:
"O Monarch, when thy ravished eyes
First looked upon thy lovely prize,
Then was the time to bid us scan
Each peril and mature a plan.
Blest is the king who acts with heed,
And ne'er repents one hasty deed;
And hapless he whose troubled soul
Mourns over days beyond control.
Thou hast, in beauty's toils ensnared,
A desperate deed of boldness dared;
By fortune saved ere Rama's steel
One wound, thy mortal bane, could deal.
But, Ravan, as the deed is done,
The toil of war I will not shun.
This arm, O rover of the night,
Thy foemen to the earth shall smite,
Though Indra with the Lord of Flame,
The Sun and Storms, against me came.
E'en Indra, monarch of the skies,
Would dread my club and mountain size,
Shrink from these teeth and quake to hear
The thunders of my voice of fear.
No second dart shall Rama cast:
The first he aims shall be the last.
He falls, and these dry lips shall drain
The blood of him my hand has slain;
And Sita, when her champion dies,
Shall be thine undisputed prize."





Canto XIII. Ravan's Speech.


But Mahaparsva saw the sting
Of keen reproach had galled the king;
And humbly, eager to appease
His anger, spoke in words like these:

  "And breathes there one so cold and weak
The forest and the gloom to seek
Where savage beasts abound, and spare
To taste the luscious honey there?
Art thou not lord? and who is he
Shall venture to give laws to thee?
Love thy Videhan still, and tread
Upon thy prostrate foeman's head.
O'er Sita's will let thine prevail,
And strength achieve if flattery fail.
What though the lady yet be coy
And turn her from the proffered joy?
Soon shall her conquered heart relent
And yield to love and blandishment.
With us let Kumbhakarna fight,
And Indrajit of matchless might:
We need not other champions, they
Shall lead us forth to rout and slay.
Not ours to bribe or soothe or part
The foeman's force with gentle art,
Doomed, conquered by our might, to feel
The vengeance of the warrior's steel."

  The Rakshas monarch heard, and moved
By flattering hopes the speech approved:

  "Hear me," he cried, "great chieftain, tell
What in the olden time befell,--
A secret tale which, long suppressed,
Lies prisoned only in my breast.
One day--a day I never forget--
Fair Punjikasthala(922) I met,
When, radiant as a flame of fire,
She sought the palace of the Sire.
In passion's eager grasp I tore
From her sweet limbs the robes she wore,
And heedless of her prayers and cries
Strained to my breast the vanquised prize.
Like Nalini(923) with soil distained,
The mansion of the Sire she gained,
And weeping made the outrage known
To Brahma on his heavenly throne.
He in his wrath pronounced a curse,--
That lord who made the universe:
"If, Ravan, thou a second time
Be guilty of so foul a crime,
Thy head in shivers shall be rent:
Be warned, and dread the punishment."
Awed by the threat of vengeance still
I force not Sita's stubborn will.
Terrific as the sea in might:
My steps are like the Storm-Gods' flight;
But Rama knows not this, or he
Had never sought to war with me.
Where is the man would idly brave
The lion in his mountain cave,
And wake him when with slumbering eyes
Grim, terrible as Death, he lies?
No, blinded Rama knows me not:
Ne'er has he seen mine arrows shot;
Ne'er marked them speeding to their aim
Like snakes with cloven tongues of flame.
On him those arrows will I turn,
Whose fiery points shall rend and burn.
Quenched by my power when I assail
The glory of his might shall fail,
As stars before the sun grow dim
And yield their feeble light to him."





Canto XIV. Vibhishan's Speech.


  He ceased: Vibhishan ill at ease
Addressed the king in words like these:

  "O Ravan, O my lord, beware
Of Sita dangerous as fair,
Nor on thy heedless bosom hang
This serpent with a deadly fang.
O King, the Maithil dame restore
To Raghu's matchless son before
Those warriors of the woodlands, vast
As mountain peaks, approaching fast,
Armed with fierce teeth and claws, enclose
Thy city with unsparing foes.
O, be the Maithil dame restored
Ere loosened from the clanging cord
The vengeful shafts of Rama fly,
And low in death thy princes lie.
In all thy legions hast thou one
A match in war for Raghu's son?
Can Kumbhakarna's self withstand,
Or Indrajit, that mighty hand?
In vain with Rama wilt thou strive:
Thou wilt not save thy soul alive
Though guarded by the Lord of Day
And Storm-Gods' terrible array,
In vain to Indra wilt thou fly,
Or seek protection in the sky,
In Yama's gloomy mansion dwell,
Or hide thee in the depths of hell."

  He ceased; and when his lips were closed
Prahasta thus his rede opposed:

  "O timid heart, to counsel thus!
What terrors have the Gods for us?
Can snake, Gandharva, fiend appal
The giants' sons who scorn them all?
And shall we now our birth disgrace,
And dread a king of human race?"
Thus fierce Prahasta counselled ill:
But sage Vibhishan's constant will
The safety of the realm ensued;
Who thus in turn his speech renewed:

  "Yes, when a soul defiled with sin
Shall mount to heaven and enter in,
Then, chieftain, will experience teach
The truth of thy disdainful speech.
Can I, or thou, or these or all
Our bravest compass Rama's fall,
The chief in whom all virtues shine,
The pride of old Ikshvaku'a line,
With whom the Gods may scarce compare
In skill to act, in heart to dare?
Yea, idly mayst thou vaunt thee, till
Sharp arrows winged with matchless skill
From Rama's bowstring, fleet and fierce
As lightning's flame, thy body pierce.
Nikumbha shall not save thee then,
Nor Ravan, from the lord of men.
O Monarch, hear my last appeal,
My counsel for thy kingdom's weal.
This sentence I again declare:
O giant King, beware, beware!
Save from the ruin that impends
Thy town, thy people, and thy friends;
O hear the warning urged once more:
To Raghu's son the dame restore."





Canto XV. Indrajit's Speech.


He ceased: and Indrajit the pride
Of Rakshas warriors thus replied:

  "Is this a speech our king should hear,
This counsel of ignoble fear?
A scion of our glorious race
Should ne'er conceive a thought so base,
But one mid all our kin we find,
Vibhishan, whose degenerate mind
No spark of gallant pride retains,
Whose coward soul his lineage stains.
Against one giant what can two
Unhappy sons of Raghu do?
Away with idle fears, away!
Matched with our meanest, what are they?
Beneath my conquering prowess fell
The Lord of earth and heaven and hell.(924)
Through every startled region dread
Of my resistless fury spread;
And Gods in each remotest sphere
Confessed the universal fear.
Rending the air with roar and groan,
Airavat(925) to the earth was thrown.
From his huge head the tusks I drew,
And smote the Gods with fear anew.
Shall I who tame celestials' pride,
By whom the fiends are terrified,
Now prove a weakling little worth,
And fail to slay those sons of earth?"

  He ceased: Vibhishan trained and tried
In war and counsel thus replied

  "Thy speech is marked with scorn of truth,
With rashness and the pride of youth.
Yea, to thy ruin like a child
Thou pratest, and thy words are wild.
Most dear, O Indrajit, to thee
Should Ravan's weal and safety be,
For thou art called his son, but thou
Art proved his direst foeman now,
When warned by me thou hast not tried
To turn the coming woe aside.
Both thee and him 'twere meet to slay,
Who brought thee to this hall to-day,
And dared so rash a youth admit
To council where the wisest sit.
Presumptuous, wild, devoid of sense,
Filled full of pride and insolence,
Thy reckless tongue thou wilt not rule
That speaks the counsel of a fool.
Who in the fight may brook or shun
The arrows shot by Raghu's son
With flame and fiery vengeance sped,
Dire as his staff who rules the dead?
O Ravan, let thy people live,
And to the son of Raghu give
Fair robes and gems and precious ore,
And Sita to his arms restore."





Canto XVI. Ravan's Speech.


Then, while his breast with fury swelled,
Thus Ravan spoke, as fate impelled:

  "Better with foes thy dwelling make,
Or house thee with the venomed snake,
Than live with false familiar friends
Who further still thy foeman's ends.
I know their treacherous mood, I know
Their secret triumph at thy woe.
They in their inward hearts despise
The brave, the noble, and the wise,
Grieve at their bliss with rancorous hate,
And for their sorrows watch and wait:
Scan every fault with curious eye,
And each slight error magnify.
Ask elephants who roam the wild
How were their captive friends beguiled.
"For fire," they cry, "we little care,
For javelin and shaft and snare:
Our foes are traitors, taught to bind
The trusting creatures of their kind."
Still, still, shall blessings flow from cows,(926)
And Brahmans love their rigorous vows;
Still woman change her restless will,
And friends perfidious work us ill.
What though with conquering feet I tread
On every prostrate foeman's head;
What though the worlds in abject fear
Their mighty lord in me revere?
This thought my peace of mind destroys
And robs me of expected joys.
The lotus of the lake receives
The glittering rain that gems its leaves,
But each bright drop remains apart:
So is it still with heart and heart.
Deceitful as an autumn cloud
Which, though its thunderous voice be loud,
On the dry earth no torrent sends,
Such is the race of faithless friends.
No riches of the bloomy spray
Will tempt the wandering bee to stay
That loves from flower to flower to range;
And friends like thee are swift to change.
Thou blot upon thy glorious line,
If any giant's tongue but thine
Had dared to give this base advice,
He should not live to shame me twice."

  Then just Vibhishan in the heat
Of anger started from his seat,
And with four captains of the band
Sprang forward with his mace in hand;
Then, fury flashing from his eye,
Looked on the king and made reply:

  "Thy rights, O Ravan, I allow:
My brother and mine elder thou.
Such, though from duty's path they stray,
We love like fathers and obey,
But still too bitter to be borne
Is thy harsh speech of cruel scorn.
The rash like thee, who spurn control,
Nor check one longing of the soul,
Urged by malignant fate repel
The faithful friend who counsels well.
A thousand courtiers wilt thou meet,
With flattering lips of smooth deceit:
But rare are they whose tongue or ear
Will speak the bitter truth, or hear.
Unclose thy blinded eyes and see
That snares of death encompass thee.
I dread, my brother, to behold
The shafts of Rama, bright with gold,
Flash fury through the air, and red
With fires of vengeance strike thee dead.
Lord, brother, King, again reflect,
Nor this mine earnest prayer reject,
O, save thyself, thy royal town,
Thy people and thine old renown."





Canto XVII. Vibhishan's Flight.


Soon as his bitter words were said,
To Raghu's sons Vibhishan fled.(927)
Their eyes the Vanar leaders raised
And on the air-borne Rakhshas gazed,
Bright as a thunderbolt, in size
Like Meru's peak that cleaves the skies.
In gorgeous panoply arrayed
Like Indra's self he stood displayed,
And four attendants brave and bold
Shone by their chief in mail and gold.
Sugriva then with dark surmise
Bent on their forms his wondering eyes,
And thus in hasty words confessed
The anxious doubt that moved his breast:

  "Look, look ye Vanars, and beware:
That giant chief sublime in air
With other four in bright array
Comes armed to conquer and to slay."
Soon as his warning speech they heard,
The Vanar chieftains undeterred
Seized fragments of the rock and trees,
And made reply in words like these:
"We wait thy word: the order give,
And these thy foes shall cease to live.
Command us, mighty King, and all
Lifeless upon the earth shall fall."

  Meanwhile Vibhishan with the four
Stood high above the ocean shore.
Sugriva and the chiefs he spied,
And raised his mighty voice and cried:
"From Ravan, lord of giants, I
His brother, named Vibhishan, fly.
From Janasthan he stole the child
Of Janak by his art beguiled,
And in his palace locked and barred
Surrounds her with a Rakshas guard.
I bade him, plied with varied lore,
His hapless prisoner restore.
But he, by Fate to ruin sent,
No credence to my counsel lent,
Mad as the fevered wretch who sees
And scorns the balm to bring him ease.
He scorned the sage advice I gave,
He spurned me like a base-born slave.
I left my children and my wife,
And fly to Raghu's son for life.
I pray thee, Vanar chieftain, speed
To him who saves in hour of need,
And tell him famed in distant lands
That suppliant here Vibhishan stands."

  The Rakshas ceased: Sugriva hied
To Raghu's noble son and cried:

  "A stranger from the giant host,
Borne o'er the sea, has reached the coast;
A secret foe, he comes to slay,
As owls attack their heedless prey.
'Tis thine, O King, in time of need
To watch, to counsel, and to lead,
Our Vanar legions to dispose,
And guard us from our crafty foes.
Vibhishan from the giants' isle,
King Ravan's brother, comes with guile
And, feigning from his king to flee,
Seeks refuge, Raghu's son, with thee.
Arise, O Rama, and prevent
By bold attack his dark intent.
Who comes in friendly guise prepared
To slay thee by his arts ensnared."

  Thus urged Sugriva famed for lore
Of moving words, and spoke no more.
Then Rama thus in turn addressed
The bold Hanuman and the rest:
"Chiefs of the Vanar legions each
Of you heard Sugriva's speech.
What think ye now in time of fear,
When peril and distress are near,
In every doubt the wise depend
For counsel on a faithful friend."

  They heard his gracious words, and then
Spake reverent to the lord of men:
"O Raghu's son, thou knowest well
All things of heaven and earth and hell.
'Tis but thy friendship bids us speak
The counsel Rama need not seek.
So duteous, brave, and true art thou,
Heroic, faithful to thy vow.
Deep in the scriptures, trained and tried,
Still in thy friends wilt thou confide.
Let each of us in turn impart
The secret counsel of his heart,
And strive to win his chief's assent,
By force of wisest argument."

  They ceased and Angad thus began:
"With jealous eye the stranger scan:
Not yet with trusting heart receive
Vibhishan, nor his tale believe.
These giants wandering far and wide
Their evil nature falsely hide,
And watching with malignant skill
Assail us when we fear no ill.
Well ponder every hope and fear
Until thy doubtful course be clear;
Then own his merit or detect
His guile, and welcome or reject."

  Then Sarabha the bold and brave
In turn his prudent sentence gave:
"Yea, Rama, send a skilful spy
With keenest tact to test and try.
Then let the stranger, as is just,
Obtain or be refused thy trust."

  Then he whose heart was rich in store
Of scripture's life-directing lore,
King Jambavan, stood forth and cried:
"Suspect, suspect a foe allied
With Ravan lord of Lanka's isle,
And Rakshas sin and Rakshas guile."

  Then Mainda, wisest chief, who knew
The wrong, the right, the false, the true,
Pondered a while, then silence broke,
And thus his sober counsel spoke:

  "Let one with gracious speech draw near
And gently charm Vibhishan's ear,
Till he the soothing witchery feel
And all his secret heart reveal.
So thou his aims and hopes shalt know,
And hail the friend or shun the foe."

  "Not he," Hanuman cried, "not he
Who taught the Gods(928) may rival thee,
Supreme in power of quickest sense,
First in the art of eloquence.
But hear me soothly speak, O King,
And learn the hope to which I cling.
Vibhishan comes no crafty spy:
Urged by his brother's fault to fly.
With righteous soul that loathes the sin,
He fled from Lanka and his kin.
If strangers question, doubt will rise
And chill the heart of one so wise.
Marred by distrust the parle will end,
And thou wilt lose a faithful friend.
Nor let it seem so light a thing
To sound a stranger's heart, O King.
And he, I ween, whate'er he say,
Will ne'er an evil thought betray.
He comes a friend in happy time,
Loathing his brother for his crime.
His ear has heard thine old renown,
The might that struck King Bali down,
And set Sugriva on the throne.
And looking now to thee alone
He comes thy matchless aid to win
And punish Ravan for his sin.
Thus have I tried thy heart to move,
And thus Vibhishan's truth to prove.
Still in his friendship I confide;
But ponder, wisest, and decide."





Canto XVIII. Rama's Speech.


Then Rama's rising doubt was stilled,
And friendly thoughts his bosom filled.
Thus, deep in Scripture's lore, he spake:
"The suppliant will I ne'er forsake,
Nor my protecting aid refuse
When one in name of friendship sues.
Though faults and folly blot his fame,
Pity and help he still may claim."

  He ceased: Sugriva bowed his head
And pondered for a while, and said:

  "Past number be his faults or few,
What think ye of the Rakshas who,
When threatening clouds of danger rise,
Deserts his brother's side and flies?
Say, Vanars, who may hope to find
True friendship in his faithless kind?"

  The son of Raghu heard his speech:
He cast a hasty look on each
Of those brave Vanar chiefs, and while
Upon his lips there played a smile,
To Lakshman turned and thus expressed
The thoughts that moved his gallant breast:
"Well versed in Scripture's lore, and sage
And duly reverent to age,
Is he, with long experience stored,
Who counsels like this Vanar lord.
Yet here, methinks, for searching eyes
Some deeper, subtler matter lies.
To you and all the world are known
The perils of a monarch's throne,
While foe and stranger, kith and kin
By his misfortune trust to win.
By hope of such advantage led,
Vibhishan o'er the sea has fled.
He in his brother's stead would reign,
And our alliance seeks to gain;
And we his offer may embrace,
A stranger and of alien race.
But if he comes a spy and foe,
What power has he to strike a blow
In furtherance of his close design?
What is his strength compared with mine?
And can I, Vanar King, forget
The great, the universal debt,
Ever to aid and welcome those
Who pray for shelter, friends or foes?
Hast thou not heard the deathless praise
Won by the dove in olden days,
Who conquering his fear and hate
Welcomed the slayer of his mate,
And gave a banquet, to refresh
The weary fowler, of his flesh?
Now hear me, Vanar King, rehearse
What Kandu(929) spoke in ancient verse,
Saint Kanva's son who loved the truth
And clave to virtue from his youth:
"Strike not the suppliant when he stands
And asks thee with beseeching hands
For shelter: strike him not although
He were thy father's mortal foe.
No, yield him, be he proud or meek,
The shelter which he comes to seek,
And save thy foeman, if the deed
Should cost thy life, in desperate need."
And shall I hear the wretched cry,
And my protecting aid deny?
Shall I a suppliant's prayer refuse,
And heaven and glory basely lose?
No, I will do for honour sake
E'en as the holy Kandu spake,
Preserve a hero's name from stain,
And bliss in heaven and glory gain.
Bound by a solemn vow I sware
That all my saving help should share
Who sought me in distress and cried,
"Thou art my hope, and none beside."
Then go, I pray thee, Vanar King,
Vibhishan to my presence bring,
Yea, were he Ravan's self, my vow
Forbids me to reject him now."

  He ceased: the Vanar king approved;
And Rama toward Vibhishan moved.
So moves, a brother God to greet,
Lord Indra from his heavenly seat.





Canto XIX. Vibhishan's Counsel.


When Raghu's son had owned his claim
Down from the air Vibhishan came,
And with his four attendants bent
At Rama's feet most reverent.

  "O Rama," thus he cried, "in me
Vibhishan, Ravan's brother see.
By him disgraced thine aid I seek,
Sure refuge of the poor and weak.
From Lanka, friends, and wealth I fly,
And reft of all on thee rely.
On thee, the wretch's firmest friend,
My kingdom, joys, and life depend."

  With glance of favour Rama eyed
The Rakshas chief and thus replied:

  "First from thy lips I fain would hear
Each brighter hope, each darker fear.
Speak, stranger, that I well may know
The strength and weakness of the foe."

  He ceased: the Rakshas chief obeyed,
And thus in turn his answer made:

  "O Prince, the Self-existent gave
This boon to Ravan; he may brave
All foes in fight; no fiend or snake,
Gandharva, God, his life may take.
His brother Kumbhakarna vies
In might with him who rules the skies.
The captain of his armies--fame
Perhaps has taught the warrior's name--
Is terrible Prahasta, who
King Manibhadra's(930) self o'erthrew.
Where is the warrior found to face
Young Indrajit, when armed with brace
And guard(931) and bow he stands in mail
And laughs at spear and arrowy hail?
Within his city Lanka dwell
Ten million giants fierce and fell,
Who wear each varied shape at will
And eat the flesh of those they kill.
These hosts against the Gods he led,
And heavenly might discomfited."

  Then Rama cried: "I little heed
Gigantic strength or doughty deed.
In spite of all their might has done
The king, the captain, and the son
Shall fall beneath my fury dead,
And thou shalt reign in Ravan's stead.
He, though in depths of earth he dwell,
Or seek protection down in hell,
Or kneel before the Sire supreme,
His forfeit life shall ne'er redeem.
Yea, by my brothers' lives I swear,
I will not to my home repair
Till Ravan and his kith and kin
Have paid in death the price of sin."

  Vibhishan bowed his head and cried:
"Thy conquering army will I guide
To storm the city of the foe,
And aid the tyrant's overthrow."
Thus spake Vibhishan: Rama pressed
The Rakshas chieftain to his breast,
And cried to Lakshman: "Haste and bring
Sea-water for the new-made king."
He spoke, and o'er Vibhishan's head
The consecrating drops were shed
Mid shouts that hailed with one accord
The giants' king and Lanka's lord.

  "Is there no way," Hanuman cried,
"No passage o'er the boisterous tide?
How may we lead the Vanar host
In triumph to the farther coast?"
"Thus," said Vibhishan, "I advise:
Let Raghu's son in suppliant guise
Entreat the mighty Sea to lend
His succour and this cause befriend.
His channels, as the wise have told,
By Sagar's sons were dug of old,(932)
Nor will high-thoughted Ocean scorn
A prince of Sagar's lineage born."

  He ceased; the prudent counsel won
The glad assent of Raghu's son.
Then on the ocean shore a bed
Of tender sacred grass was spread,
Where Rama at the close of day
Like fire upon an altar lay.





Canto XX. The Spies.


Sardula, Ravan's spy, surveyed
The legions on the strand arrayed.
And bore, his bosom racked with fear,
These tidings to the monarch's ear:

  "They come, they come. A rushing tide,
Ten leagues they spread from side to side,
And on to storm thy city press,
Fierce rovers of the wilderness.
Rich in each princely power and grace,
The pride of Dasaratha's race,
Rama and Lakshman lead their bands,
And halt them on the ocean sands.
O Monarch, rise, this peril meet;
Risk not the danger of defeat.
First let each wiser art be tried;
Bribe them, or win them, or divide."
Such was the counsel of the spy:
And Ravan called to Suka: "Fly,
Sugriva lord of Vanars seek,
And thus my kingly message speak:
"Great power and might and fame are thine,
Brave scion of a royal line,
King Riksharajas' son, in thee
A brother and a friend I see.
How wronged by me canst thou complain?
What profit here pretend to gain?
If from the wood the wife I stole
Of Rama of the prudent soul,
What cause hast thou to mourn the theft?
Thou art not injured or bereft.
Return, O King, thy steps retrace
And seek thy mountain dwelling-place.
No, never may thy hosts within
My Lanka's walls a footing win.
A mighty town whose strength defies
The gathered armies of the skies."

  He ceased: obedient Suka heard;
With wings and plumage of a bird
He rose in eager speed and through
The air upon his errand flew.
Borne o'er the sea with rapid wing
He stood above the Vanar king,
And spoke aloud, sublime in air,
The message he was charged to bear.
The Vanar heard the words he spoke,
And quick redoubling stroke on stroke
On head and pinions hemmed him round
And bore him struggling to the ground.
The Rakshas wounded and distressed
These words to Raghu's son addressed:

  "Quick, quick! This Vanar host restrain,
For heralds never must be slain.
To him alone, a wretch untrue,
The punishment of death is due
Who leaves his master's speech unsaid
And speaks another in its stead."
Moved by the suppliant speech and prayer
Up sprang the prince and cried, forbear.
Saved from his wild assailant's blows
Again the Rakshas herald rose
And borne on light wings to the sky
Addressed Sugriva from on high:
"O Vanar Monarch, chief endued
With power and wonderous fortitude,
What answer is my king, the fear
And scourge of weeping worlds, to hear?"
"Go tell thy lord," Sugriva cried,
"Thou, Rama's foe, art thus defied.
His arm the guilty Bali slew;
Thus, tyrant, shalt thou perish too.
Thy sons, thy friends, proud King, and all
Thy kith and kin with thee shall fall;
And, emptied of the giant's brood,
Burnt Lanka be a solitude.
Fly to the Sun-God's pathway, go
And hide thee deep in hell below:
In vain from Rama shalt thou flee
Though heavenly warriors fight for thee.
Thine arm subdued, securely bold,
The Vulture-king infirm and old:
But will thy puny strength avail
When Raghu's wrathful sons assail?
A captive in thy palace lies
The lady of the lotus eyes:
Thou knowest not how fierce and strong
Is he whom thou hast dared to wrong.
The best of Raghu's lineage, he
Whose conquering hand shall punish thee."

  He ceased: and Angad raised a cry;
"This is no herald but a spy.
Above thee from his airy post
His rapid eye surveyed our host,
Where with advantage he might scan
Our gathered strength from rear to van.
Bind him, Vanars, bind the spy,
Nor let him back to Lanka fly."

  They hurled the Rakshas to the ground,
They grasped his neck, his pinions bound,
And firmly held him while in vain
His voice was lifted to complain.
But Rama's heart inclined to spare,
He listened to his plaint and prayer,
And cried aloud: "O Vanars, cease;
The captive from his bonds release."





Canto XXI. Ocean Threatened.


His hands in reverence Rama raised
And southward o'er the ocean gazed;
Then on the sacred grass that made
His lowly couch his limbs he laid.
His head on that strong arm reclined
Which Sita, best of womankind,
Had loved in happier days to hold
With soft arms decked with pearls and gold.
Then rising from his bed of grass,
"This day," he cried, "the host shall pass
Triumphant to the southern shore,
Or Ocean's self shall be no more."
Thus vowing in his constant breast
Again he turned him to his rest,
And there, his eyes in slumber closed,
Silent beside the sea reposed.
Thrice rose the Day-God thrice he set,
The lord of Ocean came not yet,
Thrice came the night, but Raghu's son
No answer by his service won.
To Lakshman thus the hero cried,
His eyes aflame with wrath and pride:

  "In vain the softer gifts that grace
The good are offered to the base.
Long-suffering, patience, gentle speech
Their thankless hearts can never reach.
The world to him its honour pays
Whose ready tongue himself can praise,
Who scorns the true, and hates the right,
Whose hand is ever raised to smite.
Each milder art is tried in vain:
It wins no glory, but disdain.
And victory owns no softer charm
Than might which nerves a warrior's arm.
My humble suit is still denied
By Ocean's overweening pride.
This day the monsters of the deep
In throes of death shall wildly leap.
My shafts shall rend the serpents curled
In caverns of the watery world,
Disclose each sunless depth and bare
The tangled pearl and coral there.
Away with mercy! at a time
Like this compassion is a crime.
Welcome, the battle and the foe!
My bow! my arrows and my bow!
This day the Vanars' feet shall tread
The conquered Sea's exhausted bed,
And he who never feared before
Shall tremble to his farthest shore."

  Red flashed his eyes with angry glow:
He stood and grasped his mighty bow,
Terrific as the fire of doom
Whose quenchless flames the world consume.
His clanging cord the archer drew,
And swift the fiery arrows flew
Fierce as the flashing levin sent
By him who rules the firmament.
Down through the startled waters sped
Each missile with its flaming head.
The foamy billows rose and sank,
And dashed upon the trembling bank.
Sea monsters of tremendous form
With crash and roar of thunder storm.
Still the wild waters rose and fell
Crowned with white foam and pearl and shell.
Each serpent, startled from his rest,
Raised his fierce eyes and glowing crest.
And prisoned Danavs(933) where they dwelt
In depths below the terror felt.
Again upon his string he laid
A flaming shaft, but Lakshman stayed
His arm, with gentle reasoning tried
To soothe his angry mood, and cried:
"Brother, reflect: the wise control
The rising passions of the soul.
Let Ocean grant, without thy threat,
The boon on which thy heart is set.
That gracious lord will ne'er refuse
When Rama son of Raghu sues."
He ceased: and voices from the air
Fell clear and loud, Spare, Rama, spare.





Canto XXII. Ocean Threatened.


With angry menace Rama, best
Of Raghu's sons, the Sea addressed:
"With fiery flood of arrowy rain
Thy channels will I dry and drain.
And I and all the Vanar host
Will reach on foot the farther coast.
Thou shalt not from destruction save
The creatures of the teeming wave,
And lapse of time shall ne'er efface
The memory of the dire disgrace."

  Thus spoke the warrior, and prepared
The mortal shaft which never spared,
Known mystic weapon, by the name
Of Brahma, red with quenchless flame.
Great terror, as he strained the bow,
Struck heaven above and earth below.
Through echoing skies the thunder pealed,
And startled mountains rocked and reeled,
The earth was black with sudden night
And heaven was blotted from the sight.
Then ever and anon the glare
Of meteors shot through murky air,
And with a wild terrific sound
Red lightnings struck the trembling ground.
In furious gusts the fierce wind blew:
Tall trees it shattered and o'erthrew,
And, smiting with a giant's stroke,
Huge masses from the mountain broke.
A cry of terror long and shrill
Came from each valley, plain, and hill.
Each ruined dale, each riven peak
Re-echoed with a wail or shriek.

  While Raghu's son undaunted gazed,
The waters of the deep were raised,
And, still uplifted more and more,
Leapt in wild flood upon the shore.
Still Rama looked upon the tide
And kept his post unterrified.
Then from the seething flood upreared
Majestic Ocean's form appeared,
As rising from his eastern height
Springs through the sky the Lord of Light.
Attendant on their monarch came
Sea serpents with their eyes aflame.
Like lazulite mid burning gold
His form was wondrous to behold.
Bright with each fairest precious stone
A chain about his neck was thrown.
Calm shone his lotus eyes beneath
The blossoms of his heavenly wreath,
And many a pearl and sea-born gem
Flashed in the monarch's diadem.
There Ganga, tributary queen,
And Sindhu(934) by his lord, were seen,
And every stream and brook renowned
In ancient story girt him round.
Then, as the waters rose and swelled,
The king with suppliant hands upheld,
His glorious head to Rama bent
And thus addressed him reverent:
"Air, ether, fire, earth, water, true
To nature's will, their course pursue;
And I, as ancient laws ordain,
Unfordable must still remain.
Yet, Raghu's son, my counsel hear:
I ne'er for love or hope or fear
Will pile my waters in a heap
And leave a pathway through the deep.
Still shall my care for thee provide
An easy passage o'er the tide,
And like a city's paven street
Shall be the road beneath thy feet."
He ceased: and Rama spoke again:
"This spell is ne'er invoked in vain.
Where shall the magic shaft, to spend
The fury of its might, descend?"
"Shoot," Ocean cried, "thine arrow forth
With all its fury to the north,
Where sacred Drumakulya lies,
Whose glory with thy glory vies.
There dwells a wild Abhira(935) race,
As vile in act as foul of face,
Fierce Dasyus(936) who delight in ill,
And drink my tributary rill.
My soul no longer may endure
Their neighbourhood and touch impure.
At these, O son of Raghu, aim
Thine arrow with the quenchless flame."

  Swift from the bow, as Rama drew
His cord, the fiery arrow flew.
Earth groaned to feel the wound, and sent
A rush of water through the rent;
And famed for ever is the well
Of Vrana(937) where the arrow fell.
Then every brook and lake beside
Throughout the region Rama dried.
But yet he gave a boon to bless
And fertilize the wilderness:
No fell disease should taint the air,
And sheep and kine should prosper there:
Earth should produce each pleasant root,
The stately trees should bend with fruit;
Oil, milk, and honey should abound,
And fragrant herbs should clothe the ground.
Then spake the king of brooks and seas
To Raghu's son in words like these:
"Now let a wondrous task be done
By Nala, Visvakarma's son,
Who, born of one of Vanar race,
Inherits by his father's grace
A share of his celestial art.
Call Nala to perform his part,
And he, divinely taught and skilled,
A bridge athwart the sea shall build."

  He spoke and vanished. Nala, best
Of Vanar chiefs, the king addressed:
"O'er the deep sea where monsters play
A bridge, O Rama, will I lay;
For, sharer of my father's skill,
Mine is the power and mine the will.
'Tis vain to try each gentler art
To bribe and soothe the thankless heart;
In vain on such is mercy spent;
It yields to naught but punishment.
Through fear alone will Ocean now
A passage o'er his waves allow.
My mother, ere she bore her son,
This boon from Visvakarma won:
"O Mandari, thy child shall be
In skill and glory next to me."
But why unbidden should I fill
Thine ear with praises of my skill?
Command the Vanar hosts to lay
Foundations for the bridge to-day."

  He spoke: and swift at Rama's hest
Up sprang the Vanars from their rest,
The mandate of the king obeyed
And sought the forest's mighty shade.
Unrooted trees to earth they threw,
And to the sea the timber drew.
The stately palm was bowed and bent,
Asokas from the ground were rent,
And towering Sals and light bamboos,
And trees with flowers of varied hues,
With loveliest creepers wreathed and crowned,
Shook, reeled, and fell upon the ground.
With mighty engines piles of stone
And seated hills were overthrown:
Unprisoned waters sprang on high,
In rain descending from the sky:
And ocean with a roar and swell
Heaved wildly when the mountains fell.
Then the great bridge of wondrous strength
Was built, a hundred leagues in length.
Rocks huge as autumn clouds bound fast
With cordage from the shore were cast,
And fragments of each riven hill,
And trees whose flowers adorned them still.
Wild was the tumult, loud the din
As ponderous rocks went thundering in.
Ere set of sun, so toiled each crew,
Ten leagues and four the structure grew;
The labours of the second day
Gave twenty more of ready way,
And on the fifth, when sank the sun,
The whole stupendous work was done.
O'er the broad way the Vanars sped,
Nor swayed it with their countless tread.
Exultant on the ocean strand
Vibhishan stood, and, mace in hand,
Longed eager for the onward way,
And chafed impatient at delay.
Then thus to Rama trained and tried
In battle King Sugriva cried:
"Come, Hanuman's broad back ascend;
Let Angad help to Lakshman lend.
These high above the sea shall bear
Their burthen through the ways of air."

  So, with Sugriva, borne o'erhead
Ikshvaku's sons the legions led.
Behind, the Vanar hosts pursued
Their march in endless multitude.
Some skimmed the surface of the wave,
To some the air a passage gave.
Amid their ceaseless roar the sound
Of Ocean's fearful voice was drowned,
As o'er the bridge by Nala planned
They hastened on to Lanka's strand,
Where, by the pleasant brooks, mid trees
Loaded with fruit, they took their ease.





Canto XXIII. The Omens.


Then Rama, peerless in the skill
That marks each sign of good and ill,
Strained his dear brother to his breast,
And thus with prudent words addressed:
"Now, Lakshman, by the water's side
In fruitful groves the host divide,
That warriors of each woodland race
May keep their own appointed place.
Dire is the danger: loss of friends,
Of Vanars and of bears, impends.
Distained with dust the breezes blow,
And earth is shaken from below.
The tall hills rock from foot to crown,
And stately trees come toppling down.
In threatening shape, with voice of fear,
The clouds like cannibals appear,
And rain in fitful torrents, red
With sanguinary drops, is shed.
Long streaks of lurid light invest
The evening skies from east to west.
And from the sun at times a ball
Of angry fire is seen to fall.
From every glen and brake is heard
The boding voice of beast and bird:
From den and lair night-prowlers run
And shriek against the falling sun.
Up springs the moon, but hot and red
Kills the sad night with woe and dread;
No gentle lustre, but the gloom
That heralds universal doom.
A cloud of dust and vapour mars
The beauty of the evening stars,
And wild and fearful is the sky
As though the wreck of worlds were nigh.
Around our heads in boding flight
Wheel hawk and vulture, crow and kite;
And every bird of happy note
Shrieks terror from his altered throat.
Sword, spear and shaft shall strew the plain
Dyed red with torrents of the slain.
To-day the Vanar troops shall close
Around the city of our foes."





Canto XXIV. The Spy's Return.


As shine the heavens with autumn's moon
Refulgent in the height of noon,
So shone with light which Rama gave
That army of the bold and brave,
As from the sea it marched away
In war's magnificent array,
And earth was shaken by the beat
And trampling of unnumbered feet.
Then to the giants' ears were borne,
The mingled notes of drum and horn,
And clash of tambours smote the sky,
And shouting and the battle cry.
The sound of martial strains inspired
Each chieftain, and his bosom fired:
While giants from their walls replied,
And answering shouts the foe defied,
Then Rama looked on Lanka where
Bright banners floated in the air,
And, pierced with anguish at the view,
His loving thoughts to Sita flew.
"There, prisoned by the giant, lies
My lady of the tender eyes,
Like Rohini the queen of stars
O'erpowered by the fiery Mars."
Then turned he to his brother chief
And cried in agony of grief:
"See on the hill, divinely planned
And built by Visvakarma's hand,
The towers and domes of Lanka rise
In peerless beauty to the skies.
Bright from afar the city shines
With gleam of palaces and shrines,
Like pale clouds through the region spread
By Vishnu's self inhabited.
Fair gardens grow, and woods between
The stately domes are fresh and green,
Where trees their bloom and fruit display,
And sweet birds sing on every spray.
Each bird is mad with joy, and bees
Sing labouring in the bloomy trees
On branches by the breezes bowed,
Where the gay Koil's voice is loud."

  This said, he ranged with warlike art
Each body of the host apart.
"There in the centre," Rama cried,
"Be Angad's place by Nila's side.
Let Rishabh of impetuous might
Be lord and leader on the right,
And Gandhamadan, next in rank,
Be captain of the farther flank.
Lakshman and I the hosts will lead,
And Jambavan of ursine breed,
With bold Sushen unused to fear,
And Vegadarsi, guide the rear."

  Thus Rama spoke: the chiefs obeyed;
And all the Vanar hosts arrayed
Showed awful as the autumn sky
When clouds embattled form on high.
Their arms were mighty trees o'erthrown,
And massy blocks of mountain stone.
One hope in every warlike breast,
One firm resolve, they onward pressed,
To die in fight or batter down
The walls and towers of Lanka's town.

  Those marshalled legions Rama eyed,
And thus to King Sugriva cried:
"Now, Monarch, ere the hosts proceed,
Let Suka, Ravan's spy, be freed."
He spoke: the Vanar gave consent
And loosed him from imprisonment:
And Suka, trembling and afraid,
His homeward way to Ravan made.
Loud laughed the lord of Lanka's isle:
"Where hast thou stayed this weary while?
Why is thy plumage marred, and why
Do twisted cords thy pinions tie?
Say, comest thou in evil plight
The victim of the Vanars' spite?"

  He ceased: the spy his fear controlled,
And to the king his story told:
"I reached the ocean's distant shore,
Thy message to the king I bore.
In sudden wrath the Vanars rose,
They struck me down with furious blows;
They seized me helpless on the ground,
My plumage rent, my pinions bound.
They would not, headlong in their ire,
Consider, listen, or inquire;
So fickle, wrathful, rough and rude
Is the wild forest multitude.
There, marshalling the Vanar bands,
King Rama with Sugriva stands,
Rama the matchless warrior, who
Viradha and Kabandha slew,
Khara, and countless giants more,
And tracks his queen to Lanka's shore.
A bridge athwart the sea was cast,
And o'er it have his legions passed.
Hark! heralded by horns and drums
The terrible avenger comes.
E'en now the giants' isle he fills
With warriors huge as clouds and hills,
And burning with vindictive hate
Will thunder soon at Lanka's gate.
Yield or oppose him: choose between
Thy safety and the Maithil queen."

  He ceased: the tyrant's eyeballs blazed
With fury as his voice he raised:
"No, if the dwellers of the sky,
Gandharvas, fiends assail me, I
Will keep the Maithil lady still,
Nor yield her back for fear of ill.
When shall my shafts with iron hail
My foeman, Raghu's son, assail,
Thick as the bees with eager wing
Beat on the flowery trees of spring?
O, let me meet my foe at length,
And strip him of his vaunted strength,
Fierce as the sun who shines afar
Stealing the light of every star.
Strong as the sea's impetuous might
My ways are like the tempest's flight;
But Rama knows not this, or he
In terror from my face would flee."





Canto XXV. Ravan's Spies.(938)


When Rama and the host he led
Across the sea had safely sped,
Thus Ravan, moved by wrath and pride,
To Suka and to Saran cried:
"O counsellors, the Vanar host
Has passed the sea from coast to coast,
And Dasaratha's son has wrought
A wondrous deed surpassing thought.
And now in truth I needs must know
The strength and number of the foe.
Go ye, to Rama's host repair
And count me all the legions there.
Learn well what power each captain leads
His name and fame for warlike deeds.
Learn by what artist's wondrous aid
That bridge athwart the sea was made;
Learn how the Vanar host came o'er
And halted on the island shore.
Mark Rama son of Raghu well;
His valour, strength, and weapons tell.
Watch his advisers one by one,
And Lakshman, Raghu's younger son.
Learn with observant eyes, and bring
"Unerring tidings to your king.

  He ceased: then swift in Vanar guise
Forth on their errand sped the spies.
They reached the Vanars, and, dismayed,
Their never-ending lines surveyd:
Nor would they try, in mere despair,
To count the countless legions there,
That crowded valley, plain and hill,
That pressed about each cave and rill.
Though sea-like o'er the land were spread
The endless hosts which Rama led,
The bridge by thousands yet was lined,
And eager myriads pressed behind.
But sage Vibhishan's watchful eyes
Had marked the giants in disguise.
He gave command the pair to seize,
And told the tale in words like these:

  "O Rama these, well known erewhile,
Are giant sons of Lanka's isle,
Two counsellors of Ravan sent
To watch the invading armament."

  Vibhishan ceased: at Rama's look
The Rakshas envoys quailed and shook;
Then suppliant hand to hand they pressed
And thus Ikshvaku's son addressed:
"O Rama, bear the truth we speak:
Our monarch Ravan bade us seek
The Vanar legions and survey
Their numbers, strength, and vast array."

  Then Rama, friend and hope and guide
Of suffering creatures, thus replied:

  "Now giants, if your eyes have scanned
Our armies, numbering every band,
Marked lord and chief, and gazed their fill,
Return to Ravan when ye will.
If aught remain, if aught anew
Ye fain would scan with closer view,
Vibhishan, ready at your call,
Will lead you forth and show you all.
Think not of bonds and capture; fear
No loss of life, no peril here:
For, captive, helpless and unarmed,
An envoy never should be harmed.
Again to Lanka's town repair,
Speed to the giant monarch there,
And be these words to Ravan told,
Fierce brother of the Lord of Gold:
"Now, tyrant, tremble for thy sin:
Call up thy friends, thy kith and kin,
And let the power and might be seen
Which made thee bold to steal my queen.
To-morrow shall thy mournful eye
Behold thy bravest warriors die,
And Lanka's city, tower and wall,
Struck by my fiery shafts, will fall.
Then shall my vengeful blow descend
Its rage on thee and thine to spend,
Fierce as the fiery bolt that flew
From heaven against the Danav crew,
Mid those rebellious demons sent
By him who rules the firmament."

  Thus spake Ikshvaku's son, and ceased:
The giants from their bonds released
Lauded the King with glad accord,
And hasted homeward to their lord.
Before the tyrant side by side
Suka and Saran stood and cried:
"Vibhishan seized us, King, and fain
His helpless captives would have slain.
But glorious Rama saw us; he,
Great-hearted hero, made us free.
There in one spot our eyes beheld
Four chiefs on earth unparalleled,
Who with the guardian Gods may vie
Who rule the regions of the sky.
There Rama stood, the boast and pride
Of Raghu's race, by Lakshman's side.
There stood the sage Vibhishan, there
Sugriva strong beyond compare.
These four alone can batter down
Gate, rampart, wall, and Lanka's town.
Nay, Rama matchless in his form,
A single foe, thy town would storm:
So wondrous are his weapons, he
Needs not the succour of the three.
Why speak we of the countless train
That fills the valley, hill and plain,
The millions of the Vanar breed
Whom Rama and Sugriva lead?
O King, be wise, contend no more,
And Sita to her lord restore."





Canto XXVI. The Vanar Chiefs.


"Not if the Gods in heaven who dwell,
Gandharvas, and the fiends of hell
In banded opposition rise
Against me, will I yield my prize.
Still trembling from the ungentle touch
Of Vanar hands ye fear too much,
And bid me, heedless of the shame,
Give to her lord the Maithil dame."

  Thus spoke the king in stern reproof;
Then mounted to his palace roof
Aloft o'er many a story raised,
And on the lands beneath him gazed.
There by his faithful spies he stood
And looked on sea and hill and wood.
There stretched before him far away
The Vanars' numberless array:
Scarce could the meadows' tender green
Beneath their trampling feet be seen.
He looked a while with furious eye,
Then questioned thus the nearer spy:
"Bend, Saran, bend thy gaze, and show
The leaders of the Vanar foe.
Tell me their heroes' names, and teach
The valour, power and might of each."

  Obedient Saran eyed the van,
The leaders marked, and thus began:
"That chief conspicuous at the head
Of warriors in the forest bred,
Who hither bends his ruthless eye
And shouts his fearful battle cry:
Whose voice with pealing thunder shakes
All Lanka, with the groves and lakes
And hills that tremble at the sound,
Is Nila, for his might renowned:
First of the Vanar lords controlled
By King Sugriva lofty-souled.
He who his mighty arm extends,
And his fierce eye on Lanka bends,
In stature like a stately tower,
In colour like a lotus flower,
Who with his wild earth-shaking cries
Thee, Ravan, to the field defies,
Is Angad, by Sugriva's care
Anointed his imperial heir:
In wondrous strength, in martial fire
Peer of King Bali's self, his sire;
For Rama's sake in arms arrayed
Like Varun called to Sakra's aid.
Behind him, girt by warlike bands,
Nala the mighty Vanar stands,
The son of Visvakarma, he
Who built the bridge athwart the sea.
Look farther yet, O King, and mark
That chieftain clothed in Sandal bark.
'Tis Sweta, famed among his peers,
A sage whom all his race reveres.
See, in Sugriva's ear he speaks,
Then, hasting back, his post reseeks,
And turns his practised eye to view
The squadrons he has formed anew.
Next Kumud stands who roamed of yore
On Gomati's(939) delightful shore,
Feared where the waving woods invest
His seat on Mount Sanrochan's crest.
Next him a chieftain strong and dread,
Comes Chanda at his legions' head;
Exulting in his warrior might
He hastens, burning for the fight,
And boasts that his unaided powers
Shall cast to earth thy walls and towers.
Mark, mark that chief of lion gait,
Who views thee with a glance of hate
As though his very eyes would burn
The city walls to which they turn:
'Tis Rambha, Vanar king; he dwells
In Krishnagiri's tangled dells,
Where Vindhya's pleasant slopes are spread
And fair Sudarsan lifts his head.
There, listening with erected ears,
Sarabha, mighty chief, appears.
His soul is burning for the strife,
Nor dreads the jeopardy of life.
He trembles as he moves, for ire,
And bends around his glance of fire.
Next, like a cloud that veils the skies,
A chieftain of terrific size,
Conspicuous mid the Vanars, comes
With battle shout like rolling drums,
'Tis Panas, trained in war and tried,
Who dwells on Pariyatra's side.
He, far away, the chief who throws
A glory o'er the marshalled rows
That ranged behind their captain stand
Exulting on the ocean strand,
Is Vinata the fierce in fight,
Preeminent like Dardur's height.
That chieftain bending down to drink
On lovely Vena's verdant brink,
Is Krathan; now he lifts his eyes
And thee to mortal fray defies.
Next Gavaya comes, whose haughty mind
Scorns all the warriors of his kind.
He comes to trample--such his boast--
On Lanka with his single host."





Canto XXVII. The Vanar Chiefs.


"Yet more remain, brave chiefs who stake
Their noble lives for Rama's sake.
See, glorious, golden-coated, one
Who glisters like the morning sun,
Whom thousands of his race surround,
'Tis Hara for his strength renowned.
Next comes a mighty chieftain, he
Whose legions, armed with rock and tree,
Press on, in numbers passing tale,
The ramparts of our town to scale.
O Ravan, see the king advance
Terrific with his fiery glance,
Girt by the bravest of his train,
Majestic as the God of Rain,
Parjanya, when his host of clouds
About the king, embattled, crowds:
On Rikshavan's high mountain nursed,
In Narmada(940) he slakes his thirst,
Dhumra, proud ursine chief, who leads
Wild warriors whom the forest breeds.
His brother, next in strength and age,
In Jambavan the famous sage.
Of yore his might and skill he lent
To him who rules the firmament,
And Indra's liberal boons repaid
The chieftain for the timely aid.
There like a gloomy cloud that flies
Borne by the tempest through the skies,
Pramathi stands: he roamed of yore
The forest wilds on Ganga's shore,
Where elephants were struck with dread
And trembling at his coming fled.
There on his foes he loved to sate
The old hereditary hate.(941)
Look, Gaja and Gavaksha show
Their lust of battle with the foe.
See Nala burning for the fray,
And Nila chafing at delay.
Behind the eager captains press
Wild hosts in numbers numberless,
And each for Rama's sake would fall
Or force his way through Lanka's wall."





Canto XXVIII. The Chieftains.


There Saran ceased: then Suka broke
The silence and to Ravan spoke:
"O Monarch, yonder chiefs survey:
Like elephants in size are they,
And tower like stately trees that grow
Where Ganga's nursing waters flow;
Yea, tall as mountain pines that fling
Long shadows o'er the snow-crowned king.
They all in wild Kishkindha dwell
And serve their lord Sugriva well.
The Gods' and bright Gandharvas' seed,
They take each form that suits their need.
Now farther look, O Monarch, where
Those chieftains stand, a glorious pair,
Conspicuous for their godlike frames;
Dwivid and Mainda are their names.
Their lips the drink of heaven have known,
And Brahma claims them for his own.
That chieftain whom thine eyes behold
Refulgent like a hill of gold,
Before whose wrathful might the sea
Roused from his rest would turn and flee,
The peerless Vanar, he who came
To Lanka for the Maithil dame,
The Wind-God's son Hanuman; thou
Hast seen him once, behold him now.
Still nearer let thy glance be bent,
And mark that prince preeminent
Mid chieftains for his strength and size
And splendour of his lotus eyes.
Far through the worlds his virtues shine,
The glory of Ikshvaku's line.
The path of truth he never leaves,
And still through all to duty cleaves.
Deep in the Vedas, skilled to wield
The mystic shafts to him revealed:
Whose flaming darts to heaven ascend,
And through the earth a passage rend:
In might like him who rules the sky;
Like Yama, when his wrath grows high:
Whose queen, the darling of his soul,
Thy magic art deceived and stole:
There royal Rama stands and longs
For battle to avenge his wrongs.
Near on his right a prince, in hue
Like pure gold freshly burnished, view:
Broad is his chest, his eye is red,
His black hair curls about his head:
'Tis Lakshman, faithful friend, who shares
His brother's joys, his brother's cares.
By Rama's side he loves to stand
And serve him as his better hand,
For whose dear sake without a sigh
The warrior youth would gladly die.
On Rama's left Vibhishan view,
With giants for his retinue:
King-making drops have dewed his head,
Appointed monarch in thy stead.
Behold that chieftain sternly still,
High towering like a rooted hill,
Supreme in power and pride of place,
The monarch of the Vanar race.
Raised high above his woodland kind,
In might and glory, frame and mind,
His head above his host he shows
Conspicuous as the Lord of Snows.
His home is far from hostile eyes
Where deep in woods Kishkindha lies.
A glistering chain which flowers bedeck
With burnished gold adorns his neck.
Queen Fortune, loved by Gods and kings,
To him her chosen favourite clings.
That chain he owes to Rama's grace,
And Tara and his kingly place.
In him the great Sugriva know,
Whom Rama rescued from his foe."(942)





Canto XXIX. Sardula Captured.


The giant viewed with earnest ken
The Vanars and the lords of men;
Then thus, with grief and anger moved,
In bitter tone the spies reproved:
"Can faithful servants hope to please
Their master with such fates as these?
Or hope ye with wild words to wring
The bosom of your lord and king?
Such words were better said by those
Who come arrayed our mortal foes.
In vain your ears have heard the sage,
And listened to the lore of age,
Untaught, though lectured many a day,
The first great lesson, to obey,
'Tis marvel Ravan reigns and rules
Whose counsellors are blind and fools.
Has death no terrors that ye dare
To tempt your monarch to despair,
From whose imperial mandate flow
Disgrace and honour, weal and woe?
Yea, forest trees, when flames are fanned
About their scorching trunks, may stand;
But naught can set the sinner free
When kings the punishment decree.
I would not in mine anger spare
The traitorous foe-praising pair,
But years of faithful service plead
For pardon, and they shall not bleed.
Henceforth to me be dead: depart,
Far from my presence and my heart."

  Thus spoke the angry king: the two
Cried, Long live Ravan, and withdrew,
The giant monarch turned and cried
To strong Mahodar at his side:
"Go thou, and spies more faithful bring.
More duteous to their lord the king."

  Swift at his word Mahodar shed,
And came returning at the head
Of long tried messengers, who bent
Before their monarch reverent.
"Go quickly hence," said Ravan "scan
With keenest eyes the foeman's plan.
Learn who, as nearest friends, advise
And mould each secret enterprise.
Learn when he wakes and goes to rest,
Sound every purpose of his breast.
Learn what the prince intends to-day:
Watch keenly all, and come away."

  With joy they heard the words he said:
Then with Sardula at their head
About the giant king they went
With circling paces reverent.
By fair Suvela's grassy side
The chiefs of Raghu's race they spied,
Where, shaded by the waving wood,
Vibhishan and Sugriva stood.
A while they rested there and viewed
The Vanars' countless multitude.
Vibhishan with observant eyes
Knew at a glance the giant spies,
And bade the warriors of his train
Bind the rash foes with cord and chain:
"Sardula's is the sin," he cried.
He neath the Vanars' hands had died,
But Rama from their fury freed
The captive in his utmost need,
And, merciful at sight of woe,
Loosed all the spies and bade them go.
Then home to Lanka's monarch fled
The giant chiefs discomfited.





Canto XXX. Sardula's Speech.


They told their lord that Rama still
Lay waiting by Suvela's hill.
The tyrant, flushed with angry glow,
Heard of the coming of the foe,
And thus with close inquiry pressed
Sardula spokesman for the rest:
"Why art thou sad, night-rover? speak:
Has grief or terror changed thy cheek?
Have the wild Vanars' hostile bands
Assailed thee with their mighty hands?"

  Sardula heard, but scarce might speak;
His trembling tones were faint and weak:
"O Giant King, in vain we try
The purpose of the foe to spy.
Their strength and number none may tell,
And Rama guards his legions well.
He leaves no hope to prying eyes,
And parley with the chiefs denies:
Each road and path a Vanar guard,
Of mountain size, has closed and barred.
Soon as my feet an entrance found
By giants was I seized and bound,
And wounded sore I fell beneath
Their fists and knees and hands and teeth.
Then trembling, bleeding, wellnigh dead
To Rama's presence was I led.
He in his mercy stooped to save,
And freedom to the captive gave.
With rocks and shattered mountains he
Has bridged his way athwart the sea,
And he and all his legions wait
Embattled close to Lanka's gate.
Soon will the host thy wall assail,
And, swarming on, the rampart scale.
Now, O my King, his consort yield,
Or arm thee with the sword and shield.
This choice is left thee: choose between
Thy safety and the Maithil queen."(943)





Canto XXXI. The Magic Head.


The tyrant's troubled eye confessed
The secret fear that filled his breast.
With dread of coming woe dismayed
He called his counsellors to aid;
Then sternly silent, deep in thought,
His chamber in the palace sought.
Then, as the surest hope of all,
The monarch bade his servants call
Vidyujjihva, whom magic skill
Made master of the means of ill.
Then spake the lord of Lanka's isle:
"Come, Sita with thine arts beguile.
With magic skill and deftest care
A head like Rama's own prepare.
This head, long shafts and mighty bow,
To Janak's daughter will we show."

  He ceased: Vidyujjihva obeyed,
And wondrous magic skill displayed;
And Ravan for the art he showed
An ornament of price bestowed.
Then to the grove where Sita lay
The lord of Lanka took his way.
Pale, wasted, weeping, on the ground
The melancholy queen he found,
Whose thoughts in utmost stress of ill
Were fixed upon her husband still.
The giant king approached the dame,
Declared in tones of joy his name;
Then heeding naught her wild distress
Bespake her, stern and pitiless:
"The prince to whom thy fancies cling
Though loved and wooed by Lanka's king,
Who slew the noble Khara,--he
Is slain by warriors sent by me.
Thy living root is hewn away,
Thy scornful pride is tamed to-day.
Thy lord in battle's front has died,
And Sita shall be Ravan's bride.
Hence, idle thoughts: thy hope is fled;
What wilt thou, Sita, with the dead?
Rise, child of Janak, rise and be
The queen of all my queens and me.
Incline thine ear, and I will tell,
Dear lady, how thy husband fell.
He bridged his way across the sea
With countless troops to fight with me.
The setting sun had flushed the west
When on the shore they took their rest.
Weary with toil no watch they kept,
Securely on the sands they slept.
Prahasta's troops assailed our foes,
And smote them in their deep repose.
Scarce could their bravest prove their might:
They perished in the dark of night.
Axe, spear, and sword, directed well,
Upon the sleeping myriads fell.
First in the fight Prahasta's sword
Reft of his head thy slumbering lord.
Roused at the din Vibhishan rose,
The captive of surrounding foes,
And Lakshman through the woods that spread
Around him with his Vanars fled.
Hanuman fell: one deadly stroke
The neck of King Sugriva broke,
And Mainda sank, and Dwivid lay
Gasping in blood his life away.
The Vanars died, or fled dispersed
Like cloudlets when the storm has burst.
Some rose aloft in air, and more
Ran to the sea and filled the shore.
On shore, in woods, on hill and plain
Our conquering giants left the slain.
Thus my victorious host o'erthrew
The Vanars, and thy husband slew:
See, rudely stained with dust, and red
With dropping blood, the severed head."

  Then, turning to a Rakshas slave,
The ruthless king his mandate gave,
And straight Vidyujjihva who bore
The head still wet with dripping gore,
The arrows and the mighty bow,
Bent down before his master low.
"Vidyujjihva," cried Ravan, "place
The head before the lady's face,
And let her see with weeping eyes
That low in death her husband lies."

  Before the queen the giant laid
The beauteous head his art had made.
And Ravan cried: "Thine eyes will know
These arrows and the mighty bow.
With fame of this by Rama strung
The earth and heaven and hell have rung.
Prahasta brought it hither when
His hand had slain thy prince of men.
Now, widowed Queen, thy hopes resign:
Forget thy husband and be mine."





Canto XXXII. Sita's Lament.


Again her eyes with tears o'erflowed:
She gazed upon the head he showed,
Gazed on the bow so famed of yore,
The glorious bow which Rama bore.
She gazed upon his cheek and brows,
The eyes of her beloved spouse;
His lips, the lustre of his hair,
The priceless gem that glittered there.
The features of her lord she knew,
And, pierced with anguish at the view,
She lifted up her voice and cried:
"Kaikeyi, art thou satisfied?
Now all thy longings are fulfilled;
The joy of Raghu's race is killed,
And ruined is the ancient line,
Destroyer, by that fraud of thine.
Ah, what offence, O cruel dame,
What fault in Rama couldst thou blame,
To drive him clad in hermit dress
With Sita to the wilderness?"

  Great trembling seized her frame, and she
Fell like a stricken plantain tree.
As lie the dead she lay; at length
Slowly regaining sense and strength,
On the dear head she fixed her eye
And cried with very bitter cry:
"Ah, when thy cold dead cheek I view,
My hero, I am murdered too.
Then first a faithful woman's eyes
See sorrow, when her husband dies.
When thou, my lord, wast nigh to save,
Some stealthy hand thy death wound gave.
Thou art not dead: rise, hero, rise;
Long life was thine, as spake the wise
Whose words, I ween, are ever true,
For faith lies open to their view.
Ah lord, and shall thy head recline
On earth's cold breast, forsaking mine,
Counting her chill lap dearer far
Than I and my caresses are?
Ah, is it thus these eyes behold
Thy famous bow adorned with gold,
Whereon of yore I loved to bind
Sweet garlands that my hands had twined?
And hast thou sought in heaven a place
Amid the founders of thy race,
Where in the home deserved so well
Thy sires and Dasaratha dwell?
Or dost thou shine a brighter star
In skies where blest immortals are,
Forsaking in thy lofty scorn
The race wherein thy sires were born?
Turn to my gaze, O turn thine eye:
Why are thy cold lips silent, why?
When first we met as youth and maid,
When in thy hand my hand was laid,
Thy promise was thy steps should be
Through life in duty's path with me.
Remember, faithful still, thy vow,
And take me with thee even now.
Is that broad bosom where I hung,
That neck to which I fondly clung,
Where flowery garlands breathed their scent
By hungry dogs and vultures rent?
Shall no funereal honours grace
The parted lord of Raghu's race,
Whose bounty liberal fees bestowed,
For whom the fires of worship glowed?
Kausalya wild with grief will see
One sole survivor of the three
Who in their hermit garments went
To the dark woods in banishment.
Then at her cry shall Lakshman tell
How, slain by night, the Vanars fell;
How to thy side the giants crept,
And slew the hero as he slept.
Thy fate and mine the queen will know,
And broken-hearted die of woe.
For my unworthy sake, for mine,
Rama, the glory of his line,
Who bridged his way across the main,
Is basely in a puddle slain;
And I, the graceless wife he wed,
Have brought this ruin on his head.
Me, too, on him, O Ravan, slay:
The wife beside her husband lay.
By his dear body let me rest,
Cheek close to cheek and breast to breast,
My happy eyes I then will close,
And follow whither Rama goes."

  Thus cried the miserable dame;
When to the king a warder came,
Before the giant monarch bowed
And said that, followed by a crowd
Of counsellors and lords of state,
Prahasta stood before the gate,
And, sent by some engrossing care,
Craved audience of his master there.
The anxious tyrant left his seat
And hastened forth the chief to meet:
Then summoning his nobles all,
Took counsel in his regal hall.

  When Lanka's lord had left the queen,
The head and bow no more were seen.
The giant king his nobles eyed,
And, terrible as Yama, cried:
"O faithful lords, the time is come:
Gather our hosts with beat of drum.
Nigh to the town our foeman draws:
Be prudent, nor reveal the cause."

  The nobles listened and obeyed:
Swift were the gathered troops arrayed,
And countless rovers of the night
Stood burning for the hour of fight.





Canto XXXIII. Sarama.


But Sarama, of gentler mood,
With pitying eyes the mourner viewed,
Stole to her side and softly told
Glad tidings that her heart consoled,
Revealing with sweet voice and smile
The secret of the giant's guile.
She, one of those who night and day
Watching in turns by Sita lay,
Though Rakshas born felt pity's touch,
And loved the hapless lady much.

  "I heard," she said, "thy bitter cry,
Heard Ravan's speech and thy reply,
For, hiding in the thicket near,
No word or tone escaped mine ear.
When Ravan hastened forth I bent
My steps to follow as he went,
And learnt the secret cause that drove
The monarch from the Asoka grove.
Believe me, Queen, thou needst not weep
For Rama slaughtered in his sleep.
Thy lion lord of men defies
By day attack, by night surprise.
Can even giants slay with ease
Vast hosts who fight with brandished trees,
For whom, with eye that never sleeps,
His constant watch thy Rama keeps?
Lord of the mighty arm and chest,
Of earthly warriors first and best,
Whose fame through all the regions rings,
Proud scion of a hundred kings;
Who guards his life and loves to lend
His saving succour to a friend:
Whose bow no hand but his can strain,--
Thy lord, thy Rama is not slain.
Obedient to his master's will,
A great magician, trained in ill,
With deftest art surpassing thought
That marvellous illusion wrought.
Let rising hope thy grief dispel:
Look up and smile, for all is well,
And gentle Lakshmi, Fortune's Queen,
Regards thee with a favouring mien.
Thy Rama with his Vanar train
Has thrown a bridge athwart the main,
Has led his countless legions o'er,
And ranged them on this southern shore.
These eyes have seen the hero stand
Girt by his hosts on Lanka's strand,
And breathless spies each moment bring
Fresh tidings to the giant king;
And every peer and lord of state
Is called to counsel and debate."

  She ceased: the sound, long loud and clear,
Of gathering armies smote her ear,
Where call of drum and shell rang out,
The tambour and the battle shout;
And, while the din the echoes woke,
Again to Janak's child she spoke:
"Hear, lady, hear the loud alarms
That call the Rakshas troops to arms,
From stable and from stall they lead
The elephant and neighing steed,
Brace harness on with deftest care,
And chariots for the fight prepare.
Swift o'er the trembling ground career
Mailed horsemen armed with axe and spear,
And here and there in road and street
The terrible battalions meet.
I hear the gathering near and far,
The snorting steed, the rattling car.
Bold chieftains, leaders of the brave,
Press densely on, like wave on wave,
And bright the evening sunbeams glance
On helm and shield, on sword and lance.
Hark, lady, to the ringing steel,
Hark to the rolling chariot wheel:
Hark to the mettled courser's neigh
And drums' loud thunder far away.
The Queen of Fortune holds thee dear,
For Lanka's troops are struck with fear,
And Rama with the lotus eyes,
Like Indra monarch of the skies,
With conquering arm will slay his foe
And free his lady from her woe.
Soon will his breast support thy head,
And tears of joy thine eyes will shed.
Soon by his mighty arm embraced
The long-lost rapture wilt thou taste,
And Rama, meet for highest bliss,
Will gain his guerdon in thy kiss."





Canto XXXIV. Sarama's Tidings.


Thus Sarama her story told:
And Sita's spirit was consoled,
As when the first fresh rain is shed
The parching earth is comforted.
Then, filled with zeal for Sita's sake,
Again in gentle tones she spake,
And, skilled in arts that soothe and please,
Addressed the queen in words like these:
"Thy husband, lady, will I seek,
Say the fond words thy lips would speak,
And then, unseen of any eye,
Back to thy side will swiftly fly.
My airy flights are speedier far
Than Garuda's and the tempest are."

  Then Sita spake: her former woe
Still left her accents faint and low:
"I know thy steps, which naught can stay,
Can urge through heaven and hell their way.
Then if thy love and changeless will
Would serve the helpless captive still,
Go forth and learn each plot and guile
Planned by the lord of Lanka's isle.
With magic art like maddening wine
He cheats these weeping eyes of mine,
Torments me with his suit, nor spares
Reproof or flattery, threats or prayers.
These guards surround me night and day;
My heart is sad, my senses stray;
And helpless in my woe I fear
The tyrant Ravan even here."

  Then Sarama replied: "I go
To learn the purpose of thy foe,
Soon by thy side again to stand
And tell thee what the king has planned."
She sped, she heard with eager ears
The tyrant speak his hopes and fears,
Where, gathered at their master's call,
The nobles filled the council hall;
Then swiftly, to her promise true,
Back to the Asoka grove she flew.
The lady on the grassy ground,
Longing for her return, she found;
Who with a gentle smile, to greet
The envoy, led her to a seat.
Through her worn frame a shiver ran
As Sarama her tale began:
"There stood the royal mother: she
Besought her son to set thee free,
And to her counsel, tears and prayers,
The elder nobles added theirs:
"O be the Maithil queen restored
With honour to her angry lord,
Let Janasthan's unhappy fight
Be witness of the hero's might.
Hanuman o'er the waters came
And looked upon the guarded dame.
Let Lanka's chiefs who fought and fell
The prowess of the leader tell."
In vain they sued, in vain she wept,
His purpose still unchanged he kept,
As clings the miser to his gold,
He would not loose thee from his hold.
No, never till in death he lies,
Will Lanka's lord release his prize.
Soon slain by Rama's arrows all
The giants with their king will fall,
And Rama to his home will lead
His black-eyed queen from bondage freed."

  An awful sound that moment rose
From Lanka's fast-approaching foes,
Where drum and shell in mingled peal
Made earth in terror rock and reel.
The hosts within the walls arrayed
Stood trembling, in their hearts dismayed;
Thought of the tempest soon to burst,
And Lanka's lord, their ruin, cursed.





Canto XXXV. Malyavan's Speech.


The fearful notes of drum and shell
Upon the ear of Ravan fell.
One moment quailed his haughty look,
One moment in his fear he shook,
But soon recalling wonted pride,
His counsellors he sternly eyed,
And with a voice that thundered through
The council hall began anew:
"Lords, I have heard--your tongues have told--
How Raghu's son is fierce and bold.
To Lanka's shore has bridged his way
And hither leads his wild array.
I know your might, in battle tried,
Fighting and conquering by my side.
Why now, when such a foe is near,
Looks eye to eye in silent fear?"

  He ceased, his mother's sire well known
For wisdom in the council shown,
Malyavan, sage and faithful guide.
Thus to the monarch's speech replied:
"Long reigns the king in safe repose,
Unmoved by fear of vanquished foes,
Whose feet by saving knowledge led
In justice path delight to tread:
Who knows to sheath the sword or wield,
To order peace, to strike or yield:
Prefers, when foes are stronger, peace,
And bids a doubtful conflict cease.
Now, King, the choice before thee lies,
Make peace with Rama, and be wise.
This day the captive queen restore
Who brings the foe to Lanka's shore.
The Sire by whom the worlds are swayed
Of yore the Gods and demons made.
With these Injustice sided; those
Fair Justice for her champions chose.
Still Justice dwells with Gods above;
Injustice, fiends and giants love.
Thou, through the worlds that fear thee, long
Hast scorned the right and loved the wrong,
And Justice, with thy foes allied,
Gives might resistless to their side.
Thou, guided by thy wicked will,
Hast found delight in deeds of ill,
And sages in their holy rest
Have trembled, by thy power oppressed.
But they, who check each vain desire,
Are clothed with might which burns like fire.
In them the power and glory live
Which zeal and saintly fervour give.
Their constant task, their sole delight
Is worship and each holy rite,
To chant aloud the Veda hymn,
Nor let the sacred fires grow dim.
Now through the air like thunder ring
The echoes of the chants they sing.
The vapours of their incense rise
And veil with cloudy pall the skies,
And Rakshas might grows weak and faint
Killed by the power of sage and saint.
By Brahma's boon thy life was screened
From God, Gandharva, Yaksha, fiend;
But Vanars, men, and bears, arrayed
Against thee now, thy shores invade.
Red meteors, heralds of despair
Flash frequent through the lurid air,
Foretelling to my troubled mind
The ruin of the Rakshas kind.
With awful thundering overhead
Clouds black as night are densely spread,
And oozing from the gloomy pall
Great drops of blood on Lanka fall.
Dogs roam through house and shrine to steal
The sacred oil and curd and meal,
Cats pair with tigers, hounds with swine,
And asses' foals are born of kine.
In these and countless signs I trace
The ruin of the giant race.
'Tis Vishnu's self who comes to storm
Thy city, clothed in Rama's form;
For, well I ween, no mortal hand
The ocean with a bridge has spanned.
O giant King, the dame release,
And sue to Raghu's son for peace"





Canto XXXVI. Ravan's Reply.


But Ravan's breast with fury swelled,
And thus he spake by Death impelled,
While, under brows in anger bent,
Fierce glances from his eyes were sent:
"The bitter words which thou, misled
By friendly thought, hast fondly said,
Which praise the foe and counsel fear,
Unheeded fall upon mine ear.
How canst thou deem a mighty foe
This Rama who, in stress of woe,
Seeks, banished as his sire decreed,
Assistance from the Vanar breed?
Am I so feeble in thine eyes,
Though feared by dwellers of the skies,--
Whose might in many a battle shown
The glorious race of giants own?
Shall I for fear of him restore
The lady whom I hither bore,
Exceeding fair like Beauty's Queen(944)
Without her well-loved lotus seen?
Around the chief let Lakshman stand,
Sugriva, and each Vanar band,
Soon, Malyavan, thine eyes will see
This boasted Rama slain by me.
I in the brunt of war defy
The mightiest warriors of the sky;
And if I stoop to combat men,
Shall I be weak and tremble then?
This mangled trunk the foe may rend,
But Ravan ne'er can yield or bend,
And be it vice or virtue, I
This nature never will belie.
What marvel if he bridged the sea?
Why should this deed disquiet thee?
This, only this, I surely know,
Back with his life he shall not go."

  Thus in loud tones the king exclaimed,
And mute stood Malyavan ashamed,
His reverend head he humbly bent,
And slowly to his mansion went.
But Ravan stayed, and deep in care
Held counsel with his nobles there,
All entrance to secure and close,
And guard the city from their foes.
He bade the chief Prahasta wait,
Commander at the eastern gate,
To fierce Mahodar, strong and brave,
To keep the southern gate, he gave,
Where Mahaparsva's might should aid
The chieftain with his hosts arrayed.
To guard the west--no chief more fit--
He placed the warrior Indrajit,
His son, the giant's joy and boast,
Surrounded by a Rakshas host:
And mighty Saran hastened forth
With Suka to protect the north.(945)
"I will myself," the monarch cried,
"Be present on the northern side."
These orders for the walls' defence
The tyrant gave, then parted thence,
And, by the hope of victory fired,
To chambers far within, retired.





Canto XXXVII. Preparations.


Lords of the legions of the wood,
The chieftains with Vibhishan stood,
And, strangers in the foeman's land,
Their hopes and fears in council scanned:

  "See, see where Lanka's towers ascend,
Which Ravan's power and might defend,
Which Gods, Gandharvas, fiends would fail
To conquer, if they durst assail.
How shall our legions pass within,
The city of the foe to win,
With massive walls and portals barred
Which Ravan keeps with surest guard?"
With anxious looks the walls they eyed:
And sage Vibhishan thus replied:
"These lords of mine(946) can answer: they
Within the walls have found their way,
The foeman's plan and order learned,
And hither to my side returned.
Now, Rama, let my tongue declare
How Ravan's hosts are stationed there.
Prahasta heads, in warlike state,
His legions at the eastern gate.
To guard the southern portal stands
Mahodar, girt by Rakshas bands,
Where mighty Mahaparsva, sent
By Ravan's hest, his aid has lent.
Guard of the gate that fronts the west
Is valiant Indrajit, the best
Of warriors, Ravan's joy and pride;
And by the youthful chieftain's side
Are giants, armed for fierce attacks
With sword and mace and battle-axe.
North, where approach is dreaded most,
The king, encompassed with a host
Of giants trained in war, whose hands
Wield maces, swords and lances, stands.
All these are chiefs whom Ravan chose
As mightiest to resist his foes;
And each a countless army(947) leads
With elephants and cars and steeds."

  Then Rama, while his spirit burned
For battle, words like these returned:
"The eastern gate be Nila's care,
Opponent of Prahasta there.
The southern gate, with troops arrayed
Let Angad, Bali's son, invade.
The gate that fronts the falling sun
Shall be by brave Hanuman won;
Soon through its portals shall he lead
His myriads of Vanar breed.
The gate that fronts the north shall be
Assailed by Lakshman and by me,
For I myself have sworn to kill
The tyrant who delights in ill.
Armed with the boon which Brahma gave,
The Gods of heaven he loves to brave,
And through the trembling worlds he flies,
Oppressor of the just and wise.
Thou, Jambavan, and thou, O King
Of Vanars, all your bravest bring,
And with your hosts in dense array
Straight to the centre force your way.
But let no Vanar in the storm
Disguise him in a human form,
Ye chiefs who change your shapes at will,
Retain your Vanar semblance still.
Thus, when we battle with the foe,
Both men and Vanars will ye know,
In human form will seven appear;
Myself, my brother Lakshman here;
Vibhishan, and the four he led
From Lanka's city when he fled."

  Thus Raghu's son the chiefs addressed:
Then, gazing on Suvela's crest,
Transported by the lovely sight,
He longed to climb the mountain height.





Canto XXXVIII. The Ascent Of Suvela.


"Come let us scale," the hero cried,
"This hill with various metals dyed.
This night upon the breezy crest
Sugriva, Lakshman, I, will rest,
With sage Vibhishan, faithful friend,
His counsel and his lore to lend.
From those tall peaks each eager eye
The foeman's city shall espy,
Who from the wood my darling stole
And brought long anguish on my soul."

  Thus spake the lord of men, and bent
His footsteps to the steep ascent,
And Lakshman, true in weal and woe,
Next followed with his shafts and bow.
Vibhishan followed, next in place,
The sovereign of the Vanar race,
And hundreds of the forest kind
Thronged with impetuous feet, behind.
The chiefs in woods and mountains bred
Fast followed to Suvela's head,
And gazed on Lanka bright and fair
As some gay city in the air.
On glittering gates, on ramparts raised
By giant hands, the chieftains gazed.
They saw the mighty hosts that, skilled
In arts of war, the city filled,
And ramparts with new ramparts lined,
The swarthy hosts that stood behind.
With spirits burning for the fight
They saw the giants from the height,
And from a hundred throats rang out
Defiance and the battle shout.
Then sank the sun with dying flame,
And soft the shades of twilight came,
And the full moon's delicious light
Was shed upon the tranquil night.





Canto XXXIX. Lanka.


They slept secure: the sun arose
And called the chieftains from repose.
Before the wondering Vanars, gay
With grove and garden, Lanka lay,
Where golden buds the Champak showed,
And bright with bloom Asoka glowed,
And palm and Sal and many a tree
With leaf and flower were fair to see.
They looked on wood and lawn and glade,
On emerald grass and dusky shade,
Where creepers filled the air with scent,
And luscious fruit the branches bent,
Where bees inebriate loved to throng,
And each sweet bird was loud in song.
The wondering Vanars passed the bound
That circled that enchanting ground,
And as they came a sweet breeze through
The odorous alleys softly blew.
Some Vanars, at their king's behest,
Onward to bannered Lanka pressed,
While, startled by the strangers' tread,
The birds and deer before them fled.
Earth trembled at each step they took,
And Lanka at their shouting shook.
Bright rose before their wondering eyes
Trikuta's peak that kissed the skies,
And, clothed with flowers of every hue,
Afar its golden radiance threw.
Most fair to see the mountain's head
A hundred leagues in length was spread.
There Ravan's town, securely placed,
The summit of Trikuta graced.
O'er leagues of land she stretched in pride,
A hundred long and twenty wide.
They saw a lofty wall enfold
The city, built of blocks of gold,
They saw the beams of morning fall
On dome and fane within the wall,
Bright with the shine that mansion gives
Where Vishnu in his glory lives.
White-crested like the Lord of Snows
Before them Ravan's palace rose.
High on a thousand pillars raised
With gold and precious stone it blazed,
Guarded by giant warders, crown
And ornament of Lanka's town.





Canto XL. Ravan Attacked.


Still stood the son of Raghu where
Suvela's peak rose high in air,
And with Sugriva turned his eye
To scan each quarter of the sky.
There on Trikuta, nobly planned
And built by Visvakarma's hand,
He saw the lovely Lanka, dressed
In all her varied beauty, rest.
High on a tower above the gate
The tyrant stood in kingly state.
The royal canopy displayed
Above him lent its grateful shade,
And servants, from the giant band,
His cheek with jewelled chowries fanned.
Red sandal o'er his breast was spread,
His ornaments and robe were red:
Thus shows a cloud of darksome hue
With golden sunbeams flashing through.
While Rama and the chiefs intent
Upon the king their glances bent,
Up sprang Sugriva from the ground
And reached the turret at a bound.
Unterrified the Vanar stood,
And wroth, with wondrous hardihood,
The king in bitter words addressed,
And thus his scorn and hate expressed:

  "King of the giant race, in me
The friend and slave of Rama see.
Lord of the world, he gives me power
To smite thee in thy fenced tower."
While through the air his challenge rang,
At Ravan's face the Vanar sprang.
Snatched from his head the kingly crown
And dashed it in his fury down.
Straight at his foe the giant flew,
His mighty arms about him threw.
With strength resistless swung him round
And dashed him panting to the ground.
Unharmed amid the storm of blows
Swift to his feet Sugriva rose.
Again in furious fight they met:
With streams of blood their limbs were wet,
Each grasping his opponent's waist.
Thus with their branches interlaced,
Which, crimson with the flowers of spring,
From side to side the breezes swing,
In furious wrestle you may see
The Kinsuk and the Seemal tree.(948)
They fought with fists and hands, alike
Prepared to parry and to strike.
Long time the doubtful combat, waged
With matchless strength and fury, raged.
Each fiercely struck, each guarded well,
Till, closing, from the tower they fell,
And, grasping each the other's throat,
Lay for an instant in the moat.
They rose, and each in fiercer mood
The sanguinary strife renewed.
Well matched in size and strength and skill
They fought the dubious battle still.
While sweat and blood their limbs bedewed
They met, retreated, and pursued:
Each stratagem and art they tried,
Stood front to front and swerved aside.
His hand a while the giant stayed
And called his magic to his aid.
But brave Sugriva, swift to know
The guileful purpose of the foe,
Gained with light leap the upper air,
And breath and strength and spirit there;
Then, joyous as for victory won,
Returned to Raghu's royal son.





Canto XLI. Rama's Envoy.


When Rama saw each bloody trace
On King Sugriva's limbs and face,
He cried, while, sorrowing at the view,
His arms about his friend he threw:
"Too venturous chieftain, kings like us
Bring not their lives in peril thus;
Nor, save when counsel shows the need,
Attempt so bold, so rash a deed.
Remember, I, Vibhishan all
Have sorrowed fearing for thy fall.
O do not--for us all I speak--
These desperate adventures seek."
"I could not," cried Sugriva, "brook
Upon the giant king to look,
Nor challenge to the deadly strife
The fiend who robbed thee of thy wife."
"Now Lakshman, marshal," Rama cried,
"Our legions where the woods are wide,
And stand we ready to oppose
The fury of our giant foes.
This day our armies shall ascend
The walls which Ravan's powers defend,
And floods of Rakshas blood shall stain
The streets encumbered with the slain."
Down from the peak he came, and viewed
The Vanars' ordered multitude.
Each captain there for battle burned,
Each fiery eye to Lanka turned.
On, where the royal brothers led
To Lanka's walls the legions sped.
The northern gate, where giant foes
Swarmed round their monarch, Rama chose
Where he in person might direct
The battle, and his troops protect.
What arm but his the post might keep
Where, strong as he who sways the deep,(949)
Mid thousands armed with bow and mace,
Stood Ravan mightiest of his race?
The eastern gate was Nila's post,
Where marshalled stood his Vanar host,
And Mainda with his troops arrayed,
And Dwivid stood to lend him aid.
The southern gate was Angad's care,
Who ranged his bold battalions there.
Hanuman by the port that faced
The setting sun his legions placed,
And King Sugriva held the wood
East of the gate where Ravan stood.
On every side the myriads met,
And Lanka's walls of close beset
That scarce the roving gale could win
A passage to the hosts within.
Loud as the angry ocean's roar
When wild waves lash the rocky shore,
Ten thousand thousand throats upsent
A shout that tore the firmament,
And Lanka with each grove and brook
And tower and wall and rampart shook.
The giants heard, and were appalled:
Then Raghu's son to Angad called,
And, led by kingly duty,(950) gave
This order merciful as brave:
"Go, Angad, Ravan's presence seek,
And thus my words of warning speak:
"How art thou changed and fallen now,
O Monarch of the giants, thou
Whose impious fury would not spare
Saint, nymph, or spirit of the air;
Whose foot in haughty triumph trod
On Yaksha, king, and Serpent God:
How art thou fallen from thy pride
Which Brahma's favour fortified!
With myriads at thy Lanka's gate
I stand my righteous ire to sate,
And punish thee with sword and flame,
The tyrant fiend who stole my dame.
Now show the might, employ the guile,
O Monarch of the giants' isle,
Which stole a helpless dame away:
Call up thy power and strength to-day.
Once more I warn thee, Rakshas King,
This hour the Maithil lady bring,
And, yielding while there yet is time,
Seek, suppliant, pardon for the crime,
Or I will leave beneath the sun
No living Rakshas, no, not one.
In vain from battle wilt thou fly,
Or borne on pinions seek the sky;
The hand of Rama shall not spare;
His fiery shaft shall smite thee there.' "

  He ceased: and Angad bowed his head;
Thence like embodied flame he sped,
And lighted from his airy road
Within the Rakshas king's abode.
There sate, the centre of a ring
Of counsellors, the giant king.
Swift through the circle Angad pressed,
And spoke with fury in his breast:
"Sent by the lord of Kosal's land,
His envoy here, O King, I stand,
Angad the son of Bali: fame
Has haply taught thine ears my name.
Thus in the words of Rama I
Am come to warn thee or defy:
Come forth, and fighting in the van
Display the spirit of a man.
This arm shall slay thee, tyrant: all
Thy nobles, kith and kin shall fall:
And earth and heaven, from terror freed,
Shall joy to see the oppressor bleed.
Vibhishan, when his foe is slain,
Anointed king in peace shall reign.
Once more I counsel thee: repent,
Avoid the mortal punishment,
With honour due the dame restore,
And pardon for thy sin implore."

  Loud rose the king's infuriate cry:
"Seize, seize the Vanar, let him die."
Four of his band their lord obeyed,
And eager hands on Angad laid.
He purposing his strength to show
Gave no resistance to the foe,
But swiftly round his captors cast
His mighty arms and held them fast.
Fierce shout and cry around him rang:
Light to the palace roof he sprang,
There his detaining arms unwound,
And hurled the giants to the ground.
Then, smiting with a fearful stroke,
A turret from the roof he broke,--
As when the fiery levin sent
By Indra from the clouds has rent
The proud peak of the Lord of Snow,--
And flung the stony mass below.
Again with loud terrific cry
He sprang exulting to the sky,
And, joyous for his errand done,
Stood by the side of Raghu's son.





Canto XLII. The Sally.


Still was the cry, "The Vanar foes
Around the leaguered city close."
King Ravan from the terrace gazed
And saw, with eyes where fury blazed,
The Vanar host in serried ranks
Press to the moat and line the banks,
And, first in splendour and in place,
The lion lord of Raghu's race.
And Rama looked on Lanka where
Gay flags were streaming to the air,
And, while keen sorrow pierced him through,
His loving thoughts to Sita flew:
"There, there in deep affliction lies
My darling with the fawn-like eyes.
There on the cold bare ground she keeps
Sad vigil and for Rama weeps."
Mad with the thought, "Charge, charge," he cried.
"Let earth with Rakshas blood be dyed."

  Responsive to his call rang out
A loud, a universal shout,
As myriads filled the moat with stone,
Trees, rocks, and mountains overthrown,
And charging at their leader's call
Pressed forward furious to the wall.
Some in their headlong ardour scaled
The rampart's height, the guard assailed,
And many a ponderous fragment rent
From portal, tower, and battlement.
Huge gates adorned with burnished gold
Were loosed and lifted from their hold;
And post and pillar, with a sound
Like thunder, fell upon the ground.
At every portal, east and west
And north and south, the chieftains pressed
Each in his post appointed led
His myriads in the forest bred.

  "Charge, let the gates be opened wide:
Charge, charge, my giants," Ravan cried.
They heard his voice, and loud and long
Rang the wild clamour of the throng,
And shell and drum their notes upsent,
And every martial instrument.
Forth, at the bidding of their lord
From every gate the giants poured,
As, when the waters rise and swell,
Huge waves preceding waves impel.
Again from every Vanar throat
A scream of fierce defiance smote
The welkin: earth and sea and sky
Reechoed with the awful cry.
The roar of elephants, the neigh
Of horses eager for the fray.
The frequent clash of warriors' steel,
The rattling of the chariot wheel.
Fierce was the deadly fight: opposed
In terrible array they closed,
As when the Gods of heaven enraged
With rebel fiends wild battle waged.
Axe, spear, and mace were wielded well:
At every blow a Vanar fell.
But shivered rock and brandished tree
Brought many a giant on his knee,
To perish in his turn beneath
The deadly wounds of nails and teeth.





Canto XLIII. The Single Combats.


Brave chiefs of each opposing side
Their strength in single combat tried.
Fierce Indrajit the fight began
With Angad in the battle's van.
Sampati, strongest of his race,
Stood with Prajangha face to face.
Hanuman, Jambumali met
In mortal opposition set.
Vibhishan, brother of the lord
Of Lanka, raised his threatening sword
And singled out, with eyes aglow
With wrath, Satrughna for his foe.
The mighty Gaja Tapan sought,
And Nila with Nikumbha fought.
Sugriva, Vanar king, defied
Fierce Praghas long in battle tried,
And Lakshman fearless in the fight
Encountered Virupaksha's might.
To meet the royal Rama came
Wild Agniketu fierce as flame;
Mitraghana, he who loved to strike
His foeman and his friend alike:
With Rasmiketu, known and feared
Where'er his ponderous flag was reared;
And Yajnakopa whose delight
Was ruin of the sacred rite.
These met and fought, with thousands more,
And trampled earth was red with gore.
Swift as the bolt which Indra sends
When fire from heaven the mountain rends
Smote Indrajit with furious blows
On Angad queller of his foes.
But Angad from his foeman tore
The murderous mace the warrior bore,
And low in dust his coursers rolled,
His driver, and his car of gold.
Struck by the shafts Prajangha sped,
The Vanar chief Sampati bled,
But, heedless of his gashes he
Crushed down the giant with a tree.
Then car-borne Jambumali smote
Hanuman on the chest and throat;
But at the car the Vanar rushed,
And chariot, steeds, and rider crushed.
Sugriva whirled a huge tree round,
And struck fierce Praghas to the ground.
One arrow shot from Lakshman's bow
Laid mighty Virupaksha low.
His giant foes round Rama pressed
And shot their shafts at head and breast;
But, when the iron shower was spent,
Four arrows from his bow he sent,
And every missile, deftly sped;
Cleft from the trunk a giant head.(951)





Canto XLIV. The Night.


The lord of Light had sunk and set:
Night came; the foeman struggled yet;
And fiercer for the gloom of night
Grew the wild fury of the fight.
Scarce could each warrior's eager eye
The foeman from the friend descry.
"Rakshas or Vanar? say;" cried each,
And foe knew foeman by his speech.
"Why wilt thou fly? O warrior, stay:
Turn on the foe, and rend and slay:"
Such were the cries, such words of fear
Smote through the gloom each listening ear.
Each swarthy rover of the night
Whose golden armour flashed with light,
Showed like a towering hill embraced
By burning woods about his waist.
The giants at the Vanars flew,
And ravening ate the foes they slew:
With mortal bite like serpent's fang,
The Vanars at the giants sprang,
And car and steeds and they who bore
The pennons fell bedewed with gore.
No serried band, no firm array
The fury of their charge could stay.
Down went the horse and rider, down
Went giant lords of high renown.
Though midnight's shade was dense and dark,
With skill that swerved not from the mark
Their bows the sons of Raghu drew,
And each keen shaft a chieftain slew.
Uprose the blinding dust from meads
Ploughed by the cars and trampling steeds,
And where the warriors fell the flood
Was dark and terrible with blood.
Six giants(952) singled Rama out,
And charged him with a furious shout
Loud as the roaring of the sea
When every wind is raging free.
Six times he shot: six heads were cleft;
Six giants dead on earth were left.
Nor ceased he yet: his bow he strained,
And from the sounding weapon rained
A storm of shafts whose fiery glare
Filled all the region of the air;
And chieftains dropped before his aim
Like moths that perish in the flame.
Earth glistened where the arrows fell,
As shines in autumn nights a dell
Which fireflies, flashing through the gloom,
With momentary light illume.

  But Indrajit, when Bali's son(953)
The victory o'er the foe had won,
Saw with a fury-kindled eye
His mangled steeds and driver die;
Then, lost in air, he fled the fight,
And vanished from the victor's sight.
The Gods and saints glad voices raised,
And Angad for his virtue praised;
And Raghu's sons bestowed the meed
Of honour due to valorous deed.

  Compelled his shattered car to quit,
Rage filled the soul of Indrajit,
Who brooked not, strong by Brahma's grace
Defeat from one of Vanar race.
In magic mist concealed from view
His bow the treacherous warrior drew,
And Raghu's sons were first to feel
The tempest of his winged steel.
Then when his arrows failed to kill
The princes who defied him still,
He bound them with the serpent noose,(954)
The magic bond which none might loose.





Canto XLV. Indrajit's Victory.


Brave Rama, burning still to know
The station of his artful foe,
Gave to ten chieftains, mid the best
Of all the host, his high behest.
Swift rose in air the Vanar band:
Each region of the sky they scanned:
But Ravan's son by magic skill
Checked them with arrows swifter still,
When streams of blood from chest and side
The dauntless Vanars' limbs had dyed,
The giant in his misty shroud
Showed like the sun obscured by cloud.
Like serpents hissing through the air,
His arrows smote the princely pair;
And from their limbs at every rent
A stream of rushing blood was sent.
Like Kinsuk trees they stood, that show
In spring their blossoms' crimson glow.
Then Indrajit with fury eyed
Ikshvaku's royal sons, and cried:

  "Not mighty Indra can assail
Or see me when I choose to veil
My form in battle: and can ye,
Children of earth, contend with me?
The arrowy noose this hand has shot
Has bound you with a hopeless knot;
And, slaughtered by my shafts and bow,
To Yama's hall this hour ye go."

  He spoke, and shouted. Then anew
The arrows from his bowstring flew,
And pierced, well aimed with perfect art,
Each limb and joint and vital part.
Transfixed with shafts in every limb,
Their strength relaxed, their eyes grew dim.
As two tall standards side by side,
With each sustaining rope untied,
Fall levelled by the howling blast,
So earth's majestic lords at last
Beneath the arrowy tempest reeled,
And prostrate pressed the battle field.





Canto XLVI. Indrajit's Triumph.


The Vanar chiefs whose piercing eyes
Scanned eagerly the earth and skies,
Saw the brave brothers wounded sore
Transfixed with darts and stained with gore.
The monarch of the Vanar race,
With wise Vibhishan, reached the place;
Angad and Nila came behind,
And others of the forest kind,
And standing with Hanuman there
Lamented for the fallen pair.
Their melancholy eyes they raised;
In fruitless search a while they gazed.
But magic arts Vibhishan knew;
Not hidden from his keener view,
Though veiled by magic from the rest,
The son of Ravan stood confessed.
Fierce Indrajit with savage pride
The fallen sons of Raghu eyed,
And every giant heart was proud
As thus the warrior cried aloud:

  "Slain by mine arrows Rama lies,
And closed in death are Lakshman's eyes.
Dead are the mighty princes who
Dushan and Khara smote and slew.
The Gods and fiends may toil in vain
To free them from the binding chain.
The haughty chief, my father's dread,
Who drove him sleepless from his bed,
While Lanka, troubled like a brook
In rain time, heard his name and shook:
He whose fierce hate our lives pursued
Lies helpless by my shafts subdued.
Now fruitless is each wondrous deed
Wrought by the race the forests breed,
And fruitless every toil at last
Like cloudlets when the rains are past."
Then rose the shout of giants loud
As thunder from a bursting cloud,
When, deeming Rama, dead, they raised
Their voices and the conqueror praised.

  Still motionless, as lie the slain,
The brothers pressed the bloody plain,
No sigh they drew, no breath they heaved,
And lay as though of life bereaved.
Proud of the deed his art had done,
To Lanka's town went Ravan's son,
Where, as he passed, all fear was stilled,
And every heart with triumph filled.
Sugriva trembled as he viewed
Each fallen prince with blood bedewed,
And in his eyes which overflowed
With tears the flame of anger glowed.
"Calm," cried Vibhishan, "calm thy fears,
And stay the torrent of thy tears.
Still must the chance of battle change,
And victory still delight to range.
Our cause again will she befriend
And bring us triumph in the end.
This is not death: each prince will break
The spell that holds him, and awake;
Nor long shall numbing magic bind
The mighty arm, the lofty mind."

  He ceased: his finger bathed in dew
Across Sugriva's eyes he drew;
From dulling mist his vision freed,
And spoke these words to suit the need:
"No time is this for fear: away
With fainting heart and weak delay.
Now, e'en the tear which sorrow wrings
From loving eyes destruction brings.
Up, on to battle at the head
Of those brave troops which Rama led.
Or guardian by his side remain
Till sense and strength the prince regain.
Soon shall the trance-bound pair revive,
And from our hearts all sorrow drive.
Though prostrate on the earth he lie,
Deem not that Rama's death is nigh;
Deem not that Lakshmi will forget
Or leave her darling champion yet.
Rest here and be thy heart consoled;
Ponder my words, be firm and bold.
I, foremost in the battlefield,
Will rally all who faint or yield.
Their staring eyes betray their fear;
They whisper each in other's ear.
They, when they hear my cheering cry
And see the friend of Rama nigh,
Will cast their gloom and fears away
Like faded wreaths of yesterday."

  Thus calmed he King Sugriva's dread;
Then gave new heart to those who fled.
Fierce Indrajit, his soul on fire
With pride of conquest, sought his sire,
Raised reverent hands, and told him all,
The battle and the princes' fall.
Rejoicing at his foes' defeat
Upsprang the monarch from his seat,
Girt by his giant courtiers: round
His warrior son his arms he wound,
Close kisses on his head applied,
And heard again how Rama died.





Canto XLVII. Sita.


Still on the ground where Rama slept
Their faithful watch the Vanars kept.
There Angad stood o'erwhelmed with grief
And many a lord and warrior chief;
And, ranged in densest mass around,
Their tree-armed legions held the ground.
Far ranged each Vanar's eager eye,
Now swept the land, now sought the sky,
All fearing, if a leaf was stirred,
A Rakshas in the sound they heard.
The lord of Lanka in his hall,
Rejoicing at his foeman's fall,
Commanded and the warders came
Who ever watched the Maithil dame.
"Go," cried the Rakshas king, "relate
To Janak's child her husband's fate.
Low on the earth her Rama lies,
And dark in death are Lakshman's eyes.
Bring forth my car and let her ride
To view the chieftains side by side.
The lord to whom her fancy turned
For whose dear sake my love she spurned,
Lies smitten, as he fiercely led
The battle, with his brother dead.
Lead forth the royal lady: go
Her husband's lifeless body show.
Then from all doubt and terror free
Her softening heart will turn to me."

  They heard his speech: the car was brought;
That shady grove the warders sought
Where, mourning Rama night and day,
The melancholy lady lay.
They placed her in the car and through
The yielding air they swiftly flew.
The lady looked upon the plain,
Looked on the heaps of Vanar slain,
Saw where, triumphant in the fight,
Thronged the fierce rovers of the night,
And Vanar chieftains, mournful-eyed,
Watched by the fallen brothers' side.
There stretched upon his gory bed
Each brother lay as lie the dead,
With shattered mail and splintered bow
Pierced by the arrows of the foe.
When on the pair her eyes she bent,
Burst from her lips a wild lament
Her eyes o'erflowed, she groaned and sighed
And thus in trembling accents cried:





Canto XLVIII. Sita's Lament.


"False are they all, proved false to-day,
The prophets of my fortune, they
Who in the tranquil time of old
A blessed life for me foretold,
Predicting I should never know
A childless dame's, a widow's woe,
False are they all, their words are vain,
For thou, my lord and life, art slain.
False was the priest and vain his lore
Who blessed me in those days of yore
By Rama's side in bliss to reign:
For thou, my lord and life, art slain.
They hailed me happy from my birth,
Proud empress of the lord of earth.
They blessed me--but the thought is pain--
For thou, my lord and life, art slain.
Ah, fruitless hope! each glorious sign
That stamps the future queen is mine,
With no ill-omened mark to show
A widow's crushing hour of woe.
They say my hair is black and fine,
They praise my brows' continuous line;
My even teeth divided well,
My bosom for its graceful swell.
They praise my feet and fingers oft;
They say my skin is smooth and soft,
And call me happy to possess
The twelve fair marks that bring success.(955)
But ah, what profit shall I gain?
Thou, O my lord and life, art slain.
The flattering seer in former days
My gentle girlish smile would praise,
And swear that holy water shed
By Brahman hands upon my head
Should make me queen, a monarch's bride:
How is the promise verified?
Matchless in might the brothers slew
In Janasthan the giant crew.
And forced the indomitable sea
To let them pass to rescue me.
Theirs was the fiery weapon hurled
By him who rules the watery world;(956)
Theirs the dire shaft by Indra sped;
Theirs was the mystic Brahma's Head.(957)
In vain they fought, the bold and brave:
A coward's hand their death-wounds gave.
By secret shafts and magic spell
The brothers, peers of Indra, fell.
That foe, if seen by Rama's eye
One moment, had not lived to fly.
Though swift as thought, his utmost speed
Had failed him in the hour of need.
No might, no tear, no prayer may stay
Fate's dark inevitable day.
Nor could their matchless valour shield
These heroes on the battle field.
I sorrow for the noble dead,
I mourn my hopes for ever fled;
But chief my weeping eyes o'erflow
For Queen Kausalya's hopeless woe.
The widowed queen is counting now
Each hour prescribed by Rama's vow,
And lives because she longs to see
Once more her princely sons and me."

  Then Trijata,(958) of gentler mould
Though Rakshas born, her grief consoled:
"Dear Queen, thy causeless woe dispel:
Thy husband lives, and all is well.
Look round: in every Vanar face
The light of joyful hope I trace.
Not thus, believe me, shine the eyes
Of warriors when their leader dies.
An Army, when the chief is dead,
Flies from the field dispirited.
Here, undisturbed in firm array,
The Vanars by the brothers stay.
Love prompts my speech; no longer grieve;
Ponder my counsel, and believe.
These lips of mine from earliest youth
Have spoken, and shall speak, the truth.
Deep in my heart thy gentle grace
And patient virtues hold their place.
Turn, lady, turn once more thine eye:
Though pierced with shafts the heroes lie,
On brows and cheeks with blood-drops wet
The light of beauty lingers yet.
Such beauty ne'er is found in death,
But vanishes with parting breath.
O, trust the hope these tokens give:
The heroes are not dead, but live."

  Then Sita joined her hands, and sighed,
"O, may thy words be verified!"
The car was turned, which fleet as thought
The mourning queen to Lanka brought.
They led her to the garden, where
Again she yielded to despair,
Lamenting for the chiefs who bled
On earth's cold bosom with the dead.





Canto XLIX. Rama's Lament.


Ranged round the spot where Rama fell
Each Vanar chief stood sentinel.
At length the mighty hero broke
The trance that held him, and awoke.
He saw his senseless brother, dyed
With blood from head to foot, and cried:
"What have I now to do with life
Or rescue of my prisoned wife,
When thus before my weeping eyes,
Slain in the fight, my brother lies?
A queen like Sita I may find
Among the best of womankind,
But never such a brother, tried
In war, my guardian, friend, and guide.
If he be dead, the brave and true,
I will not live but perish too.
How, reft of Lakshman, shall I meet
My mother, and Kaikeyi greet?
My brother's eager question brook,
And fond Sumitra's longing look?
What shall I say, o'erwhelmed with shame
To cheer the miserable dame?
How, when she hears her son is dead,
Will her sad heart be comforted?
Ah me, for longer life unfit
This mortal body will I quit;
For Lakshman slaughtered for my sake,
From sleep of death will never wake.
Ah when I sank oppressed with care,
Thy gentle voice could soothe despair.
And art thou, O my brother, killed?
Is that dear voice for ever stilled?
Cold are those lips, my brother, whence
Came never word to breed offence?
Ah stretched upon the gory plain
My brother lies untimely slain:
Numbed is the mighty arm that slew
The leaders of the giant crew.
Transfixed with shafts, with blood-streams red,
Thou liest on thy lowly bed:
So sinks to rest, his journey done,
Mid arrowy rays the crimson sun.
Thou, when from home and sire I fled,
The wood's wild ways with me wouldst tread:
Now close to thine my steps shall be,
For I in death will follow thee.
Vibhishan now will curse my name,
And Rama as a braggart blame,
Who promised--but his word is vain--
That he in Lanka's isle should reign.
Return, Sugriva: reft of me
Lead back thy Vanars o'er the sea,
Nor hope to battle face to face
With him who rules the giant race.
Well have ye done and nobly fought,
And death in desperate combat sought.
All that heroic might can do,
Brave Vanars, has been done by you.
My faithful friends I now dismiss:
Return: my last farewell is this."

  Bedewed with tears was every cheek
As thus the Vanars heard him speak.
Vibhishan on the field had stayed
The Vanar hosts who fled dismayed.
Now lifting up his mace on high
With martial step the chief drew nigh.
The hosts who watched by Rama's side
Beheld his shape and giant stride.
'Tis he, 'tis Ravan's son, they thought:
And all in flight their safety sought.





Canto L. The Broken Spell.


Sugriva viewed the flying crowd,
And thus to Angad cried aloud:
"Why run the trembling hosts, as flee
Storm-scattered barks across the sea?"
"Dost thou not mark," the chief replied,
"Transfixed with shafts, with bloodstreams dyed,
With arrowy toils about them wound,
The sons of Raghu on the ground?"

  That moment brought Vibhishan near.
Sugriva knew the cause of fear,
And ordered Jambavan, who led
The bears, to check the hosts that fled.
The king of bears his hest obeyed:
The Vanars' headlong flight was stayed.
A little while Vibhishan eyed
The brothers fallen side by side.
His giant fingers wet with dew
Across the heroes' eyes he drew,
Still on the pair his sad look bent,
And spoke these word in wild lament:
"Ah for the mighty chiefs brought low
By coward hand and stealthy blow!
Brave pair who loved the open fight,
Slain by that rover of the night.
Dishonest is the victory won
By Indrajit my brother's son.
I on their might for aid relied,
And in my cause they fought and died.
Lost is the hope that soothed each pain:
I live, but live no more to reign,
While Lanka's lord, untouched by ill,
Exults in safe defiance still."

  "Not thus," Sugriva said, "repine,
For Lanka's isle shall still be thine.
Nor let the tyrant and his son
Exult before the fight be done.
These royal chiefs, though now dismayed,
Freed from the spell by Garud's aid,
Triumphant yet the foe shall meet
And lay the robber at their feet."

  His hope the Vanar monarch told,
And thus Vibhishan's grief consoled.
Then to Sushen who at his side
Expectant stood, Sugriva cried:
"When these regain their strength and sense,
Fly, bear them to Kishkindha hence.
Here with my legions will I stay,
The tyrant and his kinsmen slay,
And, rescued from the giant king,
The Maithil lady will I bring,
Like Glory lost of old, restored
By Sakra, heaven's almighty lord."

  Sushen made answer: "Hear me yet:
When Gods and fiends in battle met,
So fiercely fought the demon crew,
So wild a storm of arrows flew,
That heavenly warriors faint with pain,
Sank smitten by the ceaseless rain.
Vrihaspati,(959) with herb and spell,
Cured the sore wounds of those who fell.
And, skilled in arts that heal and save,
New life and sense and vigour gave.
Far, on the Milky Ocean's shore,
Still grow those herbs in boundless store;
Let swiftest Vanars thither speed
And bring them for our utmost need.
Those herbs that on the mountain spring
Let Panas and Sampati bring,
For well the wondrous leaves they know,
That heal each wound and life bestow.
Beside that sea which, churned of yore,
The amrit on its surface bore,
Where the white billows lash the land,
Chandra's fair height and Drona stand.
Planted by Gods each glittering steep
Looks down upon the milky deep.
Let fleet Hanuman bring us thence
Those herbs of wondrous influence."

  Meanwhile the rushing wind grew loud,
Red lightnings flashed from banks of cloud.
The mountains shook, the wild waves rose,
And smitten with resistless blows
Unrooted fell each stately tree
That fringed the margin of the sea.
All life within the waters feared
Then, as the Vanars gazed, appeared
King Garud's self, a wondrous sight,
Disclosed in flames of fiery light.
From his fierce eye in sudden dread
All serpents in a moment fled.
And those transformed to shaft that bound
The princes vanished in the ground.
On Raghu's sons his eyes he bent,
And hailed the lords armipotent.
Then o'er them stooped the feathered king,
And touched their faces with his wing.
His healing touch their pangs allayed,
And closed each rent the shafts had made.
Again their eyes were bright and bold,
Again the smooth skin shone like gold.
Again within their shell enshrined
Came memory and each power of mind:
And, from those numbing bonds released,
Their spirit, zeal, and strength increased.
Firm on their feet they stood, and then
Thus Rama spake, the lord of men:

  "By thy dear grace in sorest need
From deadly bonds we both are freed.
To these glad eyes as welcome now
As Aja(960) or my sire art thou.
Who art thou, mighty being? say,
Thus glorious in thy bright array."
He ceased: the king of birds replied,
While flashed his eye with joy and pride:
"In me, O Raghu's son, behold
One who has loved thee from of old:
Garud, the lord of all that fly,
Thy guardian and thy friend am I.
Not all the Gods in heaven could loose
These numbing bonds, this serpent noose,
Wherewith fierce Ravan's son, renowned
For magic arts, your limbs had bound.
Those arrows fixed in every limb
Were mighty snakes, transformed by him.
Blood thirsty race, they live beneath
The earth, and slay with venomed teeth.
On, smite the lord of Lanka's isle,
But guard you from the giants' guile
Who each dishonest art employ
And by deceit brave foes destroy.
So shall the tyrant Ravan bleed,
And Sita from his power be freed."
Thus Garud spake: then, swift as thought,
The region of the sky he sought,
Where in the distance like a blaze
Of fire he vanished from the gaze.

  Then the glad Vanars' joy rang out
In many a wild tumultuous shout,
And the loud roar of drum and shell
Startled each distant sentinel.





Canto LI. Dhumraksha's Sally.


King Ravan, where he sat within,
Heard from his hall the deafening din,
And with a spirit ill at ease
Addressed his lords in words like these:

  "That warlike shout, those joyous cries,
Loud as the thunder of the skies,
Upsent from every Vanar throat,
Some new-born confidence denote.
Hark, how the sea and trembling shore
Re-echo with the Vanars' roar.
Though arrowy chains, securely twined
Both Rama and his brother bind,
Still must the fierce triumphant shout
Disturb my soul with rising doubt.
Swift envoys to the army send,
And learn what change these cries portend."

  Obedient, at their master's call,
Fleet giants clomb the circling wall.
They saw the Vanars formed and led:
They saw Sugriva at their head,
The brothers from their bonds released:
And hope grew faint and fear increased.
Their faces pale with doubt and dread,
Back to the giant king they sped,
And to his startled ear revealed
The tidings of the battle field.

  The flush of rage a while gave place
To chilling fear that changed his face:

  "What?" cried the tyrant, "are my foes
Freed from the binding snakes that close
With venomed clasp round head and limb,
Bright as the sun and fierce like him:
The spell a God bestowed of yore,
The spell that never failed before?
If arts like these be useless, how
Shall giant strength avail us now?
Go forth, Dhumraksha, good at need,
The bravest of my warriors lead:
Force through the foe thy conquering way,
And Rama and the Vanars slay."

  Before his king with reverence due
Dhumraksha bowed him, and withdrew.
Around him at his summons came
Fierce legions led by chiefs of fame.
Well armed with sword and spear and mace,
They hurried to the gathering place,
And rushed to battle, borne at speed
By elephant and car and steed.





Canto LII. Dhumraksha's Death.


The Vanars saw the giant foe
Pour from the gate in gallant show,
Rejoiced with warriors' fierce delight
And shouted, longing for the fight.
Near came the hosts and nearer yet:
Dire was the tumult as they met,
As, serried line to line opposed,
The Vanars and the giants closed.
Fierce on the foe the Vanars rushed,
And, wielding trees, the foremost crushed;
But, feathered from the heron's wing,
With eager flight from sounding string,
Against them shot with surest aim
A ceaseless storm of arrows came:
And, pierced in head and chest and side,
Full many a Vanar fell and died.
They perished slain in fierce attacks
With sword and pike and battle-axe;
But myriads following undismayed
Their valour in the fight displayed.
Unnumbered Vanars rent and torn
With shaft and spear to earth were borne.
But crushed by branchy trees and blocks
Of jagged stone and shivered rocks
Which the wild Vanars wielded well
The bravest of the giants fell.
Their trampled banners strewed the fields,
And broken swords and spears and shields;
And, crushed by blows which none might stay,
Cars, elephants, and riders lay.
Dhumraksha turned his furious eye
And saw his routed legions fly.
Still dauntless, with terrific blows,
He struck and slew his foremost foes.
At every blow, at every thrust,
He laid a Vanar in the dust.
So fell they neath the sword and lance
In battle's wild Gandharva(961) dance,
Where clang of bow and clash of sword
Did duty for the silvery chord,
And hoofs that rang and steeds that neighed
Loud concert for the dancers made.
So fiercely from Dhumraksha's bow
His arrows rained in ceaseless flow,
The Vanar legions turned and fled
To all the winds discomfited.
Hanuman saw the Vanars fly;
He heaved a mighty rock on high.
His keen eyes flashed with wrathful fire,
And, rapid as the Wind his sire,
Strong as the rushing tempests are,
He hurled it at the advancing car.
Swift through the air the missile sang:
The giant from the chariot sprang,
Ere crushed by that terrific blow
Lay pole and wheel and flag and bow.
Hanuman's eyes with fury blazed:
A mountain's rocky peak he raised,
Poised it on high in act to throw,
And rushed upon his giant foe.
Dhumraksha saw: he raised his mace
And smote Hanuman on the face,
Who maddened by the wound's keen pang
Again upon his foeman sprang;
And on the giant's head the rock
Descended with resistless shock.
Crushed was each limb: a shapeless mass
He lay upon the blood-stained grass.





Canto LIII. Vajradanshtra's Sally.


When Ravan in his palace heard
The mournful news, his wrath was stirred;
And, gasping like a furious snake,
To Vajradanshtra thus he spake:

  "Go forth, my fiercest captain, lead
The bravest of the giants' breed.
Go forth, the sons of Raghu slay
And by their side Sugriva lay."

  He ceased: the chieftain bowed his head
And forth with gathered troops he sped.
Cars, camels, steeds were well arrayed,
And coloured banners o'er them played.
Rings decked his arms: about his waist
The life-protecting mail was braced,
And on the chieftain's forehead set
Glittered his cap and coronet.
Borne on a bannered car that glowed
With golden sheen the warrior rode,
And footmen marched with spear and sword
And bow and mace behind their lord.
In pomp and pride of warlike state
They sallied from the southern gate,
But saw, as on their way they sped,
Dread signs around and overhead.
For there were meteors falling fast,
Though not a cloud its shadow cast;
And each ill-omened bird and beast,
Forboding death, the fear increased,
While many a giant slipped and reeled,
Falling before he reached the field.
They met in mortal strife engaged,
And long and fierce the battle raged.
Spears, swords uplifted, gleamed and flashed,
And many a chief to earth was dashed.
A ceaseless storm of arrows rained,
And limbs were pierced and blood-distained.
Terrific was the sound that filled
The air, and every heart was chilled,
As hurtling o'er the giants flew
The rocks and trees which Vanars threw.
Fierce as a hungry lion when
Unwary deer approach his den,
Angad, his eyes with fury red,
Waving a tree above his head,
Rushed with wild charge which none could stay
Where stood the giants' dense array.
Like tall trees levelled by the blast
Before him fell the giants fast,
And earth that streamed with blood was strown
With warriors, steeds, and cars o'erthrown.





Canto LIV. Vajradanshtra's Death.


The giant leader fiercely rained
His arrows and the fight maintained.
Each time the clanging cord he drew
His certain shaft a Vanar slew.
Then, as the creatures he has made
Fly to the Lord of Life for aid,
To Angad for protection fled
The Vanar hosts dispirited.
Then raged the battle fiercer yet
When Angad and the giant met.
A hundred thousand arrows, hot
With flames of fire, the giant shot;
And every shaft he deftly sent
His foeman's body pierced and rent.
From Angad's limbs ran floods of gore:
A stately tree from earth he tore,
Which, maddened as his gashes bled,
He hurled at his opponent's head.
His bow the dauntless giant drew;
To meet the tree swift arrows flew,
Checked the huge missile's onward way,
And harmless on the earth it lay.
A while the Vanar chieftain gazed,
Then from the earth a rock he raised
Rent from a thunder-splitten height,
And cast it with resistless might.
The giant marked, and, mace in hand,
Leapt from his chariot to the sand,
Ere the rough mass descending broke
The seat, the wheel, the pole and yoke.

  Then Angad seized a shattered hill,
Whereon the trees were flowering still,
And with full force the jagged peak
Fell crashing on the giant's cheek.
He staggered, reeled, and fell: the blood
Gushed from the giant in a flood.
Reft of his might, each sense astray,
A while upon the sand he lay.
But strength and wandering sense returned
Again his eyes with fury burned,
And with his mace upraised on high
He wounded Angad on the thigh.
Then from his hand his mace he threw,
And closer to his foeman drew.
Then with their fists they fought, and smote
On brow and cheek and chest and throat.
Worn out with toil, their limbs bedewed,
With blood, the strife they still renewed,
Like Mercury and fiery Mars
Met in fierce battle mid the stars.

  A while the deadly fight was stayed:
Each armed him with his trusty blade
Whose sheath with tinkling bells supplied,
And golden net, adorned his side;
And grasped his ponderous leather shield
To fight till one should fall or yield.
Unnumbered wounds they gave and took:
Their wearied bodies reeled and shook.
At length upon the sand that drank
Streams of their blood the warriors sank,
But as a serpent rears his head
Sore wounded by a peasant's tread,
So Angad, fallen on his knees,
Yet gathered strength his sword to seize;
And, severed by the glittering blade,
The giant's head on earth was laid.

[I omit Cantos LV, LVI, LVII, and LVIII, which relate how Akampan and
Prahasta sally out and fall. There is little novelty of incident in these
Cantos and the results are exactly the same as before. In Canto LV,
Akampan, at the command of Ravan, leads forth his troops. Evil omens are
seen and heard. The enemies meet, and many fall on each side, the Vanars
transfixed with arrows, the Rakshases crushed with rocks and trees.

In Canto LVI Akampan sees that the Rakshases are worsted, and fights with
redoubled rage and vigour. The Vanars fall fast under his "nets of
arrows." Hanuman comes to the rescue. He throws mountain peaks at the
giant which are dexterously stopped with flights of arrows; and at last
beats him down and kills him with a tree.

In Canto LVII, Ravan is seriously alarmed. He declares that he himself,
Kumbhakarna or Prahasta, must go forth. Prahasta sallies out vaunting that
the fowls of the air shall eat their fill of Vanar flesh.

In Canto LVIII, the two armies meet. Dire is the conflict; ceaseless is
the rain of stones and arrows. At last Nila meets Prahasta and breaks his
bow. Prahasta leaps from his car, and the giant and the Vanar fight on
foot. Nila with a huge tree crushes his opponent who falls like a tree
when its roots are cut.]





Canto LIX. Ravan's Sally.


They told him that the chief was killed,
And Ravan's breast with rage was filled.
Then, fiercely moved by wrath and pride,
Thus to his lords the tyrant cried:

  "No longer, nobles, may we show
This lofty scorn for such a foe
By whom our bravest, with his train
Of steeds and elephants, is slain.
Myself this day will take the field,
And Raghu's sons their lives shall yield."

  High on the royal car, that glowed
With glory from his face, he rode;
And tambour shell and drum pealed out,
And joyful was each giant's shout.
A mighty host, with eyeballs red
Like flames of kindled fire, he led.
He passed the city gate, and viewed,
Arrayed, the Vanar multitude,
Those wielding massy rocks, and these
Armed with the stems of uptorn trees,
And Rama with his eyes aglow
With warlike ardour viewed the foe,
And thus the brave Vibhishan, best
Of weapon-wielding chiefs, addressed:
"What captain leads this bright array
Where lances gleam and banners play,
And thousands armed with spear and sword
Await the bidding of their lord?"

  "Seest, thou," Vibhishan answered, "one
Whose face is as the morning sun,
Preeminent for hugest frame?
Akampan(962) is the giant's name.
Behold that chieftain, chariot-borne,
Whom Brahma's chosen gifts adorn.
He wields a bow like Indra's own;
A lion on his flag is shown,
His eyes with baleful fire are lit:
'Tis Ravan's son, 'tis Indrajit.
There, brandishing in mighty hands
His huge bow, Atikaya stands.
And that proud warrior o'er whose head
A moon-bright canopy is spread:
Whose might, in many a battle tried,
Has tamed imperial Indra's pride;
Who wears a crown of burnished gold,
Is Lanka's lord the lofty-souled."

  He ceased: and Rama knew his foe,
And laid an arrow on his bow:
"Woe to the wretch," he cried, "whom fate
Abandons to my deadly hate."
He spoke, and, firm by Lakshman's side,
The giant to the fray defied.
The lord of Lanka bade his train
Of warriors by the gates remain,
To guard the city from surprise
By Rama's forest born allies.
Then as some monster of the sea
Cleaves swift-advancing billows, he
Charged with impetuous onset through
The foe, and cleft the host in two.
Sugriva ran, the king to meet:
A hill uprooted from its seat
He hurled, with trees that graced the height
Against the rover of the night:
But cleft with shafts that checked its way
Harmless upon the earth it lay.
Then fiercer Ravan's fury grew,
An arrow from his side he drew,
Swift as a thunderbolt, aglow
With fire, and launched it at the foe.
Through flesh and bone a way it found,
And stretched Sugriva on the ground.
Sushen and Nala saw him fall,
Gavaksha, Gavaya heard their call,
And, poising hills, in act to fling
They charged amain the giant king.
They charged, they hurled the hills in vain,
He checked them with his arrowy rain,
And every brave assailant felt
The piercing wounds his missiles dealt,
Then smitten by the shafts that came
Keen, fleet, and thick, with certain aim,
They fled to Rama, sure defence
Against the oppressor's violence,
Then, reverent palm to palm applied,
Thus Lakshman to his brother cried:
"To me, my lord, the task entrust
To lay this giant in the dust."
"Go, then," said Rama, "bravely fight;
Beat down this rover of the night.
But he, unmatched in bold emprise,
Fears not the Lord of earth and skies,
Keep on thy guard: with keenest eye
Thy moments of attack espy.
Let hand and eye in due accord
Protect thee with the bow and sword."

  Then Lakshman round his brother threw
His mighty arms in honour due,
Bent lowly down his reverent head,
And onward to the battle sped.
Hanuman from afar beheld
How Ravan's shafts the Vanars quelled:
To meet the giant's car he ran,
Raised his right arm and thus began:
"If Brahma's boon thy life has screened
From Yaksha, God, Gandharva, fiend,
With these contending fear no ill,
But tremble at a Vanar still."
With fury flashing from his eye
The lord of Lanka made reply:
"Strike, Vanar, strike: the fray begin,
And hope eternal fame to win.
This arm shall prove thee in the strife
And end thy glory and thy life."
"Remember," cried the Wind-God's son,
"Remember all that I have done,
My prowess, King, thou knowest well,
Shown in the fight when Aksha(963) fell."

  With heavy hand the giant smote
Hanuman on the chest and throat,
Who reeled and staggered to and fro,
Stunned for a moment by the blow.
Till, mustering strength, his hand he reared
And struck the foe whom Indra feared.
His huge limbs bent beneath the shock,
As mountains, in an earthquake, rock,
And from the Gods and sages pealed
Shouts of loud triumph as he reeled.
But strength returning nerved his frame:
His eyeballs flashed with fiercer flame.
No living creature might resist
That blow of his tremendous fist
Which fell upon Hanuman's flank:
And to the ground the Vanar sank,
No sign of life his body showed:
And Ravan in his chariot rode
At Nila; and his arrowy rain
Fell on the captain and his train.
Fierce Nila stayed his Vanar band,
And, heaving with his single hand
A mountain peak, with vigorous swing
Hurled the huge missile at the king.

  Hanuman life and strength regained,
Burned for the fight and thus complained:
"Why, coward giant, didst thou flee
And leave the doubtful fight with me?"
Seven mighty arrows keen and fleet
The giant launched, the hill to meet;
And, all its force and fury stayed,
The harmless mass on earth was laid.
Enraged the Vanar chief beheld
The mountain peak by force repelled,
And rained upon the foe a shower
Of trees uptorn with branch and flower.
Still his keen shafts which pierced and rent
Each flying tree the giant sent:
Still was the Vanar doomed to feel
The tempest of the winged steel.
Then, smarting from that arrowy storm,
The Vanar chief condensed his form,(964)
And lightly leaping from the ground
On Ravan's standard footing found;
Then springing unimpeded down
Stood on his bow and golden crown.
The Vanar's nimble leaps amazed
Ikshvaku's son who stood and gazed.
The giant, raging in his heart,
Laid on his bow a fiery dart;
The Vanar on his flagstaff eyed,
And thus in tones of fury cried:
"Well skilled in magic lore art thou:
But will thine art avail thee now?
See if thy magic will defend
Thy life against the dart I send."

  Thus Ravan spake, the giant king,
And loosed the arrow from the string.
It pierced, with direst fury sped,
The Vanar with its flaming head.
His father's might, his power innate
Preserved him from the threatened fate.
Upon his knees he fell, distained
With streams of blood, but life remained.

  Still Ravan for the battle burned:
At Lakshman next his car he turned,
And charged amain with furious show,
Straining in mighty hands his bow.
"Come," Lakshman cried, "assay the fight:
Leave foes unworthy of thy might."
Thus Lakshman spoke: and Lanka's lord
Heard the dread thunder of the cord.
And mad with burning rage and pride
In hasty words like these replied:
"Joy, joy is mine, O Raghu's son:
Thy fate to-day thou canst not shun.
Slain by mine arrows thou shalt tread
The gloomy pathway of the dead."

  Thus as he spoke his bow he drew,
And seven keen shafts at Lakshman flew,
But Raghu's son with surest aim
Cleft every arrow as it came.
Thus with fleet shafts each warrior shot
Against his foe, and rested not.
Then one choice weapon from his store,
By Brahma's self bestowed of yore,
Fierce as the flames that end the world,
The giant king at Lakshman hurled.
The hero fell, and racked with pain,
Scarce could his hand his bow retain.
But sense and strength resumed their seat
And, lightly springing to his feet,
He struck with one tremendous stroke
And Ravan's bow in splinters broke.
From Lakshman's cord three arrows flew
And pierced the giant monarch through.
Sore wounded Ravan closed, and round
Ikshvaku's son his strong arms wound.
With strength unrivalled, Brahma's gift,
He strove from earth his foe to lift.
"Shall I," he cried, "who overthrow
Mount Meru and the Lord of Snow,
And heaven and all who dwell therein,
Be foiled by one of Rama's kin?"
But though he heaved, and toiled, and strained,
Unmoved Ikshvaku's son remained.
His frame by those huge arms compressed
The giant's God-given force confessed,
But conscious that himself was part
Of Vishnu, he was firm in heart.

  The Wind-God's son the fight beheld,
And rushed at Ravan, rage-impelled.
Down crashed his mighty hand; the foe
Full in the chest received the blow.
His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way,
And senseless on the earth he lay.

  The Wind-God's son to Rama bore
Deep-wounded Lakshman stained with gore.
He whom no foe might lift or bend
Was light as air to such a friend.
The dart that Lakshman's side had cleft,
Untouched, the hero's body left,
And flashing through the air afar
Resumed its place in Ravan's car;
And, waxing well though wounded sore,
He felt the deadly pain no more.
And Ravan, though with deep wounds pained,
Slowly his sense and strength regained,
And furious still and undismayed
On bow and shaft his hand he laid.

  Then Hanuman to Rama cried:
"Ascend my back, great chief, and ride
Like Vishnu borne on Garud's wing,
To battle with the giant king."
So, burning for the dire attack,
Rode Rama on the Vanar's back,
And with fierce accents loud and slow
Thus gave defiance to the foe,
While his strained bowstring made a sound
Like thunder when it shakes the ground:
"Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay,
The penalty of sin to pay.
Stay! whither wilt thou fly, and how
Escape the death that waits thee now?"

  No word the giant king returned:
His eyes with flames of fury burned.
His arm was stretched, his bow was bent,
And swift his fiery shafts were sent.
Red torrents from the Vanar flowed:
Then Rama near to Ravan strode,
And with keen darts that never failed,
The chariot of the king assailed.
With surest aim his arrows flew:
The driver and the steeds he slew.
And shattered with the pointed steel
Car, flag, and pole and yoke and wheel.
As Indra hurls his bolt to smite
Mount Meru's heaven-ascending height,
So Rama with a flaming dart
Struck Lanka's monarch near the heart,
Who reeled and fell beneath the blow
And from loose fingers dropped his bow.
Bright as the sun, with crescent head,
From Rama's bow an arrow sped,
And from his forehead, proud no more,
Cleft the bright coronet he wore.
Then Rama stood by Ravan's side
And to the conquered giant cried:
"Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slain
Strong heroes of the Vanar train.
I will not strike or slay thee now,
For weary, faint with fight art thou.
To Lanka's town thy footsteps bend,
And there the night securely spend.
To-morrow come with car and bow,
And then my prowess shalt thou know."

  He ceased: the king in humbled pride
Rose from the earth and naught replied.
With wounded limbs and shattered crown
He sought again his royal town.





Canto LX. Kumbhakarna Roused.


With humbled heart and broken pride
Through Lanka's gate the giant hied,
Crushed, like an elephant beneath
A lion's spring and murderous teeth,
Or like a serpent 'neath the wing
And talons of the Feathered King.
Such was the giant's wild alarm
At arrows shot by Rama's arm;
Shafts with red lightning round them curled,
Like Brahma's bolts that end the world.

  Supported on his golden throne,
With failing eye and humbled tone,
"Giants," he cried, "the toil is vain,
Fruitless the penance and the pain,
If I whom Indra owned his peer,
Secure from Gods, a mortal fear.
My soul remembers, now too late,
Lord Brahma's words who spoke my fate:
"Tremble, proud Giant," thus they ran,
"And dread thy death from slighted man.
Secure from Gods and demons live,
And serpents, by the boon I give.
Against their power thy life is charmed,
But against man is still unarmed."
This Rama is the man foretold
By Anaranya's(965) lips of old:

  "Fear, Ravan, basest of the base:
For of mine own imperial race
A prince in after time shall spring
And thee and thine to ruin bring.
And Vedavati,(966) ere she died
Slain by my ruthless insult, cried:
"A scion of my royal line
Shall slay, vile wretch, both thee and thine."
She in a later birth became
King Janak's child, now Rama's dame.
Nandisvara(967) foretold this fate,
And Uma(968) when I moved her hate,
And Rambha,(969) and the lovely child
Of Varun(970) by my touch defiled.
I know the fated hour is nigh:
Hence, captains, to your stations fly.
Let warders on the rampart stand:
Place at each gate a watchful band;
And, terror of immortal eyes,
Let mightiest Kumbhakarna rise.
He, slumbering, free from care and pain,
By Brahma's curse, for months has lain.
But when Prahasta's death he hears,
Mine own defeat and doubts and fears,
The chief will rise to smite the foe
And his unrivalled valour show.
Then Raghu's royal sons and all
The Vanars neath his might will fall."

  The giant lords his hest obeyed,
They left him, trembling and afraid,
And from the royal palace strode
To Kumbhakarna's vast abode.
They carried garlands sweet and fresh,
And reeking loads of blood and flesh.
They reached the dwelling where he lay,
A cave that reached a league each way,
Sweet with fair blooms of lovely scent
And bright with golden ornament.
His breathings came so fierce and fast,
Scarce could the giants brook the blast.
They found him on a golden bed
With his huge limbs at length outspread.
They piled their heaps of venison near,
Fat buffaloes and boars and deer.
With wreaths of flowers they fanned his face,
And incense sweetened all the place.
Each raised his mighty voice as loud
As thunders of an angry cloud,
And conchs their stirring summons gave
That echoed through the giant's cave.
Then on his breast they rained their blows,
And high the wild commotion rose
When cymbal vied with drum and horn.
And war cries on the gale upborne.
Through all the air loud discord spread,
And, struck with fear, the birds fell dead.
But still he slept and took his rest.
Then dashed they on his shaggy chest
Clubs, maces, fragments of the rock:
He moved not once, nor felt the shock.
The giants made one effort more
With shell and drum and shout and roar.
Club, mallet, mace, in fury plied,
Rained blows upon his breast and side.
And elephants were urged to aid,
And camels groaned and horses neighed.
They drenched him with a hundred pails,
They tore his ears with teeth and nails.
They bound together many a mace
And beat him on the head and face;
And elephants with ponderous tread
Stamped on his limbs and chest and head.
The unusual weight his slumber broke:
He started, shook his sides, and woke;
And, heedless of the wounds and blows,
Yawning with thirst and hunger rose,
His jaws like hell gaped fierce and wide,
Dire as the flame neath ocean's tide.
Red as the sun on Meru's crest
The giant's face his wrath expressed,
And every burning breath he drew
Was like the blast that rushes through
The mountain cedars. Up he raised
His awful head with eyes that blazed
Like comets, dire as Death in form
Who threats the worlds with fire and storm.
The giants pointed to their stores
Of buffaloes and deer and boars,
And straight he gorged him with a flood
Of wine, with marrow, flesh, and blood.
He ceased: the giants ventured near
And bent their lowly heads in fear.
Then Kumbhakar[n.]a glared with eyes
Still heavy in their first surprise,
Still drowsy from his troubled rest,
And thus the giant band addressed.
"How have ye dared my sleep to break?
No trifling cause should bid me wake.
Say, is all well? or tell the need
That drives you with unruly speed
To wake me. Mark the words I say,
The king shall tremble in dismay,
The fire be quenched and Indra slain
Ere ye shall break my rest in vain."

  Yupaksha answered: "Chieftain, hear;
No God or fiend excites our fear.
But men in arms our walls assail:
We tremble lest their might prevail.
For vengeful Rama vows to slay
The foe who stole his queen away,
And, matchless for his warlike deeds,
A host of mighty Vanars leads.
Ere now a monstrous Vanar came,
Laid Lanka waste with ruthless flame,
And Aksha, Ravan's offspring, slew
With all his warrior retinue.
Our king who never trembled yet
For heavenly hosts in battle met,
At length the general dread has shared,
O'erthrown by Rama's arm and spared."

  He ceased: and Kumbhakarna spake:
"I will go forth and vengeance take;
Will tread their hosts beneath my feet,
Then triumph-flushed our king will meet.
Our giant bands shall eat their fill
Of Vanars whom this arm shall kill.
The princes' blood shall be my draught,
The chieftains' shall by you be quaffed."
He spake, and, with an eager stride
That shook the earth, to Ravan hied.





Canto LXI. The Vanars' Alarm.


The son of Raghu near the wall
Saw, proudly towering over all,
The mighty giant stride along
Attended by the warrior throng;
Heard Kumbhakarna's heavy feet
Awake the echoes of the street;
And, with the lust of battle fired,
Turned to Vibhishan and inquired:
"Vibhishan, tell that chieftain's name
Who rears so high his mountain frame;
With glittering helm and lion eyes,
Preeminent in might and size
Above the rest of giant birth,
He towers the standard of the earth;
And all the Vanars when they see
The mighty warrior turn and flee."

  "In him," Vibhishan answered, "know
Visravas' son, the Immortals' foe,
Fierce Kumbhakarna, mightier far
Than Gods and fiends and giants are.
He conquered Yama in the fight,
And Indra trembling owned his might.
His arm the Gods and fiends subdued,
Gandharvas and the serpent brood.
The rest of his gigantic race
Are wondrous strong by God-giving grace;
But nature at his birth to him
Gave matchless power and strength of limb.
Scarce was he born, fierce monster, when
He killed and ate a thousand men.
The trembling race of men, appalled,
On Indra for protection called;
And he, to save the suffering world,
His bolt at Kumbhakarna hurled.
So awful was the monster's yell
That fear on all the nations fell,
He, rushing on with furious roar,
A tusk from huge Airavat tore,
And dealt the God so dire a blow
That Indra reeling left his foe,
And with the Gods and mortals fled
To Brahma's throne dispirited.
"O Brahma," thus the suppliants cried,
"Some refuge for this woe provide.
If thus his maw the giant sate
Soon will the world be desolate."
The Self-existent calmed their woe,
And spake in anger to their foe:
"As thou wast born, Pulastya's son,
That worlds might weep by thee undone,
Thou like the dead henceforth shalt be:
Such is the curse I lay on thee."
Senseless he lay, nor spoke nor stirred;
Such was the power of Brahma's word.
But Ravan, troubled for his sake,
Thus to the Self-existent spake:
"Who lops the tree his care has reared
When golden fruit has first appeared?
Not thus, O Brahma, deal with one
Descended from thine own dear son.(971)
Still thou, O Lord, thy word must keep,
He may not die, but let him sleep.
Yet fix a time for him to break
The chains of slumber and awake."
He ceased: and Brahma made reply;
"Six months in slumber shall he lie
And then arising for a day
Shall cast the numbing bonds away."
Now Ravan in his doubt and dread
Has roused the monster from his bed,
Who comes in this the hour of need
On slaughtered Vanars flesh to feed.
Each Vanar, when his awe-struck eyes
Behold the monstrous chieftain, flies.
With hopeful words their minds deceive,
And let our trembling hosts believe
They see no giant, but, displayed,
A lifeless engine deftly made."

  Then Rama called to Nila: "Haste,
Let troops near every gate be placed,
And, armed with fragments of the rock
And trees, each lane and alley block."
Thus Rama spoke: the chief obeyed,
And swift the Vanars stood arrayed,
As when the black clouds their battle form,
The summit of a hill to storm.





Canto LXII. Ravan's Request.


Along bright Lanka's royal road
The giant, roused from slumber, strode,
While from the houses on his head
A rain of fragrant flowers was shed.
He reached the monarch's gate whereon
Rich gems and golden fretwork shone.
Through court and corridor that shook
Beneath his tread his way he took,
And stood within the chamber where
His brother sat in dark despair.
But sudden, at the grateful sight
The monarch's eye again grew bright.
He started up, forgot his fear,
And drew his giant brother near.
The younger pressed the elder's feet
And paid the King observance meet,
Then cried: "O Monarch, speak thy will,
And let my care thy word fulfil.
What sudden terror and dismay
Have burst the bonds in which I lay?"

  Fierce flashed the flame from Ravan's eye,
As thus in wrath he made reply:
"Fair time, I ween, for sleep is this,
To lull thy soul in tranquil bliss,
Unheeding, in oblivion drowned,
The dangers that our lives surround.
Brave Rama, Dasaratha's son,
A passage o'er the sea has won,
And, with the Vanar monarch's aid,
Round Lanka's walls his hosts arrayed.
Though never in the deadly field
My Rakshas troops were known to yield,
The bravest of the giant train
Have fallen by the Vanars slain.
Hence comes my fear. O fierce and brave,
Go forth, our threatened Lanka save.
Go forth, a dreadful vengeance take:
For this, O chief, I bade thee wake.
The Gods and trembling fiends have felt
The furious blows thine arm has dealt.
Earth has no warrior, heaven has none
To match thy might, Paulastya's son."





Canto LXIII. Kumbhakarna's Boast.


Then Kumbhakarna laughed aloud
And cried; "O Monarch, once so proud,
We warned thee, but thou wouldst not hear;
And now the fruits of sin appear.
We warned thee, I, thy nobles, all
Who loved thee, in thy council hall.
Those sovereigns who with blinded eyes
Neglect the foe their hearts despise,
Soon, falling from their high estate
Bring on themselves the stroke of fate.
Accept at length, thy life to save,
The counsel sage Vibhishan gave,
The prudent counsel spurned before,
And Sita to her lord restore."(972)

  The monarch frowned, by passion moved
And thus in angry words reproved:
"Wilt thou thine elder brother school,
Forgetful of the ancient rule
That bids thee treat him as the sage
Who guides thee with the lore of age?
Think on the dangers of the day,
Nor idly throw thy words away:
If, led astray, by passion stirred,
I in the pride of power have erred;
If deeds of old were done amiss,
No time for vain reproach is this.
Up, brother; let thy loving care
The errors of thy king repair."

  To calm his wrath, his soul to ease,
The younger spake in words like these:
"Yea, from our bosoms let us cast
All idle sorrow for the past.
Let grief and anger be repressed:
Again be firm and self-possessed.
This day, O Monarch, shalt thou see
The Vanar legions turn and flee,
And Rama and his brother slain
With their hearts' blood shall dye the plain.
Yea, if the God who rules the dead,
And Varun their battalions led;
If Indra with the Storm-Gods came
Against me, and the Lord of Flame,
Still would I fight with all and slay
Thy banded foes, my King, to-day.
If Raghu's son this day withstand
The blow of mine uplifted hand,
Deep in his breast my darts shall sink,
And torrents of his life-blood drink.
O fear not, in my promise trust:
This arm shall lay him in the dust,
Shall leave the fierce Sugriva dyed
With gore, and Lakshman by his side,
And strike the great Hanuman down,
The spoiler of our glorious town."(973)





Canto LXIV. Mahodar's Speech.


He ceased: and when his lips were closed
Mahodar thus his rede opposed:
"Why wilt thou shame thy noble birth
And speak like one of little worth?
Why boast thee thus in youthful pride
Rejecting wisdom for thy guide?
How will thy single arm oppose
The victor of a thousand foes,
Who proved in Janasthan his might
And slew the rovers of the night?
The remnant of those legions, they
Who saw his power that fatal day,
Now in this leaguered city dread
The mighty chief from whom they fled.
And wouldst thou meet the lord of men,
Beard the great lion in his den,
And, when thine eyes are open, break
The slumber of a deadly snake?
Who may an equal battle wage
With him, so awful in his rage,
Fierce as the God of Death whom none
May vanquish, Dasaratha's son?
But, Ravan, shall the lady still
Refuse compliance with thy will?
No, listen, King, to this design
Which soon shall make the captive thine.
This day through Lanka's streets proclaim
That four of us(974) of highest fame
With Kumbhakarna at our head
Will strike the son of Raghu dead.
Forth to the battle will we go
And prove our prowess on the foe.
Then, if our bold attempt succeed,
No further plans thy hopes will need.
But if in vain our warriors strive,
And Raghu's son be left alive,
We will return, and, wounded sore,
Our armour stained with gouts of gore,
Will show the shafts that rent each frame,
Keen arrows marked with Rama's name,
And say we giants have devoured
The princes whom our might o'erpowered.
Then let the joyful tidings spread
That Raghu's royal sons are dead.
To all around thy pleasure show,
Gold, pearls, and precious robes, bestow.
Gay garlands round the portals twine,
Enjoy the banquet and the wine.
Then go, the scornful lady seek,
And woo her when her heart is weak.
Rich robes and gold and gems display,
And gently wile her grief away.
Then will she feel her hopeless state,
Widowed, forlorn, and desolate;
Know that on thee her bliss depends,
Far from her country and her friends;
Then, her proud spirit overthrown,
The lady will be all thine own."





Canto LXV. Kumbhakarna's Speech.


But haughty Kumbhakarna spurned
His counsel, and to Ravan turned:
"Thy life from peril will I free
And slay the foe who threatens thee.
A hero never vaunts in vain,
Like bellowing clouds devoid of rain,
Nor, Monarch, be thine ear inclined
To counsellors of slavish kind,
Who with mean arts their king mislead
And mar each gallant plan and deed.
O, let not words like his beguile
The glorious king of Lanka's isle."

  Thus scornful Kumbhakarna cried,
And Ravan with a laugh replied:
"Mahodar fears and fain would shun
The battle with Ikshvaku's son.
Of all my giant warriors, who
Is strong as thou, and brave and true?
Ride, conqueror, to the battle ride,
And tame the foeman's senseless pride.
Go forth like Yama to the field,
And let thine arm thy trident wield.
Scared by the lightning of thine eye
The Vanar hosts will turn and fly;
And Rama, when he sees thee near,
With trembling heart will own his fear."

  The champion heard, and, well content,
Forth from the hall his footsteps bent.
He grasped his spear, the foeman's dread,
Black iron all, both shaft and head,
Which, dyed in many a battle, bore
Great spots of slaughtered victims' gore.
The king upon his neck had thrown
The jewelled chain which graced his own.
And garlands of delicious scent
About his limbs for ornament.
Around his arms gay bracelets clung,
And pendants in his ears were hung.
Adorned with gold, about his waist
His coat of mail was firmly braced,
And like Narayan(975) or the God
Who rules the sky he proudly trod.
Behind him went a mighty throng
Of giant warriors tall and strong,
On elephants of noblest breeds.
With cars, with camels, and with steeds:
And, armed with spear and axe and sword
Were fain to battle for their lord.(976)





Canto LXVI. Kumbhakarna's Sally.


In pomp and pride of warlike state
The giant passed the city gate.
He raised his voice: the hills, the shore
Of Lanka's sea returned the roar.
The Vanars saw the chief draw nigh
Whom not the ruler of the sky,
Nor Yama, monarch of the dead,
Might vanquish, and affrighted fled.
When royal Angad, Bali's son,
Saw the scared Vanars turn and run,
Undaunted still he kept his ground,
And shouted as he gazed around:
"O Nala, Nila, stay nor let
Your souls your generous worth forget,
O Kumud and Gavaksha, why
Like base-born Vanars will ye fly?
Turn, turn, nor shame your order thus:
This giant is no match for us"

  They heard his voice: the flight was stayed;
Again for war they stood arrayed,
And hurled upon the foe a shower
Of mountain peaks and trees in flower.
Still on his limbs their missiles rained:
Unmoved, their blows he still sustained,
And seemed unconscious of the stroke
When rocks against his body broke.
Fierce as the flame when woods are dry
He charged with fury in his eye.
Like trees consumed with fervent heat
They fell beneath the giant's feet.
Some o'er the ground, dyed red with gore,
Fled wild with terror to the shore,
And, deeming that all hope was lost,
Ran to the bridge they erst had crossed.
Some clomb the trees their lives to save,
Some sought the mountain and the cave;
Some hid them in the bosky dell,
And there in deathlike slumber fell.

  When Angad saw the chieftains fly
He called them with a mighty cry:
"Once more, O Vanars, charge once more,
On to the battle as before.
In all her compass earth has not,
To hide you safe, one secret spot.
What! leave your arms? each nobler dame
Will scorn her consort for the shame.
This blot upon your names efface,
And keep your valour from disgrace.
Stay, chieftains; wherefore will ye run,
A band of warriors scared by one?"

  Scarce would they hear: they would not stay,
And basely spoke in wild dismay:
"Have we not fought, and fought in vain
Have we not seen our mightiest slain?
The giant's matchless force we fear,
And fly because our lives are dear."
But Bali's son with gentle art
Dispelled their dread and cheered each heart.
They turned and formed and waited still
Obedient to the prince's will.





Canto LXVII. Kumbhakarna's Death.


Thus from their flight the Vanars turned,
And every heart for battle burned,
Determined on the spot to die
Or gain a warrior's meed on high.
Again the Vanars stooped to seize
Their weapons, rocks and fallen trees;
Again the deadly fight began,
And fiercely at the giant ran.
Unmoved the monster kept his place:
He raised on high his awful mace,
Whirled the huge weapon round his head
And laid the foremost Vanars dead.
Eight thousand fell bedewed with gore,
Then sank and died seven hundred more.
Then thirty, twenty, ten, or eight
At each fierce onset met their fate,
And fast the fallen were devoured
Like snakes by Garud's beak o'erpowered.
Then Dwivid from the Vanar van,
Armed with an uptorn mountain, ran,
Like a huge cloud when fierce winds blow,
And charged amain the mountain foe.
With wondrous force the hill he threw:
O'er Kumbhakarna's head it flew,
And falling on his host afar
Crushed many a giant, steed, and car.
Rocks, trees, by fierce Hanuman sped,
Rained fast on Kumbhakarna's head.
Whose spear each deadlier missile stopped,
And harmless on the plain it dropped.
Then with his furious eyes aglow
The giant rushed upon the foe,
Where, with a woody hill upheaved,
Hanuman's might his charge received.
Through his vast frame the giant felt
The angry blow Hanuman dealt.
He reeled a moment, sore distressed,
Then smote the Vanar on the breast,
As when the War-God's furious stroke
Through Krauncha's hill a passage broke.(977)
Fierce was the blow, and deep and wide
The rent: with crimson torrents dyed,
Hanuman, maddened by the pain,
Roared like a cloud that brings the rain,
And from each Rakshas throat rang out
Loud clamour and exultant shout.
Then Nila hurled with mustered might
The fragment of a mountain height;
Nor would the rock the foe have missed,
But Kumbhakarna raised his fist
And smote so fiercely that the mass
Fell crushed to powder on the grass.
Five chieftains of the Vanar race(978)
Charged Kumbhakarna face to face,
And his huge frame they wildly beat
With rocks and trees and hands and feet.
Round Rishabh first the giant wound
His arms and hurled him to the ground,
Where speechless, senseless, wounded sore,
He lay his face besmeared with gore.
Then Nila with his fist he slew,
And Sarabh with his knee o'erthrew,
Nor could Gavaksha's strength withstand
The force of his terrific hand.
At Gandhamadan's eager call
Rushed thousands to avenge their fall,
Nor ceased those Vanars to assail
With knee and fist and tooth and nail.
Around his foes the giant threw
His mighty arms, and nearer drew
The captives subject to his will:
Then snatched them up and ate his fill.
There was no respite then, no pause:
Fast gaped and closed his hell-like jaws:
Yet, prisoned in that gloomy cave,
Some Vanars still their lives could save:
Some through his nostrils found a way,
Some through his ears resought the day.
Like Indra with his thunder, like
The God of Death in act to strike,
The giant seized his ponderous spear,
And charged the foe in swift career.
Before his might the Vanars fell,
Nor could their hosts his charge repel.
Then trembling, nor ashamed to run,
They turned and fled to Raghu's son.

  When Bali's warrior son(979) beheld
Their flight, his heart with fury swelled.
He rushed, with his terrific shout,
To meet the foe and stay the rout.
He came, he hurled a mountain peak,
And smote the giant on the cheek.
His ponderous spear the giant threw:
Fierce was the cast, the aim was true;
But Angad, trained in war and tried,
Saw ere it came, and leapt aside.
Then with his open hand he smote
The giant on the chest and throat.
That blow the giant scarce sustained;
But sense and strength were soon regained.
With force which nothing might resist
He caught the Vanar by the wrist,
Whirled him, as if in pastime, round,
And dashed him senseless on the ground.
There low on earth his foe lay crushed:
At King Sugriva next he rushed,
Who, waiting for the charge, stood still,
And heaved on high a shattered hill,
He looked on Kumbhakarna dyed
With streams of blood, and fiercely cried:
"Great glory has thine arm achieved,
And thousands of their lives bereaved.
Now leave a while thy meaner foes,
And brook the hill Sugriva throws."

  He spoke, and hurled the mass he held:
The giant's chest the stroke repelled,
Then on the Vanars fell despair,
And Rakshas clamour filled the air.
The giant raised his arm, and fast
Came the tremendous(980) spear he cast.
Hanuman caught it as it flew,
And knapped it on his knee in two.
The giant saw the broken spear:
His clouded eye confessed his fear;
Yet at Sugriva's head he sent
A peak from Lanka's mountain rent.
The rushing mass no might could stay:
Sugriva fell and senseless lay.
The giant stooped his foe to seize,
And bore him thence, as bears the breeze
A cloud in autumn through the sky.
He heard the sad Immortals sigh,
And shouts of triumph long and loud
Went up from all the Rakshas crowd.
Through Lanka's gate the giant passed
Holding his struggling captive fast,
While from each terrace, house, and tower
Fell on his haughty head a shower
Of fragrant scent and flowery rain,
Blossoms and leaves and scattered grain.(981)

  By slow degrees the Vanars' lord
Felt life and sense and strength restored.
He heard the giants' joyful boast:
He thought upon his Vanar host.
His teeth and feet he fiercely plied,
And bit and rent the giant's side,
Who, mad with pain and smeared with gore,
Hurled to the ground the load he bore.
Regardless of a storm of blows
Swift to the sky the Vanar rose,
Then lightly like a flying ball
High overleapt the city wall,
And joyous for deliverance won
Regained the side of Raghu's son.
And Kumbhakarna, mad with hate
And fury, sallied from the gate,
The carnage of the foe renewed
And filled his maw with gory food.
Slaying, with headlong frenzy blind,
Both Vanar foes and giant kind.

  Nor would Sumitra's valiant son(982)
The might of Kumbhakarna shun,
Who through his harness felt the sting
Of keen shafts loosened from the string.
His heart confessed the warrior's power,
And, bleeding from the ceaseless shower
That smote him on the chest and side,
With words like these the giant cried:
"Well fought, well fought, Sumitra's son;
Eternal glory hast thou won,
For thou in desperate fight hast met
The victor never conquered yet,
Whom, borne on huge Airavat's back,
E'en Indra trembles to attack.
Go, son of Queen Sumitra, go:
Thy valour and thy strength I know.
Now all my hope and earnest will
Is Rama in the fight to kill.
Let him beneath my weapons fall,
And I will meet and conquer all."

  The chieftain, of Sumitra born,
Made answer as he laughed in scorn:
"Yea, thou hast won a victor's fame
From trembling Gods and Indra's shame.
There waits thee now a mightier foe
Whose prowess thou hast yet to know.
There, famous in a hundred lands,
Rama the son of Raghu stands."

  Straight at the king the giant sped,
And earth was shaken at his tread.
His bow the hero grasped and strained,
And deadly shafts in torrents rained.
As Kumbhakarna felt each stroke
From his huge mouth burst fire and smoke;
His hands were loosed in mortal pain
And dropped his weapons on the plain.
Though reft of spear and sword and mace
No terror changed his haughty face.
With heavy hands he rained his blows
And smote to death a thousand foes.
Where'er the furious monster strode
While down his limbs the red blood flowed
Like torrents down a mountain's side,
Vanars and bears and giants died.
High o'er his head a rock he swung,
And the huge mass at Rama flung.
But Rama's arrows bright as flame
Shattered the mountain as it came.
Then Raghu's son, his eyes aglow
With burning anger, charged the foe,
And as his bow he strained and tried
With fearful clang the cord replied.
Wroth at the bowstring's threatening clang
To meet his foe the giant sprang.
High towering with enormous frame
Huge as a wood-crowned hill he came.
But Rama firm and self-possessed
In words like these the foe addressed:
"Draw near, O Rakshas lord, draw near,
Nor turn thee from the fight in fear.
Thou meetest Rama face to face,
Destroyer of the giant race.
Come, fight, and thou shalt feel this hour,
Laid low in death, thy conqueror's power."

  He ceased: and mad with wrath and pride
The giant champion thus replied:
"Come thou to me and thou shalt find
A foeman of a different kind.
No Khara, no Viradha,--thou
Hast met a mightier warrior now.
The strength of Kumbhakarna fear,
And dread the iron mace I rear
This mace in days of yore subdued
The Gods and Danav multitude.
Prove, lion of Ikshvaku's line,
Thy power upon these limbs of mine.
Then, after trial, shalt thou bleed,
And with thy flesh my hunger feed."

  He ceased: and Rama, undismayed,
Upon his cord those arrows laid
Which pierced the stately Sal trees through,
And Bali king of Vanars slew.
They flew, they smote, but smote in vain
Those mighty limbs that felt no pain.
Then Rama sent with surest aim
The dart that bore the Wind-God's name.
The missile from the giant tore
His huge arm and the mace it bore,
Which crushed the Vanars where it fell:
And dire was Kumbhakarna's yell.
The giant seized a tree, and then
Rushed madly at the lord of men.
Another dart, Lord Indra's own,
To meet his furious onset thrown,
His left arm from the shoulder lopped,
And like a mountain peak it dropped.
Then from the bow of Rama sped
Two arrows, each with crescent head;
And, winged with might which naught could stay,
They cut the giant's legs away.
They fell, and awful was the sound
As those vast columns shook the ground;
And sky and sea and hill and cave
In echoing roars their answer gave.
Then from his side the hero drew
A dart that like the tempest flew--
No deadlier shaft has ever flown
Than that which Indra called his own--
Nor could the giant's mail-armed neck
The fury of the missile check.
Through skin and flesh and bone it smote
And rent asunder head and throat.
Down with the sound of thunder rolled
The head adorned with rings of gold,
And crushed to pieces in its fall
A gate, a tower, a massive wall.
Hurled to the sea the body fell:
Terrific was the ocean's swell,
Nor could swift fin and nimble leap
Save the crushed creatures of the deep.

  Thus he who plagued in impious pride
The Gods and Brahmans fought and died.
Glad were the hosts of heaven, and long
The air re-echoed with their song.(983)





Canto LXVIII. Ravan's Lament.


They ran to Ravan in his hall
And told him of his brother's fall:
"Fierce as the God who rules the dead,
Upon the routed foe he fed;
And, victor for a while, at length
Fell slain by Rama's matchless strength.
Now like a mighty hill in size
His mangled trunk extended lies,
And where he fell, a bleeding mass,
Blocks Lanka's gate that none may pass."
The monarch heard: his strength gave way;
And fainting on the ground he lay.
Grieved at the giants' mournful tale,
Long, shrill was Atikaya's wail;
And Trisiras in sorrow bowed
His triple head, and wept aloud.
Mahodar, Mahaparsva shed
Hot tears and mourned their brother dead.
At length, his wandering sense restored,
In loud lament cried Lanka's lord:
"Ah chief, for might and valour famed,
Whose arm the haughty foeman tamed,
Forsaking me, thy friends and all,
Why hast thou fled to Yama's hall?
Why hast thou fled to taste no more
The slaughtered foeman's flesh and gore?
Ah me, my life is done to-day:
My better arm is lopped away.
Whereon in danger I relied,
And, fearless, Gods and fiends defied.
How could a shaft from Rama's bow
The matchless giant overthrow,
Whose iron frame so strong of yore
The crushing bolt of Indra bore?
This day the Gods and sages meet
And triumph at their foe's defeat.
This day the Vanar chiefs will boast
And, with new ardour fired, their host
In fiercer onset will assail
Our city, and the ramparts scale.
What care I for a monarch's name,
For empire, or the Maithil dame?
What joy can power and riches give,
Or life that I should care to live,
Unless this arm in mortal fray
The slayer of my brother slay?
For me, of Kumbhakarna reft,
Death is the only solace left;
And I will seek, o'erwhelmed with woes,
The realm to which my brother goes.
Ah me ill-minded, not to take
His counsel when Vibhishan spake
When he this evil day foretold
My foolish heart was overbold:
I drove my sage adviser hence,
And reap the fruits of mine offence."





Canto LXIX. Narantak's Death.


Pierced to the soul by sorrow's sting
Thus wailed the evil-hearted king.
Then Trisiras stood forth and cried:
"Yea, father, he has fought and died,
Our bravest: and the loss is sore:
But rouse thee, and lament no more.
Hast thou not still thy coat of mail,
Thy bow and shafts which never fail?
A thousand asses draw thy car
Which roars like thunder heard afar.
Thy valour and thy warrior skill,
Thy God-given strength, are left thee still.
Unarmed, thy matchless might subdued
The Gods and Danav multitude.
Armed with thy glorious weapons, how
Shall Raghu's son oppose thee now?
Or, sire, within thy palace stay;
And I myself will sweep away
Thy foes, like Garud when he makes
A banquet of the writhing snakes.
Soon Raghu's son shall press the plain,
As Narak(984) fell by Vishnu slain,
Or Sambar(985) in rebellious pride
Who met the King of Gods(986) and died."

  The monarch heard: his courage grew,
And life and spirit came anew.
Devantak and Narantak heard,
And their fierce souls with joy were stirred;
And Atikaya(987) burned to fight,
And heard the summons with delight;
While from the rest loud rang the cry,
"I too will fight," "and I," "and I."

  The joyous king his sons embraced,
With gold and chains and jewels graced,
And sent them forth with stirring speech
Of benison and praise to each.
Forth from the gate the princes sped
And ranged for war the troops they led.
The Vanar legions charged anew,
And trees and rocks for missiles flew.
They saw Narantak's mighty form
Borne on a steed that mocked the storm.
To check his charge in vain they strove:
Straight through their host his way he clove,
As springs a dolphin through the tide:
And countless Vanars fell and died,
And mangled limbs and corpses lay
To mark the chief's ensanguined way,
Sugriva saw them fall or fly
When fierce Narantak's steed was nigh,
And marked the giant where he sped
O'er heaps of dying or of dead.
He bade the royal Angad face
That bravest chief of giant race.
As springs the sun from clouds dispersed,
So Angad from the Vanars burst.
No weapon for the fight he bore
Save nails and teeth, and sought no more.
"Leave, giant chieftain," thus he spoke,
"Leave foes unworthy of thy stroke,
And bend against a nobler heart
The terrors of thy deadly dart."

  Narantak heard the words he spake:
Fast breathing, like an angry snake,
With bloody teeth his lips he pressed
And hurled his dart at Angad's breast.
True was the aim and fierce the stroke,
Yet on his breast the missile broke.
Then Angad at the giant flew,
And with a blow his courser slew:
The fierce hand crushed through flesh and bone,
And steed and rider fell o'erthrown.
Narantak's eyes with fury blazed:
His heavy hand on high he raised
And struck in savage wrath the head
Of Bali's son, who reeled and bled,
Fainted a moment and no more:
Then stronger, fiercer than before
Smote with that fist which naught could stay,
And crushed to death the giant lay.





Canto LXX. The Death Of Trisiras.


Then raged the Rakshas chiefs, and all
Burned to avenge Narantak's fall.
Devantak raised his club on high
And rushed at Angad with a cry.
Behind came Trisiras, and near
Mahodar charged with levelled spear.
There Angad stood to fight with three:
High o'er his head he waved a tree,
And at Devantak, swift and true
As Indra's flaming bolt, it flew.
But, cut by giant shafts in twain,
With minished force it flew in vain.
A shower of trees and blocks of stone
From Angad's hand was fiercely thrown;
But well his club Devantak plied
And turned each rock and tree aside.
Nor yet, by three such foes assailed,
The heart of Angad sank or quailed.
He slew the mighty beast that bore
Mahodar: from his head he tore
A bleeding tusk, and blow on blow
Fell fiercely on his Rakshas foe.
The giant reeled, but strength regained,
And furious strokes on Angad rained,
Who, wounded by the storm of blows,
Sank on his knees, but swiftly rose.
Then Trisiras, as up he sprang,
Drew his great bow with awful clang,
And fixed three arrows from his sheaf
Full in the forehead of the chief.
Hanuman saw, nor long delayed
To speed with Nila to his aid,
Who at the three-faced giant sent
A peak from Lanka's mountain rent.
But Trisiras with certain aim
Shot rapid arrows as it came:
And shivered by their force it broke
And fell to earth with flash and smoke.
Then as the Wind-God's son came nigh,
Devantak reared his mace on high.
Hanuman smote him on the head
And stretched the monstrous giant dead.
Fierce Trisiras with fury strained
His bow, and showers of arrows rained
That smote on Nila's side and chest:
He sank a moment, sore distressed;
But quickly gathered strength to seize
A mountain with its crown of trees.
Crushed by the hill, distained with gore,
Mahodar fell to rise no more.

  Then Trisiras raised high his spear
Which chilled the trembling foe with fear
And, like a flashing meteor through
The air at Hanuman it flew.
The Vanar shunned the threatened stroke,
And with strong hands the weapon broke.
The giant drew his glittering blade:
Dire was the wound the weapon made
Deep in the Vanar's ample chest,
Who, for a moment sore oppressed,
Raised his broad hand, regaining might,
And struck the rover of the night.
Fierce was the blow: with one wild yell
Low on the earth the monster fell.
Hanuman seized his fallen sword
Which served no more its senseless lord,
And from the monster triple-necked
Smote his huge heads with crowns bedecked.
Then Mahaparsva burned with ire;
Fierce flashed his eyes with vengeful fire.
A moment on the dead he gazed,
Then his black mace aloft was raised,
And down the mass of iron came
That struck and shook the Vanar's frame.
Hanuman's chest was wellnigh crushed,
And from his mouth red torrents gushed:
Yet served one instant to restore
His spirit: from the foe he tore
His awful mace, and smote, and laid
The giant in the dust dismayed.
Crushed were his jaws and teeth and eyes:
Breathless and still he lay as lies
A summit from a mountain rent
By him who rules the firmament.





Canto LXXI. Atikaya's Death.


But Atikaya's wrath grew high
To see his noblest kinsmen die.
He, fiercest of the giant race,
Presuming still on Brahma's grace;
Proud tamer of the Immortals' pride,
Whose power and might with Indra's vied,
For blood and vengeful carnage burned,
And on the foe his fury turned.
High on a car that flashed and glowed
Bright as a thousand suns he rode.
Around his princely brows was set
A rich bejewelled coronet.
Gold pendants in his ears he wore;
He strained and tried the bow he bore,
And ever, as a shaft he aimed,
His name and royal race proclaimed.
Scarce might the Vanars brook to hear
His clanging bow and voice of fear:
To Raghu's elder son they fled,
Their sure defence in woe and dread.
Then Rama bent his eyes afar
And saw the giant in his car
Fast following the flying crowd
And roaring like a rainy cloud.
He, with the lust of battle fired,
Turned to Vibhishan and inquired:
"Say, who is this, of mountain size,
This archer with the lion eyes?
His car, which strikes our host with awe,
A thousand eager coursers draw.
Surrounded by the flashing spears
Which line his car, the chief appears
Like some huge cloud when lightnings play
About it on a stormy day;
And the great bow he joys to hold
Whose bended back is bright with gold,
As Indra's bow makes glad the skies,
That best of chariots glorifies.
O see the sunlike splendour flung
From the great flag above him hung,
Where, blazoned with refulgent lines,
Rahu(988) the dreadful Dragon shines.
Full thirty quivers near his side,
His car with shafts is well supplied:
And flashing like the light of stars
Gleam his two mighty scimitars.
Say, best of giants, who is he
Before whose face the Vanars flee?"

  Thus Rama spake. Vibhishan eyed
The giants' chief, and thus replied:
"This Rama, this is Ravan's son:
High fame his youthful might has won.
He, best of warriors, bows his ear
The wisdom of the wise to hear.
Supreme is he mid those who know
The mastery of sword and bow.
Unrivalled in the bold attack
On elephant's or courser's back,
He knows, beside, each subtler art,
To win the foe, to bribe, or part.
On him the giant hosts rely,
And fear no ill when he is nigh.
This peerless chieftain bears the name
Of Atikaya huge of frame,
Whom Dhanyamalini of yore
To Ravan lord of Lanka bore."

  Roused by his bow-string's awful clang,
To meet their foes the Vanars sprang.
Armed with tall trees from Lanka's wood,
And rocks and mountain peaks, they stood.
The giant's arrows, gold-bedecked,
The storm of hurtling missiles checked;
And ever on his foemen poured
Fierce tempest from his clanging cord;
Nor could the Vanar chiefs sustain
His shafts' intolerable rain.
They fled: the victor gained the place
Where stood the lord of Raghu's race,
And cried with voice of thunder: "Lo,
Borne on my car, with shaft and bow,
I, champion of the giants, scorn
To fight with weaklings humbly born.
Come forth your bravest, if he dare,
And fight with one who will not spare."

  Forth sprang Sumitra's noble child,(989)
And strained his ready bow, and smiled;
And giants trembled as the clang
Through heaven and earth reechoing rang.
The giant to his string applied
A pointed shaft, and proudly cried;
"Turn, turn, Sumitra's son and fly,
For terrible as Death am I.
Fly, nor that youthful form oppose,
Untrained in war, to warriors' blows.
What! wilt thou waste thy childish breath
And wake the dormant fire of death?
Cast down, rash boy, that useless bow:
Preserve thy life, uninjured go."

  He ceased: and stirred by wrath & pride
Sumitra's noble son replied:
"By warlike deed, not words alone,
The valour of the brave is shown.
Cease with vain boasts my scorn to move,
And with thine arm thy prowess prove.
Borne on thy car, with sword and bow,
With all thine arms, thy valour show.
Fight, and my deadly shafts this day
Low in the dust thy head shall lay,
And, rushing fast in ceaseless flood,
Shall rend thy flesh and drink thy blood."

  His giant foe no answer made,
But on his string an arrow laid.
He raised his arm, the cord he drew,
At Lakshman's breast the arrow flew.
Sumitra's son, his foemen's dread,
Shot a fleet shaft with crescent head,
Which cleft that arrow pointed well,
And harmless to the earth it fell.
A shower of shafts from Lakshman's bow
Fell fast and furious on the foe
Who quailed not as the missiles smote
With idle force his iron coat.
Then came the friendly Wind-God near,
And whispered thus in Lakshman's ear:
"Such shafts as these in vain assail
Thy foe's impenetrable mail.
A more tremendous missile try,
Or never may the giant die.
Employ the mighty spell, and aim
The weapon known by Brahma's name."
He ceased; Sumitra's son obeyed:
On his great bow the shaft was laid,
And with a roar like thunder, true
As Indra's flashing bolt, it flew.
The giant poured his shafts like rain
To check its course, but all in vain.
With spear and mace and sword he tried
To turn the fiery dart aside.
Winged with a force which naught could check,
It smote the monster in the neck,
And, sundered from his shoulders, rolled
To earth his head and helm of gold.





Canto LXXII. Ravan's Speech.


The giants bent, in rage and grief,
Their eyes upon the fallen chief:
Then flying wild with fear and pale
To Ravan bore the mournful tale.
He heard how Atikaya died,
Then turned him to his lords, and cried:
"Where are they now--my bravest--where,
Wise to consult and prompt to dare?
Where is Dhumraksha, skilled to wield
All weapons in the battle field?
Akampan, and Prahasta's might,
And Kumbhakarna bold in fight?
These, these and many a Rakshas more,
Each master of the arms he bore,
Who every foe in fight o'erthrew,
The victors none could e'er subdue,
Have perished by the might of one,
The vengeful arm of Raghu's son.
In vain I cast mine eyes around,
No match for Rama here is found,
No chief to stand before that bow
Whose deadly shafts have caused our woe.
Now, warriors, to your stations hence;
Provide ye for the wall's defence,
And be the Asoka garden, where
The lady lies, your special care.
Be every lane and passage barred,
Set at each gate a chosen guard.
And with your troops, where danger calls,
Be ready to defend the walls.
Each movement of the Vanars mark;
Observe them when the skies grow dark;
Be ready in the dead of night,
And ere the morning bring the light.
Taught by our loss we may not scorn
These legions of the forest-born."

  He ceased: the Rakshas lords obeyed;
Each at his post his troops arrayed:
And, torn with pangs that pierced him through
The monarch from the hall withdrew.





Canto LXXIII. Indrajit's Victory.


But Indrajit the fierce and bold
With words like these his sire consoled:
"Dismiss, O King, thy grief and dread,
And be not thus disquieted.
Against this numbing sorrow strive,
For Indrajit is yet alive;
And none in battle may withstand
The fury of his strong right hand.
This day, O sire, thine eyes shall see
The sons of Raghu slain by me."

  He ceased: he bade the king farewell:
Clear, mid the roar of drum and shell,
The clash of sword and harness rang
As to his car the warrior sprang.
Close followed by his Rakshas train
Through Lanka's gate he reached the plain.
Then down he leapt, and bade a band
Of giants by the chariot stand:
Then with due rites, as rules require,
Did worship to the Lord of Fire.
The sacred oil, as texts ordain,
With wreaths of scented flowers and grain,
Within the flame in order due,
That mightiest of the giants threw.
There on the ground were spear and blade,
And arrowy leaves and fuel laid;
An iron ladle deep and wide,
And robes with sanguine colours dyed.
Beside him stood a sable goat:
The giant seized it by the throat,
And straight from the consuming flame
Auspicious signs of victory came.
For swiftly, curling to the right,
The fire leapt up with willing light
Undimmed by smoky cloud, and, red
Like gold, upon the offering fed.
They brought him, while the flame yet glowed,
The dart by Brahma's grace bestowed,
And all the arms he wielded well
Were charmed with text and holy spell.

  Then fiercer for the fight he burned,
And at the foe his chariot turned,
While all his followers lifting high
Their maces charged with furious cry.
Dire, yet more dire the battle grew,
As rocks and trees and arrows flew.
The giant shot his shafts like rain,
And Vanars fell in myriads slain,
Sugriva, Angad, Nila felt
The wounds his hurtling arrows dealt.
His shafts the blood of Gaya drank;
Hanuman reeled and Mainda sank.
Bright as the glances of the sun
Came the swift darts they could not shun.
Caught in the arrowy nets he wove,
In vain the sons of Raghu strove;
And Rama, by the darts oppressed,
His brother chieftain thus addressed:
"See, first this giant warrior sends
Destruction, mid our Vanar friends,
And now his arrows thick and fast
Their binding net around us cast.
To Brahma's grace the chieftain owes
The matchless power and might he shows;
And mortal strength in vain contends
With him whom Brahma's self befriends.
Then let us still with dauntless hearts
Endure this storm of pelting darts.
Soon must we sink bereaved of sense;
And then the victor, hurrying hence,
Will seek his father in his hall
And tell him of his foemen's fall."
He ceased: o'erpowered by shaft and spell
The sons of Raghu reeled and fell.
The Rakshas on their bodies gazed;
And, mid the shouts his followers raised,
Sped back to Lanka to relate
In Ravan's hall the princes' fate.





Canto LXXIV. The Medicinal Herbs.


The shades of falling night concealed
The carnage of the battle field,
Which, bearing each a blazing brand,
Hanuman and Vibhishan scanned,
Moving with slow and anxious tread
Among the dying and the dead.
Sad was the scene of slaughter shown
Where'er the torches' light was thrown.
Here mountain forms of Vanars lay
Whose heads and limbs were lopped away,
Arms, legs and fingers strewed the ground,
And severed heads lay thick around.
The earth was moist with sanguine streams,
And sighs were heard and groans and screams.
There lay Sugriva still and cold,
There Angad, once so brave and bold.
There Jambavan his might reposed,
There Vegadarsi's eyes were closed;
There in the dust was Nala's pride,
And Dwivid lay by Mainda's side.
Where'er they looked the ensanguined plain
Was strewn with myriads of the slain;(990)
They sought with keenly searching eyes
King Jambavan supremely wise.
His strength had failed by slow decay,
And pierced with countless shafts he lay.
They saw, and hastened to his side,
And thus the sage Vibhishan cried:
"Thee, monarch of the bears, we seek:
Speak if thou yet art living, speak."

  Slow came the aged chief's reply;
Scarce could he say with many a sigh:
"Torn with keen shafts which pierce each limb,
My strength is gone, my sight is dim;
Yet though I scarce can raise mine eyes,
Thy voice, O chief, I recognize.
O, while these ears can hear thee, say,
Has Hanuman survived this day?"

  "Why ask," Vibhishan cried, "for one
Of lower rank, the Wind-God's son?
Hast thou forgotten, first in place,
The princely chief of Raghu's race?
Can King Sugriva claim no care,
And Angad, his imperial heir?"

  "Yea, dearer than my noblest friends
Is he on whom our hope depends.
For if the Wind-God's son survive,
All we though dead are yet alive.
But if his precious life be fled
Though living still we are but dead:
He is our hope and sure relief."
Thus slowly spoke the aged chief:
Then to his side Hanuman came,
And with low reverence named his name.
Cheered by the face he longed to view
The wounded chieftain lived anew.
"Go forth," he cried, "O strong and brave,
And in their woe the Vanars save.
No might but thine, supremely great,
May help us in our lost estate.
The trembling bears and Vanars cheer,
Calm their sad hearts, dispel their fear.
Save Raghu's noble sons, and heal
The deep wounds of the winged steel.
High o'er the waters of the sea
To far Himalaya's summits flee.
Kailasa there wilt thou behold,
And Rishabh, with his peaks of gold.
Between them see a mountain rise
Whose splendour will enchant thine eyes;
His sides are clothed above, below,
With all the rarest herbs that grow.
Upon that mountain's lofty crest
Four plants, of sovereign powers possessed,
Spring from the soil, and flashing there
Shed radiance through the neighbouring air.
One draws the shaft: one brings again
The breath of life to warm the slain;
One heals each wound; one gives anew
To faded cheeks their wonted hue.
Fly, chieftain, to that mountain's brow
And bring those herbs to save us now."

  Hanuman heard, and springing through
The air like Vishnu's discus(991) flew.
The sea was passed: beneath him, gay
With bright-winged birds, the mountains lay,
And brook and lake and lonely glen,
And fertile lands with toiling men.
On, on he sped: before him rose
The mansion of perennial snows.
There soared the glorious peaks as fair
As white clouds in the summer air.
Here, bursting from the leafy shade,
In thunder leapt the wild cascade.
He looked on many a pure retreat
Dear to the Gods' and sages' feet:
The spot where Brahma dwells apart,
The place whence Rudra launched his dart;(992)
Vishnu's high seat and Indra's home,
And slopes where Yama's servants roam.
There was Kuvera's bright abode;
There Brahma's mystic weapon glowed.
There was the noble hill whereon
Those herbs with wondrous lustre shone,
And, ravished by the glorious sight,
Hanuman rested on the height.
He, moving down the glittering peak,
The healing herbs began to seek:
But, when he thought to seize the prize,
They hid them from his eager eyes.
Then to the hill in wrath he spake:
"Mine arm this day shall vengeance take,
If thou wilt feel no pity, none,
In this great need of Raghu's son."
He ceased: his mighty arms he bent
And from the trembling mountain rent
His huge head with the life it bore,
Snakes, elephants, and golden ore.
O'er hill and plain and watery waste
His rapid way again he traced.
And mid the wondering Vanars laid
His burthen through the air conveyed,
The wondrous herbs' delightful scent
To all the host new vigour lent.
Free from all darts and wounds and pain
The sons of Raghu lived again,
And dead and dying Vanars healed
Rose vigorous from the battle field.





Canto LXXV. The Night Attack.


Sugriva spake in words like these:
"Now, Vanar lords, the occasion seize.
For now, of sons and brothers reft,
To Ravan little hope is left:
And if our host his gates assail
His weak defence will surely fail."

  At dead of night the Vanar bands
Rushed on with torches in their hands.
Scared by the coming of the host
Each giant warder left his post.
Where'er the Vanar legions came
Their way was marked with hostile flame
That spread in fury to devour
Palace and temple, gate and tower.
Down came the walls and porches, down
Came stately piles that graced the town.
In many a house the fire was red,
On sandal wood and aloe fed.
And scorching flames in billows rolled
O'er diamonds and pearls and gold.
On cloth of wool, on silk brocade,
On linen robes their fury preyed.
Wheels, poles and yokes were burned, and all
The coursers' harness in the stall;
And elephants' and chariots' gear,
The sword, the buckler, and the spear.
Scared by the crash of falling beams,
Mid lamentations, groans and screams,
Forth rushed the giants through the flames
And with them dragged bewildered dames,
Each, with o'erwhelming terror wild,
Still clasping to her breast a child.
The swift fire from a cloud of smoke
Through many a gilded lattice broke,
And, melting pearl and coral, rose
O'er balconies and porticoes.
The startled crane and peacock screamed
As with strange light the courtyard gleamed,
And fierce unusual glare was thrown
On shrinking wood and heated stone.
From burning stall and stable freed
Rushed frantic elephant and steed,
And goaded by the driving blaze
Fled wildly through the crowded ways.
As earth with fervent heat will glow
When comes her final overthrow;
From gate to gate, from court to spire
Proud Lanka was one blaze of fire,
And every headland, rock and bay
Shone bright a hundred leagues away.
Forth, blinded by the heat and flame
Ran countless giants huge of frame;
And, mustering for fierce attack,
The Vanars charged to drive them back,
While shout and scream and roar and cry
Reechoed through the earth and sky.
There Rama stood with strength renewed,
And ever, as the foe he viewed,
Shaking the distant regions rang
His mighty bow's tremendous clang.
Then through the gates Nikumbha hied,
And Kumbha by his brother's side,
Sent forth--the bravest and the best--
To battle by the king's behest.
There fought the chiefs in open field,
And Angad fell and Dwivid reeled.
Sugriva saw: by rage impelled
He crushed the bow which Kumbha held.
About his foe Sugriva wound
His arms, and, heaving from the ground
The giant hurled him o'er the bank;
And deep beneath the sea he sank.
Like mandar hill with furious swell
Up leapt the waters where he fell.
Again he rose: he sprang to land
And raised on high his threatening hand:
Full on Sugriva's chest it came
And shook the Vanar's massy frame,
But on the wounded bone he broke
His wrist--so furious was the stroke.
With force that naught could stay or check,
Sugriva smote him neath the neck.
The fierce blow crashed through flesh and bone
And Kumbha lay in death o'erthrown.
Nikumbha saw his brother die,
And red with fury flashed his eye.
He dashed with mighty sway and swing
His axe against the Vanar king;
But shattered on that living rock
It split in fragments at the shock.
Sugriva, rising to the blow,
Raised his huge hand and smote his foe.
And in the dust the giant lay
Gasping in blood his soul away.

[I have briefly despatched Kumbha and Nikumbha, each of whom has in the
text a long Canto to himself. When they fall Ravan sends forth Makaraksha
or Crocodile-Eye, the son of Khara who was slain by Rama in the forest
before the abduction of Sita. The account of his sallying forth, of his
battle with Rama and of his death by the fiery dart of that hero occupies
two Cantos which I entirely pass over. Indrajit again comes forth and,
rendered invisible by his magic art slays countless Vanars with his
unerring arrows. He retires to the city and returns bearing in his chariot
an effigy of Sita, the work of magic, weeping and wailing by his side. He
grasps the lovely image by the hair and cuts it down with his scimitar in
the sight of the enraged Hanuman and all the Vanar host. At last after
much fighting of the usual kind Indrajit's chariot is broken in pieces,
his charioteer is slain, and he himself falls by Lakshman's hand, to the
inexpressible delight of the high-souled saints, the nymphs of heaven and
other celestial beings.]





Canto XCIII. Ravan's Lament.


They sought the king, a mournful train,
And cried, "My lord, thy son is slain.
By Lakshman's hand, before these eyes,
The warrior fell no more to rise.
No time is this for vain regret:
Thy hero son a hero met;
And he whose might in battle pressed
Lord Indra and the Gods confessed,
Whose power was stranger to defeat,
Has gained in heaven a blissful seat."

  The monarch heard the mournful tale:
His heart was faint, his cheek was pale;
His fleeting sense at length regained,
In trembling tones he thus complained:
"Ah me, my son, my pride: the boast
And glory of the giant host.
Could Lakshman's puny might defeat
The foe whom Indra feared to meet?
Could not thy deadly arrows split
Proud Mandar's peaks, O Indrajit,
And the Destroyer's self destroy?
And wast thou conquered by a boy?
I will not weep: thy noble deed
Has blessed thee with immortal meed
Gained by each hero in the skies
Who fighting for his sovereign dies.
Now, fearless of all meaner foes,
The guardian Gods(993) will taste repose:
But earth to me, with hill and plain,
Is desolate, for thou art slain.
Ah, whither hast thou fled, and left
Thy mother, Lanka, me bereft;
Left pride and state and wives behind,
And lordship over all thy kind?
I fondly hoped thy hand should pay
Due honours on my dying day:
And couldst thou, O beloved, flee
And leave thy funeral rites to me?
Life has no comfort left me, none,
O Indrajit my son, my son."

  Thus wailed he broken by his woes:
But swift the thought of vengeance rose.
In awful wrath his teeth he gnashed,
And from his eyes red lightning flashed.
Hot from his mouth came fire and smoke,
As thus the king in fury spoke:

  "Through many a thousand years of yore
The penance and the pain I bore,
And by fierce torment well sustained
The highest grace of Brahma gained,
His plighted word my life assured,
From Gods of heaven and fiends secured.
He armed my limbs with burnished mail
Whose lustre turns the sunbeams pale,
In battle proof gainst heavenly bands
With thunder in their threatening hands.
Armed in this mail myself will go
With Brahma's gift my deadly bow,
And, cleaving through the foes my way,
The slayers of my son will slay."

  Then, by his grief to frenzy wrought,
The captive in the grove he sought.
Swift through the shady path he sped:
Earth trembled at his furious tread.
Fierce were his eyes: his monstrous hand
Held drawn for death his glittering brand.
There weeping stood the Maithil dame:
She shuddered as the giant came.
Near drew the rover of the night
And raised his sword in act to smite;
But, by his nobler heart impelled,
One Rakshas lord his arm withheld:
"Wilt thou, great Monarch," thus he cried,
"Wilt thou, to heavenly Gods allied,
Blot for all time thy glorious fame,
The slayer of a gentle dame?
What! shall a woman's blood be spilt
To stain thee with eternal guilt,
Thee deep in all the Veda's lore?
Far be the thought for evermore.
Ah look, and let her lovely face
This fury from thy bosom chase."

  He ceased: the prudent counsel pleased
The monarch, and his wrath appeased;
Then to his council hall in haste
The giant lord his steps retraced.

[I omit two Cantos in the first of which Rama with an enchanted Gandharva
weapon deals destruction among the Rakshases sent out by Ravan, and in the
second the Rakshas dames lament the slain and mourn over the madness of
Ravan.]





Canto XCVI. Ravan's Sally.


The groans and cries of dames who wailed
The ears of Lanka's lord assailed,
For from each house and home was sent
The voice of weeping and lament.
In troubled thought his head he bowed,
Then fiercely loosing on the crowd
Of nobles near his throne he broke
The silence, and in fury spoke:
"This day my deadly shafts shall fly,
And Raghu's sons shall surely die.
This day shall countless Vanars bleed
And dogs and kites and vultures feed.
Go, bid them swift my car prepare,
Bring the great bow I long to bear:
And let my host with sword and shield
And spear be ready for the field."

  From street to street the captains passed
And Rakshas warriors gathered fast.
With spear and sword to pierce and strike,
And axe and club and mace and pike.

[I omit several weapons for which I cannot find distinctive names, and
among them the _Sataghni_ or _Centicide_, supposed by some to be a kind of
fire-arms or rocket, but described by a commentator on the Mahabharata as
a stone or cylindrical piece of wood studded with iron spikes.]

Then Ravan's warrior chariot(994) wrought
With gold and rich inlay was brought.
Mid tinkling bells and weapons' clang
The monarch on the chariot sprang,
Which, decked with gems of every hue,
Eight steeds of noble lineage drew.
Mid roars of drum and shell rang out
From countless throats a joyful shout.
As, girt with hosts in warlike pride,
Through Lanka's streets the tyrant hied.
Still, louder than the roar of drums,
Went up the cry "He comes, he comes,
Our ever conquering lord who trod
Beneath his feet both fiend and God."
On to the gate the warriors swept
Where Raghu's sons their station kept.
When Ravan's car the portal passed
The sun in heaven was overcast.
Earth rocked and reeled from side to side
And birds with boding voices cried.
Against the standard of the king
A vulture flapped his horrid wing.
Big gouts of blood before him dropped,
His trembling steeds in terror stopped.
The hue of death was on his cheek,
And scarce his flattering tongue could speak,
When, terrible with flash and flame,
Through murky air a meteor came.
Still by the hand of Death impelled
His onward way the giant held.
The Vanars in the field afar
Heard the loud thunder of his car.
And turned with warriors' fierce delight
To meet the giant in the fight.
He came: his clanging bow he drew
And myriads of the Vanars slew.
Some through the side and heart he cleft,
Some headless on the plain were left.
Some struggling groaned with mangled thighs,
Or broken arms or blinded eyes.

[I omit Cantos XCVII, XCVIII, and XCIX, which describe in the usual way
three single combats between Sugriva and Angad on the Vanar side and
Virupaksha, Mahodar, and Mahaparsva on the side of the giants. The weapons
of the Vanars are trees and rocks; the giants fight with swords, axes, and
bows and arrows. The details are generally the same as those of preceding
duels. The giants fall, one in each Canto.]





Canto C. Ravan In The Field.


The plain with bleeding limbs was spread,
And heaps of dying and of dead.
His mighty bow still Rama strained,
And shafts upon the giants rained.
Still Angad and Sugriva, wrought
To fury, for the Vanars fought.
Crushed with huge rocks through chest and side
Mahodar, Mahaparsva died,
And Virupaksha stained with gore
Dropped on the plain to rise no more.
When Ravan saw the three o'erthrown
He cried aloud in furious tone:
"Urge, urge the car, my charioteer,
The haughty Vanars' death is near.
This very day shall end our griefs
For leaguered town and slaughtered chiefs.
Rama the tree whose lovely fruit
Is Sita, shall this arm uproot,--
Whose branches with protecting shade
Are Vanar lords who lend him aid."

  Thus cried the king: the welkin rang
As forth the eager coursers sprang,
And earth beneath the chariot shook
With flowery grove and hill and brook.
Fast rained his shafts: where'er he sped
The conquered Vanars fell or fled,
On rolled the car in swift career
Till Raghu's noble sons were near.
Then Rama looked upon the foe
And strained and tried his sounding bow,
Till earth and all the region rang
Re-echoing to the awful clang.
His bow the younger chieftain bent,
And shaft on shaft at Ravan sent.
He shot: but Ravan little recked;
Each arrow with his own he checked,
And headless, baffled of its aim,
To earth the harmless missile came;
And Lakshman stayed his arm o'erpowered
By the thick darts the giant showered.
Fierce waxed the fight and fiercer yet,
For Ravan now and Rama met,
And each on other poured amain
The tempest of his arrowy rain.
While all the sky above was dark
With missiles speeding to their mark
Like clouds, with flashing lightning twined
About them, hurried by the wind.
Not fiercer was the wondrous fight
When Vritra fell by Indra's might.
All arts of war each foeman knew,
And trained alike, his bowstring drew.
Red-eyed with fury Lanka's king
Pressed his huge fingers on the string,
And fixed in Rama's brows a flight
Of arrows winged with matchless flight.
Still Raghu's son endured, and bore
That crown of shafts though wounded sore.
O'er a dire dart a spell he spoke
With mystic power to aid the stroke.
In vain upon the foe it smote
Rebounding from the steelproof coat.
The giant armed his bow anew,
And wondrous weapons hissed and flew,
Terrific, deadly, swift of flight,
Beaked like the vulture and the kite,
Or bearing heads of fearful make,
Of lion, tiger, wolf and snake.(995)
Then Rama, troubled by the storm
Of flying darts in every form
Shot by an arm that naught could tire,
Launched at the foe his dart of fire,
Which, sacred to the Lord of Flame,
Burnt and consumed where'er it came.
And many a blazing shaft beside
The hero to his string applied.
With fiery course of dazzling hue
Swift to the mark each missile flew,
Some flashing like a shooting star,
Some as the tongues of lightning are;
One like a brilliant plant, one
In splendour like the morning sun.
Where'er the shafts of Rama burned
The giant's darts were foiled and turned.
Far into space his weapons fled,
But as they flew struck thousands dead.





Canto CI. Lakshman's Fall.


When Ravan saw his darts repelled,
With double rage his bosom swelled.
He summoned, wroth but undismayed,
A mightier charm to lend its aid.
And, fierce as fire before the blast,
A storm of missiles thick and fast,
Spear, pike and javelin, mace and brand,
Came hurtling from the giant's hand.
But, mightier still, the arms employed
By Raghu's son their force destroyed,
And every dart fell dulled and spent
By powers the bards of heaven had lent.
With his huge mace Vibhishan slew
The steeds that Ravan's chariot drew.
Then Ravan hurled in deadly ire
A ponderous spear that flashed like fire:
But Rama's arrows checked its way,
And harmless on the earth it lay,
The giant seized a mightier spear,
Which Death himself would shun with fear.
Vibhishan with the stroke had died,
But Lakshman's hand his bowstring plied,
And flying arrows thick as hail
Smote fiercely on the giant's mail.
Then Ravan turned his aim aside,
On Lakshman looked and fiercely cried:
"Thou, thou again my wrath hast braved,
And from his death Vibhishan saved.
Now in his stead this spear receive
Whose deadly point thy heart shall cleave."

  He ceased: he hurled the mortal dart
By Maya forged with magic art.
The spear, with all his fury flung,
Swift, flickering like a serpent's tongue,
Adorned with many a tinkling bell,
Smote Lakshman, and the hero fell.
When Rama saw, he heaved a sigh,
A tear one moment dimmed his eye.
But tender grief was soon repressed
And thoughts of vengeance filled his breast.
The air around him flashed and gleamed
As from his bow the arrows streamed;
And Lanka's lord, the foeman's dread,
O'erwhelmed with terror turned and fled.





Canto CII. Lakshman Healed.


But Rama, pride of Raghu's race,
Gazed tenderly on Lakshman's face,
And, as the sight his spirit broke,
Turned to Sushen and sadly spoke:
"Where is my power and valour? how
Shall I have heart for battle now,
When dead before my weeping eyes
My brother, noblest Lakshman, lies?
My tears in blinding torrents flow,
My hand unnerved has dropped my bow.
The pangs of woe have blanched my cheek,
My heart is sick, my strength is weak.
Ah me, my brother! Ah, that I
By Lakshman's side might sink and die:
Life, war and conquest, all are vain
If Lakshman lies in battle slain.
Why will those eyes my glances shun?
Hast thou no word of answer, none?
Ah, is thy noble spirit flown
And gone to other worlds alone?
Couldst thou not let thy brother seek
Those worlds with thee? O speak, O speak!
Rise up once more, my brother, rise,
Look on me with thy loving eyes.
Were not thy steps beside me still
In gloomy wood, on breezy hill?
Did not thy gentle care assuage
Thy brother's grief and fitful rage?
Didst thou not all his troubles share,
His guide and comfort in despair?"

  As Rama, vanquished, wept and sighed
The Vanar chieftain thus replied:
"Great Prince, unmanly thoughts dismiss,
Nor yield thy soul to grief like this.
In vain those burning tears are shed:
Our glory Lakshman is not dead.
Death on his brow no mark has set,
Where beauty's lustre lingers yet.
Clear is the skin, and tender hues
Of lotus flowers his palms suffuse.
O Rama, cheer thy trembling heart;
Not thus do life and body part.
Now, Hanuman, to thee I speak:
Hie hence to tall Mahodaya's(996) peak
Where herbs of sovereign virtue grow
Which life and health and strength bestow
Bring thou the leaves to balm his pain,
And Lakshman shall be well again."

  He ceased: the Wind-God's son obeyed
Swift through the clouds his way he made.
He reached the hill, nor stayed to find
The wondrous herbs of healing kind,
From its broad base the mount he tore
With all the shrubs and trees it bore,
Sped through the clouds again and showed
To wise Sushen his woody load.(997)
Sushen in wonder viewed the hill,
And culled the sovereign salve of ill.
Soon as the healing herb he found,
The fragrant leaves he crushed and ground.
Then over Lakshman's face he bent,
Who, healed and strengthened by the scent
Of that blest herb divinely sweet,
Rose fresh and lusty on his feet.





Canto CIII. Indra's Car.


Then Raghu's son forgot his woe:
Again he grasped his fallen bow
And hurled at Lanka's lord amain
The tempest of his arrowy rain.
Drawn by the steeds his lords had brought,
Again the giant turned and fought.
And drove his glittering chariot nigh
As springs the Day-God through the sky.
Then, as his sounding bow he bent,
Like thunderbolts his shafts were sent,
As when dark clouds in rain time shed
Fierce torrents on a mountain's head.
High on his car the giant rode,
On foot the son of Raghu strode.
The Gods from their celestial height
Indignant saw the unequal fight.
Then he whom heavenly hosts revere,
Lord Indra, called his charioteer:

  "Haste, Matali," he cried, "descend;
To Raghu's son my chariot lend.
With cheering words the chief address;
And all the Gods thy deed will bless."

  He bowed; he brought the glorious car
Whose tinkling bells were heard afar;
Fair as the sun of morning, bright
With gold and pearl and lazulite.
He yoked the steeds of tawny hue
That swifter than the tempest flew.
Then down the slope of heaven he hied
And stayed the car by Rama's side.
"Ascend, O Chief," he humbly cried,
"The chariot which the Gods provide.
The mighty bow of Indra see,
Sent by the Gods who favour thee;
Behold this coat of glittering mail,
And spear and shafts which never fail."

  Cheered by the grace the Immortals showed
The chieftain on the chariot rode.
Then as the car-borne warriors met
The awful fight raged fiercer yet.
Each shaft that Ravan shot became
A serpent red with kindled flame,
And round the limbs of Rama hung
With fiery jaws and quivering tongue.
But every serpent fled dismayed
When Raghu's valiant son displayed
The weapon of the Feathered King,(998)
And loosed his arrows from the string.
But Ravan armed his bow anew,
And showers of shafts at Rama flew,
While the fierce king in swift career
Smote with a dart the charioteer.
An arrow shot by Ravan's hand
Laid the proud banner on the sand,
And Indra's steeds of heavenly strain
Fell by the iron tempest slain.
On Gods and spirits of the air
Fell terror, trembling, and despair.
The sea's white billows mounted high
With froth and foam to drench the sky.
The sun by lurid clouds was veiled,
The friendly lights of heaven were paled;
And, fiercely gleaming, fiery Mars
Opposed the beams of gentler stars.

  Then Rama's eyes with fury blazed
As Indra's heavenly spear he raised.
Loud rang the bells: the glistering head
Bright flashes through the region shed.
Down came the spear in swift descent:
The giant's lance was crushed and bent.
Then Ravan's horses brave and fleet
Fell dead beneath his arrowy sleet.
Fierce on his foeman Rama pressed,
And gored with shafts his mighty breast.
And spouting streams of crimson dyed
The weary giant's limbs and side.

[I omit Cantos CIV and CV in which the fight is renewed and Ravan severely
reprimands his charioteer for timidity and want of confidence in his
master's prowess, and orders him to charge straight at Rama on the next
occasion.]





Canto CVI. Glory To The Sun.


There faint and bleeding fast, apart
Stood Ravan raging in his heart.
Then, moved with ruth for Rama's sake,
Agastya(999) came and gently spake:
"Bend, Rama, bend thy heart and ear
The everlasting truth to hear
Which all thy hopes through life will bless
And crown thine arms with full success.
The rising sun with golden rays,
Light of the worlds, adore and praise:
The universal king, the lord
By hosts of heaven and fiends adored.
He tempers all with soft control,
He is the Gods' diviner soul;
And Gods above and fiends below
And men to him their safety owe.
He Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, he
Each person of the glorious Three,
Is every God whose praise we tell,
The King of Heaven,(1000) the Lord of Hell:(1001)
Each God revered from times of old,
The Lord of War,(1002) the King of Gold:(1003)
Mahendra, Time and Death is he,
The Moon, the Ruler of the Sea.(1004)
He hears our praise in every form,--
The manes,(1005) Gods who ride the storm,(1006)
The Asvins,(1007) Manu,(1008) they who stand
Round Indra,(1009) and the Sadhyas'(1010) band
He is the air, and life and fire,
The universal source and sire:
He brings the seasons at his call,
Creator, light, and nurse of all.
His heavenly course he joys to run,
Maker of Day, the golden sun.
The steeds that whirl his car are seven,(1011)
The flaming steeds that flash through heaven.
Lord of the sky, the conqueror parts
The clouds of night with glistering darts.
He, master of the Vedas' lore,
Commands the clouds' collected store:
He is the rivers' surest friend;
He bids the rains, and they descend.
Stars, planets, constellations own
Their monarch of the golden throne.
Lord of twelve forms,(1012) to thee I bow,
Most glorious King of heaven art thou.
O Rama, he who pays aright
Due worship to the Lord of Light
Shall never fall oppressed by ill,
But find a stay and comfort still.
Adore with all thy heart and mind
This God of Gods, to him resigned;
And thou his saving power shalt know
Victorious o'er thy giant foe."

[This Canto does not appear in the Bengal recension. It comes in awkwardly
and may I think be considered as an interpolation, but I paraphrase a
portion of it as a relief after so much fighting and carnage, and as an
interesting glimpse of the monotheistic ideas which underlie the Hindu
religion. The hymn does not readily lend itself to metrical translation,
and I have not attempted here to give a faithful rendering of the whole. A
literal version of the text and the commentary given in the Calcutta
edition will be found in the Additional Notes.

A canto is here omitted. It contains fighting of the ordinary kind between
Rama and Ravan, and a description of sights and sounds of evil omen
foreboding the destruction of the giant.]





Canto CVIII. The Battle.


He spoke, and vanished: Rama raised
His eyes with reverence meet, and praised
The glorious Day-God full in view:
Then armed him for the fight anew.
Urged onward by his charioteer
The giant's foaming steeds came near,
And furious was the battle's din
Where each resolved to die or win.
The Rakshas host and Vanar bands
Stood with their weapons in their hands,
And watched in terror and dismay
The fortune of the awful fray.
The giant chief with rage inflamed
His darts at Rama's pennon aimed;
But when they touched the chariot made
By heavenly hands their force was stayed.
Then Rama's breast with fury swelled;
He strained the mighty bow he held,
And straight at Ravan's banner flew
An arrow as the string he drew--
A deadly arrow swift of flight,
Like some huge snake ablaze with light,
Whose fury none might e'er repel,--
And, split in twain, the standard fell.
At Rama's steeds sharp arrows, hot
With flames of fire, the giant shot.
Unmoved the heavenly steeds sustained
The furious shower the warrior rained,
As though soft lotus tendrils smote
Each haughty crest and glossy coat.
Then volleyed swift by magic art,
Tree, mountain peak and spear and dart,
Trident and pike and club and mace
Flew hurtling straight at Rama's face.
But Rama with his steeds and car
Escaped the storm which fell afar
Where the strange missiles, as they rushed
To earth, a thousand Vanars crushed.





Canto CIX. The Battle.


With wondrous power and might and skill
The giant fought with Rama still.
Each at his foe his chariot drove,
And still for death or victory strove.
The warriors' steeds together dashed,
And pole with pole reechoing clashed.
Then Rama launching dart on dart
Made Ravan's coursers swerve and start.
Nor was the lord of Lanka slow
To rain his arrows on the foe,
Who showed, by fiery points assailed,
No trace of pain, nor shook nor quailed.
Dense clouds of arrows Rama shot
With that strong arm which rested not,
And spear and mace and club and brand
Fell in dire rain from Ravan's hand.
The storm of missiles fiercely cast
Stirred up the oceans with its blast,
And Serpent-Gods and fiends who dwell
Below were troubled by the swell.
The earth with hill and plain and brook
And grove and garden reeled and shook:
The very sun grew cold and pale,
And horror stilled the rising gale.
God and Gandharva, sage and saint
Cried out, with grief and terror faint:
"O may the prince of Raghu's line
Give peace to Brahmans and to kine,
And, rescuing the worlds, o'erthrow
The giant king our awful foe."

  Then to his deadly string the pride
Of Raghu's race a shaft applied.
Sharp as a serpent's venomed fang
Straight to its mark the arrow sprang,
And from the giant's body shred
With trenchant steel the monstrous head.
There might the triple world behold
That severed head adorned with gold.
But when all eyes were bent to view,
Swift in its stead another grew.
Again the shaft was pointed well:
Again the head divided fell;
But still as each to earth was cast
Another head succeeded fast.
A hundred, bright with fiery flame,
Fell low before the victor's aim,
Yet Ravan by no sign betrayed
That death was near or strength decayed.
The doubtful fight he still maintained,
And on the foe his missiles rained.
In air, on earth, on plain, on hill,
With awful might he battled still;
And through the hours of night and day
The conflict knew no pause or stay.





Canto CX. Ravan's Death.


Then Matali to Rama cried:
"Let other arms the day decide.
Why wilt thou strive with useless toil
And see his might thy efforts foil?
Launch at the foe thy dart whose fire
Was kindled by the Almighty Sire."
He ceased: and Raghu's son obeyed:
Upon his string the hero laid
An arrow, like a snake that hissed.
Whose fiery flight had never missed:
The arrow Saint Agastya gave
And blessed the chieftain's life to save
That dart the Eternal Father made
The Monarch of the Gods to aid;
By Brahma's self on him bestowed
When forth to fight Lord Indra rode.
'Twas feathered with the rushing wind;
The glowing sun and fire combined
To the keen point their splendour lent;
The shaft, ethereal element,
By Meru's hill and Mandar, pride
Of mountains, had its weight supplied.
He laid it on the twisted cord,
He turned the point at Lanka's lord,
And swift the limb-dividing dart
Pierced the huge chest and cleft the heart,
And dead he fell upon the plain
Like Vritra by the Thunderer slain.
The Rakahas host when Ravan fell
Sent forth a wild terrific yell,
Then turned and fled, all hope resigned,
Through Lanka's gates, nor looked behind.
His voice each joyous Vanar raised,
And Rama, conquering Rama, praised.
Soft from celestial minstrels came
The sound of music and acclaim.
Soft, fresh, and cool, a rising breeze
Brought odours from the heavenly trees,
And ravishing the sight and smell
A wondrous rain of blossoms fell:
And voices breathed round Raghu's son:
"Champion of Gods, well done, well done."





Canto CXI. Vibhishan's Lament.


Vibhishan saw his brother slain,
Nor could his heart its woe contain.
O'er the dead king he sadly bent
And mourned him with a loud lament:
"O hero, bold and brave," he cried,
"Skilled in all arms, in battle tried.
Spoiled of thy crown, with limbs outspread,
Why wilt thou press thy gory bed?
Why slumber on the earth's cold breast,
When sumptuous couches woo to rest?
Ah me, my brother over bold,
Thine is the fate my heart foretold:
But love and pride forbade to hear
The friend who blamed thy wild career.
Fallen is the sun who gave us light,
Our lordly moon is veiled in night.
Our beacon fire is dead and cold
A hundred waves have o'er it rolled.
What could his light and fire avail
Against Lord Rama's arrowy hail?
Woe for the giants' royal tree,
Whose stately height was fair to see.
His buds were deeds of kingly grace,
His bloom the sons who decked his race.
With rifled bloom and mangled bough
The royal tree lies prostrate now."
"Nay, idly mourn not," Rama cried,
"The warrior king has nobly died,
Intrepid hero, firm through all,
So fell he as the brave should fall;
And ill beseems it chiefs like us
To weep for those who perish thus.
Be firm: thy causeless grief restrain,
And pay the dues that yet remain."

  Again Vibhishan sadly spoke:
"His was the hero arm that broke
Embattled Gods' and Indra's might,
Unconquered ere to-day in fight.
He rushed against thee, fought and fell,
As Ocean, when his waters swell,
Hurling his might against a rock,
Falls spent and shattered by the shock.
Woe for our king's untimely end,
The generous lord the trusty friend:
Our sure defence when fear arose,
A dreaded scourge to stubborn foes.
O, let the king thy hand has slain
The honours of the dead obtain."

  Then Rama answered. "Hatred dies
When low in dust the foeman lies.
Now triumph bids the conflict cease,
And knits us in the bonds of peace.
Let funeral rites be duly paid.
And be it mine thy toil to aid."





Canto CXII. The Rakshas Dames.


High rose the universal wail
That mourned the monarch's death, and, pale
With crushing woe, her hair unbound,
Her eyes in floods of sorrow drowned,
Forth from the inner chambers came
With trembling feet each royal dame,
Heedless of those who bade them stay
They reached the field where Ravan lay;
There falling by their husband's side,
"Ah, King! ah dearest lord!" they cried.
Like creepers shattered by the storm
They threw them on his mangled form.
One to his bleeding bosom crept
And lifted up her voice and wept.
About his feet one mourner clung,
Around his neck another hung,
One on the giant's severed head,
Her pearly tears in torrents shed
Fast as the drops the summer shower
Pours down upon the lotus flower.
"Ah, he whose arm in anger reared
The King of Gods and Yama feared,
While panic struck their heavenly train,
Lies prostrate in the battle slain.
Thy haughty heart thou wouldst not bend,
Nor listen to each wiser friend.
Ah, had the dame, as they implored,
Been yielded to her injured lord,
We had not mourned this day thy fall,
And happy had it been for all.
Then Rama and thy friends content
In blissful peace their days had spent.
Thine injured brother had not fled,
Nor giant chiefs and Vanars bled.
Yet for these woes we will not blame.
Thy fancy for the Maithil dame,
Fate, ruthless Fate, whom none may bend
Has urged thee to thy hapless end."





Canto CXIII. Mandodari's Lament.


While thus they wept, supreme in place,
The loveliest for form and face,
Mandodari drew near alone,
Looked on her lord and made her moan:
"Ah Monarch, Indra feared to stand
In fight before thy conquering hand.
From thy dread spear the Immortals ran;
And art thou murdered by a man?
Ah, 'twas no child of earth, I know,
That smote thee with that mortal blow.
'Twas Death himself in Rama's shape,
That slew thee: Death whom none escape.
Or was it he who rules the skies
Who met thee, clothed in man's disguise?
Ah no, my lord, not Indra: he
In battle ne'er could look on thee.
One only God thy match I deem:
'Twas Vishnu's self, the Lord Supreme,
Whose days through ceaseless time extend
And ne'er began and ne'er shall end:
He with the discus, shell, and mace,
Brought ruin on the giant race.
Girt by the Gods of heaven arrayed
Like Vanar hosts his strength to aid,
He Rama's shape and arms assumed
And slew the king whom Fate had doomed.
In Janasthan when Khara died
With giant legions by his side,
No mortal was the unconquered foe
In Rama's form who struck the blow.
When Hanuman the Vanar came
And burnt thy town with hostile flame,
I counselled peace in anxious fear:
I counselled, but thou wouldst not hear.
Thy fancy for the foreign dame
Has brought thee death and endless shame.
Why should thy foolish fancy roam?
Hadst thou not wives as fair at home?
In beauty, form and grace could she,
Dear lord, surpass or rival me?
Now will the days of Sita glide
In tranquil joy by Rama's side:
And I--ah me, around me raves
A sea of woe with whelming waves.
With thee in days of old I trod
Each spot beloved by nymph and God;
I stood with thee in proud delight
On Mandar's side and Meru's height;
With thee, my lord, enchanted strayed
In Chaitraratha's(1013) lovely shade,
And viewed each fairest scene afar
Transported in thy radiant car.
But source of every joy wast thou,
And all my bliss is ended now."

  Then Rama to Vibhishan cried:
"Whate'er the ritual bids, provide.
Obsequial honours duly pay,
And these sad mourners' grief allay."
Vibhishan answered, wise and true,
For duty's changeless law he knew:
"Nay one who scorned all sacred vows
And dared to touch another's spouse,
Fell tyrant of the human race,
With funeral rites I may not grace."

  Him Raghu's royal son, the best
Of those who love the law, addressed:
"False was the rover of the night,
He loved the wrong and scorned the right.
Yet for the fallen warrior plead
The dauntless heart, the valorous deed.
Let him who ne'er had brooked defeat,
The chief whom Indra feared to meet,
The ever-conquering lord, obtain
The honours that should grace the slain."
Vibhishan bade his friends prepare
The funeral rites with thoughtful care.
Himself the royal palace sought
Whence sacred fire was quickly brought,
With sandal wood and precious scents
And pearl and coral ornaments.
Wise Brahmans, while the tears that flowed
Down their wan cheeks their sorrow sowed,
Upon a golden litter laid
The corpse in finest ropes arrayed.
Thereon were flowers and pennons hung,
And loud the monarch's praise was sung.
Then was the golden litter raised,
While holy fire in order blazed.
And first in place Vibhishan led
The slow procession of the dead,
Behind, their cheeks with tears bedewed,
Came sad the widowed multitude.
Where, raised as Brahmans ordered, stood
Piled sandal logs, and scented wood,
The body of the king was set
High on a deerskin coverlet.
Then duly to the monarch's shade
The offerings for the dead they paid,
And southward on the eastern side
An altar formed and fire supplied.
Then on the shoulder of the dead
The oil and clotted milk were shed.
All rites were done as rules ordain:
The sacrificial goat was slain.
Next on the corpse were perfumes thrown
And many a flowery wreath was strown;
And with Vibhishan's ready aid
Rich vesture o'er the king was laid.
Then while the tears their cheeks bedewed
Parched grain upon the dead they strewed;
Last, to the wood, as rules require,
Vibhishan set the kindling fire.

  Then having bathed, as texts ordain,
To Lanka went the mourning train.
Vibhishan, when his task was done,
Stood by the side of Raghu's son.
And Rama, freed from every foe,
Unstrung at last his deadly bow,
And laid the glittering shafts aside,
And mail by Indra's love supplied.





Canto CXIV. Vibhishan Consecrated.


Joy reigned in heaven where every eye
Had seen the Lord of Lanka die.
In cars whose sheen surpassed the sun's
Triumphant rode the radiant ones:
And Ravan's death, by every tongue,
And Rama's glorious deeds were sung.
They praised the Vanars true and brave,
The counsel wise Sugriva gave.
The deeds of Hanuman they told,
The valiant chief supremely bold,
The strong ally, the faithful friend,
And Sita's truth which naught could bend.

  To Matali, whom Indra sent,
His head the son of Raghu bent:
And he with fiery steeds who clove
The clouds again to Swarga drove.
Round King Sugriva brave and true
His arms in rapture Rama threw,
Looked on the host with joy and pride,
And thus to noble Lakshman cried:

  "Now let king-making drops be shed,
Dear brother, on Vibhishan's head
For truth and friendship nobly shown,
And make him lord of Ravan's throne."
This longing of his heart he told:
And Lakshman took an urn of gold
And bade the wind-fleet Vanars bring
Sea water for the giants' king.
The brimming urn was swiftly brought:
Then on a throne superbly wrought
Vibhishan sat, the giants' lord,
And o'er his brows the drops were poured.
As Raghu's son the rite beheld
His loving heart with rapture swelled:
But tenderer thoughts within him woke,
And thus to Hanuman he spoke:

  "Go to my queen: this message give:
Say Lakshman and Sugriva live.
The death of Lanka's monarch tell,
And bid her joy, for all is well."





Canto CXV. Sita's Joy.


The Vanar chieftain bowed his head,
Within the walls of Lanka sped,
Leave from the new-made king obtained,
And Sita's lovely garden gained.
Beneath a tree the queen he found,
Where Rakshas warders watched around.
Her pallid cheek, her tangled hair,
Her raiment showed her deep despair,
Near and more near the envoy came
And gently hailed the weeping dame.
She started up in sweet surprise,
And sudden joy illumed her eyes.
For well the Vanar's voice she knew,
And hope reviving sprang and grew.

  "Fair Queen," he said, "our task is done:
The foe is slain and Lanka won.
Triumphant mid triumphant friends
Kind words of greeting Rama sends.
"Blest for thy sake, O spouse most true,
My deadly foe I met and slew.
Mine eyes are strangers yet to sleep:
I built a bridge athwart the deep
And crossed the sea to Lanka's shore
To keep the mighty oath I swore.
Now, gentle love, thy cares dispel,
And weep no more, for all is well.
Fear not in Ravan's house to stay
For good Vibhishan now bears sway,
For constant truth and friendship known
Regard his palace as thine own."
He greets thee thus thy heart to cheer,
And urged by love will soon be here."

  Then flushed with joy the lady's cheek.
Her eyes o'erflowed, her voice was weak;
But struggling with her sobs she broke
Her silence thus, and faintly spoke:
"So fast the flood of rapture came,
My trembling tongue no words could frame.
Ne'er have I heard in days of bliss
A tale that gave such joy as this.
More precious far than gems and gold
The message which thy lips have told."

  His reverent hands the Vanar raised
And thus the lady's answer praised:
"Sweet are the words, O Queen, which thou
True to thy lord, hast spoken now,
Better than gems and pearls of price,
Yea, or the throne of Paradise.
But, lady, ere I leave this place,
Grant me, I pray, a single grace.
Permit me, and this vengeful hand
Shall slay thy guards, this Rakshas band,
Whose cruel insult threat and scorn
Thy gentle soul too long has borne."

  Thus, stern of mood, Hanuman cried:
The Maithil lady thus replied:
"Nay, be not wroth with servants: they,
When monarchs bid must needs obey.
And, vassals of their lords, fulfil
Each fancy of their sovereign will.
To mine own sins the blame impute,
For as we sow we reap the fruit.
The tyrant's will these dames obeyed
When their fierce threats my soul dismayed."

  She ceased: with admiration moved
The Vanar chief her words approved:
"Thy speech," he cried, "is worthy one
Whom love has linked to Raghu's son.
Now speak, O Queen, that I may know
Thy pleasure, for to him I go."
The Vanar ceased: then Janak's child
Made answer as she sweetly smiled:
"'My first, my only wish can be,
O chief, my loving lord to see."
Again the Vanar envoy spoke,
And with his words new rapture woke:
"Queen, ere this sun shall cease to shine
Thy Rama's eyes shall look in thine.
Again the lord of Raghu's race
Shall turn to thee his moon-bright face.
His faithful brother shall thou see
And every friend who fought for thee,
And greet once more thy king restored
Like Sachi(1014) to her heavenly lord."
To Raghu's son his steps he bent
And told the message that she sent.





Canto CXVI. The Meeting.


He looked upon that archer chief
Whose full eye mocked the lotus leaf,
And thus the noble Vanar spake:
"Now meet the queen for whose dear sake
Thy mighty task was first begun,
And now the glorious fruit is won.
O'erwhelmed with woe thy lady lies,
The hot tears streaming from her eyes.
And still the queen must long and pine
Until those eyes be turned to thine."

  But Rama stood in pensive mood,
And gathering tears his eyes bedewed.
His sad looks sought the ground: he sighed
And thus to King Vibhishan cried:
"Let Sita bathe and tire her head
And hither to my sight be led
In raiment sweet with precious scent,
And gay with golden ornament."

  The Rakshas king his palace sought,
And Sita from her bower was brought.
Then Rakshas bearers tall and strong,
Selected from the menial throng,
Through Lanka's gate the queen, arrayed
In glorious robes and gems, conveyed.
Concealed behind the silken screen,
Swift to the plain they bore the queen,
While Vanars, close on every side,
With eager looks the litter eyed.
The warders at Vibhishan's hest
The onward rushing throng repressed,
While like the roar of ocean loud
Rose the wild murmur of the crowd.
The son of Raghu saw and moved
With anger thus the king reproved:
"Why vex with hasty blow and threat
The Vanars, and my rights forget?
Repress this zeal, untimely shown:
I count this people as mine own.
A woman's guard is not her bower,
The lofty wall, the fenced tower:
Her conduct is her best defence,
And not a king's magnificence.
At holy rites, in war and woe,
Her face unveiled a dame may show;
When at the Maiden's Choice(1015) they meet,
When marriage troops parade the street.
And she, my queen, who long has lain
In prison racked with care and pain,
May cease a while her face to hide,
For is not Rama by her side?
Lay down the litter: on her feet
Let Sita come her lord to meet.
And let the hosts of woodland race
Look near upon the lady's face."

  Then Lakshman and each Vanar chief
Who heard his words were filled with grief.
The lady's gentle spirit sank,
And from each eye in fear she shrank,
As, her sweet eyelids veiled for shame,
Slowly before her lord she came.
While rapture battled with surprise
She raised to his her wistful eyes.
Then with her doubt and fear she strove,
And from her breast all sorrow drove.
Regardless of the gathering crowd,
Bright as the moon without a cloud,
She bent her eyes, no longer dim,
In joy and trusting love on him.





Canto CXVII. Sita's Disgrace.


He saw her trembling by his side,
And looked upon her face and cried:
"Lady, at length my task is done,
And thou, the prize of war, art won,
This arm my glory has retrieved,
And all that man might do achieved;
The insulting foe in battle slain
And cleared mine honour from its stain.
This day has made my name renowned
And with success my labour crowned.
Lord of myself, the oath I swore
Is binding on my soul no more.
If from my home my queen was reft,
This arm has well avenged the theft,
And in the field has wiped away
The blot that on mine honour lay.
The bridge that spans the foaming flood,
The city red with giants' blood;
The hosts by King Sugriva led
Who wisely counselled, fought and bled;
Vibhishan's love, our guide and stay--
All these are crowned with fruit to-day.
But, lady, 'twas not love for thee
That led mine army o'er the sea.
'Twas not for thee our blood was shed,
Or Lanka filled with giant dead.
No fond affection for my wife
Inspired me in the hour of strife.
I battled to avenge the cause
Of honour and insulted laws.
My love is fled, for on thy fame
Lies the dark blot of sin and shame;
And thou art hateful as the light
That flashes on the injured sight.
The world is all before thee: flee:
Go where thou wilt, but not with me.
How should my home receive again
A mistress soiled with deathless stain?
How should I brook the foul disgrace,
Scorned by my friends and all my race?
For Ravan bore thee through the sky,
And fixed on thine his evil eye.
About thy waist his arms he threw,
Close to his breast his captive drew,
And kept thee, vassal of his power,
An inmate of his ladies' bower."





Canto CXVIII. Sita's Reply.


Struck down with overwhelming shame
She shrank within her trembling frame.
Each word of Rama's like a dart
Had pierced the lady to the heart;
And from her sweet eyes unrestrained
The torrent of her sorrows, rained.
Her weeping eyes at length she dried,
And thus mid choking sobs replied:
"Canst thou, a high-born prince, dismiss
A high-born dame with speech like this?
Such words befit the meanest hind,
Not princely birth and generous mind,
By all my virtuous life I swear
I am not what thy words declare.
If some are faithless, wilt thou find
No love and truth in womankind?
Doubt others if thou wilt, but own
The truth which all my life has shown.
If, when the giant seized his prey,
Within his hated arms I lay,
And felt the grasp I dreaded, blame
Fate and the robber, not thy dame.
What could a helpless woman do?
My heart was mine and still was true,
Why when Hanuman sent by thee
Sought Lanka's town across the sea,
Couldst thou not give, O lord of men,
Thy sentence of rejection then?
Then in the presence of the chief
Death, ready death, had brought relief,
Nor had I nursed in woe and pain
This lingering life, alas in vain.
Then hadst thou shunned the fruitless strife
Nor jeopardied thy noble life,
But spared thy friends and bold allies
Their vain and weary enterprise.
Is all forgotten, all? my birth,
Named Janak's child, from fostering earth?
That day of triumph when a maid
My trembling hand in thine I laid?
My meek obedience to thy will,
My faithful love through joy and ill,
That never failed at duty's call--
O King, is all forgotten, all?"

  To Lakshman then she turned and spoke
While sobs and sighs her utterance broke:
"Sumitra's son, a pile prepare,
My refuge in my dark despair.
I will not live to bear this weight
Of shame, forlorn and desolate.
The kindled fire my woes shall end
And be my best and surest friend."

  His mournful eyes the hero raised
And wistfully on Rama gazed,
In whose stern look no ruth was seen,
No mercy for the weeping queen.
No chieftain dared to meet those eyes,
To pray, to question or advise.

  The word was passed, the wood was piled
And fain to die stood Janak's child.
She slowly paced around her lord,
The Gods with reverent act adored,
Then raising suppliant hands the dame
Prayed humbly to the Lord of Flame:
"As this fond heart by virtue swayed
From Raghu's son has never strayed,
So, universal witness, Fire
Protect my body on the pyre,
As Raghu's son has idly laid
This charge on Sita, hear and aid."

  She ceased: and fearless to the last
Within the flame's wild fury passed.
Then rose a piercing cry from all
Dames, children, men, who saw her fall
Adorned with gems and gay attire
Beneath the fury of the fire.





Canto CXIX. Glory To Vishnu.


The shrill cry pierced through Rama's ears
And his sad eyes o'erflowed with tears,
When lo, transported through the sky
A glorious band of Gods was nigh.
Ancestral shades,(1016) by men revered,
In venerable state appeared,
And he from whom all riches flow,(1017)
And Yama Lord who reigns below:
King Indra, thousand-eyed, and he
Who wields the sceptre of the sea.(1018)
The God who shows the blazoned bull,(1019)
And Brahma Lord most bountiful
By whose command the worlds were made
All these on radiant cars conveyed,
Brighter than sun-beams, sought the place
Where stood the prince of Raghu's race,
And from their glittering seats the best
Of blessed Gods the chief addressed:

  "Couldst thou, the Lord of all, couldst thou,
Creator of the worlds, allow
Thy queen, thy spouse to brave the fire
And give her body to the pyre?
Dost thou not yet, supremely wise,
Thy heavenly nature recognize?"
They ceased: and Rama thus began:
"I deem myself a mortal man.
Of old Ikshvaku's line, I spring
From Dasaratha Kosal's king."
He ceased: and Brahma's self replied:
"O cast the idle thought aside.
Thou art the Lord Narayan, thou
The God to whom all creatures bow.
Thou art the saviour God who wore
Of old the semblance of a boar;
Thou he whose discus overthrows
All present, past and future foes;
Thou Brahma, That whose days extend
Without beginning, growth or end;
The God, who, bears the bow of horn,
Whom four majestic arms adorn;
Thou art the God who rules the sense
And sways with gentle influence;
Thou all-pervading Vishnu Lord
Who wears the ever-conquering sword;
Thou art the Guide who leads aright,
Thou Krishna of unequalled might.
Thy hand, O Lord, the hills and plains,
And earth with all her life sustains;
Thou wilt appear in serpent form
When sinks the earth in fire and storm.
Queen Sita of the lovely brows
Is Lakshmi thy celestial spouse.
To free the worlds from Ravan thou
Wouldst take the form thou wearest now.
Rejoice: the mighty task is done:
Rejoice, thou great and glorious one.
The tyrant, slain, thy labours end:
Triumphant now to heaven ascend.
High bliss awaits the devotee
Who clings in loving faith to thee,
Who celebrates with solemn praise
The Lord of ne'er beginning days.
On earth below, in heaven above
Great joy shall crown his faith and love.
And he who loves the tale divine
Which tells each glorious deed of thine
Through life's fair course shall never know
The fierce assault of pain and woe."(1020)





Canto CXX. Sita Restored.


Thus spoke the Self-existent Sire:
Then swiftly from the blazing pyre
The circling flames were backward rolled,
And, raising in his gentle hold
Alive unharmed the Maithil dame,
The Lord of Fire embodied came.
Fair as the morning was her sheen,
And gold and gems adorned the queen.
Her form in crimson robes arrayed,
Her hair was bound in glossy braid.
Her wreath was fresh and sweet of scent,
Undimmed was every ornament.
Then, standing close to Rama'a side,
The universal witness cried:
"From every blot and blemish free
Thy faithful queen returns to thee.
In word or deed, in look or mind
Her heart from thee has ne'er declined.
By force the giant bore away
From thy lone cot his helpless prey;
And in his bowers securely kept
She still has longed for thee and wept.
With soft temptation, bribe and threat,
He bade the dame her love forget:
But, nobly faithful to her lord,
Her soul the giant's suit abhorred.
Receive, O King, thy queen again,
Pure, ever pure from spot and stain."

  Still stood the king in thoughtful mood
And tears of joy his eyes bedewed.
Then to the best of Gods the best
Of warrior chiefs his mind expressed:

  "'Twas meet that mid the thousands here
The searching fire my queen should clear;
For long within the giant's bower
She dwelt the vassal of his power.
For else had many a slanderous tongue
Reproaches on mine honour flung,
And scorned the king who, love-impelled,
His consort from the proof withheld.
No doubt had I, but surely knew
That Janak's child was pure and true,
That, come what might, in good and ill
Her faithful heart was with me still.
I knew that Ravan could not wrong
My queen whom virtue made so strong.
I knew his heart would sink and fail,
Nor dare her honour to assail,
As Ocean, when he raves and roars,
Fears to o'erleap his bounding shores.
Now to the worlds her truth is shown,
And Sita is again mine own.
Thus proved before unnumbered eyes,
On her pure fame no shadow lies.
As heroes to their glory cleave,
Mine own dear spouse I ne'er will leave."
He ceased: and clasped in fond embrace
On his dear breast she hid her face.





Canto CXXI. Dasaratha.


To him Mahesvar thus replied:
"O strong-armed hero, lotus-eyed,
Thou, best of those who love the right,
Hast nobly fought the wondrous fight.
Dispelled by thee the doom that spread
Through trembling earth and heaven is fled.
The worlds exult in light and bliss,
And praise thy name, O chief, for this.
Now peace to Bharat's heart restore,
And bid Kausalya weep no more.
Thy face let Queen Kaikeyi see,
Let fond Sumitra gaze on thee.
The longing of thy friends relieve,
The kingdom of thy sires receive.
Let sons of gentle Sita born
Ikshvaku's ancient line adorn.
Then from all care and foemen freed
Perform the offering of the steed.
In pious gifts thy wealth expend,
Then to the home of Gods ascend,
Thy sire, this glorious king, behold,
Among the blest in heaven enrolled.
He comes from where the Immortals dwell:
Salute him, for he loves thee well."

  His mandate Raghu's sons obeyed,
And to their sire obeisance made,
Where high he stood above the car
In wondrous light that shone afar,
His limbs in radiant garments dressed
Whereon no spot of dust might rest.
When on the son he loved so well
The eyes of Dasaratha fell,
He strained the hero to his breast
And thus with gentle words addressed:
"No joy to me is heavenly bliss,
For there these eyes my Rama miss.
Enrolled on high with saint and sage,
Thy woes, dear son, my thoughts engage.
Kaikeyi's guile I ne'er forget:
Her cruel words will haunt me yet,
Which sent thee forth, my son, to roam
The forest far from me and home.
Now when I look on each dear face,
And hold you both in fond embrace,
My heart is full of joy to see
The sons I love from danger free.
Now know I what the Gods designed,
And how in Rama's form enshrined
The might of Purushottam lay,
The tyrant of the worlds to slay.
Ah, how Kausalya will rejoice
To hear again her darling's voice,
And, all thy weary wanderings o'er,
To gaze upon thy face once more.
Ah blest, for ever blest are they
Whose eyes shall see the glorious day
Of thy return in joy at last,
Thy term of toil and exile past.
Ayodhya's lord, begin thy reign,
And day by day new glory gain."

  He ceased: and Rama thus replied:
"Be not this grace, O sire, denied.
Those hasty words, that curse revoke
Which from thy lips in anger broke:
"Kaikeyi, be no longer mine:
I cast thee off, both thee and thine."
O father, let no sorrow fall
On her or hers: thy curse recall."
"Yea, she shall live, if so thou wilt,"
The sire replied, "absolved from guilt."
Round Lakshman then his arms he threw,
And moved by love began anew:
"Great store of merit shall be thine,
And brightly shall thy glory shine;
Secure on earth thy brother's grace.
And high in heaven shall be thy place.
Thy glorious king obey and fear:
To him the triple world is dear.
God, saint, and sage, by Indra led,
To Rama bow the reverent head,
Nor from the Lord, the lofty-souled,
Their worship or their praise withhold.
Heart of the Gods, supreme is he,
The One who ne'er shall cease to be."

  On Sita then he looked and smiled;
"List to my words" he said, "dear child,
Let not thy gentle breast retain
One lingering trace of wrath or pain.
When by the fire thy truth be proved,
By love for thee his will was moved.
The furious flame thy faith confessed
Which shrank not from the awful test:
And thou, in every heart enshrined,
Shalt live the best of womankind."

  He ceased: he bade the three adieu,
And home to heaven exulting flew.





Canto CXXII. Indra's Boon.


Then Indra, he whose fiery stroke
Slew furious Paka, turned and spoke:
"A glorious day, O chief, is this,
Rich with the fruit of lasting bliss.
Well pleased are we: we love thee well
Now speak, thy secret wishes tell."

  Thus spake the sovereign of the sky,
And this was Rama's glad reply:
"If I have won your grace, incline
To grant this one request of mine.
Restore, O King: the Vanar dead
Whose blood for me was nobly shed.
To life and strength my friends recall,
And bring them back from Yama's hall.
When, fresh in might the warriors rise,
Prepare a feast to glad their eyes.
Let fruits of every season glow,
And streams of purest water flow."

  Thus Raghu's son, great-hearted, prayed,
And Indra thus his answer made:
"High is the boon thou seekest: none
Should win this grace but Raghu's son.
Yet, faithful to the word I spake,
I grant the prayer for thy dear sake.
The Vanars whom the giants slew
Their life and vigour shall renew.
Their strength repaired, their gashes healed
Whose torrents dyed the battle field,
The warrior hosts from death shall rise
Like sleepers when their slumber flies."

  Restored from Yama's dark domain
The Vanar legions filled the plain,
And, round the royal chief arrayed,
With wondering hearts obeisance paid.
Each God the son of Raghu praised,
And cried as loud his voice he raised:
"Turn, King, to fair Ayodhya speed,
And leave thy friends of Vanar breed.
Thy true devoted consort cheer
After long days of woe and fear.
Bharat, thy loyal brother, see,
A hermit now for love of thee.
The tears of Queen Kausalya dry,
And light with joy each stepdame's eye;
Then consecrated king of men
Make glad each faithful citizen."

  They ceased: and borne on radiant cars
Sought their bright home amid the stars.





Canto CXXIII. The Magic Car.


Then slept the tamer of his foes
And spent the night in calm repose.
Vibhishan came when morning broke,
And hailed the royal chief, and spoke:
"Here wait thee precious oil and scents,
And rich attire and ornaments.
The brimming urns are newly filled,
And women in their duty skilled,
With lotus-eyes, thy call attend,
Assistance at thy bath to lend."
"Let others," Rama cried, "desire
These precious scents, this rich attire,
I heed not such delights as these,
For faithful Bharat, ill at ease,
Watching for me is keeping now
Far far away his rigorous vow.
By Bharat's side I long to stand,
I long to see my fatherland.
Far is Ayodhya: long, alas,
The dreary road and hard to pass."

  "One day," Vibhishan cried, "one day
Shall bear thee o'er that length of way.
Is not the wondrous chariot mine,
Named Pushpak, wrought by hands divine.
The prize which Ravan seized of old
Victorious o'er the God of Gold?
This chariot, kept with utmost care,
Will waft thee through the fields of air,
And thou shalt light unwearied down
In fair Ayodhya's royal town.
But yet if aught that I have done
Has pleased thee well, O Raghu's son;
If still thou carest for thy friend,
Some little time in Lanka spend;
There after toil of battle rest
Within my halls an honoured guest."
Again the son of Raghu spake:
"Thy life was perilled for my sake.
Thy counsel gave me priceless aid:
All honours have been richly paid.
Scarce can my love refuse, O best
Of giant kind, thy last request.
But still I yearn once more to see
My home and all most dear to me;
Nor can I brook one hour's delay:
Forgive me, speed me on my way."

  He ceased: the magic car was brought.
Of yore by Visvakarma wrought.
In sunlike sheen it flashed and blazed;
And Raghu's sons in wonder gazed.





Canto CXXIV. The Departure.


The giant lord the chariot viewed,
And humbly thus his speech renewed:
"Behold, O King, the car prepared:
Now be thy further will declared."
He ceased: and Rama spake once more:
"These hosts who thronged to Lanka's shore
Their faith and might have nobly shown,
And set thee on the giants' throne.
Let pearls and gems and gold repay
The feats of many a desperate day,
That all may go triumphant hence
Proud of their noble recompense."
Vibhishan, ready at his call,
With gold and gems enriched them all.
Then Rama clomb the glorious car
That shone like day's resplendent star.
There in his lap he held his dame
Vailing her eyes in modest shame.
Beside him Lakshman took his stand,
Whose mighty bow still armed his hand,
"O King Vibhishan," Rama cried,
"O Vanar chiefs, so long allied,
My comrades till the foemen fell,
List, for I speak a long farewell.
The task, in doubt and fear begun,
With your good aid is nobly done.
Leave Lanka's shore, your steps retrace,
Brave warriors of the Vanar race.
Thou, King Sugriva, true, through all,
To friendship's bond and duty's call,
Seek far Kishkindha with thy train
And o'er thy realm in glory reign.
Farewell, Vibhishan, Lanka's throne
Won by our arms is now thine own,
Thou, mighty lord, hast nought to dread
From heavenly Gods by Indra led.
My last farewell, 0 King, receive,
For Lanka's isle this hour I leave."

  Loud rose their cry in answer: "We,
O Raghu's son, would go with thee.
With thee delighted would we stray
Where sweet Ayodhya's groves are gay,
Then in the joyous synod view
King-making balm thy brows bedew;
Our homage to Kausalya pay,
And hasten on our homeward way."

  Their prayer the son of Raghu heard,
And spoke, his heart with rapture stirred:
"Sugriva, O my faithful friend,
Vibhishan and ye chiefs, ascend.
A joy beyond all joys the best
Will fill my overflowing breast,
If girt by you, O noble band,
I seek again my native land."
With Vanar lords in danger tried
Sugriva sprang to Rama's side,
And girt by chiefs of giant kind
Vibhishan's step was close behind.
Swift through the air, as Rama chose,
The wondrous car from earth arose.
And decked with swans and silver wings
Bore through the clouds its freight of kings.





Canto CXXV. The Return.


Then Rama, speeding through the skies,
Bent on the earth his eager eyes:
"Look, Sita, see, divinely planned
And built by Visvakarma's hand,
Lanka the lovely city rest
Enthroned on Mount Trikuta's crest
Behold those fields, ensanguined yet,
Where Vanar hosts and giants met.
There, vainly screened by charm and spell,
The robber Ravan fought and fell.
There knelt Mandodari(1021) and shed
Her tears in floods for Ravan dead.
And every dame who loved him sent
From her sad heart her wild lament.
There gleams the margin of the deep,
Where, worn with toil, we sank to sleep.
Look, love, the unconquered sea behold,
King Varun's home ordained of old,
Whose boundless waters roar and swell
Rich with their store of pearl and shell.
O see, the morning sun is bright
On fair Hiranyanabha's(1022) height,
Who rose from Ocean's sheltering breast
That Hanuman might stay and rest.
There stretches, famed for evermore,
The wondrous bridge from shore to shore.
The worlds, to life's remotest day,
Due reverence to the work shall pay,
Which holier for the lapse of time
Shall give release from sin and crime.
Now thither bend, dear love, thine eyes
Where green with groves Kishkindha lies,
The seat of King Sugriva's reign,
Where Bali by this hand was slain.(1023)
There Rishyamuka's hill behold
Bright gleaming with embedded gold.
There too my wandering foot I set,
There King Sugriva first I met.
And, where yon trees their branches wave,
My promise of assistance gave.
There, flushed with lilies, Pampa shines
With banks which greenest foliage lines,
Where melancholy steps I bent
And mourned thee with a mad lament.
There fierce Kabandha, spreading wide
His giant arms, in battle died.
Turn, Sita, turn thine eyes and see
In Janasthan that glorious tree:
There Ravan, lord of giants slew
Our friend Jatayus brave and true,
Thy champion in the hopeless strife,
Who gave for thee his noble life.
Now mark that glade amid the trees
Where once we lived as devotees.
See, see our leafy cot between
Those waving boughs of densest green,
Where Ravan seized his prize and stole
My love the darling of my soul.
O, look again: beneath thee gleams
Godavari the best of streams,
Whose lucid waters sweetly glide
By lilies that adorn her side.
There dwelt Agastya, holy sage,
In plantain-sheltered hermitage.
See Sarabhanga's humble shed
Which sovereign Indra visited.
See where the gentle hermits dwell
Neath Atri's rule who loved us well;
Where once thine eyes were blest to see
His sainted dame who talked with thee.
Now rest thine eyes with new delight
On Chitrakuta's woody height,
See Jumna flashing in the sun
Through groves of brilliant foliage run.
Screened by the shade of spreading boughs.
There Bharadvaja keeps his vows,
There Ganga, river of the skies,
Rolls the sweet wave that purifies,
There Sringavera's towers ascend
Where Guha reigns, mine ancient friend.
I see, I see thy glittering spires,
Ayodhya, city of my sires.
Bow down, bow down thy head, my sweet,
Our home, our long-lost home to greet."





Canto CXXVI. Bharat Consoled.


But Rama bade the chariot stay,
And halting in his airy way,
In Bharadvaja's holy shade
His homage to the hermit paid.
"O saint," he cried, "I yearn to know
My dear Ayodhya's weal and woe.
O tell me that the people thrive,
And that the queens are yet alive."

  Joy gleamed in Bhardvaja's eye,
Who gently smiled and made reply:
"Thy brother, studious of thy will,
Is faithful and obedient still.
In tangled twine he coils his hair:
Thy safe return is all his care.
Before thy shoes he humbly bends,
And to thy house and realm attends.
When first these dreary years began,
When first I saw the banished man,
With Sita, in his hermit coat,
At this sad heart compassion smote.
My breast with tender pity swelled:
I saw thee from thy home expelled,
Reft of all princely state, forlorn,
A hapless wanderer travel-worn,
Firm in thy purpose to fulfil
Thy duty and thy father's will.
But boundless is my rapture now:
Triumphant, girt with friends, art thou.
Where'er thy wandering steps have been,
Thy joy and woe mine eyes have seen.
Thy glorious deeds to me art known,
The Brahmans saved, the foes o'erthrown.
Such power have countless seasons spent
In penance and devotion lent.
Thy virtues, best of chiefs, I know,
And now a boon would fain bestow.
This hospitable gift(1024) receive:
Then with the dawn my dwelling leave."
The bended head of Rama showed
His reverence for the grace bestowed;
Then for each brave companion's sake
He sought a further boon and spake:

  "O let that mighty power of thine
The road to fair Ayodhya line
With trees where fruit of every hue
The Vanars' eye and taste may woo,
And flowers of every season, sweet
With stores of honeyed juice, may meet."
The hero ceased: the hermit bent
His reverend head in glad assent;
And swift, as Bharadvaja willed,
The prayer of Rama was fulfilled.
For many a league the lengthening road
Trees thick with fruit and blossom showed
With luscious beauty to entice
The taste like trees of Paradise.
The Vanars passed beneath the shade
Of that delightful colonnade,
Still tasting with unbounded glee
The treasures of each wondrous tree.





Canto CXXVII. Rama's Message.


But Rama, when he first looked down
And saw afar Ayodhya's town,
Had called Hanuman to his side,
The chief on whom his heart relied,
And said: "Brave Vanar, good at need,
Haste onward, to Ayodhya speed,
And learn, I pray, if all be well
With those who in the palace dwell.
But as thou speedest on thy way
Awhile at Sringavera stay.
Tell Guha the Nishadas' lord,
That victor, with my queen restored,
In health and strength with many a friend
Homeward again my steps I bend.
Thence by the road that he will show
On to Ayodhya swiftly go.
There with my love my brother greet,
And all our wondrous tale repeat.
Say that victorious in the strife
I come with Lakshman and my wife,
Then mark with keenest eye each trace
Of joy or grief on Bharat's face.
Be all his gestures closely viewed,
Each change of look and attitude.
Where breathes the man who will not cling
To all that glorifies a king?
Where beats the heart that can resign
An ancient kingdom, nor repine
To lose a land renowned for breeds
Of elephants and warrior steeds?
If, won by custom day by day,
My brother Bharat thirsts for sway,
Still let him rule the nations, still
The throne of old Ikshvaku fill.
Go, mark him well: his feelings learn,
And, ere we yet be near return."

  He ceased: and, garbed in human form,
Forth sped Hanuman swift as storm.
Sublime in air he rose, and through
The region of his father flew.
He saw far far beneath his feet
Where Ganga's flood and Jumna meet.
Descending from the upper air
He entered Sringavera, where
King Guha's heart was well content
To hear the message Rama sent.
Then, with his mighty strength renewed,
The Vanar chief his way pursued,
Valukini was far behind,
And Gomati with forests lined,
And golden fields and pastures gay
With flocks and herds beneath him lay.
Then Nandigrama charmed his eye
Where flowers were bright with every dye,
And trees of lovely foliage made
With meeting boughs delightful shade,
Where women watched in trim array
Their little sons' and grandsons' play.
His eager eye on Bharat fell
Who sat before his lonely cell.
In hermit weed, with tangled hair,
Pale, weak, and worn with ceaseless care.
His royal pomp and state resigned
For Rama still he watched and pined,
Still to his dreary vows adhered,
And royal Rama's shoes revered.
Yet still the terror of his arm
Preserved the land from fear and harm.

  The Wind-God's son, in form a man,
Raised reverent hands and thus began:
"Fond greeting, Prince, I bring to thee,
And Rama's self has sent it: he
For whom thy spirit sorrows yet
As for a hapless anchoret
In Dandak wood, in dire distress,
With matted hair and hermit dress.
This sorrow from thy bosom fling,
And hear the tale of joy I bring.
This day thy brother shalt thou meet
Exulting in his foe's defeat,
Freed from his toil and lengthened vow,
The light of victory on his brow,
With Sita, Lakshman and his friends
Homeward at last his steps he bends."

  Then joy, too mighty for control,
Rushed in full flood o'er Bharat's soul;
His reeling sense and strength gave way,
And fainting on the earth he lay,
At length upspringing from the ground,
His arms about Hanuman wound,
With tender tears of rapture sprung,
He dewed the neck to which he clung:
"Art thou a God or man," he cried,
"Whom love and pity hither guide?
For this a hundred thousand kine,
A hundred villages be thine.
A score of maids of spotless lives
To thee I give to be thy wives,
Of golden hue and bright of face,
Each lovely for her tender grace."

  He ceased a while by joy subdued,
And then his eager speech renewed.





Canto CXXVIII. Hanuman's Story.


"In doubt and fear long years have passed
And glorious tidings come at last.
True, true is now the ancient verse
Which men in time of bliss rehearse:
"Once only in a hundred years
Great joy to mortal men appears."
But now his woes and triumph tell,
And loss and gain as each befell."
He ceased: Hanuman mighty-souled
The tale of Rama's wanderings told
From that first day on which he stood
In the drear shade of Dandak wood.
He told how fierce Viradha fell;
He told of Sarabhanga's cell
Where Rama saw with wondering eyes
Indra descended from the skies.
He told how Surpanakhi came,
Her soul aglow with amorous flame,
And fled repulsed, with rage and tears,
Reft of her nose and severed ears.
He told how Rama's might subdued
The giants' furious multitude;
How Khara with the troops he led
And Trisiras and Dushan bled:
How Rama, tempted from his cot,
The golden deer pursued and shot,
And Ravan came and stole away
The Maithil queen his hapless prey,
When, as he fought, the dame to save,
His noble life Jatayus gave:
How Rama still the the search renewed,
The robber to his hold pursued,
Bridging the sea from shore to shore,
And found his queen to part no more.(1025)





Canto CXXIX. The Meeting With Bharat.


O'erwhelmed with rapture Bharat heard
The tale that all his being stirred,
And, heralding the glad event,
This order to Satrughna sent:
"Let every shrine with flowers be gay
Let incense burn and music play.
Go forth, go forth to meet your king,
Let tabours sound and minstrels sing,
Let bards swell high the note of praise
Skilled in the lore of ancient days,
Call forth the royal matrons: call
Each noble from the council hall.
Send all we love and honour most,
Send Brahmans and the warrior host,
A glorious company to bring
In triumph home our lord the king."

  Great rapture filled Satrughna's breast,
Obedient to his brother's hest.
"Send forth ten thousand men" he cried,
"Let brawny arms be stoutly plied,
And, smoothing all with skilful care,
The road for Kosal's king prepare.
Then o'er the earth let thousands throw
Fresh showers of water cool as snow,
And others strew with garlands gay
With loveliest blooms our monarch's way.
On tower and temple porch and gate
Let banners wave in royal state,
And be each roof and terrace lined
With blossoms loose and chaplets twined."

  The nobles hasting forth fulfilled
His order as Satrughna willed.
Sublime on elephants they rode
Whose gilded girths with jewels glowed.
Attended close by thousands more
Gay with the gear and flags they bore.
A thousand chiefs their steeds bestrode,
Their glittering cars a thousand showed.
And countless hosts in rich array
Pursued on foot their eager way.
Veiled from the air with silken screens
In litters rode the widowed queens.
Kausalya first, acknowledged head
And sovereign of the household, led:
Sumitra next, and after, dames
Of lower rank and humbler names.
Then compassed by a white-robed throng
Of Brahmans, heralded with song,
With shouts of joy from countless throats,
And shells' and tambours' mingled notes,
And drums resounding long and loud,
Exulting Bharat joined the crowd.
Still on his head, well-trained in lore
Of duty, Rama's shoes he bore.
The moon-white canopy was spread
With flowery twine engarlanded,
And jewelled cheuries, meet to hold
O'er Rama's brow, shone bright with gold,
Though Nandigrama's town they neared,
Of Rama yet no sign appeared.
Then Bharat called the Vanar chief
And questioned thus in doubt and grief:
"Hast thou uncertain, like thy kind,
A sweet delusive guile designed?
Where, where is royal Rama? show
The hero, victor of the foe.
I gaze, but see no Vanars still
Who wear each varied shape at will."

  In eager love thus Bharat cried,
And thus the Wind-God's son replied:
"Look, Bharat, on those laden trees
That murmur with the song of bees;
For Rama's sake the saint has made
Untimely fruits, unwonted shade.
Such power in ages long ago
Could Indra's gracious boon bestow.
O, hear the Vanars' voices, hear
The shouting which proclaims them near.
E'en now about to cross they seem
Sweet Gomati's delightful stream.
I see, I see the car designed
By Brahma's own creative mind,
The car which, radiant as the moon,
Moves at the will by Brahma's boon;
The car which once was Ravan's pride,
The victor's spoil when Ravan died.
Look, there are Raghu's sons: between
The brothers stands the rescued queen.
There is Vibhishan full in view,
Sugriva and his retinue."

  He ceased: then rapture loosed each tongue:
From men and dames, from old and young,
One long, one universal cry,
'Tis he, 'tis Rama, smote the sky.
All lighted down with eager speed
From elephant and car and steed,
And every joyful eye intent
On Rama's moonbright face was bent.
Entranced a moment Bharat gazed:
Then reverential hands he raised,
And on his brother humbly pressed
The honours due to welcome guest.
Then Bharat clomb the car to greet
His king and bowed him at his feet,
Till Rama raised him face to face
And held him in a close embrace.
Then Lakshman and the Maithil dame
He greeted as he spoke his name(1026)
He greeted next, supreme in place,
The sovereign of the Vanar race,
And Jambavan and Bali's son,
And lords and chiefs, omitting none.(1027)
Sugriva to his heart he pressed
And thus with grateful words addressed:
"Four brothers, Vanar king, were we,
And now we boast a fifth in thee.
By kindly acts a friend we know:
Offence and wrong proclaim the foe."
To King Vibhishan then he spake:
"Well hast thou fought for Rama's sake."
Nor was the brave Satrughna slow
His reverential love to show
To both his brothers, as was meet,
And venerate the lady's feet.
Then Rama to his mother came,
Saw her pale cheek and wasted frame,
With gentle words her heart consoled,
And clasped her feet with loving hold.
Then at Sumitra's feet he bent,
And fair Kaikeyi's, reverent,
Greeted each dame from chief to least,
And bowed him to the household priest.
Up rose a shout from all the throng:
"O welcome, Rama, mourned so long.
Welcome, Kausalya's joy and pride,"
Ten hundred thousand voices cried.
Then Bharat placed, in duty taught,
On Rama's feet the shoes he brought:
"My King," he cried, "receive again
The pledge preserved through years of pain,
The rule and lordship of the land
Entrusted to my weaker hand.
No more I sigh o'er sorrows past,
My birth and life are blest at last
In the glad sight this day has shown,
When Rama comes to rule his own."

  He ceased: the faithful love that moved
The prince's soul each heart approved;
Nor could the Vanar chiefs refrain
From tender tears that fell like rain.
Then Rama, stirred with joy anew,
His arms about his brother threw,
And to the grove his course he bent
Where Bharat's hermit days were spent.
Alighting in that pure retreat
He pressed the earth with eager feet.
Then, at his hest, the car rose high
And sailing through the northern sky
Sped homeward to the Lord of Gold
Who owned the wondrous prize of old.(1028)





Canto CXXX. The Consecration.


Then, reverent hand to hand applied,
Thus Bharat to his brother cried:
"Thy realm, O King, is now restored,
Uninjured to the rightful lord.
This feeble arm with toil and pain,
The weighty charge could scarce sustain.
And the great burthen wellnigh broke
The neck untrained to bear the yoke.
The royal swan outspeeds the crow:
The steed is swift, the mule is slow,
Nor can my feeble feet be led
O'er the rough ways where thine should tread.
Now grant what all thy subjects ask:
Begin, O King, thy royal task.
Now let our longing eyes behold
The glorious rite ordained of old,
And on the new-found monarch's head
Let consecrating drops be shed."

  He ceased; victorious Rama bent
His head in token of assent.
He sat, and tonsors trimmed with care
His tangles of neglected hair
Then, duly bathed, the hero shone
With all his splendid raiment on.
And Sita with the matrons' aid
Her limbs in shining robes arrayed,
Sumantra then, the charioteer,
Drew, ordered by Satrughna near,
And stayed within the hermit grove
The chariot and the steeds he drove.
Therein Sugriva's consorts, graced
With gems, and Rama's queen were placed,
All fain Ayodhya to behold:
And swift away the chariot rolled.
Like Indra Lord of Thousand Eyes,
Drawn by fleet lions through the skies.
Thus radiant in his glory showed
King Rama as he homeward rode,
In power and might unparalleled.
The reins the hand of Bharat held.
Above the peerless victor's head
The snow-white shade Satrughna spread,
And Lakshman's ever-ready hand
His forehead with a chourie fanned.
Vibhishan close to Lakshman's side
Sharing his task a chourie plied.
Sugriva on Satrunjay came,
An elephant of hugest frame:
Nine thousand others bore, behind,
The chieftains of the Vanar kind
All gay, in forms of human mould,
With rich attire and gems and gold.
Thus borne along in royal state
King Rama reached Ayodbya's gate
With merry noise of shells and drums
And joyful shouts, He comes, he comes,
A Brahman host with solemn tread,
And kine the long procession led,
And happy maids in ordered bands
Threw grain and gold with liberal hands.
Neath gorgeous flags that waved in rows
On towers and roofs and porticoes.
Mid merry crowds who sang and cheered
The palace of the king they neared.
Then Raghu's son to Bharat, best
Of duty's slaves, these words addressed:
"Pass onward to the monarch's hall.
The high-souled Vanars with thee call,
And let the chieftains, as is meet,
The widows of our father greet.
And to the Vanar king assign
Those chambers, best of all, which shine
With lazulite and pearl inlaid,
And pleasant grounds with flowers and shade."

  He ceased: and Bharat bent his head;
Sugriva by the hand he led
And passed within the palace where
Stood couches which Satrughna's care,
With robes and hangings richly dyed,
And burning lamps, had seen supplied.
Then Bharat spake: "I pray thee, friend,
Thy speedy messengers to send,
Each sacred requisite to bring
That we may consecrate our king."
Sugriva raised four urns of gold,
The water for the rite to hold,
And bade four swiftest Vanars flee
And fill them from each distant sea.
Then east and west and south and north
The Vanar envoys hastened forth.
Each in swift flight an ocean sought
And back through air his treasure brought,
And full five hundred floods beside
Pure water for the king supplied.
Then girt by many a Brahman sage,
Vasishtha, chief for reverend age,
High on a throne with jewels graced
King Rama and his Sita placed.
There by Jabali, far revered,
Vijay and Kasyap's son appeared;
By Gautam's side Katvayan stood,
And Vamadeva wise and good,
Whose holy hands in order shed
The pure sweet drops on Rama's head.
Then priests and maids and warriors, all
Approaching at Vasishtha's call,
With sacred drops bedewed their king,
The centre of a joyous ring,
The guardians of the worlds, on high,
And all the children of the sky
From herbs wherewith their hands were filled
Rare juices on his brow distilled.
His brows were bound with glistering gold
Which Manu's self had worn of old,
Bright with the flash of many a gem
His sire's ancestral diadem.
Satrughna lent his willing aid
And o'er him held the regal shade:
The monarchs whom his arm had saved
The chouries round his forehead waved.
A golden chain, that flashed and glowed
With gems the God of Wind bestowed:
Mahendra gave a glorious string
Of fairest pearls to deck the king,
The skies with acclamation rang,
The gay nymphs danced, the minstrels sang.
On that blest day the joyful plain
Was clothed anew with golden grain.
The trees the witching influence knew,
And bent with fruits of loveliest hue,
And Rama's consecration lent
New sweetness to each flowret's scent.
The monarch, joy of Raghu's line,
Gave largess to the Brahmans, kine
And steeds unnumbered, wealth untold
Of robes and pearls and gems and gold.
A jewelled chain, whose lustre passed
The glory of the sun, he cast
About his friend Sugriva's neck;
And, Angad Bali's son to deck,
He gave a pair of armlets bright
With diamond and lazulite.
A string of pearls of matchless hue
Which gleams like tender moonlight threw
Adorned with gems of brightest sheen,
He gave to grace his darling queen.
The offering from his hand received
A moment on her bosom heaved;
Then from her neck the chain she drew,
A glance on all the Vanars threw,
And wistful eyes on Rama bent
As still she held the ornament.
Her wish he knew, and made reply
To that mute question of her eye:
"Yea, love; the chain on him bestow
Whose wisdom truth and might we know,
The firm ally, the faithful friend
Through toil and peril to the end."

  Then on Hanuman's bosom hung
The chain which Sita's hand had flung:
So may a cloud, when winds are still
With moon-lit silver gird a hill.

  To every Vanar Rama gave
Rich treasures from the mine and wave.
And with their honours well content
Homeward their steps the chieftains bent.
Ten thousand years Ayodhya, blest
With Rama's rule, had peace and rest,
No widow mourned her murdered mate,
No house was ever desolate.
The happy land no murrain knew,
The flocks and herds increased and grew.
The earth her kindly fruits supplied,
No harvest failed, no children died.
Unknown were want, disease, and crime:
So calm, so happy was the time.(1029)





APPENDIX.




Section XIII. Ravan Doomed.


Afterwards Rishyasring said again to the King "I will perform another
sacrificial act to secure thee a son." Then the son of Vibhandak, of
subdued passions, seeking the happiness of the king, proceeded to perform
the sacrifice for the accomplishment of his wishes. Hither were previously
collected the gods, with the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the sages, for
the sake of receiving their respective shares, Brahma too, the sovereign
of the gods, with Sthanu, and Narayana, chief of beings and the four
supporters of the universe, and the divine mothers of all the celestials,
met together there. To the Asvamedha, the great sacrifice of the
magnanimous monarch, came also Indra the glorious one, surrounded by the
Maruts. Rishyasring then supplicated the gods assembled for their share of
the sacrifice (saying), "This devout king Dasaratha, who, through the
desire of offspring, confiding in you, has performed sacred austerities,
and who has offered to you the sacrifice called Asvamedha, is about to
perform another sacrifice for the sake of obtaining sons: To him thus
desirous of offspring be pleased to grant the blessing: I supplicate you
all with joined hands. May he have four sons, renowned through the
universe." The gods replied to the sage's son supplicating with joined
hands, "Be it so: thou, O Brahman, art ever to be regarded by us, as the
king is in a peculiar manner. The lord of men by this sacrifice shall
obtain the great object of his desires." Having thus said, the gods
preceded by Indra, disappeared.

They all then having seen that (sacrifice) performed by the great sage
according to the ordinance went to Prajapati the lord of mankind, and with
joined hands addressed Brahma the giver of blessings, "O Brahma, the
Raksha Ravana by name, to whom a blessing was awarded by thee, through
pride troubleth all of us the gods, and even the great sages, who
perpetually practise sacred austerities. We, O glorious one, regarding the
promise formerly granted by thy kindness that he should be invulnerable to
the gods, the Danavas and the Yakshas have born (_sic_) all, (his
oppression); this lord of Rakshas therefore distresses the universe; and,
inflated by this promise unjustly vexes the divine sages, the Yakshas, and
Gandharvas, the Asuras, and men: where Ravana remains there the sun loses
his force, the winds through fear of him do not blow; the fire ceases to
burn; the rolling ocean, seeing him, ceases to move its waves. Visravas,
distressed by his power, has abandoned Lanka and fled. O divine one save
us from Ravana, who fills the world with noise and tumult. O giver of
desired things, be pleased to contrive a way for his destruction."

Brahma thus informed by the devas, reflecting, replied, "Oh! I have
devised the method for slaying this outrageous tyrant. Upon his
requesting, 'May I be invulnerable to the divine sages, the Gaundharvas,
the Yakshas, the Rakshasas and the serpents,' I replied 'Be it so.' This
Raksha, through contempt, said nothing respecting man; therefore this
wicked one shall be destroyed by man." The gods, preceded by Sakra,
hearing these words spoken by Brahma, were filled with joy.

At this time Vishnu the glorious, the lord of the world, arrayed in
yellow, with hand ornaments of glowing gold, riding on Vinateya, as the
sun on a cloud, arrived with his conch, his discus, and his club in his
hand. Being adored by the excellent celestials, and welcomed by Brahma, he
drew near and stood before him. All the gods then addressed Vishnu, "O
Madhusudana, thou art able to abolish the distress of the distressed. We
intreat thee, be our sanctuary, O Vishnu." Vishnu replied, "Say, what
shall I do?" The celestials hearing these his words added further. "The
virtuous, the encourager of excellence, eminent for truth, the firm
observer of his vows, being childless, is performing an Asvamedha for the
purpose of obtaining offspring. For the sake of the good of the universe,
we intreat thee, O Vishnu, to become his son. Dividing thyself into four
parts, in the wombs of his three consorts equal to Hari, Sri, and Kirti,
assume the sonship of king Dasaratha, the lord of Ayodhya, eminent in the
knowledge of duty, generous and illustrious, as the great sages. Thus
becoming man, O Vishnu, conquer in battle Ravana, the terror of the
universe, who is invulnerable to the gods. This ignorant Rakshasa Ravana,
by the exertion of his power, afflicts the gods, the Gandharvaa, the
Siddhas, and the most excellent sages; these sages, the Gandharvas, and
the Apsaras, sporting in the forest Nandana have been destroyed by that
furious one. We, with the sages, are come to thee seeking his destruction.
The Siddhas, the Gandharvas, and the Yakshas betake themselves to thee,
thou art our only refuge; O Deva, afflicter of enemies, regard the world
of men, and destroy the enemy of the gods."

Vishnu, the sovereign of the gods, the chief of the celestials, adored by
all beings, being thus supplicated, replied to all the assembled gods
(standing) before Brahma, "Abandon fear; peace be with you; for your
benefit having killed Ravana the cruel, destructively active, the cause of
fear to the divine sages, together with all his posterity, his courtiers
and counsellors, and his relations, and friends, protecting the earth, I
will remain incarnate among men for the space of eleven thousand years."

Having given this promise to the gods, the divine Vishnu, ardent in the
work, sought a birth-place among men. Dividing himself into four parts, he
whose eyes resemble the lotus and the pulasa, the lotus petal-eyed, chose
for his father Dasaratha the sovereign of men. The divine sages then with
the Gandharvas, the Rudras, and the (different sorts of) Apsaras, in the
most excellent strains, praised the destroyer of Madhu, (saying) "Root up
Ravana, of fervid energy, the devastator, the enemy of Indra swollen with
pride. Destroy him, who causes universal lamentation, the annoyer of the
holy ascetics, terrible, the terror of the devout Tapaswis. Having
destroyed Ravana, tremendously powerful, who causes universal weeping,
together with his army and friends, dismissing all sorrow, return to
heaven, the place free from stain and sin, and protected by the sovereign
of the celestial powers."

Thus far the Section, containing the plan for the death of Ravan.

CAREY AND MARSHMAN.




Caput XIV. RATIO NECANDI RAVANAE EXCOGITATA.


Prudens ille, voluminum sacrorum gnarus, responsum quod dederat aliquamdiu
meditatus, mente ad se revocata regem deuno est effatus: Parabo tibi aliud
sacrum, genitale, prolis masculae adipiscendae gratia, cum carminibus in
ATHARVANIS exordio expressis rite peragendum. Tum coepit modestus
Vibhandaci filius, regis commodis intentus, parare sacrum, quo eius
desiderium expleret. Iam'antea eo convenerant, ut suam quisque portionem
acciperent, Di cum fidicinum coelestium choris, Beatique cum Sapientibus;
Brachman Superum regnator, Sthanus nec non augustus Narayanus, Indrasque
almus, coram visendus Ventorum cohorte circumdatus, in magno isto
sacrificio equino regis magnanimi. Ibidem vates ille deos, qui portiones
suas accipiendi gratia advenerant, apprecatus, En inquit, hicce ex
Dasarathus filiorum desiderio castimoniis adstrictus, fidei plenus,
vestrum numen adoravit sacrificio equino. Nunc iterum accingit se ad aliud
sacrum peragendum: quamobrem aequum est, ut filios cupienti vos faveatis.
Ille ego, qui manus supplices tendo, vos universos pro eo apprecor:
nascantur ei filii quatuor, faina per triplicem mundum clari. Divi
supplicem vatis filium invicem affari: Fiat quod petis! Tu nobis,
virsancte, imprimis es venerandus, nee minus rex ille; compos fiet voti
sui egregii hominum princeps. Ita locuti Di Indra duce, ex oculis
evanuerunt.

Superi vero, legitime in concilio congregati. BRACHMANEM mundi creatorem
his verbis compellarunt: Tuo munere auctus, O Brachman! gigas nomine
Ravanas, prae superbia nos omnes vexat, pariterque Sapientes castimoniis
gaudentes. A te propitio olim ex voto ei hoc munus concessum fuit, ut ne a
diis, Danuidis, Geniisve necari posset. Nos, oraculum tuum reveriti,
facinora eius qualiacunque toleramus. At ille gigantum tyrannus ternos
mundos gravibus iniuriis vexat Deos, Sapientes, Genios, Fidicines
coelestes, Titanes, mortales denique, exsuperat ille aegre cohibendus,
tuoque munere demens. Non ibi calet sol, neque Ventus prae timore spirat,
nee flagrat ignis, ubi Ravanas versatur. Ipse oceanus, vagis fluctibus
redimitus, isto viso stat immotus; eiectus fuit e sede sua Cuverus, huius
robore vexatus. Ergo ingens nobis periculum imminet ab hoc gigante visu
horribili; tuum est, alme Parens! auxilium parare, quo hic deleatur. Ita
admonitus ille a diis universis, paulisper meditatus, Ehem! inquit, hancce
inveni rationem nefarium istum necandi. Petierat is a me, ut a Gandharvis,
a Geniis, a Divis, Danuibus Gigantibusque necari non posset et me annuente
voto suo potitus est. Prae contemptu vero monstrum illud homines non
commemoravit: ideo ab homine est necandus: nullum aliud exstat leti genus,
quod ei sit fatale. Postquam audiverant gratum hunc sermonem BRACHMANIS
ore prolatum, Di cum duce suo Indra summopere gaudio erecti sunt. Eodem
temporis momento Vishnus, istuc accessit, splendore insignis, concham,
discum et clavum manibus gestans, croceo vestitu, mundi dominus, vulturis
Vinateii dorso, sicuti sol nimbo, vectus, armillas ex auro candente
gerens, salutatus a Superum primoribus. Quem laudibus celebratum
reverenter Di universi compellarunt. Tu animantium afflictorum es vindex,
Madhus interfector! quamobrem nos afflicti te apprecamur. Sis praesidio
nobis numine tuo inconcusso. Dicite, inquit Vishnus, quid pro vobis facere
me oporteat. Audito eius sermone, Di hunc in modum respondent: Rex quidam,
nomine Dasarathus, austeris castimoniis sese castigavit, litavit
sacrificio equino, prolis cupidus et prole carens. Nostro hortatu tu,
Vishnus, conditionem natorum eius subeas: ex tribus eius uxoribus,
Pudicitiae, Venustatis et Famae similibus, nasci, velis, temetipsum
quadrifariam dividens. Ibi tu in humanam naturam conversus Ravanam,
gravissimam mundi pestem, diis insuperabilem, O Vishnus! proelio caede.
Gigas ille vecors Ravanas Deos cum Fidicinum choris, Beatos et Sapientes
praestantissimos vexat, audacia superbiens. Etenim ab hoc furioso
Sapientes Fidicines et nymphae, ludentes in Nandano viridario, sunt
proculcati. Tu es nostrum omnium summa salus, divine bellator! Ut deoram
hostes extinguas, ad sortem humanam animum converte. Augustus ille
Narayanus, diis hunc in modum coram hortantibus, eosdem apto hoc sermone
compellavit: Quare, quaeso, hac in re negotium vestrum a me potissimum,
corporea specie palam facto, est peragendum aut unde tantus vobis terror
fuit iniectus? His verbis a Vishnu interrogati Di talia proferre: Terror
nobis instat, O Vishnus! a Ravana mundi direptore; a quo nos vindicare,
corpore humano assumpto, tuum est. Nemo alius coelicoiarum praeter te hunc
scelestum enecare potis est. Nimirum ille, O hostium domitor! per
diuturnum tempus sese excruciaverat severissima abstinentia, qua magnus
hicce rerum Parens propitius ipsi redditus est. Itaque almus votorum
sponsor olim ei concessit securitatem ab ommibus animantibus, hominibus
tamen exceptis. Hinc ilium, voti compotem, non aliunde quam ab homine
necis periculum urget: tu ergo, humanitate assumpta eum intertice. Sic
monitus Vishnus, Superum princeps, quem mundus universus adorat, magnum
Parentem oeterosque deos, in concilio congregatos, recti auctores,
affatur: Mittite timorem; bene bobis eveniat! Vestrae salutis gratia,
postquam praelio necavero Ravanam cum filiis nepotibusque, cum amicis,
ministris, cognatis sociisque, crudelem istum aegre cohibendum, qui
divinis Sapientibus terrorem meutit, per decem millia annorum decies
centenis additis, commorabor in mortalium sedibus, orbem terrarum imperio
regens. Tum divini sapientes et Fidicines conjuncti cum Rudris
nympharumque choris celebravere Madhus interfectorem hymnis, quales sedem
aetheriam decent.

"Ravanam ilium insolentem, acri impetu actum, superbia elatum, Superum
hostem, tumultus cientem, bonorum piorumque pestem, humanitate assumpta
pessamdare tuum est."

SCHLEGEL.




Caput XIV. IL MEZZO STABILITO PER UCCIDERE RAVANO.


Ma Riseyasringo soggiunse poscia al re: Tapprestero io un altro rito
santissimo, genitale, onde tu conseguisca la prole che tu brami. E in quel
punto stesso il saggio figliulo di Vibhandaco, intento alla prosperita del
re, pose mano al sacro rito per condurre ad effetto il suo desiderio. Gia
erano prima, per ricevere ciascuno la sua parte, qui convenuti al gran
sacrifizio del re magnanimo l'Asvamedha, i Devi coi Gandharvi, i Siddhi e
i Muni, Brahma Signor dei Sari, Sthanu e l' Augusto Narayana, i quattio
custodi dell' universo e le Madri degli Iddu, i Yacsi insieme cogli Dei, e
il sovrano, venerando Indra, visibile, circondato dalla schiera dei
Maruti. Quivi cosi parlo Riscyasringo agli Dei venuti a partecipare del
sacrifizio: Questo e il re Dasaratha, che per desiderio di progenie gia s'
astrinse ad osservanze austere, e teste pieno di fede ha a voi, O eccelsi,
sacrificato con un Asvamedha. Ora egli, sollecito d' aver figli, si
dispone ad adempiere un nuovo rito; vogliate essere favorevole a lui che
sospira progenie. Io alzo a voi supplici le mani, e voi tutti per lui
imploro: nascano a lui quattro figli degni d'essere celebrati pei tre
mondi. Risposero gli Dei al supplichevole figliuolo del Risci: Sia fatto
cio che chiedi; a te ed al re parimente si debbe da noi, O Brahmano, sommo
pregio; canseguira il re per questo sacro rito il suo suppremo desiderio.
Cio detto disparvero i Numi preceduti da Indra.

Poiche videro gli Dei compiersi debitamente dal gran Risci l'oblazione,
venuti al cospetto di Brahma facitor del mondo, signor delle creature,
cosi parlarono reverenti a lui dator di grazie: O Brahma, un Racsaso per
nome Ravano, eui tu fosti largo del tuo favore, e per superbia infesto a
noi tutti e ai grandi Saggi penitenti. Un di, O Nume, augusto, tu propizio
a lui gli accordasti il favore, ch' egli bramava, di non poter essere
ucciso dagli Dei, dai Danavi ne dai Yacsi: noi venerando i tuoi oracoli,
ogni cosa sopportiamo da costui. Quindi il signor dei Racsasi infesta con
perpetue offese i tre mondi, i Devi, i Risci, i Yacsi ed i Gandharvi, gli
Asuri e gli uomini: tutti egli opprime indegnamente inorgoglito pel tuo
dono. Cola dove si trova Ravano, piu non isfavilla per timore il sole, piu
non spira il vento, piu non fiammeggia il fuoco: l' oceano stesso cui fan
corona i vasti flutti, veggendo costui, tutto si turba e si commuove.
Stretto dalla forza di costui e ridotto allo stremo dovette Vaisravano
abbandonare Lanca. Da questo Ravano, terror del mondo, tu ne proteggi, O
almo Nume: degna, O dator d'ogni bene, trovar modo ad estirpar costui.
Fatto di queste cose conscio dai Devi, stette alquanto meditando, poi
rispose Brahma: Orsu! e stabilito il modo onde distruggere questo iniquo.
Egli a me chiese, ed io gliel concessi, di non poter essere ucciso dai
Devi, dai Risci, dai Gandharvi, dai Yacsi, dai Racsasi ne dai Serpenti; ma
per disprezzo non fece menzione degli uomini quel Racso: or bene, sara
quell' empio ucciso da un uomo. Udite le fauste parole profferte da
Brahma, furono per ogni parte liete gli Iddii col loro duce Indra. In
questo mezzo qui sopravvenne raggiante d'immensa luce il venerando Visnu,
pensato da Brahma nell' immortal sua mente, siccome atto ad estirpar
colui; Allora Brahma colla schiera de' Celesti cosi parlo a Visnu: Tu sei
il conforto delle gente oppresse, O distruttor di Madhu: noi quindi a te
supplichiamo afflitti: sia tu nostro sostegno, O Aciuto. Dite, loro
rispose Visnu, quale cosa io debba far per voi; e gli Dei, udite queste
parole, cosi soggiunsero: Un re per nome Dasaratha, giusto, virtuoso,
veridico e pio, non ha progenie e la desidera: ei gia s' impose durissime
penitenze, ed ora ha sacrificato con un Asvamedha: tu, per nostro
consiglio, O Visnu, consenti a divenir suo figlio: fatte di te quattro
parti, ti manifesta, O invocato dalle genti, nel seno delle quattro sue
consorti, simili alla venusta Dea. Cosi esortato dagli Dei quivi presenti,
l'augusto Narayana loro rispose queste opportune parole: Quale opra s'ha
da me, fatto visible nel mondo, a compiere per voi, O Devi? e d'onde in
voi cotal terrore? Intese le parole di Visnu, cosi risposero gli Dei: Il
nostro terrore. O Visnu, nasce da un Racsaso per nome Ravano, spavento
dell' universo. Vestendo umano corpo, tu debbi esterminar costui. Nessuno
fra i Celesti, fuorche tu solo, e valevole ad uccidere quell' iniquo.
Egli, O domator de' tuoi nemici, sostenne per lungo tempo acerbissime
macerazioni: per esse fu di lui contento l'augusto sommo Genitore: e un di
gli accordo propizio la sicurezza da tutti gli esseri, eccettutine gli
uomini. Per questo favore a lui concesso nou ha egli a temere offesa da
alcuna parte, fuorche dall' uomo, percio, assumendo la natura umana,
costui tu uccidi. Egli, il peggior di tutti i Racsasi, insano per la forza
che gli infonde il dono avuto, da travaglio ai Devi ed ai Gaudharvi, ai
Risci, ai Muni ed ai mortali. Egli, sicuro da morte pel favore ottenuto, e
turbatore dei sacrifizj, nemico ed uccisor dei Brahmi, divoratore degli
uomini, peste del mondo. Da lui furono assaliti re coi loro carri ed
elefanti; altri percessi e fugati si dispersero per ogni dove. Da lui
furono divorati Risci ed Apsarase: egli insomma oltracotato continuamente
e quasi per ischerzo tutti travaglia i sette mondi. Percio, O terribile ai
nemici e stabilita la morte di costui per opra d'un uomo; poich' un di per
superbia del dono tutti sprezzo gli uomini. Tu, O supremo fra i Numi, dei,
umanandoti, estirpare questo tremendo, superbo Ravano, oltracotato, a noi
nemico, terrore e flagello dei penitenti.

GORRESIO.




XIV.


De nouveau Rishyacringa tint ce langage au Monarque: "Je vais celebrer un
autre sacrifice, afin que le ciel accorde a tes voeux les enfants que tu
souhaites." Cela dit, cherchant le bonheur du roi et pour
l'accomplissement de son desir, le fils puissant de Vibhandaka se mit a
celebrer ce nouveau sacrifice.

La auparavant, etaient venus deja recevoir une part de l' offrande les
Dieux, accompagnes des Gaudharvas, et les Siddhas avec les Mounis divins,
Brahma, le monarque des Souras, l' immuable Siva, et l' auguste Narayana,
et les quatre gardiens vigilants du monde, et les meres des Immortels, et
tous les Dieux, escortes des Yakshas, et le maitre eminent du ciel, Indra,
qui se manifestait aux yeux, environne par l' essaim des Maroutes. Alors
ce jeune anachorete avait supplie tous les Dieux, que le desir d'une part
dans l' offrande avait conduits a l' acwamedha, cette grande ceremonie de
ce roi magnanime; _et, dans ce moment, l' epoux de Santa les conjurait
ainsi pour la seconde fois_: "Cet homme _en prieres_, c'est le roi
Dacaratha, qui est prive de fils. Il est rempli d' une foi vive; il s'est
inflige de penibles austerites; il vous a deja servi, divinites augustes,
le sacrifice d'un acwa-medha, et maintenant il s'etudie encore a vous
plaire avec ce nouveau sacrifice dans l'esperance que vous lui donnerez
les fils, ou tendent ses desirs. Versez donc sur lui votre bienveillance
et daignez sourire a son voeu pour des fils. C'est pour lui que moi ici,
les mains jointes, je vous adresse a tous mes supplications: envoyez-lui
quatre fils, qui soient vantes dans les trois mondes!"

"Oui! repondirent les Dieux au fils suppliant du rishi; tu merites que
nous t'ecoutions avec faveur, toi, brahme saint, et meme, en premier lieu,
ce roi. Comme recompense de ces differents sacrifices, le monarque
obtendra cet objet le plus cher de ses desirs."

Ayant aussi parle et vu que le grand saint avait mis fin suivant les rites
a son _pieux_ sacrifice, les Dieux, Indra a leur tete, s'evanouissent dans
le vide des airs et se rendent vers l' architecte des mondes, le souverain
des creatures, le donateur des biens, vers Brahma enfin, auquel tous, les
mains jointes, ils adressent les paroles suivantes: "O Brahma, un
rakshasa, nomme Ravana, tourne su mal les graces, qu'il a recues de toi.
Dans son orgueil, il nous opprime tous; il opprime avec nous les grands
anchoretes, qui se font un bonheur des macerations: car jadis, ayant su te
plaire, O Bhagavat, il a recu de toi ce don incomparable. 'Oui, as-tu dit,
exaucant le voeu du mauvais Genie; Dieu. Yaksha ou Demon ne pourra jamais
causer ta mort!' Et nous, par qui ta parole est respectee, nous avons tout
supporte de ce roi des rakshasas, qui ecrase de sa tyrannie les trois
mondes, ou il promene l' injure impunement. Enorgueilli de ce don
victorieux, il opprime indignement les Dieux, les rishis, les Yakshas, les
Gandharvas, les Asouras et les enfants de Manou. La ou se tient Ravana, la
peur empeche le soleil d'echauffer, le vent craint de souffler, et le feu
n'ose flamboyer. A son aspect, la guirlande meme des grands flots tremble
au sein de la mer. Accable par sa vigueur indomptable, Kouvera defait lui
a cede Lanka. Suave-nous donc, o toi, qui reposes daus le bonheur absolu;
sauve-nous de Ravana, le fleau des mondes. Daigne, o toi, qui souris aux
voeux du suppliant, daigne imaginer un expedient pour oter la vie a ce
cruel Demon." Les Dieux ayant ainsi denonce leurs maux a Brahma, il
reflechit un instant et leur tint ce langage: "Bien, voici que j'ai
decouvert un moyen pour tuer ce Genie scelerat. Que ni les Dieux, a-t-il
dit, ni les rishis, ni les Gandharvas ni les Yakshas, ni les rakshasas, ni
les Nagas meme ne puissent me donner la mort! Soit lui ai-je repondu.
Mais, par dedain pour la force humaine, les hommes n'ont pas ete compris
daus sa demande. C'est donc par la main d' un homme, qu'il faut immoler ce
mechant." Ainsi tombee de la bouche du createur, cette parole salutaire
satisfit pleinement le roi des habitants du ciel et tous les Dieux avec
lui. La, dans ce meme instant, survint le fortune Visnou, revetu d' une
splendeur infinie; car c'etait a lui, que Brahma avait pense dans son ame
pour la mort du tyran. Celui-ci donc avec l'essaim des Immortels adresse a
Vishnou ces paroles: "Meurtrier de Madhou, comme tu aimes a tirer de
l'affliction les etres malheureux, nous te supplions, nous qui sommes
plonges dans la tristesse, Divinite auguste, sois notre asyle!" "Dites!
reprit Vishnou; que dois-je faire?" "Ayant oui les paroles de l'ineffable,
tous les Dieux repondirent: Il est un roi nomme Dacaratha; il a embrasse
une tres-dure penitence; il a celebre meme le sacrifice d'un acwa-medha,
parce qu'il n'a point de fils et qu'il veut en obtenir du ciel. Il est
inebranlable dans sa piete, il est vante pour ses vertus; la justice est
son caractere, la verite est sa parole. Acquiesce donc a notre demande, o
toi, Vishnou, et consens a naitre comme son fils. Divise en quatre
portions de toi-meme, daigne, o toi, qui foules aux pieds tes ennemis,
daigne t' incarner dans le sein de ses trois epouses, belles comme la
deesse de la beaute." Narayana, le maitre, _non perceptible aux sens, mais
qui alors s' etait rendu_ visible, Narayana repondit cette parole
salutaire aux Dieux, qui i invitaient a cet _heroique avatara_. Quelle
chose, une fois revetu de cette incarnation, faudra-t-il encore que je
fasse pour vous, et de quelle part vient la terreur, qui vous trouble
ainsi? A ces mots du grand Vishnou: "C'est le demon Ravana, reprirent les
Dieux; c'est lui, Vishnou, cette desolation des mondes, qui nous inspire
un tel effroi. Enveloppe-toi d'un corps, humain, et qu'il te plaise
arracher du monde cette blessante epine; car nul autre que toi parmi les
habitants du ciel n'est capable d'immoler ce pecheur. _Sache que_
longtemps il s'est impose la plus austere penitence, et _que_ par elle il
s'est rendu agreable au supreme ayeul de toutes les creatures. Aussi le
distributeur ineffable des graces lui a-t-il accorde ce don insigne d'etre
invulnerable a tous les etres, l' homme seul excepte. Puisque, doue ainsi
de cette faveur, la mort terrible et sure ne peut venir a lui de nulle
autre part que de l'homme, va, dompteur _puissant_ de tes ennemis, va dans
la condition humaine, et tue-le. Car ce don, auquel on ne peut resister,
elevant au plus haut point l'ivresse de sa force, le vil rakshasa
tourmente les Dieux, les rishis, les Gandharvas, les hommes sanctifies par
la penitence; et, quoique, destructeur des sacrifices, lacerateur des
Saintes Ecritures, ennemi des brahmes, devorateur des hommes, cette faveur
incomparable sauve de la mort Ravana le triste fleau des mondes. Il ose
attaquer les rois, que defendant les chars de guerre, que remparent les
elephants: d'autres blesses et mis en fuite, sont dissipes ca et la devant
lui. Il a devore des saints, il a devore meme une foule d'apsaras. Sans
cesse, dans son delire, il s'amuse a tourmenter les sept mondes. Comme _on
vient de nous apprendre qu'_ il n'a point daigne parler d'eux ce jour, que
lui fut donnee cette faveur, _dont il abuse_, entre dans un corps humain,
o toi, qui peux briser tes ennemis, et jette sans vie a tes pieds, roi
puissant des treize Dieux, ce Ravana superbe, d'une force epouvantable,
d'un orgueil immense, l'ennemi de tous les ascetes, ce ver, _qui les
ronge_, cette cause de leurs gemissements."

_Ici, dans le premier tome du saint Ramayana_, Finit le quatorzieme
chapitre, nomme: UN EXPEDIENT POUR TUER RAVANA.

HIPPOLYTE FAUCHE.




Uttarakanda.


The Ramayan ends, epically complete, with the triumphant return of Rama
and his rescued queen to Ayodhya and his consecration and coronation in
the capital of his forefathers. Even if the story were not complete, the
conclusion of the last Canto of the sixth Book, evidently the work of a
later hand than Valmiki's, which speaks of Rama's glorious and happy reign
and promises blessings to those who read and hear the Ramayan, would be
sufficient to show that, when these verses were added, the poem was
considered to be finished. The Uttarakanda or Last Book is merely an
appendix or a supplement and relates only events antecedent and subsequent
to those described in the original poem. Indian scholars however, led by
reverential love of tradition, unanimously ascribe this Last Book to
Valmiki, and regard it as part of the Ramayan.

Signor Gorresio has published an excellent translation of the Uttarakanda,
in Italian prose, from the recension current in Bengal;(1030) and Mr. Muir
has epitomized a portion of the book in the Appendix to the Fourth Part of
his Sanskrit Texts (1862). From these scholars I borrow freely in the
following pages, and give them my hearty thanks for saving me much
wearisome labour.

"After Rama had returned to Ayodhya and taken possession of the throne,
the rishis [saints] assembled to greet him, and Agastya, in answer to his
questions recounted many particulars regarding his old enemies. In the
Krita Yuga (or Golden Age) the austere and pious Brahman rishi Pulastya, a
son of Brahma, being teased with the visits of different damsels,
proclaimed that any one of them whom he again saw near his hermitage
should become pregnant. This had not been heard by the daughter of the
royal rishi Trinavindu, who one day came into Pulastya's neighbourhood,
and her pregnancy was the result (Sect. 2, vv. 14 ff.). After her return
home, her father, seeing her condition, took her to Pulastya, who accepted
her as his wife, and she bore a son who received the name of Visravas.
This son was, like his father, an austere and religious sage. He married
the daughter of the muni Bharadvaja, who bore him a son to whom Brahma
gave the name of Vaisravan-Kuvera (Sect. 3, vv. 1 ff.). He performed
austerities for thousands of years, when he obtained from Brahma as a boon
that he should be one of the guardians of the world (along with Indra,
Varuna, and Yama) and the god of riches. He afterwards consulted his
father Visravas about an abode, and at his suggestion took possession of
the city of Lanka, which had formerly been built by Visvakarman for the
Rakshasas, but had been abandoned by them through fear of Vishnu, and was
at that time unoccupied. Rama then (Sect. 4) says he is surprised to hear
that Lanka had formerly belonged to the Rakshasas, as he had always
understood that they were the descendants of Pulastya, and now he learns
that they had also another origin. He therefore asks who was their
ancestor, and what fault they had committed that they were chased away by
Vishnu. Agastya replies that when Brahma created the waters, he formed
certain beings,--some of whom received the name of Rakshasas,--to guard
them. The first Rakshasas kings were Heti and Praheti. Heti married a
sister of Kala (Time). She bore him a son Vidyutkesa, who in his turn took
for his wife Lankatanka[t.]a, the daughter of Sandhya (V. 21). She bore
him a son Sukesa, whom she abandoned, but he was seen by Siva as he was
passing by with his wife Parvati, who made the child as old as his mother,
and immortal, and gave him a celestial city. Sukesa married a Gandharvi
called Devavati who bore three sons, Malyavat, Sumali and Mali. These sons
practised intense austerities, when Brahma appeared and conferred on them
invincibility and long life. They then harassed the gods. Visvakarma gave
them a city, Lanka, on the mountain Trikuta, on the shore of the southern
ocean, which he had built at the command of Indra.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The three Rakshasa,
Malyavat and his two brothers, then began to oppress the gods, rishis,
etc.; who (Sect. 6, v. 1 ff.) in consequence resort for aid to Mahadeva,
who having regard to his protege Sukesa the father of Malyavat, says that
he cannot kill the Rakshasas, but advises the suppliants to go to Vishnu,
which they do, and receive from him a promise that he will destroy their
enemies. The three Rakshasa kings, hearing of this, consult together, and
proceed to heaven to attack the gods. Vishnu prepares to meet them. The
battle is described in the seventh section. The Rakshasas are defeated by
Vishnu with great slaughter, and driven back to Lanka, one of their
leaders, Mali, being slain. Malyavat remonstrates with Vishnu, who was
assaulting the rear of the fugitives, for his unwarrior-like conduct, and
wishes to renew the combat (Sect. 8, v. 3 ff.). Vishnu replies that he
must fulfil his promise to the gods by slaying the Rakshasas, and that he
would destroy them even if they fled to Patala. These Rakshasas, Agastya
says, were more powerful than Ravana, and, could only be destroyed by
Narayana, _i.e._ by Rama himself, the eternal, indestructible god. Sumali
with his family lived for along time in Patala, while Kuvera dwelt in
Lanka. In section 9 it is related that Sumali once happened to visit the
earth, when he observed Kuvera going in his chariot to see his father
Visravas. This leads him to consider how he might restore his own
fortunes. He consequently desires his daughter Kaikasi to go and woo
Visravas, who receives her graciously. She becomes the mother of the
dreadful Ravana, of the huge Kumbhakarna, of Surpanakha, and of the
righteous Vibhishana, who was the last son. These children grow up in the
forest. Kumbhakarna goes about eating rishis. Kuvera comes to visit his
father, when Kaikasi takes occasion to urge her son Ravana to strive to
become like his brother (Kuvera) in splendour. This Ravana promises to do.
He then goes to the hermitage of Gokarna with his brothers to perform
austerity. In section 10 their austere observances are described: after a
thousand years' penance Ravana throws his head into the fire. He repeats
this oblation nine times after equal intervals, and is about to do it the
tenth time, when Brahma appears, and offers a boon. Ravana asks
immortality, but is refused. He then asks that he may be indestructible by
all creatures more powerful than men; which boon is accorded by Brahma
together with the recovery of all the heads he had sacrificed and the
power of assuming any shape he pleased. Vibhishana asks as his boon that
even amid the greatest calamities he may think only of righteousness, and
that the weapon of Brahma may appear to him unlearnt, etc. The god grants
his request, and adds the gift of immortality. When Brahma is about to
offer a boon to Kumbhakarna, the gods interpose, as, they say, he had
eaten seven Apsarases and ten followers of Indra, besides rishis and men;
and beg that under the guise of a boon stupefaction may be inflicted on
him. Brahma thinks on Sarasvati, who arrives and, by Brahma's command,
enters into Kumbhakarna's mouth that she may speak for him. Under this
influence he asks that he may receive the boon of sleeping for many years,
which is granted. When however Sarasvati has left him, and he recovers his
own consciousness, he perceives that he has been deluded. Kuvera by his
father's advice, gives up the city of Lanka to Ravan."(1031) Ravana
marries (Sect. 12) Mandodari the beautiful daughter of the Asur Maya whose
name has several times occurred in the Ramayan as that of an artist of
wonderful skill. She bears a son Meghanada or the Roaring Cloud who was
afterwards named Indrajit from his victory over the sovereign of the
skies. The conquest of Kuvera, and the acquisition of the magic
self-moving chariot which has done much service in the Ramayan, form the
subject of sections XIII., XIV. and XV. "The rather pretty story of
Vedavati is related in the seventeenth section, as follows: Ravana in the
course of his progress through the world, comes to the forest on the
Himalaya, where he sees a damsel of brilliant beauty, but in ascetic garb,
of whom he straightway becomes enamoured. He tells her that such an
austere life is unsuited to her youth and attractions, and asks who she is
and why she is leading an ascetic existence. She answers that she is
called Vedavati, and is the vocal daughter of Vrihaspati's son, the rishi
Kusadhwaja, sprung from him during his constant study of the Veda. The
gods, gandharvas, etc., she says, wished that she should choose a husband,
but her father would give her to no one else than to Vishnu, the lord of
the world, whom he desired for his son-in-law. Vedavati then proceeds: 'In
order that I may fulfil this desire of my father in respect of Narayana, I
wed him with my heart. Having entered into this engagement I practise
great austerity. Narayana and no other than he, Purushottama, is my
husband. From the desire of obtaining him, I resort to this severe
observance.' Ravana's passion is not in the least diminished by this
explanation and he urges that it is the old alone who should seek to
become distinguished by accumulating merit through austerity, prays that
she who is so young and beautiful shall become his bride; and boasts that
he is superior to Vishnu. She rejoins that no one but he would thus
contemn that deity. On receiving this reply he touches the hair of her
head with the tip of his finger. She is greatly incensed, and forthwith
cuts off her hair and tells him that as he has so insulted her, she cannot
continue to live, but will enter into the fire before his eyes. She goes
on 'Since I have been insulted in the forest by thee who art
wicked-hearted, I shall be born again for thy destruction. For a man of
evil desire cannot be slain by a woman; and the merit of my austerity
would be lost if I were to launch a curse against thee. But if I have
performed or bestowed or sacrificed aught may I be born the virtuous
daughter, not produced from the womb, of a righteous man.' Having thus
spoken she entered the blazing fire. Then a shower of celestial flowers
fell (from every part of the sky). It is she, lord, who, having been
Vedavati in the Krita age, has been born (in the Treta age) as the
daughter of the king of the Janakas, and (has become) thy [Rama's] bride;
for thou art the eternal Vishnu. The mountain-like enemy who was
[virtually] destroyed before by her wrath, has now been slain by her
having recourse to thy superhuman energy." On this the commentator
remarks: "By this it is signified that Sita was the principal cause of
Ravana's death; but the function of destroying him is ascribed to Rama."
On the words, "thou art Vishnu," in the preceding verse the same
commentator remarks: "By this it is clearly affirmed that Sita was
Lakshmi." This is what Parasara says: "In the god's life as Rama, she
became Sita, and in his birth as Krishna [she became] Rukmini."(1032)

In the following section (XVIII.) "Ravana is described as violently
interrupting a sacrifice which is being performed by king Marutta, and the
assembled gods in terror assume different shapes to escape; Indra becomes
a peacock, Yama a crow, Kuvera a lizard, and Varuna a swan; and each deity
bestows a boon on the animal he had chosen. The peacock's tail recalls
Indra's thousand eyes; the swan's colour becomes white, like the foam of
the ocean (Varuna being its lord); the lizard obtains a golden colour; and
the crow is never to die except when killed by a violent death, and the
dead are to enjoy the funeral oblations when they have been devoured by
the crows."(1033)

Ravan then attacks Arjuna or Karttavirya the mighty king of Mahishmati on
the banks of the Narmada, and is defeated, captured and imprisoned by
Arjuna. At the intercession of Pulastya (Sect. XXII.) he is released from
his bonds. He then visits Kishkindha where he enters into alliance with
Bali the King of the Vanars: "We will have all things in common," says
Ravan, "dames, sons, cities and kingdoms, food, vesture, and all
delights." His next exploit is the invasion of the kingdom of departed
spirits and his terrific battle with the sovereign Yama. The poet in his
description of these regions with the detested river with waves of blood,
the dire lamentations, the cries for a drop of water, the devouring worm,
all the tortures of the guilty and the somewhat insipid pleasures of the
just, reminds one of the scenes in the under world so vividly described by
Homer, Virgil, and Dante. Yama is defeated (Sect. XXVI.) by the giant, not
so much by his superior power as because at the request of Brahma Yama
refrains from smiting with his deadly weapon the Rakshas enemy to whom
that God had once given the promise that preserved him. In the
twenty-seventh section Ravan goes "under the earth into Patala the
treasure-house of the waters inhabited by swarms of serpents and Daityas,
and well defended by Varun." He subdues Bhogavati the city ruled by Vasuki
and reduces the Nagas or serpents to subjection. He penetrates even to the
imperial seat of Varun. The God himself is absent, but his sons come forth
and do battle with the invader. The giant is victorious and departs
triumphant. The twenty-eighth section gives the details of a terrific
battle between Ravan and Mandhata King of Ayodhya, a distinguished
ancestor of Rama. Supernatural weapons are employed on both sides and the
issue of the conflict is long doubtful. But at last Mandhata prepares to
use the mighty weapon "acquired by severe austerities through the grace
and favour of Rudra." The giant would inevitably have been slain. But two
pre-eminent Munis Pulastya and Galava beheld the fight through the power
given by contemplation, and with words of exhortation they parted King
Mandhata and the sovereign of the Rakshases. Ravan at last (Sect. XXXII.)
returns homeward carrying with him in his car Pushpak the virgin daughters
of kings, of Rishis, of Daityas, and Gandharvas whom he has seized upon
his way. The thirty-sixth section describes a battle with Indra, in which
the victorious Meghanada son of the giant, makes the King of the Gods his
prisoner, binds him with his magic art, and carries him away (Sect.
XXVII.) in triumph to Lanka. Brahma intercedes (Sect. XXXVIII.) and
Indrajit releases his prisoner on obtaining in return the boon that
sacrifice to the Lord of Fire shall always make him invincible in the
coming battle. In sections XXXIX., XL, "we have a legend related to Rama
by the sage Agastya to account for the stupendous strength of the monkey
Hanuman, as it had been described in the _Ramayana_. Rama naturally
wonders (as perhaps many readers of the _Ramayana_ have done since) why a
monkey of such marvellous power and prowess had not easily overcome Bali
and secured the throne for his friend Sugriva. Agastya replies that
Hanuman was at that time under a curse from a Rishi, and consequently was
not conscious of his own might."(1034) The whole story of the marvellous
Vanar is here given at length, but nothing else of importance is added to
the tale already given in the Ramayana. The Rishis or saints then (Sect.
XL.) return to their celestial seats, and the Vanars, Rakshases and bears
also (Sect. XLIII.) take their departure. The chariot Pushpak is restored
to its original owner Kuvera, as has already been related in the Ramayan.

The story of Rama and Sita is then continued, and we meet with matter of
more human interest. The winter is past and the pleasant spring-time is
come, and Rama and Sita sit together in the shade of the Asoka trees happy
as Indra and Sachi when they drink in Paradise the nectar of the Gods.
"Tell me, my beloved," says Rama, "for thou wilt soon be a mother, hast
thou a wish in thy heart for me to gratify?" And Sita smiles and answers:
"I long, O son of Raghu, to visit the pure and holy hermitages on the
banks of the Ganges and to venerate the feet of the saints who there
perform their rigid austerities and live on roots and berries. This is my
chief desire, to stand within the hermits' grove were it but for a single
day." And Rama said: "Let not the thought trouble thee: thou shalt go to
the grove of the ascetics." But slanderous tongues have been busy in
Ayodhya, and Sita has not been spared. Rama hears that the people are
lamenting his blind folly in taking back to his bosom the wife who was so
long a captive in the palace of Ravan. Rama well knows her spotless purity
in thought, word, and deed, and her perfect love of him; but he cannot
endure the mockery and the shame and resolves to abandon his unsuspecting
wife. He orders the sad but still obedient Lakshman to convey her to the
hermitage which she wishes to visit and to leave her there, for he will
see her face again no more. They arrive at the hermitage, and Lakshman
tells her all. She falls fainting on the ground, and when she recovers her
consciousness sheds some natural tears and bewails her cruel and
undeserved lot. But she resolves to live for the sake of Rama and her
unborn son, and she sends by Lakshman a dignified message to the husband
who has forsaken her: "I grieve not for myself," she says "because I have
been abandoned on account of what the people say, and not for any evil
that I have done. The husband is the God of the wife, the husband is her
lord and guide; and what seems good unto him she should do even at the
cost of her life."

Sita is honourably received by the saint Valmiki himself, and the holy
women of the hermitage are charged to entertain and serve her. In this
calm retreat she gives birth to two boys who receive the names of Kusa and
Lava. They are carefully brought up and are taught by Valmiki himself to
recite the Ramayan. The years pass by: and Rama at length determines to
celebrate the Asvamedha or Sacrifice of the Steed. Valmiki, with his two
young pupils, attends the ceremony, and the unknown princes recite before
the delighted father the poem which recounts his deeds. Rama inquires into
their history and recognizes them as his sons. Sita is invited to return
and solemnly affirm her innocence before the great assembly.

"But Sita's heart was too full; this second ordeal was beyond even her
power to submit to, and the poet rose above the ordinary Hindu level of
women when he ventured to paint her conscious purity as rebelling:
'Beholding all the spectators, and clothed in red garments, Sita clasping
her hands and bending low her face, spoke thus in a voice choked with
tears: "as I, even in mind, have never thought of any other than Rama, so
may Madhavi the goddess of Earth, grant me a hiding-place." As Sita made
this oath, lo! a marvel appeared. Suddenly cleaving the earth, a divine
throne of marvellous beauty rose up, borne by resplendent dragons on their
heads: and seated on it, the goddess of Earth, raising Sita with her arm,
said to her, "Welcome to thee!" and placed her by her side. And as the
queen, seated on the throne, slowly descended to Hades, a continuous
shower of flowers fell down from heaven on her head.'(1035)"

"Both the great Hindu epics thus end in disappointment and sorrow. In the
_Mahabharata_ the five victorious brothers abandon the hardly won throne
to die one by one in a forlorn pilgrimage to the Himalaya; and in the same
way Rama only regains his wife, after all his toils, to lose her. It is
the same in the later Homeric cycle--the heroes of the _Iliad_ perish by
ill-fated deaths. And even Ulysses, after his return to Ithaca, sets sail
again to Thesprotia, and finally falls by the hand of his own son. But in
India and Greece alike this is an afterthought of a self-conscious time,
which has been subsequently added to cast a gloom on the strong
cheerfulness of the heroic age."(1036)

"The termination of Rama's terrestrial career is thus told in Sections 116
ff. of the Uttarakanda. Time, in the form of an ascetic, comes to his
palace gate, and asks, as the messenger of the great rishi (Brahma) to see
Rama. He is admitted and received with honour, but says, when he is asked
what he has to communicate, that his message must be delivered in private,
and that any one who witnesses the interview is to lose his life. Rama
informs Lakshman of all this, and desires him to stand outside. Time then
tells Rama that he has been sent by Brahma, to say that when he (Rama,
_i.e._ Vishnu) after destroying the worlds was sleeping on the ocean, he
had formed him (Brahma) from the lotus springing from his navel, and
committed to him the work of creation; that he (Brahma) had then entreated
Rama to assume the function of Preserver, and that the latter had in
consequence become Vishnu, being born as the son of Aditi, and had
determined to deliver mankind by destroying Ravana, and to live on earth
ten thousand and ten hundred years; that period, adds Time, was now on the
eve of expiration, and Rama could either at his pleasure prolong his stay
on earth, or ascend to heaven and rule over the gods. Rama replies, that
he had been born for the good of the three worlds, and would now return to
the place whence he had come, as it was his function to fulfil the
purposes of the gods. While they are speaking the irritable rishi Durvasas
comes, and insists on seeing Rama immediately, under a threat, if refused,
of cursing Rama and all his family."

Lakshman, preferring to save his kinsman, though knowing that his own
death must be the consequence of interrupting the interview of Rama with
Time, enters the palace and reports the rishi's message to Rama. Rama
comes out, and when Durvasas has got the food he wished, and departed,
Rama reflects with great distress on the words of Time, which require that
Lakshman should die. Lakshman however exhorts Rama not to grieve, but to
abandon him and not break his own promise. The counsellors concurring in
this advice, Rama abandons Lakshman, who goes to the river Sarayu,
suppresses all his senses, and is conveyed bodily by Indra to heaven. The
gods are delighted by the arrival of the fourth part of Vishnu. Rama then
resolves to install Bharata as his successor and retire to the forest and
follow Lakshman. Bharata however refuses the succession, and determines to
accompany his brother. Rama's subjects are filled with grief, and say they
also will follow him wherever he goes. Messengers are sent to Satrughna,
the other brother, and he also resolves to accompany Rama; who at length
sets out in procession from his capital with all the ceremonial
appropriate to the "great departure," silent, indifferent to external
objects, joyless, with Sri on his right, the goddess Earth on his left,
Energy in front, attended by all his weapons in human shapes, by the Vedas
in the forms of Brahmans, by the Gayatri, the Omkara, the Vashatkara, by
rishis, by his women, female slaves, eunuchs, and servants. Bharata with
his family, and Satrughna, follow together with Brahmans bearing the
sacred fire, and the whole of the people of the country, and even with
animals, etc., etc. Rama, with all these attendants, comes to the banks of
the Sarayu. Brahma, with all the gods and innumerable celestial cars, now
appears, and all the sky is refulgent with the divine splendour. Pure and
fragrant breezes blow, a shower of flowers falls. Rama enters the waters
of the Sarayu; and Brahma utters a voice from the sky, saying: "Approach,
Vishnu; Raghava, thou hast happily arrived, with thy godlike brothers.
Enter thine own body as Vishnu or the eternal ether. For thou art the
abode of the worlds: no one comprehends thee, the inconceivable and
imperishable, except the large-eyed Maya thy primeval spouse." Hearing
these words, Rama enters the glory of Vishnu with his body and his
followers. He then asks Brahma to find an abode for the people who had
accompanied him from devotion to his person, and Brahma appoints them a
celestial residence accordingly.(1037)





ADDITIONAL NOTES.




Queen Fortune.


"A curious festival is celebrated in honour of this divinity (Lakshmi) on
the fifth lunar day of the light half of the month Magha (February), when
she is identified with Saraswati the consort of Brahma, and the goddess of
learning. In his treatise on festivals, a great modern authority,
Raghunandana, mentions, on the faith of a work called
_Samvatsara-sandipa_, that Lakshmi is to be worshipped in the forenoon of
that day with flowers, perfumes, rice, and water; that due honour is to be
paid to inkstand and writing-reed, and no writing to be done. Wilson, in
his essay on the _Religious Festivals of the Hindus_ (works, vol. ii, p.
188. ff.) adds that on the morning of the 2nd February, the whole of the
pens and inkstands, and the books, if not too numerous and bulky, are
collected, the pens or reeds cleaned, the inkstands scoured, and the books
wrapped up in new cloth, are arranged upon a platform, or a sheet, and
strewn over with flowers and blades of young barley, and that no flowers
except white are to be offered. After performing the necessary rites, {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
all the members of the family assemble and make their prostrations; the
books, the pens, and ink having an entire holiday; and should any
emergency require a written communication on the day dedicated to the
divinity of scholarship, it is done with chalk or charcoal upon a black or
white board."

CHAMBERS'S ENCYCLOPAEDIA. _Lakshmi_.




Indra.


"The Hindu Jove or Jupiter Tonans, chief of the secondary deities. He
presides over swarga or paradise, and is more particularly the god of the
atmosphere and winds. He is also regent of the east quarter of the sky. As
chief of the deities he is called Devapati, Devadeva, Surapati, etc.; as
lord of the atmosphere Divaspati; as lord of the eight Vasus or demigods,
Fire, etc., Vasava; as breaking cities into fragments, Purandara, Puranda;
as lord of a hundred sacrifices (the performance of a hundred Asvamedhas
elevating the sacrificer to the rank of Indra) Satakratu, Satamakha; as
having a thousand eyes, Sahasraksha; as husband of Sachi, Sachipati. His
wife is called Sachi, Indrani, Sakrani, Maghoni, Indrasakti, Pulomaja, and
Paulomi. His son is Jayanta. His pleasure garden or elysium is Nandana;
his city, Amaravati; his palace, Vaijayanta; his horse, Uchchaihsravas,
his elephant, Airavata; his charioteer, Matali."

PROFESSOR M. WILLIAMS'S English-Sanskrit Dictionary. _Indra_.




Vishnu.


"The second person of the Hindu triad, and the most celebrated and popular
of all the Indian deities. He is the personification of the preserving
power, and became incarnate in nine different forms, for the preservation
of mankind in various emergencies. Before the creation of the universe,
and after its temporary annihilation, he is supposed to sleep on the
waters, floating on the serpent Sesha, and is then identified with
Narayana. Brahma, the creator, is fabled to spring at that time from a
lotus which grows from his navel, whilst thus asleep.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} His ten avatars or
incarnations are:

"1. The Matsya, or fish. In this avatar Vishnu descended in the form of a
fish to save the pious king Satyavrata, who with the seven Rishis and
their wives had taken refuge in the ark to escape the deluge which then
destroyed the earth. 2, The Kurma, or Tortoise. In this he descended in
the form of a tortoise, for the purpose of restoring to man some of the
comforts lost during the flood. To this end he stationed himself at the
bottom of the ocean, and allowed the point of the great mountain Mandara
to be placed upon his back, which served as a hard axis, whereon the gods
and demons, with the serpent Vasuki twisted round the mountain for a rope,
churned the waters for the recovery of the amrita or nectar, and fourteen
other sacred things. 3. The Varaha, or Boar. In this he descended in the
form of a boar to rescue the earth from the power of a demon called
'golden-eyed,' Hiranyaksha. This demon had seized on the earth and carried
it with him into the depths of the ocean. Vishnu dived into the abyss, and
after a contest of a thousand years slew the monster. 4. The Narasinha, or
Man-lion. In this monstrous shape of a creature half-man, half-lion,
Vishnu delivered the earth from the tyranny of an insolent demon called
Hiranyakasipu. 5. Vamana, or Dwarf. This avatar happened in the second age
of the Hindus or Tretayug, the four preceding are said to have occurred in
the first or Satyayug; the object of this avatar was to trick Bali out of
the dominion of the three worlds. Assuming the form of a wretched dwarf he
appeared before the king and asked, as a boon, as much land as he could
pace in three steps. This was granted; and Vishnu immediately expanding
himself till he filled the world, deprived Bali at two steps of heaven and
earth, but in consideration of some merit, left Patala still in his
dominion. 6. Parasurama. 7. Ramchandra. 8. Krishna, or according to some
Balarama. 9. Buddha. In this avatar Vishnu descended in the form of a sage
for the purpose of making some reform in the religion of the Brahmins, and
especially to reclaim them from their proneness to animal sacrifice. Many
of the Hindus will not allow this to have been an incarnation of their
favourite god. 10. Kalki, or White Horse. This is yet to come. Vishnu
mounted on a white horse, with a drawn scimitar, blazing like a comet,
will, according to prophecy, end this present age, viz. the fourth or
Kaliyug, by destroying the world, and then renovating creation by an age
of purity."

WILLIAM'S DICTIONARY. _Vishnu._




Siva.


"A celebrated Hindu God, the Destroyer of creation, and therefore the most
formidable of the Hindu Triad. He also personifies reproduction, since the
Hindu philosophy excludes the idea of total annihilation without
subsequent regeneration. Hence he is sometimes confounded with Brahma, the
creator or first person of the Triad. He is the particular God of the
Tantrikas, or followers of the books called Tantras. His worshippers are
termed Saivas, and although not so numerous as the Vaishnavas, exalt their
god to the highest place in the heavens, and combine in him many of the
attributes which properly belong to the other deities. According to them
Siva is Time, Justice, Fire, Water, the Sun, the Destroyer and Creator. As
presiding over generation, his type is the Linga, or Phallus, the origin
probably of the Phallic emblem of Egypt and Greece. As the God of
generation and justice, which latter character he shares with the god
Yama, he is represented riding a white bull. His own colour, as well as
that of the bull, is generally white, referring probably to the unsullied
purity of Justice. His throat is dark-blue; his hair of a light reddish
colour, and thickly matted together, and gathered above his head like the
hair of an ascetic. He is sometimes seen with two hands, sometimes with
four, eight, or ten, and with five faces. He has three eyes, one being in
the centre of his forehead, pointing up and down. These are said to denote
his view of the three divisions of time, past, present, and future. He
holds a trident in his hand to denote, as some say, his relationship to
water, or according to others, to show that the three great attributes of
Creator, Destroyer, and Regenerator are combined in him. His loins are
enveloped in a tiger's skin. In his character of Time, he not only
presides over its extinction, but also its astronomical regulation. A
crescent or half-moon on his forehead indicates the measure of time by the
phases of the moon; a serpent forms one of his necklaces to denote the
measure of time by years, and a second necklace of human skulls marks the
lapse and revolution of ages, and the extinction and succession of the
generations of mankind. He is often represented as entirely covered with
serpents, which are the emblems of immortality. They are bound in his
hair, round his neck, wrists, waist, arms and legs; they serve as rings
for his fingers, and earrings for his ears, and are his constant
companions. Siva has more than a thousand names which are detailed at
length in the sixty-ninth chapter of the Siva Purana."--WILLIAMS'S
DICTIONARY, _Siva_.




Apsarases.


"Originally these deities seem to have been personifications of the
vapours which are attracted by the sun, and form into mist or clouds:
their character may be thus interpreted in the few hymns of the Rigveda
where mention is made of them. At a subsequent period when the Gandharva
of the Rigveda who personifies there especially the Fire of the Sun,
expanded into the Fire of Lightning, the rays of the moon and other
attributes of the elementary life of heaven as well as into pious acts
referring to it, the Apsarasas become divinities which represent phenomena
or objects both of a physical and ethical kind closely associated with
that life; thus in the _Yajurveda_ Sunbeams are called the Apsarasas
associated with the Gandharva who is the Sun; Plants are termed the
Apsarasas connected with the Gandharva Fire: Constellations are the
Apsarasas of the Gandharva Moon: Waters the Apsarasas of the Gandharva
Wind, etc. etc.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} In the last Mythological epoch when the Gandharvas have
saved from their elementary nature merely so much as to be musicians in
the paradise of Indra, the Apsarasas appear among other subordinate
deities which share in the merry life of Indra's heaven, as the wives of
the Gandharvas, but more especially as wives of a licentious sort, and
they are promised therefore, too, as a reward to heroes fallen in battle
when they are received in the paradise of Indra; and while, in the
Rigveda, they assist Soma to pour down his floods, they descend in the
epic literature on earth merely to shake the virtue of penitent Sages and
to deprive them of the power they would otherwise have acquired through
unbroken austerities."--GOLDSTUeCKER'S _Sanskrit Dictionary_.




Vishnu's Incarnation As Rama.


"Here is described one of the _avatars_, descents or manifestations of
Vishnu in a visible form. The word _avatar_ signifies literally _descent_.
The _avatar_ which is here spoken of, that in which, according to Indian
traditions, Vishnu descended and appeared upon earth in the corporeal form
of Rama, the hero of the Ramayana, is the seventh in the series of Indian
_avatars_. Much has been said before now of these avatars, and through
deficient knowledge of the ideas and doctrines of India, they have been
compared to the sublime dogma of the Christian Incarnation. This is one of
the grossest errors that ignorance of the ideas and beliefs of a people
has produced. Between the _avatars_ of India and the Christian Incarnation
there is such an immensity of difference that it is impossible to find any
reasonable analogy that can approximate them. The idea of the _avatars_ is
intimately united with that of the Trimurti; the bond of connection
between these two ideas is an essential notion common to both, the notion
of Vishnu. What is the Trimurti? I have already said that it is composed
of three Gods, Brahma (masculine), Vishnu the God of _avatars_, and Siva.
These three Gods, who when reduced to their primitive and most simple
expression are but three cosmogonical personifications, three powers or
forces of nature, these Gods, I say, are here found, according to Indian
doctrines, entirely external to the true God of India, or Brahma in the
neuter gender. Brahma is alone, unchangeable in the midst of creation: all
emanates from him, he comprehends all, but he remains extraneous to all:
he is Being and the negation of beings. Brahma is never worshipped; the
indeterminate Being is never invoked; he is inaccessible to the prayers as
the actions of man; humanity, as well as nature, is extraneous to him.
External to Brahma rises the Trimurti, that is to say, Brahma (masculine)
the power which creates, Vishnu the power which preserves, and Siva the
power which destroys: theogony here commences at the same time with
cosmogony. The three divinities of the Trimurti govern the phenomena of
the universe and influence all nature. The real God of India is by himself
without power; real efficacious power is attributed only to three
divinities who exist externally to him. Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva,
possessed of qualities in part contradictory and attributes that are
mutually exclusive, have no other accord or harmony than that which
results from the power of things itself, and which is found external to
their own thoughts. Such is the Indian Trimurti. What an immense
difference between this Triad and the wonderful Trinity of Christianity!
Here there is only one God, who created all, provides for all, governs
all. He exists in three Persons equal to one another, and intimately
united in one only infinite and eternal substance. The Father represents
the eternal thought and the power which created, the Son infinite love,
the Holy Spirit universal sanctification. This one and triune God
completes by omnipotent power the great work of creation which, when it
has come forth from His hands, proceeds in obedience to the laws which He
has given it, governed with certain order by His infinite providence.

"The immense difference between the Trimurti of India and the Christian
Trinity is found again between the _avatars_ of Vishnu and the Incarnation
of Christ. The _avatar_ was effected altogether externally to the Being
who is in India regarded as the true God. The manifestation of one
essentially cosmogonical divinity wrought for the most part only material
and cosmogonical prodigies. At one time it takes the form of the gigantic
tortoise which sustains Mount Mandar from sinking in the ocean; at another
of the fish which raises the lost Veda from the bottom of the sea, and
saves mankind from the waters. When these _avatars_ are not cosmogonical
they consist in some protection accorded to men or Gods, a protection
which is neither universal nor permanent. The very manner in which the
_avatar_ is effected corresponds to its material nature, for instance the
mysterious vase and the magic liquor by means of which the _avatar_ here
spoken of takes place. What are the forms which Vishnu takes in his
descents? They are the simple forms of life; he becomes a tortoise, a
boar, a fish, but he is not obliged to take the form of intelligence and
liberty, that is to say, the form of man. In the _avatar_ of Vishnu is
discovered the inpress of pantheistic ideas which have always more or less
prevailed in India. Does the _avatar_ produce a permanent and definitive
result in the world? By no means. It is renewed at every catastrophe
either of nature or man, and its effects are only transitory.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} To sum up
then, the Indian _avatar_ is effected externally to the true God of India,
to Brahma; it has only a cosmogonical or historical mission which is
neither lasting nor decisive; it is accomplished by means of strange
prodigies and magic transformations; it may assume promiscuously all the
forms of life; it may be repeated indefinitely. Now let the whole of this
Indian idea taken from primitive tradition be compared with the
Incarnation of Christ and it will be seen that there is between the two an
irreconcilable difference. According to the doctrines of Christianity the
Everlasting Word, Infinite Love, the Son of God, and equal to Him, assumed
a human body, and being born as a man accomplished by his divine act the
great miracle of the spiritual redemption of man. His coming had for its
sole object to bring erring and lost humanity back to Him; this work being
accomplished, and the divine union of men with God being re-established,
redemption is complete and remains eternal.

"The superficial study of India produced in the last century many
erroneous ideas, many imaginary and false parallels between Christianity
and the Brahmanical religion. A profounder knowledge of Indian
civilization and religion, and philological studies enlarged and guided by
more certain principles have dissipated one by one all those errors. The
attributes of the Christian God, which by one of those intellectual
errors, which Vico attributes to the vanity of the learned, had been
transferred to Vishnu, have by a better inspired philosophy been reclaimed
for Christianity, and the result of the two religions, one immovable and
powerless, the other diffusing itself with all its inherent force and
energy, has shown further that there is a difference, a real opposition,
between the two principles."--GORRESIO.




Kusa and Lava.


As the story of the banishment of Sita and the subsequent birth in
Valmiki's hermitage of Kusa and Lava the rhapsodists of the Ramayan, is
intimately connected with the account in the introductory cantos of
Valmiki's composition of the poem, I shall, I trust, be pardoned for
extracting it from my rough translation of Kalidasa's Raghuvansa, parts
only of which have been offered to the public.

"Then, day by day, the husband's hope grew high,
Gazing with love on Sita's melting eye:
With anxious care he saw her pallid cheek,
And fondly bade her all her wishes speak.
"Once more I fain would see," the lady cried,
"The sacred groves that rise on Ganga's side,
Where holy grass is ever fresh and green,
And cattle feeding on the rice are seen:
There would I rest awhile, where once I strayed
Linked in sweet friendship to each hermit maid."
And Rama smiled upon his wife, and sware,
With many a tender oath, to grant her prayer.
It chanced, one evening, from a lofty seat
He viewed Ayodhya stretched before his feet:
He looked with pride upon the royal road
Lined with gay shops their glittering stores that showed,
He looked on Sarju's silver waves, that bore
The light barks flying with the sail and oar;
He saw the gardens near the town that lay,
Filled with glad citizens and boys at play.
Then swelled the monarch's bosom with delight,
And his heart triumphed at the happy sight.
He turned to Bhadra, standing by his side,--
Upon whose secret news the king relied.--
And bade him say what people said and thought
Of all the exploits that his arm had wrought.
The spy was silent, but, when questioned still,
Thus spake, obedient to his master's will:
"For all thy deeds in peace and battle done
The people praise thee, King, except for one:
This only act of all thy life they blame,--
Thy welcome home of her, thy ravished dame."
Like iron yielding to the iron's blow,
Sank Rama, smitten by those words of woe.
His breast, where love and fear for empire vied,
Swayed, like a rapid swing, from side to side.
Shall he this rumour scorn, which blots his life,
Or banish her, his dear and spotless wife?
But rigid Duty left no choice between
His perilled honour and his darling queen.
Called to his side, his brothers wept to trace
The marks of anguish in his altered face.
No longer bright and glorious as of old,
He thus addressed them when the tale was told:
"Alas! my brothers, that my life should blot
The fame of those the Sun himself begot:
As from the labouring cloud the driven rain
Leaves on the mirror's polished face a stain.
E'en as an elephant who loathes the stake
And the strong chain he has no power to break,
I cannot brook this cry on every side,
That spreads like oil upon the moving tide.
I leave the daughter of Videha's King,
And the fair blossom soon from her to spring,
As erst, obedient to my sire's command,
I left the empire of the sea-girt land.
Good is my queen, and spotless; but the blame
Is hard to bear, the mockery and the shame.
Men blame the pure Moon for the darkened ray,
When the black shadow takes the light away.
And, O my brothers, if ye wish to see
Rama live long from this reproach set free,
Let not your pity labour to control
The firm sad purpose of his changeless soul."

  Thus Rama spake. The sorrowing brothers heard
His stern resolve, without an answering word;
For none among them dared his voice to raise,
That will to question:--and they could not praise.
"Beloved brother," thus the monarch cried
To his dear Lakshman, whom he called aside.--
Lakshman, who knew no will save his alone
Whose hero deeds through all the world were known:--
"My queen has told me that she longs to rove
Beneath the shade of Saint Valmiki's grove:
Now mount thy car, away my lady bear;
Tell all, and leave her in the forest there."

  The car was brought, the gentle lady smiled,
As the glad news her trusting heart beguiled.
She mounted up: Sumantra held the reins;
And forth the coursers bounded o'er the plains.
She saw green fields in all their beauty dressed,
And thanked her husband in her loving breast.
Alas! deluded queen! she little knew
How changed was he whom she believed so true;
How one she worshipped like the Heavenly Tree
Could, in a moment's time, so deadly be.
Her right eye throbbed,--ill-omened sign, to tell
The endless loss of him she loved so well,
And to the lady's saddening heart revealed
The woe that Lakshman, in his love, concealed.
Pale grew the bloom of her sweet face,--as fade
The lotus blossoms,--by that sign dismayed.
"Oh, may this omen,"--was her silent prayer,--
"No grief to Rama or his brothers bear!"

  When Lakshman, faithful to his brother, stood
Prepared to leave her in the distant wood,
The holy Ganga, flowing by the way,
Raised all her hands of waves to bid him stay.
At length with sobs and burning tears that rolled
Down his sad face, the king's command he told;
As when a monstrous cloud, in evil hour,
Rains from its labouring womb a stony shower.
She heard, she swooned, she fell upon the earth,
Fell on that bosom whence she sprang to birth.
As, when the tempest in its fury flies,
Low in the dust the prostrate creeper lies,
So, struck with terror sank she on the ground,
And all her gems, like flowers, lay scattered round.
But Earth, her mother, closed her stony breast,
And, filled with doubt, denied her daughter rest.
She would not think the Chief of Raghu's race
Would thus his own dear guiltless wife disgrace.
Stunned and unconscious, long the lady lay,
And felt no grief, her senses all astray.
But gentle Lakshman, with a brother's care,
Brought back her sense, and with her sense, despair.
But not her wrongs, her shame, her grief, could wring
One angry word against her lord the King:
Upon herself alone the blame she laid,
For tears and sighs that would not yet be stayed.
To soothe her anguish Lakshman gently strove;
He showed the path to Saint Valmiki's grove;
And craved her pardon for the share of ill
He wrought, obedient to his brother's will.
"O, long and happy, dearest brother, live!
I have to praise," she cried, "and not forgive:
To do his will should be thy noblest praise;
As Vishnu ever Indra's will obeys.
Return, dear brother: on each royal dame
Bestow a blessing in poor Sita's name,
And bid them, in their love, kind pity take
Upon her offspring, for the father's sake.
And speak my message in the monarch's ear,
The last last words of mine that he shall hear:
"Say, was it worthy of thy noble race
Thy guiltless queen thus lightly to disgrace?
For idle tales to spurn thy faithful bride,
Whose constant truth the searching fire had tried?
Or may I hope thy soul refused consent,
And but thy voice decreed my banishment?
Hope that no care could turn, no love could stay
The lightning stroke that falls on me to-day?
That sins committed in the life that's fled
Have brought this evil on my guilty head?
Think not I value now my widowed life,
Worthless to her who once was Rama's wife.
I only live because I hope to see
The dear dear babe that will resemble thee.
And then my task of penance shall be done,
With eyes uplifted to the scorching sun;
So shall the life that is to come restore
Mine own dear husband, to be lost no more."
And Lakshman swore her every word to tell,
Then turned to go, and bade the queen farewell.
Alone with all her woes, her piteous cries
Rose like a butchered lamb's that struggling dies.
The reverend sage who from his dwelling came
For sacred grass and wood to feed the flame,
Heard her loud shrieks that rent the echoing wood,
And, quickly following, by the mourner stood.
Before the sage the lady bent her low,
Dried her poor eyes, and strove to calm her woe.
With blessings on her hopes the blameless man
In silver tones his soothing speech began:
"First of all faithful wives, O Queen, art thou;
And can I fail to mourn thy sorrows now?
Rest in this holy grove, nor harbour fear
Where dwell in safety e'en the timid deer.
Here shall thine offspring safely see the light,
And be partaker of each holy rite.
Here, near the hermits' dwellings, shall thou lave
Thy limbs in Tonse's sin-destroying wave,
And on her isles, by prayer and worship, gain
Sweet peace of mind, and rest from care and pain.
Each hermit maiden with her sweet soft voice,
Shall soothe thy woe, and bid thy heart rejoice:
With fruit and early flowers thy lap shall fill,
And offer grain that springs for us at will.
And here, with labour light, thy task shall be
To water carefully each tender tree,
And learn how sweet a nursing mother's joy
Ere on thy bosom rest thy darling boy.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}"

That very night the banished Sita bare
Two royal children, most divinely fair.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

The saint Valmiki, with a friend's delight,
Graced Sita's offspring with each holy rite.
Kusa and Lava--such the names they bore--
Learnt, e'en in childhood, all the Vedas' lore;
And then the bard, their minstrel souls to train,
Taught them to sing his own immortal strain.
And Rama's deeds her boys so sweetly sang,
That Sita's breast forgot her bitterest pang.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

Then Sita's children, by the saint's command,
Sang the Ramayan, wandering through the land.
How could the glorious poem fail to gain
Each heart, each ear that listened to the strain!
So sweet each minstrel's voice who sang the praise
Of Rama deathless in Valmiki's lays.
Rama himself amid the wondering throng
Marked their fair forms, and loved the noble song,
While, still and weeping, round the nobles stood,
As, on a windless morn, a dewy wood.
On the two minstrels all the people gazed,
Praised their fair looks and marvelled as they praised;
For every eye amid the throng could trace
Rama's own image in each youthful face.
Then spoke the king himself and bade them say
Who was their teacher, whose the wondrous lay.
Soon as Valmiki, mighty saint, he saw,
He bowed his head in reverential awe.
"These are thy children" cried the saint, "recall
Thine own dear Sita, pure and true through all."
"O holy father," thus the king replied,
"The faithful lady by the fire was tried;
But the foul demon's too successful arts
Raised light suspicions in my people's hearts.
Grant that their breasts may doubt her faith no more,
And thus my Sita and her sons restore."

_Raghuvansa Cantos XIV, XV._




Parasurama, Page 87.


"He cleared the earth thrice seven times of the Kshatriya caste, and
filled with their blood the five large lakes of Samanta, from which he
offered libations to the race of Bhrigu. Offering a solemn sacrifice to
the King of the Gods Parasurama presented the earth to the ministering
priests. Having given the earth to Kasyapa, the hero of immeasurable
prowess retired to the Mahendra mountain, where he still resides; and in
this manner was there enmity between him and the race of the Kshatriyas,
and thus was the whole earth conquered by Parasurama." The destruction of
the Kshatriyas by Parasurama had been provoked by the cruelty of the
Kshatriyas. _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol._ II. p. 334.

The scene in which he appears is probably interpolated for the sake of
making him declare Rama to be Vishnu. "Herr von Schlegel has often
remarked to me," says Lassen, "that without injuring the connexion of the
story all the chapters [of the Ramayan] might be omitted in which Rama is
regarded as an incarnation of Vishnu. In fact, where the incarnation of
Vishnu as the four sons of Dasaratha is described, the great sacrifice is
already ended, and all the priests remunerated at the termination, when
the new sacrifice begins at which the Gods appear, then withdraw, and then
first propose the incarnation to Vishnu. If it had been an original
circumstance of the story, the Gods would certainly have deliberated on
the matter earlier, and the celebration of the sacrifice would have
continued without interruption." LASSEN, _Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol.
I._ p. 489.




Yama, Page 68.


Son of Vivasvat=Jima son of Vivanghvat, the Jamshid of the later Persians.




Fate, Page 68.


"The idea of fate was different in India from that which prevailed in
Greece. In Greece fate was a mysterious, inexorable power which governed
men and human events, and from which it was impossible to escape. In India
Fate was rather an inevitable consequence of actions done in births
antecedent to one's present state of existence, and was therefore
connected with the doctrine of metempsychosis. A misfortune was for the
most part a punishment, an expiation of ancient faults not yet entirely
cancelled." GORRESIO.




Visvamitra, Page 76.


"Though of royal extraction, Visvamitra conquered for himself and his
family the privileges of a Brahman. He became a Brahman, and thus broke
through all the rules of caste. The Brahmans cannot deny the fact, because
it forms one of the principal subjects of their legendary poems. But they
have spared no pains to represent the exertions of Visvamitra, in his
struggle for Brahmanhood, as so superhuman that no one would easily be
tempted to follow his example. No mention is made of these monstrous
penances in the Veda, where the struggle between Visvamitra, the leader of
the Kusikas or Bharatas, and the Brahman Vasishtha, the leader of the
white-robed Tritsus, is represented as the struggle of two rivals for the
place of Purohita or chief priest and minister at the court of King Sudas,
the son of Pijavana." _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol. II._ p. 336.




Household Gods, Page 102.


"No house is supposed to be without its tutelary divinity, but the notion
attached to this character is now very far from precise. The deity who is
the object of hereditary and family worship, the _Kuladevata_, is always
one of the leading personages of the Hindu mythology, as Siva, Vishnu or
Durga, but the _Grihadevata_ rarely bears any distinct appellation. In
Bengal, the domestic god is sometimes the _Salagram_ stone, sometimes the
_tulasi_ plant, sometimes a basket with a little rice in it, and sometimes
a water-jar--to either of which a brief adoration is daily addressed, most
usually by the females of the family. Occasionally small images of Lakshmi
or Chandi fulfil the office, or should a snake appear, he is venerated as
the guardian of the dwelling. In general, however, in former times, the
household deities were regarded as the unseen spirits of ill, the ghosts
and goblins who hovered about every spot, and claimed some particular
sites as their own. Offerings were made to them in the open air, by
scattering a little rice with a short formula at the close of all
ceremonies to keep them in good humour.

"The household gods correspond better with the genii locorum than with the
lares or penates of autiquity."

H. H. WILSON.




Page 107.


_Saivya, a king whom earth obeyed,_
_Once to a hawk a promise made._

The following is a free version of this very ancient story which occurs
more than once in the _Mahabharat_:

THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

Chased by a hawk there came a dove
  With worn and weary wing,
And took her stand upon the hand
  Of Kasi's mighty king.
The monarch smoothed her ruffled plumes
  And laid her on his breast,
And cried, "No fear shall vex thee here,
  Rest, pretty egg-born, rest!
Fair Kasi's realm is rich and wide,
  With golden harvests gay,
But all that's mine will I resign
  Ere I my guest betray."
But panting for his half won spoil
  The hawk was close behind.
And with wild cry and eager eye
  Came swooping down the wind:
"This bird," he cried, "my destined prize,
  'Tis not for thee to shield:
'Tis mine by right and toilsome flight
  O'er hill and dale and field.
Hunger and thirst oppress me sore,
  And I am faint with toil:
Thou shouldst not stay a bird of prey
  Who claims his rightful spoil.
They say thou art a glorious king,
  And justice is thy care:
Then justly reign in thy domain,
  Nor rob the birds of air."
Then cried the king: "A cow or deer
  For thee shall straightway bleed,
Or let a ram or tender lamb
  Be slain, for thee to feed.
Mine oath forbids me to betray
  My little twice-born guest:
See how she clings with trembling wings
  To her protector's breast."
"No flesh of lambs," the hawk replied,
  "No blood of deer for me;
The falcon loves to feed on doves
  And such is Heaven's decree.
But if affection for the dove
  Thy pitying heart has stirred,
Let thine own flesh my maw refresh,
  Weighed down against the bird."
He carved the flesh from off his side,
  And threw it in the scale,
While women's cries smote on the skies
  With loud lament and wail.
He hacked the flesh from side and arm,
  From chest and back and thigh,
But still above the little dove
  The monarch's scale stood high.
He heaped the scale with piles of flesh,
  With sinews, blood and skin,
And when alone was left him bone
  He threw himself therein.
Then thundered voices through the air;
  The sky grew black as night;
And fever took the earth that shook
  To see that wondrous sight.
The blessed Gods, from every sphere,
  By Indra led, came nigh:
While drum and flute and shell and lute
  Made music in the sky.
They rained immortal chaplets down,
  Which hands celestial twine,
And softly shed upon his head
  Pure Amrit, drink divine.
Then God and Seraph, Bard and Nymph
  Their heavenly voices raised,
And a glad throng with dance and song
  The glorious monarch praised.
They set him on a golden car
  That blazed with many a gem;
Then swiftly through the air they flew,
  And bore him home with them.
Thus Kasi's lord, by noble deed,
  Won heaven and deathless fame:
And when the weak protection seek
  From thee, do thou the same.

_Scenes from the Ramayan, &c._




Page 108.


The ceremonies that attended the consecration of a king (_Abhikshepa lit.
Sprinkling over_) are fully described in Goldstuecker's Dictionary, from
which the following extract is made: "The type of the inauguration
ceremony as practised at the Epic period may probably be recognized in the
history of the inauguration of _Rama_, as told in the _Ramayana_, and in
that of the inauguration of _Yudhishthira_, as told in the _Mahabharatha_.
Neither ceremony is described in these poems with the full detail which is
given of the vaidik rite in the _Aitareya-Brahmanam_; but the allusion
that Rama was inaugurated by _Vasishtha_ and the other Brahmanas in the
same manner as Indra by the Vasus {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} and the observation which is made in
some passages that a certain rite of the inauguration was performed
'according to the sacred rule' {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} admit of the conclusion that the ceremony
was supposed to have taken place in conformity with the vaidik
injunction.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} As the inauguration of _Rama_ was intended and the necessary
preparations for it were made when his father Dasaratha was still alive,
but as the ceremony itself, through the intrigues of his step-mother
_Kaikeyi_, did not take place then, but fourteen years later, after the
death of _Dasaratha_, an account of the preparatory ceremonies is given in
the _Ayodhyakanda_ (Book II) as well as in the _Yuddha-Kanda_ (Book VI.)
of the Ramayana, but an account of the complete ceremony in the latter
book alone. According to the _Ayodhyakanda_, on the day preceding the
intended inauguration _Rama_ and his wife _Sita_ held a fast, and in the
night they performed this preliminary rite: _Rama_ having made his
ablutions, approached the idol of _Narayana_, took a cup of clarified
butter, as the religious law prescribes, made a libation of it into the
kindled fire, and drank the remainder while wishing what was agreeable to
his heart. Then, with his mind fixed on the divinity he lay, silent and
composed, together with _Sita_, on a bed of Kusa-grass, which was spread
before the altar of Vishnu, until the last watch of the night, when he
awoke and ordered the palace to be prepared for the solemnity. At
day-break reminded of the time by the voices of the bards, he performed
the usual morning devotion and praised the divinity. In the meantime the
town Ayodhya had assumed a festive appearance and the inauguration
implements had been arranged {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} golden water-jars, an ornamented
throne-seat, a chariot covered with a splendid tiger-skin, water taken
from the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna, as well as from other sacred
rivers, tanks, wells, lakes, and from all oceans, honey, curd, clarified
butter, fried grain, Kusa-grass, flowers, milk; besides, eight beautiful
damsels, and a splendid furious elephant, golden and silver jars, filled
with water, covered with _Udumbara_ branches and various lotus flowers,
besides a white jewelled _chourie_, a white splendid parasol, a white
bull, a white horse, all manner of musical instruments and bards.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} In the
preceding chapter {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} there are mentioned _two_ white _chouries_ instead of
one, and all kinds of seeds, perfumes and jewels, a scimitar, a bow, a
litter, a golden vase, and a blazing fire, and amongst the living
implements of the pageant, instead of the bards, gaudy courtesans, and
besides the eight damsels, professors of divinity, Brahmanas, cows and
pure kinds of wild beasts and birds, the chiefs of town and country-people
and the citizens with their train."




Page 109.


_Then with the royal chaplains they_
_Took each his place in long array._

_The twice born chiefs, with zealous heed,_
_Made ready what the rite would need._

"Now about the office of a Purohita (house priest). The gods do not eat
the food offered by a king, who has no house-priest (Purohita). Thence the
king even when (not) intending to bring a sacrifice, should appoint a
Brahman to the office of house-priest." HAUG'S _Autareya Brahmanam. Vol.
II. p. 528_.




Page 110.


_There by the gate the Saras screamed._

The Saras or Indian Crane is a magnificent bird easily domesticated and
speedily constituting himself the watchman of his master's house and
garden. Unfortunately he soon becomes a troublesome and even dangerous
dependent, attacking strangers with his long bill and powerful wings, and
warring especially upon "small infantry" with unrelenting ferocity.




Page 120.


_My mothers or my sire the king._

All the wives of the king his father are regarded and spoken of by Rama as
his mothers.




Page 125.


_Such blessings as the Gods o'erjoyed_
_Poured forth when Vritra was destroyed._

"Mythology regards Vritra as a demon or Asur, the implacable enemy of
Indra, but this is not the primitive idea contained in the name of Vritra.
In the hymns of the Veda Vritra appears to be the thick dark cloud which
Indra the God of the firmament attacks and disperses with his
thunderbolt." GORRESIO.

"In that class of Rig-veda hymns which there is reason to look upon as the
oldest portion of Vedic poetry, the character of Indra is that of a mighty
ruler of the firmament, and his principal feat is that of conquering the
demon _Vritra_, a symbolical personification of the cloud which obstructs
the clearness of the sky, and withholds the fructifying rain from the
earth. In his battles with Vritra he is therefore described as 'opening
the receptacles of the waters,' as 'cleaving the cloud' with his
'far-whirling thunderbolt,' as 'casting the waters down to earth,' and
'restoring the sun to the sky.' He is in consequence 'the upholder of
heaven, earth, and firmament,' and the god 'who has engendered the sun and
the dawn.' " CHAMBERS'S CYCLOPAEDIA, _Indra_.

"Throughout these hymns two images stand out before us with overpowering
distinctness. On one side is the bright god of the heaven, as beneficent
as he is irresistible: on the other the demon of night and of darkness, as
false and treachorous as he is malignant.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The latter (as his name Vritra,
from var, to veil, indicates) is pre-eminently the thief who hides away
the rain-clouds.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But the myth is yet in too early a state to allow of the
definite designations which are brought before us in the conflicts of Zeus
with Typhon and his monstrous progeny, of Apollon with the Python, of
Bellerophon with Chimaira of Oidipous with the Sphinx, of Hercules with
Cacus, of Sigurd with the dragon Fafnir; and thus not only is Vritra known
by many names, but he is opposed sometimes by Indra, sometimes by Agni the
fire-god, sometimes by Trita, Brihaspati, or other deities; or rather
these are all names of one and the same god." COX'S _Mythology of the
Aryan Nations. Vol. II. p. 326_.




Page 125.


_And that prized herb whose sovereign power_
_Preserves from dark misfortune's hour._
"And yet more medicinal is it than that Moly,
That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;
He called it Haemony, and gave it me,
And bade me keep it as of sovereign use
'Gainst all enchantment, mildew, blast, or damp,
Or ghastly furies' apparition." _Comus._

The _Moly_ of Homer, which Dierbach considers to have been the _Mandrake_,
is probably a corruption of the Sanskrit _Mula_ a root.




Page 136.


_True is the ancient saw: the Neem_
_Can ne'er distil a honeyed stream._

The Neem tree, especially in the Rains, emits a strong unpleasant smell
like that of onions. Its leaves however make an excellent cooling
poultice, and the Extract of Neem is an admirable remedy for cutaneous
disorders.




Page 152.


_Who of Nishada lineage came._

The following account of the origin of the Nishadas is taken from Wilson's
_Vishnu Purana_, Book I. Chap. 15. "Afterwards the Munis beheld a great
dust arise, and they said to the people who were nigh: 'What is this?' And
the people answered and said: 'Now that the kingdom is without a king, the
dishonest men have begun to seize the property of their neighbours. The
great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is raised by troops of
clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their prey.' The sages, hearing
this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh of the king (Vena), who had
left no offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, thus rubbed, came
forth a being of the complexion of a charred stake, with flattened
features like a negro, and of dwarfish stature. 'What am I to do,' cried
he eagerly to the Munis. 'Sit down (nishida),' said they. And thence his
name was Nishada. His descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhya
mountain, great Muni, are still called Nishadas and are characterized by
the exterior tokens of depravity." Professor Wilson adds, in his note on
the passage: "The Matsya says that there were born outcast or barbarous
races, Mlechchhas, as black as collyrium. The Bhagavata describes an
individual of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a complexion
as black as a crow, with projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and
tawny hair, whose descendants were mountaineers and foresters. The Padma
(Bhumi Khanda) has a similar deccription; adding to the dwarfish stature
and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly.
It also particularizes his posterity as Nishadas, Kiratas, Bhillas, and
other barbarians and Mlechchhas, living in woods and on mountains. These
passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of the
Gonds, Koles, Bhils, and other uncivilized tribes, scattered along the
forests and mountains of Central India from Behar to Khandesh, and who
are, not improbably, the predecessors of the present occupants of the
cultivated portions of the country. They are always very black,
ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have countenances of a very African
character."

Manu gives a different origin of the Nishadas as the offspring of a
Brahman father and a Sudra mother. See Muir's _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p.
481.




Page 157.


_Beneath a fig-tree's mighty shade,_
_With countless pendent shoots displayed._
"So counselled he, and both together went
Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose
The fig-tree: not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as at this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree, a pillared shade
High overarched, and echoing walks between."

_Paradise Lost_, Book IX.




Page 161.


_Now, Lakshman, as our cot is made,_
_Must sacrifice be duly paid._

The rites performed in India on the completion of a house are represented
in modern Europe by the familiar "house-warming."




Page 169.


_I longed with all my lawless will_
_Some elephant by night to kill._

One of the regal or military caste was forbidden to kill an elephant
except in battle.

_Thy hand has made no Brahman bleed._

"The punishment which the Code of Manu awards to the slayer of a Brahman
was to be branded in the forehead with the mark of a headless corpse, and
entirely banished from society; this being apparently commutable for a
fine. The poem is therefore in accordance with the Code regarding the
peculiar guilt of killing Brahmans; but in allowing a hermit who was not a
_Divija_ (twice-born) to go to heaven, the poem is far in advance of the
Code. The youth in the poem is allowed to read the Veda, and to accumulate
merit by his own as well as his father's pious acts; whereas the exclusive
Code reserves all such privileges to _Divijas_ invested with the sacred
cord." Mrs. SPEIR'S _Life in Ancient India_, p. 107.




Page 174. The Praise Of Kings


"Compare this magnificent eulogium of kings and kingly government with
what Samuel says of the king and his authority: And Samuel told all the
words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king.

And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over
you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots, and to be his horsemen: and some shall run before his chariots.

And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over
fifties, and will set them to work his ground, and to reap his harvest,
and to make his instrument of war, and instruments of his chariots.

And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks,
and to be bakers.

And he will take your fields, and your vineyards and your oliveyards, even
the best of them, and give them to his servants.

And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give
to his officers, and to his servants.

And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your
goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have
chosen you. I. _Samuel_, VIII.

In India kingly government was ancient and consecrated by tradition:
whence to change it seemed disorderly and revolutionary: in Judaea
theocracy was ancient and consecrated by tradition, and therefore the
innovation which would substitute a king was represented as full of
dangers." GORRESIO.




Page 176. Salmali.


According to the Bengal recension Salmali appears to have been another
name of the Vipasa. Salmali may be an epithet signifying rich in Bombax
heptaphyllon. The commentator makes another river out of the word.




Page 178. Bharat's Return.


"Two routes from Ayodhya to Rajagriha or Girivraja are described. That
taken by the envoys appears to have been the shorter one, and we are not
told why Bharat returned by a different road. The capital of the Kekayas
lay to the west of the Vipasa. Between it and the Satadru stretched the
country of the Bahikas. Upon the remaining portion of the road the two
recensions differ. According to that of Bengal there follow towards the
east the river Indamati, then the town Ajakala belonging to the Bodhi,
then Bhulinga, then the river Saradanda. According to the other instead of
the first river comes the Ikshumati {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} instead of the first town Abhikala,
instead of the second Kulinga, then the second river. According to the
direction of the route both the above-mentioned rivers must be tributaries
of the Satadru.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The road then crossed the Yamuna (Jumna), led beyond that
river through the country of the Panchalas, and reached the Ganges at
Hastinapura, where the ferry was. Thence it led over the Ramaganga and its
eastern tributaries, then over the Gomati, and then in a southern
direction along the Malini, beyond which it reached Ayodhya. In Bharat's
journey the following rivers are passed from west to east: _Kutikoshtika_,
_Uttanika_, _Kutika_, _Kapivati_, _Gomati_ according to Schlegel, and
_Hiranyavati_, _Uttarika_, _Kutila_, _Kapivati_, _Gomati_ according to
Gorresio. As these rivers are to be looked for on the east of the Ganges,
the first must be the modern _Koh_, a small affluent of the Ramaganga,
over which the highway cannot have gone as it bends too far to the north.
The Uttanika or Uttarika must be the Ramaganga, the Kutika or Kutila its
eastern tributary, Kosila, the Kapivati the next tributary which on the
maps has different names, _Gurra_ or above Kailas, lower down _Bhaigu_.
The Gomati (Goomtee) retains its old name. The Malini, mentioned only in
the envoys' journey, must have been the western tributary of the Sarayu
now called Chuka." LASSEN'S _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. II. P. 524.




Page 183.


_What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?_

"Indian belief divided the universe into several worlds (_lokah_). The
three principal worlds were heaven, earth, and hell. But according to
another division there were seven: Bhurloka or the earth, Bhuvarloka or
the space between the earth and the sun, the seat of the Munis, Siddhas,
&c., Svarloka or the heaven of Indra between the sun and the polar star,
and the seventh Brahmaloka or the world of Brahma. Spirits which reached
the last were exempt from being born again." GORRESIO.




Page 203.


_When from a million herbs a blaze_
_Of their own luminous glory plays._

This mention of lambent flames emitted by herbs at night may be compared
with Lucan's description of a similar phenomenon in the Druidical forest
near Marseilles, (_Pharsalia_, III. 420.).

_Non ardentis_ fulgere incendia silvae.

Seneca, speaking of Argolis, (Thyestes, Act IV), says:--

Tota solet

Micare flamma silva, et excelsae trabes
_Ardent sine igni_.

Thus also the bush at Horeb (Exod. II.) flamed, but was not consumed.

The Indian explanation of the phenomenon is, that the sun before he sets
deposits his rays for the night with the deciduous plants. See _Journal of
R. As. S. Bengal_, Vol. II. p. 339.




Page 219.


_We rank the Buddhist with the thief._

Schlegel says in his Preface: "Lubrico vestigio insistit V. Cl.
_Heerenius, prof. Gottingensis_, in libro suo de commerciis veterum
populorum (OPP. Vol. HIST. XII, pag. 129,) dum putat, ex mentione
sectatorum Buddhae secundo libro Rameidos iniecta de tempore, quo totum
carmen sit conditum, quicquam legitime concludi posse.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Sunt versus
spurii, reiecti a Bengalis in sola commentatorum recensione leguntur.
Buddhas quidem mille fere annis ante Christum natun vixit: sed post multa
demumsecula, odiointernecivo inter Brachmanos et Buddhae sectatores orto,
his denique ex India pulsis, fingi potuit iniquissima criminatio, eos
animi immortalitatem poenasque et praemia in vita futura negare. Praeterea
metrum, quo concinnati sunt hi versus, de quo metro mox disseram,
recentiorem aetatem arguit.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Poenitet me nunc mei consilii, quod non
statim ab initio, {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} eiecerim cuncta disticha diversis a sloco vulgari
metris composita. Metra sunt duo: pariter ambo constant quatuor
hemistichiis inter se aequalibus, alterum undenarum syllabarum, alterum
duodenarum, hunc in modum:

[-)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [-)]
[)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [)] [-)]

Cuius generis versus in primo et secundo Rameidos libro nusquam nisi ad
finem capitum apposita inveniuntur, et huic loco unice sunt accommodata,
quasi peroratio, lyricis numeris assurgens, quo magis canorae cadant
clausulae: sicut musici in concentibus extremis omnium vocum
instrumentorumque ictu fortiore aures percellere amant. Igitur disticha
illa non ante divisionem per capita illatam addi potuerunt: hanc autem
grammaticis deberi argumento est ipse recensionum dissensus, manifesto
inde ortus, quod singuli editores in ea constituenda suo quisque iudicio
usi sunt; praeterquam quod non credibile est, poetam artis suae peritum
narrationem continuam in membra tam minuta dissecuisse. Porro discolor est
dictio: magniloquentia affectatur, sed nimis turgida illa atque effusa,
nec sententiarum pondere satis suffulta. Denique nihil fere novi affertur:
ampli ficantur prius dicta, rarius aliquid ex capite sequente anticipatur.
Si quis appendices hosce legendo transiliat, sentiet slocum ultimum cum
primo capitis proximi apte coagmentatum, nec sine vi quadam inde avulsum.
Eiusmodi versus exhibet utraque recensio, sed modo haec modo illa plures
paucioresve numero, et lectio interdum magnopere variat."

"The narrative of Rama's exile in the jungle is one of the most obscure
portions of the Ramayana, inasmuch as it is difficult to discover any
trace of the original tradition, or any illustration of actual life and
manners, beyond the artificial life of self-mortification and selfdenial
said to have been led by the Brahman sages of olden time. At the same
time, however, the story throws some light upon the significance of the
poem, and upon the character in which the Brahmanical author desired to
represent Rama; and consequently it deserves more serious consideration
than the nature of the subject-matter would otherwise seem to imply.

"According to the Ramayana, the hero Rama spent more than thirteen years
of his exile in wandering amongst the different Brahmanical settlements,
which appear to have been scattered over the country between the Ganges
and the Godaveri; his wanderings extending from the hill of Chitra-kuta in
Bundelkund, to the modern town of Nasik on the western side of India, near
the source of the Godaveri river, and about seventy-five miles to the
north-west of Bombay. The appearance of these Brahmanical hermitages in
the country far away to the south of the Raj of Kasala, seems to call for
critical inquiry. Each hermitage is said to have belonged to some
particular sage, who is famous in Brahmanical tradition. But whether the
sages named were really contemporaries of Rama, or whether they could
possibly have flourished at one and the same period, is open to serious
question. It is of course impossible to fix with any degree of certainty
the relative chronology of the several sages, who are said to have been
visited by Rama; but still it seems tolerably clear that some belonged to
an age far anterior to that in which the Ramayana was composed, and
probably to an age anterior to that in which Rama existed as a real and
living personage; whilst, at least, one sage is to be found who could only
have existed in the age during which the Ramayana was produced in its
present form. The main proofs of these inferences are as follows. An
interval of many centuries seems to have elapsed between the composition
of the Rig-Veda and that of the Ramayana: a conclusion which has long been
proved by the evidence of language, and is generally accepted by Sanskrit
scholars. But three of the sages, said to have been contemporary with
Rama, namely, Visvamitra, Atri and Agastya, are frequently mentioned in
the hymns of the Rig-Veda; whilst Valmiki, the sage dwelling at
Chitra-kuta, is said to have been himself the composer of the Ramayana.
Again, the sage Atri, whom Rama visited immediately after his departure
from Chitra-kuta, appears in the genealogical list preserved in the Maha
Bharata, as the progenitor of the Moon, and consequently as the first
ancestor of the Lunar race: whilst his grandson Buddha [Budha] is said to
have married Ila, the daughter of Ikhsvaku who was himself the remote
ancestor of the Solar race of Ayodhya, from whom Rama was removed by many
generations. These conclusions are not perhaps based upon absolute proof,
because they are drawn from untrustworthy authorities; but still the
chronological difficulties have been fully apprehended by the Pundits, and
an attempt has been made to reconcile all contradictions by representing
the sages to have lived thousands of years, and to have often re-appeared
upon earth in different ages widely removed from each other. Modern
science refuses to accept such explanations; and consequently it is
impossible to escape the conclusion that if Valmiki composed the Ramayana
in the form of Sanskrit in which it has been preserved, he could not have
flourished in the same age as the sages who are named in the Rig-Veda."
WHEELER'S _History of India, Vol._ II, 229.




Page 249.


_And King Himalaya's Child._

Uma or Parvati, was the daughter of Himalaya and Mena. She is the heroine
of Kalidasa's _Kumara-Sambhava_ or _Birth of the War-God_.




Page 250.


_Strong Kumbhakarna slumbering deep_
_In chains of never-ending sleep._

"Kumbhakarna, the gigantic brother of the titanic Ravan,--named from the
size of his ears which could contain a _Kumbha_ or large water-jar--had
such an appetite that he used to consume six months' provisions in a
single day. Brahma, to relieve the alarm of the world, which had begun to
entertain serious apprehensions of being eaten up, decreed that the giant
should sleep six months at a time and wake for only one day during which
he might consume his six months' allowance without trespassing unduly on
the reproductive capabilities of the " _Scenes front the Ramayan_, p. 153,
2nd Edit.




Page 257.


_Like Siva when his angry might_
_Stayed Daksha's sacrificial rite._

The following spirited version of this old story is from the pen of Mr. W.
Waterfield:

"This is a favorite subject of Hindu sculpture, especially on the temples
of Shiva, such as the caves of Elephanta and Ellora. It, no doubt, is an
allegory of the contest between the followers of Shiva and the worshippers
of the Elements, who observed the old ritual of the Vedas; in which the
name of Shiva is never mentioned.

Daksha for devotion
  Made a mighty feast:
Milk and curds and butter,
  Flesh of bird and beast,
Rice and spice and honey,
  Sweetmeats ghi and gur,(1038)
Gifts for all the Brahmans,
  Food for all the poor.
At the gates of Ganga(1039)
  Daksha held his feast;
Called the gods unto it,
  Greatest as the least.
All the gods were gathered
  Round with one accord;
All the gods but Uma,
  All but Uma's lord.
Uma sat with Shiva
  On Kailasa hill:
Round them stood the Rudras
  Watching for their will.
Who is this that cometh
  Lilting to his lute?
All the birds of heaven
  Heard his music, mute.
Round his head a garland
  Rich of hue was wreathed:
Every sweetest odour
  From its blossoms breathed.
'Tis the Muni Narad;
  'Mong the gods he fares,
Ever making mischief
  By the tales he bears.
"Hail to lovely Uma!
  Hail to Uma's lord!
Wherefore are they absent
  For her father's board?
Multiplied his merits
  Would be truly thrice,
Could he gain your favour
  For his sacrifice."
Worth of heart was Uma;
  To her lord she spake:--
"Why dost thou, the mighty,
  Of no rite partake?
Straight I speed to Daksha
  Such a sight to see:
If he be my father,
  He must welcome thee."
Wondrous was in glory
  Daksha's holy rite;
Never had creation
  Viewed so brave a sight.
Gods, and nymphs, find fathers,
  Sages, Brahmans, sprites,--
Every diverge creature
  Wrought that rite of rites.
Quickly then a quaking
  Fell on all from far;
Uma stood among them
  On her lion car.
"Greeting, gods and sages,
  Greeting, father mine!
Work hath wondrous virtue,
  Where such aids combine.
Guest-hall never gathered
  Goodlier company:
Seemeth all are welcome.
  All the gods but me."
Spake the Muni Daksha,
  Stern and cold his tone:--
"Welcome thou, too, daughter,
  Since thou com'st alone.
But thy frenzied husband
  Suits another shrine;
He is no partaker
  Of this feast of mine.
He who walks in darkness
  Loves no deeds of light:
He who herds with demons
  Shuns each kindly sprite.
Let him wander naked.--
  Wizard weapons wield,--
Dance his frantic measure
  Round the funeral field.
Art thou yet delighted
  With the reeking hide,
Body smeared with ashes.
  Skulls in necklace tied?
Thou to love this monster?
  Thou to plead his part!
Know the moon and Ganga
  Share that faithless heart
Vainly art thou vying
  With thy rivals' charms.
Are not coils of serpents
  Softer than thine arms?"
Words like these from Daksha
  Daksha's daughter heard:
Then a sudden passion
  All her bosom stirred.
Eyes with fury flashing.
  Speechless in her ire,
Headlong did she hurl her
  'Mid the holy fire.
Then a trembling terror
  Overcame each one,
And their minds were troubled
  Like a darkened sun;
And a cruel Vision,
  Face of lurid flame,
Uma's Wrath incarnate,
  From the altar came.
Fiendlike forms by thousands
  Started from his side,
'Gainst the sacrificers
  All their might they plied:
Till the saints availed not
  Strength like theirs to stay,
And the gods distracted
  Turned and fled away.
Hushed were hymns and chanting,
  Priests were mocked and spurned;
Food defiled and scattered;
  Altars overturned.--
Then, to save the object
  Sought at such a price,
Like a deer in semblance
  Sped the sacrifice.
Soaring toward the heavens,
  Through the sky it fled?
But the Rudras chasing
  Smote away its head.
Prostrate on the pavement
  Daksha fell dismayed:--
"Mightiest, thou hast conquered
  Thee we ask for aid.
Let not our oblations
  All be rendered vain;
Let our toilsome labour
  Full fruition gain."
Bright the broken altars
  Shone with Shiva's form;
"Be it so!" His blessing
  Soothed that frantic storm.
Soon his anger ceases,
  Though it soon arise;--
But the Deer's Head ever
  Blazes in the skies."

_Indian Ballads and other Poems._




Page 286. Urvasi.


"The personification of Urvasi herself is as thin as that of Eos or
Selene. Her name is often found in the Veda as a mere name for the
morning, and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns which
passing over men bring them to old age and death. Urvasi is the bright
flush of light overspreading the heaven before the sun rises, and is but
another form of the many mythical beings of Greek mythology whose names
take us back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the Vedic
hymns is called Uruki, the far-going (Telephassa, Telephos), so is she
also Uruasi, the wide-existing or wide-spreading; as are Europe,
Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and many more of the sisters of Athene and
Aphrodite. As such she is the mother of Vasishtha, the bright being, as
Oidipous is the son of Iokaste; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous, has
become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of Mitra and Varuna, of
night and day. Her lover Pururavas is the counterpart of the Hellenic
Polydeukes; but the continuance of her union with him depends on the
condition that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas, impatient
of her long sojourn among mortal men resolved to bring her back to their
bright home; and Pururavas is thus led unwitingly to disregard her
warning. A ewe with two lambs was tied to her couch, and the Gandharvas
stole one of them; Urvasi said, 'They take away my darling, as if I lived
in a land where there is no hero and no man.' They stole the second, and
she upbraided her husband again. Then Pururavas looked and said, 'How can
that be a land without heroes or men where I am?' And naked he sprang up;
he thought it was too long to put on his dress. Then the Gandharvas sent a
flash of lighting, and Urvasi saw her husband naked as by daylight. Then
she vanished. 'I come back,' she said, and went. 'Then he bewailed his
vanished love in bitter grief.' Her promise to return was fulfilled, but
for a moment only, at the Lotos-lake, and Pururavas in vain beseeches her
to tarry longer. 'What shall I do with thy speech?' is the answer of
Urvasi. 'I am gone like the first of the dawns. Pururavas, go home again.
I am hard to be caught like the winds.' Her lover is in utter despair; but
when he lies down to die, the heart of Urvasi was melted, and she bids him
come to her on the last night of the year. On that night only he might be
with her; but a son should be born to him. On that day he went up to the
golden seats, and there Urvasi told him that the Gandharvas would grant
him one wish, and that he must make his choice. 'Choose thou for me,' he
said: and she answered, 'Say to them, Let me be one of you.' "

COX'S _Mythology of the Aryan Nations._ Vol. I. p. 397.




Page 324.


_The sovereign of the Vanar race._

"Vanar is one of the most frequently occurring names by which the poem
calls the monkeys of Rama's army. Among the two or three derivations of
which the word Vanar is susceptible, one is that which deduces it from
vana which signifies a wood, and thus Vanar would mean a forester, an
inhabitant of the wood. I have said elsewhere that the monkeys, the
Vanars, whom Rama led to the conquest of Ceylon were fierce woodland
tribes who occupied the mountainous regions of the south of India, where
their descendants may still be seen. I shall hence forth promiscuously
employ the word _Vanar_ to denote those monkeys, those fierce combatants
of Rama's army." GORRESIO.




Page 326.


_No change of hue, no pose of limb_
_Gave sign that aught was false in him._
_Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,_
_Without a word to pain the ear,_
_From chest to throat, nor high nor low,_
_His accents came in measured flow._

Somewhat similarly in _The Squire's Tale_:

"He with a manly voice said his message,
After the form used in his language,
Withouten vice of syllable or of letter.
And for his tale shoulde seem the better
Accordant to his wordes was his chere,
As teacheth art of speech them that it lere."




Page 329. Rama's Alliance With Sugriva.


"The literal interpretation of this portion of the Ramayana is indeed
deeply rooted in the mind of the Hindu. He implicitly believes that Rama
is Vishnu, who became incarnate for the purpose of destroying the demon
Ravana: that he permitted his wife to be captured by Ravana for the sake
of delivering the gods and Brahmans from the oppressions of the Rakshasa;
and that he ultimately assembled an army of monkeys, who were the progeny
of the gods, and led them against the strong-hold of Ravana at Lanka, and
delivered the world from the tyrant Rakshasa, whilst obtaining ample
revenge for his own personal wrongs.

One other point seems to demand consideration, namely, the possibility of
such an alliance as that which Rama is said to have concluded with the
monkeys. This possibility will of course be denied by modern critics, but
still it is interesting to trace out the circumstances which seem to have
led to the acceptance of such a wild belief by the dreamy and marvel
loving Hindi. The south of India swarms with monkeys of curious
intelligence and rare physical powers. Their wonderful instinct for
organization, their attachment to particular localities, their occasional
journeys in large numbers over mountains and across rivers, their
obstinate assertion of supposed rights, and the ridiculous caricature
which they exhibit of all that is animal and emotional in man, would
naturally create a deep impression.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Indeed the habits of monkeys well
deserve to be patiently studied; not as they appear in confinement, when
much that is revolting in their nature is developed, but as they appear
living in freedom amongst the trees of the forest, or in the streets of
crowded cities, or precincts of temples. Such a study would not fail to
awaken strange ideas; and although the European would not be prepared to
regard monkeys as sacred animals he might be led to speculate as to their
origin by the light of data, which are at present unknown to the
naturalist whose observations have been derived from the menagerie alone.

Whatever, however, may have been the train of ideas which led the Hindu to
regard the monkey as a being half human and half divine, there can be
little doubt that in the Ramayana the monkeys of southern India have been
confounded with what may be called the aboriginal people of the country.
The origin of this confusion may be easily conjectured. Perchance the
aborigines of the country may have been regarded as a superior kind of
monkeys; and to this day the features of the Marawars, who are supposed to
be the aborigines of the southern part of the Carnatic, are not only
different from those of their neighbours, but are of a character
calculated to confirm the conjecture. Again, it is probable that the army
of aborigines may have been accompanied by outlying bands of monkeys
impelled by that magpie-like curiosity and love of plunder which are the
peculiar characteristics of the monkey race; and this incident may have
given rise to the story that the army was composed of Monkeys."

WHEELER'S _History of India. Vol. II. pp. 316 ff._




Page 342. The Fall Of Bali.


"As regards the narrative, it certainly seems to refer to some real event
amongst the aboriginal tribes: namely, the quarrel between an elder and
younger brother for the possession of a Raj; and the subsequent alliance
of Rama with the younger brother. It is somewhat remarkable that Rama
appears to have formed an alliance with the wrong party, for the right of
Bali was evidently superior to that of Sugriva; and it is especially
worthy of note that Rama compassed the death of Bali by an act contrary to
all the laws of fair fighting. Again, Rama seems to have tacitly
sanctioned the transfer of Tara from Bali to Sugriva, which was directly
opposed to modern rule, although in conformity with the rude customs of a
barbarous age; and it is remarkable that to this day the marriage of both
widows and divorced women is practised by the Marawars, or aborigines of
the southern Carnatic, contrary to the deeply-rooted prejudice which
exists against such unions amongst the Hindus at large."

WHEELER'S _History of India, Vol. II. 324_.




Page 370. The Vanar Host.


"The splendid Marutas form the army of Indras, the red-haired monkeys and
bears that of Ramas; and the mythical and solar nature of the monkeys and
bears of the Ramayanam manifests itself several times. The king of the
monkeys is a sun-god. The ancient king was named Balin, and was the son of
Indras. His younger brother Sugrivas, he who changes his shape at pleasure
(Kamarupas), who, helped by Ramas, usurped his throne, is said to be own
child of the sun. Here it is evident that the Vedic antagonism between
Indras and Vishnus is reproduced in a zoological and entirely apish form.
The old Zeus must give way to the new, the moon to the sun, the evening to
the morning sun, the sun of winter to that of spring; the young son
betrays and overthrows the old one.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Ramas, who treacherously kills the
old king of the monkeys, Balin, is the equivalent of Vishnus, who hurls
his predecessor Indras from his throne; and Sugrivas, the new king of the
monkeys resembles Indras when he promises to find the ravished Sita, in
the same way as Vishnus in one of his incarnations finds again the lost
vedas. And there are other indications in the Ramayanam of opposition
between Indras and the monkeys who assist Ramas. The great monkey
Hanumant, of the reddish colour of gold, has his jaw broken, Indras having
struck him with his thunderbolt and caused him to fall upon a mountain,
because, while yet a child, he threw himself off a mountain into the air
in order to arrest the course of the sun, whose rays had no effect upon
him. (The cloud rises from the mountain and hides the sun, which is unable
of itself to disperse it; the tempest comes, and brings flashes of
lightning and thunder-bolts, which tear the cloud in pieces.)

The whole legend of the monkey Hanumant represents the sun entering into
the cloud or darkness, and coming out of it. His father is said to be now
the wind, now the elephant of the monkeys (Kapikunjaras), now Kesarin, the
long-haired sun, the sun with a mane, the lion sun (whence his name of
_Kesarinah putrah_). From this point of view, Hanumant would seem to be
the brother of Sugrivas, who is also the offspring of the sun.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

All the epic monkeys of the _Ramayanam_ are described in the twentieth
canto of the first book by expressions which very closely resemble those
applied in the Vedic hymns to the Marutas, as swift as the tempestuous
wind, changing their shape at pleasure, making a noise like clouds,
sounding like thunder, battling, hurling mountain-peaks, shaking great
uprooted trees, stirring up the deep waters, crushing the earth with their
arms, making the clouds fall. Thus Balin comes out of the cavern as the
sun out of the cloud.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

But the legend of the monkey Hanumant presents another curious resemblance
to that of Samson. Hanumant is bound with cords by Indrajit, son of
Ravanas; he could easily free himself, but does not wish to do so. Ravanas
to put him to shame, orders his tail to be burned, because the tail is the
part most prized by monkeys.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}

The tail of Hanumant, which sets fire to the city of the monsters, is
probably a personification of the rays of the morning or spring sun, which
sets fire to the eastern heavens, and destroys the abode of the nocturnal
or winter monsters."

DE GUBERNATIS, _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. II. pp. 100 ff.

"The Jaitwas of Rajputana, a tribe politically reckoned as Rajputs,
nevertheless trace their descent from the monkey-god Hanuman, and confirm
it by alleging that their princes still bear its evidence in a tail-like
prolongation of the spine; a tradition which has probably a real
ethnological meaning, pointing out the Jaitwas as of non-Aryan
race."(1040) TYLOR'S _Primitive Culture_, Vol. I. p. 341.




Page 372.


The names of peoples occurring in the following _slokas_ are omitted in
the metrical translation:

"Go to the Brahmamalas,(1041) the Videhas,(1042) the Malavas,(1043) the
Kasikosalas,(1044) the Magadnas,(1045) the Pundras,(1046) and the
Angas,(1047) and the land of the weavers of silk, and the land of the
mines of silver, and the hills that stretch into the sea, and the towns
and the hamlets that are about the top of Mandar, and the
Karnapravaranas,(1048) and the Oshthakarnakas,(1049) and the
Ghoralohamukhas,(1050) and the swift Ekapadakas,(1051) and the strong
imperishable Eaters of Men, and the Kiratas(1052) with stiff hair-tufts,
men like gold and fair to look upon: And the Eaters of Raw Fish, and the
Kiratas who dwell in islands, and the fierce Tiger-men(1053) who live amid
the waters."




Page 374.


"Go to the Vidarbhas(1054) and the Rishtikas(1055) and the
Mahishikas,(1056) and the Matsyas(1057) and Kalingas(1058) and the
Kausikas(1059) {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} and the Andhras(1060) and the Pundras(1061) and the
Cholas(1062) and the Pandyas(1063) and the Keralas,(1064) Mlechchhas(1065)
and the Pulindas(1066) and the Surasenas,(1067) and the Prasthalas and the
Bharatas and Madrakas(1068) and the Kambojas(1069) and the Yavanas(1070)
and the towns of the Sakas(1071) and the Varadas."(1072)




Page 378. Northern Kurus.


Professor Lassen remarks in the Zeitschrift fuer die Kunde des
Morgenlandes, ii. 62: "At the furthest accessible extremity of the earth
appears Harivarsha with the northern Kurus. The region of Hari or Vishnu
belongs to the system of mythical geography; but the case is different
with the Uttara Kurus. Here there is a real basis of geographical fact; of
which fable has only taken advantage, without creating it. The Uttara
Kurus were formerly quite independent of the mythical system of _dvipas_,
though they were included in it at an early date." Again the same writer
says at p. 65: "That the conception of the Uttara Kurus is based upon an
actual country and not on mere invention, is proved (1) by the way in
which they are mentioned in the Vedas; (2) by the existence of Uttara Kuru
in historical times as a real country; and (3) by the way in which the
legend makes mention of that region as the home of primitive customs. To
begin with the last point the Mahabharata speaks as follows of the freer
mode of life which women led in the early world, Book I. verses 4719-22:
'Women were formerly unconfined and roved about at their pleasure,
independent. Though in their youthful innocence they abandoned their
husbands, they were guilty of no offence; for such was the rule in early
times. This ancient custom is even now the law for creatures born as
brutes, which are free from lust and anger. This custom is supported by
authority and is observed by great rishis, and it is _still practiced
among the northern Kurus_.'

"The idea which is here conveyed is that of the continuance in one part of
the world of that original blessedness which prevailed in the golden age.
To afford a conception of the happy condition of the southern Kurus it is
said in another place (M.-Bh, i. 4346.) 'The southern Kurus vied in
happiness with the northern Kurus and with the divine rishis and bards.'

Professor Lassen goes on to say: 'Ptolemy (vi. 16.) is also acquainted
with _Uttara Kuru_. He speaks of a mountain, a people, and a city called
_Ottorakorra_. Most of the other ancient authors who elsewhere mention
this name, have it from him. It is a part of the country which he calls
Serica; according to him the city lies twelve degrees west from the
metropolis of Sera, and the mountain extends from thence far to the
eastward. As Ptolemy has misplaced the whole of eastern Asia beyond the
Ganges, the _relative_ position which he assigns will guide us better that
the absolute one, which removes _Ottorakorra_ so far to the east that a
correction is inevitable. According to my opinion the _Ottorakorra_ of
Ptolemy must be sought for to the east of Kashgar.' Lassen also thinks
that Magasthenes had the Uttara Kurus in view when he referred to the
Hyperboreans who were fabled by Indian writers to live a thousand years.
In his Indian antiquities, (Ind. Alterthumskunde, i. 511, 512. and note,)
the same writer concludes that though the passages above cited relative to
the Uttara Kurus indicate a belief in the existence of a really existing
country of that name in the far north, yet that the descriptions there
given are to be taken as pictures of an ideal paradise, and not as founded
on any recollections of the northern origin of the Kurus. It is probable,
he thinks, that some such reminiscences originally existed, and still
survived in the Vedic era, though there is no trace of their existence in
latter times." MUIR'S _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. II. pp. 336, 337.




Page 428.


_Trust to these mighty Vanars._

The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has "these silvans in
the forms of monkeys, vanarah kapirupinah." "Here it manifestly appears,"
says Gorresio, "that these hosts of combatants whom Rama led to the
conquest of Lanka (Ceylon) the kingdom and seat of the Hamitic race, and
whom the poem calls monkeys, were in fact as I have elsewhere observed,
inhabitants of the mountainous and southern regions of India, who were
wild-looking and not altogether unlike monkeys. They were perhaps the
remote ancestors of the Malay races."




Page 431.


_"Art thou not he who slew of old_
_The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold."_

All these exploits of Ravan are detailed in the _Uttarakanda_, and
epitomized in the Appendix.




Page 434.


_Within the consecrated hall_.

The Brahman householder ought to maintain three sacred fires, the
_Garhapatya_, the _Ahavaniya_ and the _Dakshina_. These three fires were
made use of in many Brahmanical solemnities, for example in funeral rites
when the three fires were arranged in prescribed order.




Page 436.


_Fair Punjikasthala I met._

"I have not noticed in the Uttara Kanda any story about the daughter of
Varuna, but the commentator on the text (VI 60, 11) explains the allusion
to her thus:

"The daughter of Varuna was Punjikasthali. On her account, a curse of
Brahma, involving the penalty of death, [was pronounced] on the rape of
women." MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV. Appendix.




Page 452.


_"__Shall no funereal honours grace_
_The parted lord of Raghu's race?__"_

"Here are indicated those admirable rites and those funeral prayers which
Professor Mueller has described in his excellent work, _Die
Todtenbestattung bei den Brahmanen_, Sita laments that the body of Rama
will not be honoured with those rites and prayers, nor will the Brahman
priest while laying the ashes from the pile in the bosom of the earth,
pronounce over them those solemn and magnificent words: 'Go unto the
earth, thy mother, the ample, wide, and blessed earth.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} And do thou, O
Earth, open and receive him as a friend with sweet greeting: enfold him in
thy bosom as a mother wraps her child in her robes.' " GORRESIO.




Page 462.


                _Each glorious sign_
_That stamps the future queen is mine_.

We read in Josephus that Caesar was so well versed in chiromancy that when
one day a _soi-disant_ son of Herod had audience of him, he at once
detected the impostor because his hand was destitute of all marks of
royalty.




Page 466.


_In battle's wild Gandharva dance_.

"Here the commentator explains: 'the battle resembled the dance of the
Gandharvas,' in accordance with the notion of the Gandharvas entertained
in his day. They were regarded as celestial musicians enlivening with
their melodies Indra's heaven and the banquets of the Gods. But the
Gandharvas before becoming celestial musicians in popular tradition, were
in the primitive and true signification of the name heroes, spirited and
ardent warriors, followers of Indra, and combined the heroical character
with their atmospherical deity. Under this aspect the dance of the
Gandharvas may be a very different thing from what the commentator means,
and may signify the horrid dance of war." GORRESIO.

The Homeric expression is similar, "to dance a war-dance before Ares."




Page 470.


_By Anaranya's lips of old._

"The story of Anaranya is told in the Uttara Kanda of the Ramayana.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
Anaranya a descendant of Ixvaku and King of Ayodhya, when called upon to
fight with Ravana or acknowledge himself conquered, prefers the former
alternative; but his army is overcome, and he himself is thrown from his
chariot.

When Ravana triumphs over his prostrate foe, the latter says that he has
been vanquished not by him but by fate, and that Ravana is only the
instrument of his overthrow; and he predicts that Ravana shall one day be
slain by his descendant Rama." _Sanskrit Texts_, IV., Appendix.




Page 497.


"With regard to the magic image of Sita made by Indrajit, we may observe
that this thoroughly oriental idea is also found in Greece in Homer's
Iliad, where Apollo forms an image of AEneas to save that hero beloved by
the Gods: it occurs too in the AEneid of Virgil where Juno forms a
fictitious AEneas to save Turnus:

  Tum dea nube cava tenuem sine viribus umbram
In faciem AEneae (visu mirabile monstrum)
Dardaniis ornat telis; clipeumque jubasque
Divini assimulat capitis; dat inania verba;
Dat sine mente sonum, gressusque effingit euntis.

(_AEneidos_, lib. X.)" GORRESIO.




Page 489.


_"To Raghu's son my chariot lend."_

"Analogous to this passage of the Ramayana, where Indra sends to Rama his
own chariot, his own charioteer, and his own arms, is the passage in the
AEneid where Venus descending from heaven brings celestial arms to her son
AEneas when he is about to enter the battle:

  At Venus aethereos inter dea candida nimbos
Dona fereus aderat;{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
Arma sub adversa posuit radiantia quercum.
Ille, deae donis et tanto laetus honore,
Expleri nequit, atque oculus per singula volvit,
Miraturque, interque manus et brachia versat
Terribilem cristis galeam flammasque vomentem,
Fatiferumque ensem, loricam ex aere rigentem.

(_AEneidos_, lib. VIII)" GORRESIO.




Page 489.


_Agastya came and gently spake._

"The Muni or saint Agastya, author of several Vedic hymns, was celebrated
in Indo-Sanskrit tradition for having directed the first brahmanical
settlements in the southern regions of India; and the Mahabharata gives
him the credit of having subjected those countries, expelled the
Rakshases. and given security to the solitary ascetics, who were settled
there. Hence Agastya was regarded in ancient legend as the conqueror and
ruler of the southern country. This tradition refers to the earliest
migrations made by the Sanskrit Indians towards the south of India. To
Agastya are attributed many marvellous mythic deeds which adumbrate and
veil ancient events; some of which are alluded to here and there in the
Ramayana." GORRESIO.

The following is the literal translation of the Canto, text and
commentary, from the Calcutta edition:

Having found Rama weary with fighting and buried in deep thought, and
Ravan standing before him ready to engage in battle, the holy Agastya, who
had come to see the battle, approached Rama and spoke to him thus: "O
mighty Rama, listen to the old mystery by which thou wilt conquer all thy
foes in the battle. Having daily repeated the Adityahridaya (the delighter
of the mind of the Sun) the holy prayer which destroys all enemies (of him
who repeats it) gives victory, removes all sins, sorrows and distress,
increases life, and which is the blessing of all blessings, worship the
rising and splendid sun who is respected by both the Gods and demons, who
gives light to all bodies and who is the rich lord of all the worlds, (To
the question why this prayer claims so great reverence; the sage answers)
Since yonder(1073) sun is full of glory and all gods reside in him (he
being their material cause) and bestows being and the active principle on
all creatures by his rays; and since he protects all deities, demons and
men with his rays.

He is Brahma,(1074) Vishnu,(1075) Siva,(1076) Skanda,(1077)
Prajapati,(1078) Mahendra,(1079) Dhanada,(1080) Kala,(1081) Yama,(1082)
Soma,(1083) Apam Pati _i.e._ The lord of waters, Pitris,(1084)
Vasus,(1085) Sadhyas,(1086) Asvins,(1087) Maruts,(1088) Manu,(1089)
Vayu,(1090) Vahni,(1091) Praja,(1092) Prana,(1093) Ritukarta,(1094)
Prabhakara,(1095) (Thou,(1096) art) Aditya,(1097) Savita,(1098)
Surya,(1099) Khaga,(1100) Pushan,(1101) Gabhastiman,(1102)
Suvarnasadrisa,(1103) Bhanu,(1104) Hiranyaretas,(1105) Divakara,(1106)
Haridasva,(1107) Sahasrarchish,(1108) Saptasapti,(1109) Marichiman,(1110)
Timironmathana,(1111) Sambhu,(1112) Twashta,(1113) Martanda,(1114)
Ansuman,(1115) Hiranyagarbha,(1116) Sisira,(1117) Tapana,(1118)
Ahaskara,(1119) Ravi,(1120) Agnigarbha,(1121) Aditiputra,(1122)
Sankha,(1123) Sisiranasana,(1124) Vyomanatha,(1125) Tamobhedi,(1126)
Rigyajussamaparaga,(1127) Ghanavrishti,(1128) Apam-Mitra,(1129)
Vindhyavithiplavangama,(1130) Atapi,(1131) Mandali,(1132) Mrityu (death),
Pingala,(1133) Sarvatapana,(1134) Kavi,(1135) Visva,(1136)
Mahatejas,(1137) Rakta,(1138) Sarvabhavodbhava.(1139) The Lord of stars,
planets, and other luminous bodies, Visvabhavana,(1140)
Tejasvinam-Tejasvi,(1141) Dwadasatman:(1142) I salute thee. I salute thee
who art the eastern mountain. I salute thee who art the western mountain.
I salute thee who art the Lord of all the luminous bodies. I salute thee
who art the Lord of days.

I respectfully salute thee who art Jaya,(1143) Jayabhadra,(1144)
Haryasa,(1145) O Thou who hast a thousand rays, I repeatedly salute thee.
I repeatedly and respectfully salute thee who art Aditya, I repeatedly
salute thee who art Ugra,(1146) Vira,(1147) and Saranga.(1148) I salute
thee who openest the lotuses (or the lotus of the heart). I salute thee
who art furious. I salute thee who art the Lord of Brahma, Siva and
Vishnu. I salute thee who art the sun, Adityavarchas,(1149) splendid,
Sarvabhaksha,(1150)and Raudravapush.(1151)

I salute thee who destroyest darkness, cold and enemies: whose form is
boundless, who art the destroyer of the ungrateful; who art Deva;(1152)
who art the Lord of the luminous bodies, and who appearest like the heated
gold. I salute thee who art Hari,(1153) Visvakarman,(1154) the destroyer
of darkness, and who art splendid and Lokasakshin.(1155) Yonder sun
destroys the whole of the material world and also creates it. Yonder sun
dries (all earthly things), destroys them and causes rain with his rays.
He wakes when our senses are asleep; and resides within all beings. Yonder
sun is Agnihotra(1156) and also the fruit obtained by the performer of
Agnihotra. He is identified with the gods, sacrifices, and the fruit of
the sacrifices. He is the Lord of all the duties known to the world, if
any man, O Raghava, in calamities, miseries, forests and dangers, prays to
yonder sun, he is never overwhelmed by distress.

Worship, with close attention Him the God of gods and the Lord of the
world; and recite these verses thrice, whereby thou wilt be victorious in
the battle. O brave one, thou wilt kill Ravana this very instant."

Thereupon Agastya having said this went away as he came. The glorious Rama
having heard this became free from sorrow. Raghava whose senses were under
control, being pleased, committed the hymn to memory, recited it facing
the sun, and obtained great delight. The brave Rama having sipped water
thrice and become pure took his bow, and seeing Ravana, was delighted, and
meditated on the sun.




Page 492. Ravan's Funeral.


"In the funeral ceremonies of India the fire was placed on three sides of
the pyre; the _Dakshina_ on the south, the _Garhapatya_ on the west, and
the _Ahavaniya_ on the east. The funeral rites are not described in detail
here, and it is therefore difficult to elucidate and explain them. The
poem assigns the funeral ceremonies of Aryan Brahmans to the Rakshases, a
race different from them in origin and religion, in the same way as Homer
sometimes introduces into Troy the rites of the Grecian cult." GORRESIO.

Mr. Muir translates the description of the funeral from the Calcutta
edition, as follows: "They formed, with Vedic rites, a funeral pile of
faggots of sandal-wood, with _padmaka_ wood, _usira_ grass, and sandal,
and covered with a quilt of deer's hair. They then performed an unrivalled
obsequial ceremony for the Raxasa prince, placing the sacrificial ground
to the S.E. and the fire in the proper situation. They cast the ladle
filled with curds and ghee on the shoulder(1157) of the deceased; he (?)
placed the car on the feet, and the mortar between the thighs. Having
deposited all the wooden vessels, the [upper] and lower fire-wood, and the
other pestle, in their proper places, they departed. The Raxasas having
then slain a victim to their prince in the manner prescribed in the
Sastras, and enjoined by great rishis, cast [into the fire] the coverlet
of the king saturated with ghee. They then, Vibhishana included, with
afflicted hearts, adorned Ravana with perfumes and garlands, and with
various vestments, and besprinkled him with fried grain. Vibhishana having
bathed, and having, with his clothes wet, scattered in proper form _tila_
seeds mixed with _darbha_ grass, and moistened with water, applied the
fire [to the pile]."




Page 496.


The following is a literal translation of Brahma's address to Rama
according to the Calcutta edition, text and commentary:

"O Rama, how dost thou, being the creator of all the world, best of all
those who have profound knowledge of the Upanishads and all-powerful as
thou art, suffer Sita to fall in the fire? How dost thou not know thyself
as the best of the gods? Thou art one of the primeval Vasus,(1158) and
also their lord and creator. Thou art thyself the lord and first creator
of the three worlds. Thou art the eighth (that is Mahadeva) of the
Rudras,(1159) and also the fifth(1160) of the Sadhyas.(1161) (The poet
describes Rama as made of the following gods) The Asvinikumaras (the twin
divine physicians of the gods) are thy ears; the sun and the moon are thy
eyes; and thou hast been seen in the beginning and at the end of creation.
How dost thou neglect the daughter of Videha (Janaka} like a man whose
actions are directed by the dictates of nature?" Thus addressed by Indra,
Brahma and the other gods, Rama the descendant of Raghu, lord of the world
and the best of the virtuous, spoke to the chief of the gods. "As I take
myself to be a man of the name of Rama and son of Dasaratha, therefore,
sir, please tell me who I am and whence have I come." "O thou whose might
is never failing," said Brahma to Kakutstha the foremost of those who
thoroughly know Brahma, "Thou art Narayana,(1162) almighty, possessed of
fortune, and armed with the discus. Thou art the boar(1163) with one tusk;
the conqueror of thy past and future foes. Thou art Brahma true and
eternal or undecaying. Thou art Visvaksena,(1164) having four arms; Thou
art Hrishikesa,(1165) whose bow is made of horn; Thou art Purusha,(1166)
the best of all beings; Thou art one who is never defeated by any body;
Thou art the holder of the sword (named Nandaka). Thou art Vishnu (the
pervader of all); blue in colour: of great might; the commander of armies;
and lord of villages. Thou art truth. Thou art embodied intelligence,
forgiveness, control over the senses, creation, and destruction. Thou art
Upendra(1167) and Madhusudana.(1168) Thou art the creator of Indra, the
ruler over all the world, Padmanabha,(1169) and destroyer of enemies in
the battle. The divine Rishis call thee shelter of refugees, as well as
the giver of shelter. Thou hast a thousand horns,(1170) a hundred
heads.(1171) Thou art respected of the respected; and the lord and first
creator of the three worlds. Thou art the forefather and shelter of
Siddhas,(1172) and Sadhyas.(1173) Thou art sacrifices; Vashatkara,(1174)
Omkara.(1175) Thou art beyond those who are beyond our senses. There is
none who knows who thou art and who knows thy beginning and end. Thou art
seen in all material objects, in Brahmans, in cows, and also in all the
quarters, sky and streams. Thou hast a thousand feet, a hundred heads, and
a thousand eyes. Thou hast borne the material objects and the earth with
the mountains; and at the bottom of the ocean thou art seen the great
serpent. O Rama, Thou hast borne the three worlds, gods, Gandharvas,(1176)
and demons. I am, O Rama, thy heart; the goddess of learning is thy
tongue; the gods are the hairs of thy body; the closing of thy eyelids is
called the night: and their opening is called the day. The Vedas are thy
Sanskaras.(1177) Nothing can exist without thee. The whole world is thy
body; the surface of the earth is thy stability."

O Srivatsalakshana, fire is thy anger, and the moon is thy favour. In the
time of thy incarnation named Vamana, thou didst pervade the three worlds
with thy three steps; and Mahendra was made the king of paradise by thee
having confined the fearful Bali.(1178) Sita (thy wife) is Lakshmi; and
thou art the God Vishnu,(1179) Krishna,(1180) and Prajapati. To kill Ravan
thou hast assumed the form of a man; therefore, O best of the virtuous,
thou hast completed this task imposed by us (gods). O Rama, Ravana has
been killed by thee: now being joyful (i.e. having for some time reigned
in the kingdom of Ayodhya,) go to paradise. O glorious Rama, thy power and
thy valour are never failing. The visit to thee and the prayers made to
thee are never fruitless. Thy devotees will never be unsuccessful. Thy
devotees who obtain thee (thy favour) who art first and best of mankind,
shall obtain their desires in this world as well as in the next. They who
recite this prayer, founded on the Vedas (or first uttered by the sages),
and the old and divine account of (Rama) shall never suffer defeat."




Page 503. The Meeting.


The _Bharat-Milap_ or meeting with Bharat, is the closing scene of the
dramatic representation of Rama's great victory and triumphant return
which takes place annually in October in many of the cities of Northern
India. The Ram-Lala or Play of Rama, as the great drama is called, is
performed in the open air and lasts with one day's break through fifteen
successive days. At Benares there are three nearly simultaneous
performances, one provided by H. H. the Maharajah of Benares near his
palace at Ramnaggur, one by H. H. the Maharajah of Vizianagram near the
Missionary settlement at Sigra and at other places in the city, and one by
the leading gentry of the city at Chowka Ghat near the College. The scene
especially on the great day when the brothers meet is most interesting:
the procession of elephants with their gorgeous howdahs of silver and gold
and their magnificently dressed riders with priceless jewels sparkling in
their turbans, the enthusiasm of the thousands of spectators who fill the
streets and squares, the balconies and the housetops, the flowers that are
rained down upon the advancing car, the wild music, the shouting and the
joy, make an impression that is not easily forgotten.

_Still on his head, well trained in lore_
_Of duty, Rama's shoes he bore._

Rama's shoes are here regarded as the emblems of royalty or possession. We
may compare the Hebrew "Over Edom will I cast forth my shoe." A curiously
similar passage occurs in LYSCHANDER'S _Chronicon Greenlandiae Rhythmicon_:

"Han sendte til Irland sin skiden skoe,
Og boed den Konge. Som der monne boe,
Han skulde dem haederlig baere
Pan Juuledag i sin kongelig Pragt,
Og kjende han havde sit Rige og Magt
Af Norges og Quernes Herre."

He sent to Ireland his dirty shoes,
And commanded the king who lived there
To wear them with honour
On Christmas Day in his royal state,
And to own that he had his kingdom and power
From the Lord of Norway and the Isles.
_Notes & Queries, March 30, 1872._




Final Notes.


I end these notes with an extract which I translate from Signor Gorresio's
Preface to the tenth volume of his Ramayan, and I take this opportunity of
again thankfully acknowledging my great obligations to this eminent
Sanskritist from whom I have so frequently borrowed. As Mr. Muir has
observed, the Bengal recension which Signor Gorresio has most ably edited
is throughout an admirable commentary on the genuine Ramayan of northern
India, and I have made constant reference to the faithful and elegant
translation which accompanies the text for assistance and confirmation in
difficulties:

"Towards the southern extremity and in the island of Lanka (Ceylon) there
existed undoubtedly a black and ferocious race, averse to the Aryans and
hostile to their mode of worship: their ramifications extended through the
islands of the Archipelago, and some traces of them remain in Java to this
day.

The Sanskrit-Indians, applying to this race a name expressive of hatred
which occurs in the Vedas as the name of hostile, savage and detested
beings, called it the Rakshas race: it is against these Rakshases that the
expedition of Rama which the Ramayan celebrates is directed. The
Sanskrit-Indians certainly altered in their traditions the real character
of this race: they attributed to it physical and moral qualities not found
in human nature; they transformed it into a race of giants; they
represented it as monstrous, hideous, truculent, changing forms at will,
blood-thirsty and ravenous, just as the Semites represented the races that
opposed them as impious, horrible and of monstrous size. But
notwithstanding these mythical exaggerations, which are partly due to the
genius of the Aryans so prone to magnify everything without measure, the
Ramayan in the course of its epic narration has still preserved and noted
here and there some traits and peculiarities of the race which reveal its
true character. It represents the Rakshases as black of hue, and compares
them with black clouds and masses of black collyrium; it attributes to
them curly woolly hair and thick lips, it depicts them as loaded with
chains, collars and girdles of gold, and the other bright ornaments which
their race has always loved, and in which the kindred races of the Soudan
still delight. It describes them as worshippers of matter and force. They
are hostile to the religion of the Aryans whose rites and sacrifices they
disturb and ruin {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Such is the Rakshas race as represented in the Ramayan;
and the war of the Aryan Rama forms the subject of the epic, a subject
certainly real and historical as far as regards its substance, but greatly
exaggerated by the ancient myth. In Sanskrit-Indian tradition are found
traces of another struggle of the Aryans with the Rakshas races, which
preceded the war of Rama. According to some pauranic legends, Karttavirya,
a descendant of the royal tribe of the Yadavas, contemporary with
Parasurama and a little anterior to Rama, attacked Lanka and took Ravan
prisoner. This well shows how ancient and how deeply rooted in the Aryan
race is the thought of this war which the Ramayan celebrates.

"But," says an eminent Indianist(1181) whose learning I highly appreciate,
"the Ramayan is an allegorical epic, and no precise and historical value
can be assigned to it. Sita signifies the furrow made by the plough, and
under this symbolical aspect has already appeared honoured with worship in
the hymns of the Rig-veda; Rama is the bearer of the plough (this
assertion is entirely gratuitous); these two allegorical personages
represented agriculture introduced to the southern regions of India by the
race of the Kosalas from whom Rama was descended; the Rakshases on whom he
makes war are races of demons and giants who have little or nothing human
about them; allegory therefore predominates in the poem, and the exact
reality of an historical event must not be looked for in it." Such is
Professor Weber's opinion. If he means to say that mythical fictions are
mingled with real events,

Forsan in alcun vero suo arco percuote,

as Dante says, and I fully concede the point. The interweaving of the myth
with the historical truth belongs to the essence, so to speak, of the
primitive epopeia. If Sita is born, as the Ramayan feigns, from the furrow
which King Janak opened when he ploughed the earth, not a whit more real
is the origin of Helen and AEneas as related in Homer and Virgil, and if
the characters in the Ramayan exceed human nature, and in a greater degree
perhaps than is the case in analogous epics, this springs in part from the
nature of the subject and still more from the symbol-loving genius of the
orient. Still the characters of the Ramayan, although they exceed more or
less the limits of human nature, act notwithstanding in the course of the
poem, speak, feel, rejoice and grieve according to the natural impulse of
human passions. But if by saying that the Ramayan is an allegorical epic,
it is meant that its fundamental subject is nothing but allegory, that the
war of the Aryan Rama against the Rakshas race is an allegory, that the
conquest of the southern region and of the island of Lanka is an allegory,
I do not hesitate to answer that such a presumption cannot be admitted and
that the thing is in my opinion impossible. Father Paolino da S.
Bartolommeo,(1182) had already, together with other strange opinions of
his own on Indian matters, brought forward a similar idea, that is to say
that the exploit of Rama which is the subject of the Ramayan was a symbol
and represented the course of the sun: thus he imagined that Brahma was
the earth, Vishnu the water, and that his avatars were the blessings
brought by the fertilizing waters, etc. But such ideas, born at a time
when Indo-sanskrit antiquities were enveloped in darkness, have been
dissipated by the light of new studies. How could an epic so dear in India
to the memory of the people, so deeply rooted for many centuries in the
minds of all, so propagated and diffused through all the dialects and
languages of those regions, which had become the source of many dramas
which are still represented in India, which is itself represented every
year with such magnificence and to such crowds of people in the
neighbourhood of Ayodhya, a poem welcomed at its very birth with such
favour, as the legend relates, that the recitation of it by the first
wandering Rhapsodists has consecrated and made famous all the places
celebrated by them, and where Rama made a shorter or longer stay, how, I
ask, could such an epic have been purely allegorical? How, upon a pure
invention, upon a simple allegory, could a poem have been composed of
about fifty thousand verses, relating with such force and power the
events, and giving details with such exactness? On a theme purely
allegorical there may easily be composed a short mythical poem, as for
example a poem on Proserpine or Psyche: but never an epic so full of
traditions and historical memories, so intimately connected with the life
of the people, as the Ramayan.(1183) Excessive readiness to find allegory
whenever some traces of symbolism occur, where the myth partly veils the
historical reality, may lead and often has led to error. What poetical
work of mythical times could stand this mode of trial? could there not be
made, or rather has there not been made a work altogether allegorical, out
of the Homeric poems? We have all heard of the ingenious idea of the
anonymous writer, who in order to prove how easily we may pass beyond the
truth in our wish to seek and find allegory everywhere, undertook with
keen subtlety to prove that the great personality of Napoleon I. was
altogether allegorical and represented the sun. Napoleon was born in an
island, his course was from west to east, his twelve marshals were the
twelve signs of the zodiac, etc.

I conclude then, that the fundamental theme of the Ramayan, that is to say
the war of the Aryan Rama against the Rakshases, an Hamitic race settled
in the south, ought to be regarded as real and historical as far as
regards its substance, although the mythic element intermingled with the
true sometimes alters its natural and genuine aspect.

How then did the Indo-Sanskrit epopeia form and complete itself? What
elements did it interweave in its progress? How did it embody, how did it
clothe the naked and simple primitive datum? We must first of all remember
that the Indo-European races possessed the epic genius in the highest
degree, and that they alone in the different regions they occupied
produced epic poetry {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But other causes and particular influences combined
to nourish and develop the epic germ of the Sanskrit-Indians. Already in
the Rig-veda are found hymns in which the Aryan genius preluded, so to
speak, to the future epopeia, in songs that celebrated the heroic deeds of
Indra, the combats and the victories of the tutelary Gods of the Aryan
races over enemies secret or open, human or superhuman, the exploits and
the memories of ancient heroes. More recently, at certain solemn
occasions, as the very learned A. Weber remarks, at the solemnity, for
example of the Asvamedha or sacrifice of the horse, the praises of the
king who ordained the great rite were sung by bards and minstrels in songs
composed for the purpose, the memories of past times were recalled and
honourable mention was made of the just and pious kings of old. In the
_Brahmanas_, a sort of prose commentaries annexed to the Vedas, are found
recorded stories and legends which allude to historical events of the past
ages, to ancient memories, and to mythical events. Such popular legends
which the _Brahmanas_ undoubtedly gathered from tradition admirably suited
the epic tissue with which they were interwoven by successive hands.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Many
and various mythico-historical traditions, suitable for epic development,
were diffused among the Aryan races, those for example which are related
in the four chapters containing the description of the earth, the Descent
of the Ganges, etc. The epic genius however sometimes created beings of
its own and gave body and life to ideal conceptions. Some of the persons
in the Ramayan must be, in my opinion, either personifications of the
forces of nature like those which are described with such vigour in the
_Shahnamah_, or if not exactly created, exaggerated beyond human
proportions; others, vedic personages much more ancient than Rama, were
introduced into the epic and woven into its narrations, to bring together
men who lived in different and distant ages, as has been the case in times
nearer to our own, in the epics, I mean, of the middle ages.

In the introduction I have discussed the antiquity of the Ramayan; and by
means of those critical and inductive proofs which are all that an
antiquity without precise historical dates can furnish I have endeavoured
to establish with all the certainty that the subject admitted, that the
original composition of the Ramayan is to be assigned to about the twelfth
century before the Christian era. Not that I believe that the epic then
sprang to life in the form in which we now possess it; I think, and I have
elsewhere expressed the opinion, that the poem during the course of its
rhapsodical and oral propagation appropriated by way of episodes,
traditions, legends and ancient myths.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But as far as regards the epic
poem properly so called which celebrates the expedition of Rama against
the Rakshases I think that I have sufficiently shown that its origin and
first appearance should be placed about the twelfth century B.C.; nor have
I hitherto met with anything to oppose this chronological result, or to
oblige me to rectify or reject it.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But an eminent philologist already
quoted, deeply versed in these studies, A. Weber, has expressed in some of
his writings a totally different opinion; and the authority of his name,
if not the number and cogency of his arguments, compels me to say
something on the subject. From the fact or rather the assumption that
Megasthenes(1184) who lived some time in India has made no mention either
of the Mahabharat or the Ramayan Professor Weber argues that neither of
these poems could have existed at that time; as regards the Ramayan, the
unity of its composition, the chain that binds together its different
parts, and its allegorical character, show it, says Professor Weber, to be
much more recent than the age to which I have assigned it, near to our own
era, and according to him, later than the Mahabharat. As for Megasthenes
it should be observed, that he did not write a history of India, much less
a literary history or anything at all resembling one, but a simple
description, in great part physical, of India: whence, from his silence on
literary matters to draw inferences regarding the history of Sanskrit
literature would be the same thing as from the silence of a geologist with
respect to the literature of a country whose valleys, mountains, and
internal structure he is exploring, to conjecture that such and such a
poem or history not mentioned by him did not exist at his time. We have
only to look at the fragments of Megasthenes collected and published by
Schwanbeck to see what was the nature and scope of his _Indica_.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} But only
a few fragments of Megasthenes are extant; and to pretend that they should
be argument and proof enough to judge the antiquity of a poem is to press
the laws of criticism too far. To Professor Weber's argument as to the
more or less recent age of the Ramayan from the unity of its composition,
I will make one sole reply, which is that if unity of composition were
really a proof of a more recent age, it would be necessary to reduce by a
thousand years at least the age of Homer and bring him down to the age of
Augustus and Virgil; for certainly there is much more unity of
composition, a greater accord and harmony of parts in the Iliad and the
Odyssey than in the Ramayan. But in the fine arts perfection is no proof
of a recent age: while the experience and the continuous labour of
successive ages are necessary to extend and perfect the physical or
natural sciences, art which is spontaneous in its nature can produce and
has produced in remote times works of such perfection as later ages have
not been able to equal."




INDEX OF PRINCIPAL NAMES


Abhijit, 24.

Abhikala, 176.

Abhira, 444.

Abravanti, 374.

Aditi, 31, 57, 58, 125, 201, 245, 246.

Adityas, 246, 403.

Agastya, 5, 9, 40, 132, 151, 239, 240, 242, 244, 262, 265, 280, 375, 480,
491, 500.

Agneya, 178.

Agni, 28, 74, 109, 132, 240, 243, 276.

Agnivarna, 82, 220.

Agniketu, 433 note, 459.

Ahalya, 60, 61, 62.

Ailadhana, 178.

Air, 2, 28, 203.

Airavat, 14, 110, 178, 246, 256, 267, 335, 399, 402, 415, 429, 437, 472.

Aja, 82, 220, 465.

Ajas, 270, 271.

Akampan, 265, 266, 468, 481.

Aksha, 6, 420, 469, 471.

Akurvati, 178.

Alaka, 203 note.

Alambusha, 59, 198, 199.

Alarka, 104, 107.

Amaravati, 13, 203 note, 286.

Ambarisha, 72, 73, 74, 82, 220.

Amurtarajas, 46.

Anala, 455 note.

Anala, 245, 246.

Ananta, 373.

Anaranya, 81, 219, 470.

Anasuya, 9, 226, 227, 228.

Andhak, 264.

Andhras, 549.

Anga, 38.

Angad, 342, 348, 350, 352 ff., 363, 364 note, 367, 374, 379 ff, 391, 402,
425 ff., 439, 442, 445, 448, 456, 458, 459, 475, 479 ff, 505.

Angas, 15, 18, 19, 21, 102.

Angiras, 133, 245.

Anjan, 14, 368, 369.

Anjana, 392.

Ansudhana, 179.

Ansuman, 50, 53, 56, 82, 220.

Anuhlada, 370.

Aparparyat, 178.

Apartala, 175.

Apsarases, 57, 198, 199, 229, 378.

Aptoryam, 24.

Arishta, 424, 425.

Arishtanemi, 49, 245, 392.

Arjun, 86.

Arjuna, 518.

Arthasadhak, 14.

Arun, 246,

Arundhati, 19, 244, 413.

Aryaman, 124.

Aryan, 92.

Asamanj, 50, 53, 82, 138, 220.

Asit, 81, 219.

Asok, 14, 175.

Asoka, 6, 10, 101, 205, 278, 296, 297, 300, 318, 321, 357, 403, 444, 452,
456.

Asta, 377, 379 note.

Asurs, 57, 58, 380, 381, 387, 394, 407, 413, 420.

Asvagriva, 246.

Asvamedh, 29, 236 note.

Asvapati, 89, 131, 178, 183.

Asvatari, 346.

Asvin, 371.

Asvini, 343.

Asvins, 28, 36, 60, 62, 163, 246, 339, 343, 403, 490.

Atikaya, 468, 478 ff.

Atiratra, 24.

Atri, 245, 561.

Aurva, 373 note.

Avanti, 374.

Avindhya, 415.

Ayodhya, 4, 6, 11, 12, 14, 19, 32, 33, 38, 49, 70, 72, 79, 81, 83, 84, 85,
88, 95, 96, _passim_.

Ayomukh, 374.

Ayomukhi, 310.

Bahika, 176.

Bahuputra, 245.

Bala, 264.

Balakhilyas, 63, 235, 270, 271, 374.

Bali, 43, 59, 107, 275, 302, 421.

Bali, 5, 9, 29, 318, 324, 328, 329, 333 ff., 344, 356 ff., 362, 364, 366,
367, 379, 380, 391, 404, 412, 420, 440, 442, 448, 456, 458, 475, 478, 500,
503, 505.

Barbars, 66.

Beauty, 26, 29, 58, 88, 283, 455.

Bhadamadra, 246.

Bhadra, 52.

Bhaga, 124, 243.

Bhagirath, 53, 54, 55, 82, 220, 372.

Bhagirathi, 56.

Bharadvaja, 4, 7, 9, 10, 158, 159, 193, 196, 197, 199, 200, 201, 501.

Bharat, 4, 9, 10, 32, 81, 83, 84, 88, 89, 94, 97, _passim_.

Bharatas, 550.

Bharunda, 178.

Bhasi, 246.

Bhasakarna, 420.

Bhava, 78.

Bhima, 198.

Bhogavati, 12 note, 267, 375.

Bhrigu, 40, 63, 73, 81, 85, 86, 88, 133, 220.

Brahma, 6, 7, 10, 19, 25, 26, 33, 38, 39, 42, 46, 48, 54, 56, 59, 61, 63,
65, 67, 68, 74, 75, 77, 81, _passim_.

Brahmadatta, 46, 47.

Brahmadikas, 133 note.

Bhrahmamalas, 548.

Budha, 287.

Buddhist, 219.

Cancer, 109.

Ceylon, 375 note.

Chaitra, 91.

Chaitraratha, 41, 178, 199, 267, 279, 315, 493.

Chakravan, 376.

Champa, 30.

Chanda, 448.

Chandala, 69, 70.

Chandra, 464.

Chatushtom, 24.

Chitra, 111, 250, 283.

Chitrakuta, 4, 9, 160, 161, 197, 200, 201, 202, 209, 235, 236, 317, 416,
501.

Chitraratha, 132.

Cholas, 549.

Chuli, 47.

Chyavan, 81, 220.

Dadhimukh, 426.

Dadhivakra, 364 note.

Daitya, 125, 152, 211, 246, 289, 306, 371, 418.

Daksha, 36, 78, 228, 245, 257, 396.

Danav, 255, 270, 306, 307, 311, 371, 372, 382, 432, 443, 477.

Dandak, 9, 99, 103, 117, 124, 126, 130, 166, 181, 199, 211, 238, 271, 374.

Dandaka, 5.

Danu, 245, 246, 313.

Dapple skin, 64, 65.

Dardar, 110, 198.

Dardur, 448.

Darimukha, 371.

Dasarna, 374.

Dasaratha, 3, 9, 12, 14, 16, 18 ff., 25, 26, 29, 30, 32, 34, 41, 61, 62,
77, 79, 80 ff., 91, 92, 95, _passim_.

Dasyus, 444.

Devamidha, 82.

Devantak, 479, 480.

Devarat, 77, 82, 86.

Devasakha, 378.

Devavati, 515.

Dhanvantari, 57 note.

Dhanyamalini, 481.

Dharmabhrit, 240.

Dharmapal, 14.

Dharmaranya, 46.

Dharmavardhan, 179.

Dhritarashtri, 246.

Dhrishtaketu, 82.

Dhrishti, 14, 202.

Dhruvasandhi, 81, 219.

Dhumra, 371, 448.

Dhumraksha, 433 note, 465, 466.

Dhumrasva, 60, 481.

Dhundhumar, 81, 171, 219.

Diksha, 44.

Dilipa, 5 note, 53, 54, 56, 82, 171, 190, 220.

Diti, 58, 59, 245, 246, 323.

Dragon, 101.

Dridhanetra, 68.

Drishti, 202.

Drona, 464.

Drumakulya, 444.

Dundubhi, 333, 335, 338.

Durdhar, 420.

Durdharsha, 433 note.

Durjaya, 256 note.

Durmukha, 432, 433 note.

Durvasas, 521.

Dushan, 5, 250, 254, 255, 256, 258, 259, 261, 264, 265, 267-271, 294, 461,
502.

Dwida, 364 note.

Dwijihva, 474.

Dwivid, 371, 428, 430, 449, 451, 475, 483, 484.

Dwivida, 28.

Dyumatsena, 129.

Ekapadakas, 549.

Ekasala, 179.

Fame, 26, 283.

Fate, 42, 68, 70, 71, 81, 119, 122, 123, 130, 181, 182, 195, 256, 293,
296, 309, 343, 349, 351, 354, 386, 404, 415, 439, 492.

Fire, 2, 30, 45, 49, 218, 374.

Fortune, 2, 58, 90, 94, 124, 146, 160, 188, 242, 244, 283, 449, 453.

Fire-god, 74, 124, 328.

Gadhi, 40, 48, 63, 64, 67, 68.

Gaja, 364 note, 371, 429, 449, 459.

Galava, 518.

Gandhamadan, 28, 159, 381, 429, 446, 476.

Gandharva, 199, 256, 258, 259, 278, 285, 351, 396, 425, 437, 441, 454,
466, 468, 491.

Gandharvas, 267, 270, 281, 283, 306, 307, 308, 318, 364, 370, 375, 377,
388, 394, 409, 420, 432, 449, 455, 472.

Gandharvi, 246, 265.

Ganga, 7, 9, 37, 38, 45, 48, 49, _passim_.

Garga, 133.

Garud, 28, 29, 53, 246, 271, 373, 453, 465, 470, 475.

Gautam, 60, 61, 62, 505.

Gautama, 236.

Gavaksha, 364 note, 429, 449, 468, 475, 476.

Gavaya, 364 note, 371, 429, 448, 468.

Gaya, 482.

Gaya, 216.

Gayatri, 243.

Ghoralohamukhas, 548.

Ghritachi, 46, 198, 367.

Girivraja, 46, 176.

Glory, 301.

Godavari, 245, 247, 248, 249, 282, 303, 310, 374, 500.

Gokarna, 54.

Golabh, 351.

Gomati, 151, 179, 448, 502, 503.

Gopa, 199.

Guha, 4, 9, 152-156, 162, 192, 193, 194, 208, 501.

Guhyakas, 378.

Haha, 198.

Haihayas, 81, 219.

Hanuman, 5, 9, 10, 28, 324 ff., 328, 332, 337, 340, 350, 355, 359, 360,
363, 364 note, 368, 371, 374, 378 ff., 392 ff., 411 ff., 424 ff., 449,
456.

Hara, 448.

Hari, 246.

Haritas, 66.

Haryasva, 82.

Hastinapura, 176.

Hastiprishthak, 179.

Havishyand, 68.

Hayagriva, 346, 376.

Hema, 198, 382.

Hemachandra, 60.

Heti, 515.

Himalaya, 3, 14, 45, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 61, 67, 76, 81, 88.

Himavau, 380.

Hiranyakasipu, 391 note, 407.

Hiranyanabha, 500.

Hladini, 55, 178.

Honour, 283.

Hotri, 24.

Hrasvaroma, 82.

Huhu, 198.

Ikshumati, 80, 176.

Ikshvaku, 2, 11, 13, 18, 24, 25, 35, 59, 60, 69, 70, 71, 73, 81, 82, 83,
90, 94, 96, 103, 219, 390.

Ilval, 241.

Indra, 2, 5, 13, 14, 25, 28, 29, 36, 39, 40, 43 ff., 50, 56, _passim_.

Indrajanu, 371 note.

Indrajit, 420, 432, 436, 437, 441, 455, 459 ff., 482, 485.

Indrasatru, 433 note.

Indrasira, 178.

Iravati, 246.

Jabali, 505.

Jahnu, 55.

Jahnavi, 49, 55, 154.

Jamadagni, 85, 86, 87, 119.

Jambavan, 371, 374, 388, 391, 393, 402, 425, 428, 429, 439, 446, 448, 456,
464, 483, 503.

Jambudvip, 51, 373.

Jambumali, 418, 419, 420, 459, 460.

Jambuprastha, 179.

Jambuvatu, 364 note.

Janak, 4, 8, 9, 21, 45, 60, 61, 62, 77-85, 88, 090, _passim_.

Janamejaya, 171.

Janasthan, 225, 251, 254, 255, 264, 265, 271, 281, 282, 294, 295, 298,
308, 404, 439, 454, 463, 474, 493, 500.

Jatarupa, 373.

Jatayu, 5.

Jatayus, 245, 247, 280, 288, 290, 308, 385 ff., 500, 502.

Java, 231.

Javali, 20, 80, 174, 217, 218, 219, 222.

Jaya, 36.

Jayanta, 14, 175.

Jumna, 109, 501, 502.

Jupiter, 144.

Justice, 3, 35, 42, 149, 243, 346, 454.

Jyotishtom, 24.

Kabandha, 5, 9, 310-316, 446, 500.

Kadru, 246.

Kadruma, 246.

Kaikasi, 516.

Kaikeyi, 3, 4, 9, 27, 32, 88, 96-103, _passim_.

Kailasa, 38, 85, 92, 96, 110, 111, 267, 286, 357, 364, 368, 369, 373, 378,
421, 431.

Kakustha, 35, 37, 82, 109, 110, 123, 137, 142, 147, 149, 151, 153, 192,
208, 211, 220, 311.

Kala, 378.

Kalak, 246.

Kalaka, 245, 246.

Kalakamuka, 256 note.

Kalamahi, 372.

Kalinda, 178.

Kalindi, 81, 160, 220.

Kalinga, 179.

Kalingas, 549,

Kalmashapada, 82, 220.

Kama 37, 38, 42, 283, 286, 296.

Kamboja, 13, 66.

Kambojas, 66.

Kampili, 47

Kandu, 118, 380, 440.

Kandarpa, 37, 74, 75, 76, 250, 269.

Kanva, 440.

Kanyakubja, 47.

Kapil, 51, 52, 53.

Kapivati, 179.

Kardam, 245.

Karnapravaranas, 548.

Kartikeya, 243.

Karttavirya, 518.

Kasi, 21, 102.

Kasikosalas, 548.

Kasyap, 15, 16, 20, 30, 57-59, 80, 81, 86, 87, 91, 92, 118, 219, 215,
passim.

Katyayan, 505.

Katyayana, 80, 174.

Kausalya, 3, 23, 27, 30, 31, 79, 84, 88, 93, 94, 97, 98, 100, _passim_.

Kausambi, 46.

Kausikas, 549.

Kausiki, 48, 372.

Kaveri, 375.

Kaustubha, 58.

Kavya, 40.

Kekaya, 21, 84, 88, 90, 137, 139, 174, 175.

Kerala, 190.

Keralas, 549.

Kesari, 371.

Kesini, 49, 50.

Khara, 9, 225, 250 ff., 281, 288, 290, 294, 295, 433, 446, 451, 461, 477,
493.

Kinnars, 270, 306, 308, 318, 321, 373, 425.

Kimpurushas, 28 note.

Kiratas, 66, 549.

Kirtirat, 82.

Kirtiratha, 82.

Kishkindha, 5, 333, 334, 336, 338, 339, 351, 357, 362, 369, 385, 449, 464,
500.

Kosal, 11, 102, 273, 307, 359, 418.

Kosala, 151, 173.

Krathan, 448.

Kratu, 245.

Krauncha, 310, 378, 476.

Kraunchi, 246.

Krisasva, 36, 41, 43.

Krishna, 497.

Krishnagiri, 448.

Krishnveni, 374.

Krita, 57, 395.

Krodhavasa, 245, 246.

Kshatriyas, 246, 346.

Kukshi, 81, 219.

Kulinga, 176.

Kumbha, 484.

Kumbhakarna, 10, 250, 399, 411, 435 ff., 441, 470 ff.

Kumuda, 364 note, 448.

Kunjar, 375, 392.

Kuru(s), North, 198, 203, 315.

Kurujangal, 176.

Kusa, 10, 46, 48, 63, 526.

Kusadhwaj, 80, 82, 88.

Kusamba, 46.

Kusanabha, 46, 47, 48, 63.

Kusasva, 60.

Kusik, 33, 35, 36, 38, 44, 56, 62, 63, 68, 70 ff., 83.

Kutika, 179.

Kutikoshtika, 179.

Kuvera, 23, 88, 109, 110, 111, 112, 198, 199, 204, 232, 267, 378, 422,
431, 432, 483.

Lakshman, 4, 8, 11, 32, 36, 38, 40, 41, 44, 45, 56, 61, 79, 80, 82-84, 88,
91, 94, 97, 98, _passim_.

Lakshmi, 88, 116, 146, 227, 400, 453, 462, 497.

Lamba, 397.

Lanka, 5, 10, 265, 267, 284, 286, 293, 295-297, 367, 387, 397, 411, 423
ff., 439, 456 ff.

Lankatankata, 515.

Lava, 10, 526.

Lohitya, 179.

Lokapalas, 485.

Lomapad, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 30.

Madhavi, 520.

Madhu, 26, 51, 57, 87, 95.

Madhuka, 245.

Madhushyand, 68, 74.

Madrakas, 550.

Magadh, 46, 102.

Magadnas, 548.

Magha, 83.

Mahabir, 82.

Mahabala, 433 note.

Mahabharat, 520, 524, 551, 554.

Mahadeva, 61, 515.

Mahakapala, 256 note, 260.

Mahamali, 256 note.

Mahandhrak, 82.

Mahapadma, 14, 52.

Mahaparasva, 433, 436, 455, 478, 480, 487.

Maharath, 68.

Maharoma, 82.

Maharun, 368.

Mahasaila, 368.

Mahendra, 28, 59, 86, 87, 88, 140, 167, 213, 243, 244, 307, 336, 344, 364,
368, 370, 375, 490, 531, 554.

Maheswar, 369, 498.

Mahi, 372.

Mahishmati, 518.

Mahishikas, 549.

Mahodar, 433 note, 450, 455, 474, 478 ff.

Mahodaya, 46, 70, 71, 488.

Mainaka, 10, 394, 500 note.

Mainda, 28, 364 note, 371, 428, 430, 439, 449, 451, 458, 482, 483.

Makaraksha, 485 note.

Malaja, 39.

Malavas, 548.

Malaya, 198, 324, 328, 375, 379, 430.

Mali, 515, 516.

Malini, 175, 539.

Malyavan, 454, 455.

Malyavat, 515, 516.

Manas, 38.

Mandakarni, 240.

Mandakini, 200, 201, 203, 209, 234, 235, 304, 322, 416 note.

Mandali, 556.

Mandar, 57, 163, 285, 362, 368, 372, 399, 402, 421, 485, 491, 493, 525.

Mandari, 444.

Mandhata, 81, 219, 347, 518.

Mandavi, 84.

Mandavya, 226 note.

Mandehas, 373.

Mandodari, 402, 492, 500, 516.

Mandra, 14.

Manibhadra, 441.

Manthara, 40, 96, 97, 99, 187.

Manu, 11, 12, 13, 81, 103, 151, 179, 219, 245, 246, 347, 490, 505, 537,
555.

Maricha, 58.

Maricha, 5, 9, 35, 39, 40, 44, 266, 271-280, 298.

Marichi, 81, 91, 219, 245.

Marichipas, 270, 271.

Markandeya, 80, 174.

Mars, 93, 144, 339, 404, 445, 467, 489.

Maru, 82, 220.

Maruts, 25, 54, 59, 403, 517, 547, 555.

Mashas, 270, 271.

Matali, 109, 142, 489, 491, 493.

Matanga, 14, 246, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 336, 337, 380.

Matangi, 246.

Matarisva, 389.

Matsya, 102, 523, 537, 549.

Maya, 293, 382, 432, 488.

Maya, 293, 521.

Mayavi, 333, 334, 379.

Meghamali, 256 note.

Meghanada, 10.

Mekhal, 374.

Mena, 49, 394 note.

Menaka, 74.

Mercury, 144, 339, 467.

Meru, 4, 49, 92, 109, 110, 142, 182, 232, 236, 254, 291, 315, 368, 370,
377, 380, 418, 493.

Merusavarni, 382.

Mina, 32.

Misrakesi, 199.

Mithi, 82.

Mithila, 9 note, 21, 45, 60, 61, 78, 81, 83, 84, 85.

Mitraghna, 459.

Mlechchhas, 66, 537, 550.

Modesty, 26.

Moon, 30, 42, 58, 109 ff., 124, 218, 227, 243, 276, 367, 413, 414, 488.

Mriga, 14.

Mrigamanda, 246.

Mrigi, 246.

Mudgalya, 174.

Nabhag, 82, 220.

Nagadanta, 198.

Nagas, 12, 55, 66, 68, 145, 270, 273, 395, 409, 413, 420, 427, 518.

Nahush, 82, 95, 171, 190, 220, 307.

Nairrit, 430.

Nala, 10, 340, 364 note, 428, 444, 445, 448, 449, 468, 475, 483.

Nala, 246.

Nalini, 55, 203, 204, 267, 436.

Namuchi, 39, 261, 264, 275, 336.

Nanda, 415.

Nandan, 26, 175, 200, 267, 279, 315, 316, 426.

Nandi, 249, 421.

Nandigrama, 4, 6, 9, 224, 502, 503.

Nandisvara, 471.

Nandivardhan, 82.

Narad, 1, 2, 8, 9, 124, 199, 543.

Narak, 479.

Narantak, 479.

Narayan, 25, 26, 95, 393, 474, 497, 516, 517, 522, 535, 559.

Narmada, 374, 448, 518.

Nikumbha, 432, 433 note, 437, 459, 484.

Nila, 28, 340, 352, 360, 364 note, 371, 374, 428, 429, 430, 446, 448, 449,
456, 458, 459, 469, 472, 475, 482.

Nimi, 77, 82.

Nisakar, 389, 390.

Nishadas, 4, 152, 192, 196, 271, 501, 537.

Ocean, 10, 95, 144, 285, 286, 336, 346, 387.

Oshthakarnakas, 548.

Pahlavas, 66.

Paka, 252, 297, 498.

Pampa, 5, 9, 235, 293, 314-321, 327.

Panas, 371, 428, 448, 464.

Panasa, 455 note.

Panchajan, 376.

Panchala, 176, 539.

Panchapsaras, 240.

Panchavata, 9.

Panchavati, 244, 245, 247.

Pandyas, 375, 549.

Parasara, 517.

Parasurama, 119 note, 523, 531.

Paraviraksha, 256 note.

Pariyatra, 376, 448.

Parjanya, 112, 174, 261, 448.

Parvati, 249 note, 515, 542.

Paulastya, 472.

Paulomi, 29, 370.

Pavani, 55.

Phalguni, 83.

Pinaka, 67.

Pitris, 550.

Prabhava, 363.

Prachetas, 1, 245.

Praghas, 420, 459, 460.

Pragvat, 179.

Prahasta, 399, 418, 419, 421, 422, 432 ff., 441, 451, 452, 455, 456, 471,
481.

Praheti, 515.

Prahlada, 391.

Prajangha, 459, 460.

Prajapati, 133 note, 554, 560.

Pralamba, 175.

Pramatha, 256 note.

Pramathi, 260, 448.

Pramati, 455 note.

Prasenajit, 81, 219.

Prasravan, 304, 357, 380, 383, 415, 426.

Prasthalas, 550.

Prasussruka, 82, 220.

Pratindhak, 82.

Pravargya, 22.

Prayag, 158, 159, 196.

Prithu, 81, 219.

Prithusyama, 256 note.

Proshthapada, 32.

Pulah, 245.

Pulastya, 35, 245, 254, 268, 288, 408, 515.

Pulindas, 550.

Puloma, 370.

Punarvasu, 93.

Pundarika, 199.

Pundras, 548, 549.

Punjikasthala, 436, 552.

Puranda, 522.

Purandara, 384, 522.

Pururavas, 286, 544, 545.

Purusha, 256 note, 559.

Purushadak, 82, 220.

Purushottam, 498, 517.

Pusha, 124.

Pushpak, 10, 80, 286, 499, 519.

Pushya, 32, 90, 92, 94, 96, 98, 109, 126.

Rabhasa, 433 note.

Raghava, 5 note.

Raghu, 5, 9, 22, 32 ff., 50, 56, 61, _passim_.

Raghunandana, 522.

Rahu, 93, 223, 261, 272, 303, 351, 480.

Rain, Lord of, 92, 222.

Rajagriha, 174, 175.

Rama, _passim_.

Ramayana, 8 note, 10, 11, 541, 542.

Rambha, 75, 232, 448.

Ramana, 199.

Rasmiketu, 433 note, 459.

Ravan, 5, 9, 10, 25, 26, 32, 35, _passim_.

Renuka, 63, 119.

Richika, 48, 73, 86.

Right, 42, 68.

Riksharajas, 386, 442.

Rikshavan, 448.

Rishabh, 373, 375, 429, 446, 476, 483.

Rishtikas, 549.

Rishyamuka, 9, 314, 315, 316, 318 ff., 332, 335, 339, 340, 353, 380, 500.

Rishyasring, 15-24, 29, 30.

Rohini, 4, 112, 223, 227, 246, 251, 282, 287, 367, 404, 413, 445.

Rohitas, 376, 558.

Rudhirasana, 256 note.

Rudra, 49, 57, 67, 77, 78, 162, 249, 257, 264, 283, 296, 378, 413, 483.

Rudras, 246, 558.

Rukmini, 517.

Ruma, 346, 349, 350, 363, 366, 367, 371, 385, 403.

Ruman, 371.

Sachi, 29, 202, 234, 238, 276, 286, 297, 370, 408, 415, 494, 519, 522.

Sadhyas, 490, 555, 558, 559.

Sagar, 11, 50 ff., 82, 119, 137, 171, 441.

Sahadeva, 60.

Sahya, 429, 430.

Saivya, 104, 107, 171, 533.

Sakas, 66, 550.

Sakra, 75, 234, 307, 313, 336, 344, 448, 464.

Salmali, 176, 539.

Salyakartan, 178.

Saman, 186, 326, 359.

Sambar, 479.

Sambara, 99, 100.

Sampati, 5, 9, 246, 364 note, 385, 387 ff., 412, 455 note, 459, 460, 464.

Samprakshalas, 235.

Sanatkumar, 15, 16.

Sandhya, 515.

Sanharas, 36.

Sanhrada, 474.

Sanischar, 283.

Sankan, 82.

Sankar, 57, 335.

Sankasya, 80, 81, 82, 83.

Sankha, 555.

Sankhan, 220, 432.

Sanrochan, 448.

Sansray, 245.

Santa, 16, 19, 29, 30, 31.

Sarabh, 364 note, 439, 476.

Sarabhanga, 9, 233, 234, 235, 236, 265, 502.

Saradanda, 176, 539.

Sarama, 452, 453.

Saran, 446, 447, 455.

Sarandib, 375 note.

Saranga, 556.

Sarasvati, 178, 372, 516, 522.

Sardula, 441, 449, 450.

Sarduli, 246.

Sarju, 11, 20, 22, 36, 37, 38, 50, _passim_.

Sarvabhauma, 429.

Sarvartirtha, 179.

Sasivindhus, 81, 219.

Satabali, 371, 377, 379, 380.

Satadru, 178, 539.

Satahrada, 231.

Satananda, 62, 63, 77, 79, 80, 81, 84.

Satrughna, 32, 83, 84, 88, 89, 97, _passim_.

Satrunjay, 504.

Satyavan, 129.

Satyavati, 48.

Savitri, 129, 227.

Savari, 315, 316, 317.

Saumanas, 373.

Savarni, 377.

Seven Rishis, 23.

Sesha, 245.

Siddharth, 14, 137, 138, 175.

Siddhas, 28 note, 540, 559.

Sighraga, 82, 220.

Sila, 178.

Silavaha, 178.

Sindhu, 13, 21, 55, 102, 372, 376, 443.

Sinhika, 10, 396.

Sisir(a), 372, 555.

Sita, 4 ff., 55, 78, 79, 83, 84, 88, 93, _passim_.

Siva, 4, 36, 42, 54, 55, 57, 67, 78, 82, 85, 86, 109, 110, 205, 523, 524,
543, 554.

Skanda, 554.

Soma, 52, 58, 198, 267, 378, 554.

Somadatta, 60.

Somada, 47.

Somagiri, 376, 378.

Sona, 45, 48, 372.

Sringavera, 4, 192, 196, 223, 501, 502.

Srinjay, 60.

Srutakirti, 84.

Sthanu, 25, 37, 245.

Sthanumati, 179.

Sthulaksha, 256 note, 260.

Sthulasiras, 313.

Subahu, 364 note.

Suchakshu, 55.

Suchandra, 60.

Suchi, 238.

Sudama, 178.

Sudaman, 81, 176.

Sudarsan, 82, 83, 220, 373, 378, 448.

Sudarsandwip, 374.

Sudhanva, 82.

Sudhriti, 82.

Sudras, 6, 13, 246.

Sugriva, 5, 6, 9, 28, 29, 314, 316, 318, 324 ff., 337, 339, 344, 346 ff.,
371, 375 ff., 412, 414, 422, 424, 430, 439 ff., 446, 450, 519, 545.

Suka, 442, 446, 447, 455 ff.

Sukesa, 515, 516.

Suketu, 39, 82.

Suki, 246.

Sukra, 124, 210, 279, 384, 429.

Sumali, 515, 516.

Sumagadhi, 46.

Sumantra, 15, 16, 19, 21, 80, 92, _passim_.

Sumati, 49, 50, 59, 60.

Sumitra, 27, 30, 32, 88, 94, _passim_.

Sun, 93, 109, 110, 124, 243.

Sunabha, 425.

Sunahsepha, 72, 73, 74

Sunda, 35, 39.

Sunetra, 364 note.

Suparna, 53, 125, 231, 343, 349, 388.

Suparsva, 388.

Supatala, 364 note.

Suptaghna, 433 note.

Sura, 58.

Surabhi, 183, 246.

Surapati, 522.

Suras, 58.

Surasa, 246, 395.

Surashtra, 21, 102, 376.

Surasenas, 550.

Surpanakha, 5, 9, 249 ff., 267 ff., 288, 502.

Surya, 555.

Suryaksha, 364 note.

Suryasatru, 433 note.

Suryavan, 375.

Susandhi, 81, 219.

Sushen, 28, 351, 364 note, 376, 379, 380.

Sutanu, 199.

Sutikshna, 9, 234, 236, 237, 240, 241.

Suvahu, 35, 44, 45, 146.

Suvarat, 220.

Suvela, 450, 456, 457.

Suvira, 21, 102.

Suyajna, 20, 132.

Svayambhu, 394.

Svayamprabha, 382.

Svetaranya, 264.

Swarga, 54, 101, 202, 493.

Swarnaroma, 82.

Sweta, 448.

Syama, 160.

Syandika, 151.

Syenagami, 256 note, 260.

Syeni, 246.

Tadaka, 38, 39, 40, 41.

Tadakeya, 266.

Taittiriya, 132.

Takshak, 432.

Takshaka, 267.

Talajanghas, 81, 219.

Tamasa, 7, 147, 148, 149.

Tamra, 245, 246.

Tamraparni, 375.

Tapan, 459, 555.

Tara, 364 note, 379 ff.

Tara, 9, 336, 349 ff., 355, 359, 362, 363, 366, 367, 369, 371, 385, 403,
449, 546.

Tarak, 430.

Tarkshya, 214.

Ten-necked, 250.

Thirty-three Gods, 51.

Thousand-eyed, 41, 59, 60, 74, 75, 76, 86, 90, 112, 252, 297, 504.

Three-eyed God, 86.

Thunderer, 234.

Titan, 58, 67, 72, 79, 109, 114, 124.

Toran, 179.

Town-Destroyer, 59, 60.

Trident, 68.

Trident-wielding, 54, 57.

Trijat, 133.

Trijata, 410, 463.

Trikuta, 456, 457, 500, 515.

Trinavindu, 515.

Tripathaga, 56.

Tripur, 306.

Tripura, 85, 86.

Trisanku, 68-72, 81, 144, 219, 429.

Trisira, 9.

Trisiras, 256 note, 260, 261, 264, 267, 271, 478, 479, 480, 502.

Tumburu, 198, 199, 232.

Uchchaihsravas, 58, 522.

Udayagiri, 379 note.

Udavasu, 82.

Ujjihana, 179.

Ukthya, 24.

Uma, 49, 54, 205, 249 note, 471, 542, 543.

Upasad, 22.

Upasunda, 35.

Upendra, 74, 559.

Urmila, 47, 83, 84, 88, 228.

Urvasi, 286, 544, 545.

Usanas, 382.

Utkal, 374.

Uttanika, 179, 539.

Vahli, 13.

Vahlika, 376.

Vahni, 555.

Vaidyut, 375.

Vaijayanta, 99, 179, 522.

Vaikhanasas, 270, 271, 374.

Vainateya, 388.

Vaisravan, 265, 285, 378, 414, 515.

Vaisyas, 246.

Vaitarani, 293.

Vajra, 376.

Vajradanshtra, 432, 433 note, 466, 467.

Valmiki, 1, 7-11, 161, 519, 542.

Vamadeva, 14, 79, 80, 91, 174, 222, 505.

Vamana, 14, 523.

Vana, 81, 219.

Vanayu, 13.

Vangas, 102.

Varadas, 550.

Varun, 1 note, 28, 42, 67, 88, 109, 124, 228, 243, 272, 293, 338, 377,
383, 448, 471, 518.

Varasya, 256 note.

Varutha, 179.

Vasav, 92.

Vasava, 236, 522.

Vasishtha, 14, 15, 19-22, 25, 32, _passim_.

Vasudeva, 51, 52.

Vasuki, 57, 267, 375, 432, 518, 522.

Vasus, 14, 46, 246, 283, 377, 403, 522, 554.

Vasvaukasara, 203.

Vatapi, 241, 280.

Vayu, 59, 243, 369, 427, 428, 555.

Vedas, 1 note, 3, 12, 22, 70, 89, 109, 125, 147, 184, 229, 559.

Vedasruti, 151.

Vedavati, 470, 517.

Vegadarsi, 429, 446, 483.

Vena, 448, 537.

Vibhandak, 15, 16, 17, 18, 25.

Vibhishan, 6, 10, 250, 273, 415, 422, 423, 433 ff., 449 ff., 472, 483, 487
ff., 516.

Vibudh, 82.

Vidarbha, 46, 49.

Vidarbhas, 549.

Videha, 79 ff., 129, 130, 142, 166, 195, 227.

Videhan, 9, 79, 95, 104, 119, 125, _passim_.

Videhas, 548.

Vidyadhari, 203 note.

Vidyujjihva, 450.

Vidyunmali, 364 note.

Vidyutkesa, 515.

Vihangama, 256 note.

Vijay, 14, 36, 175, 505.

Vikata, 409.

Vikrit, 245.

Vikukshi, 81, 219.

Vinata, 179, 379, 380, 388, 448.

Vinata, 53, 125, 246.

Vindhya, 14, 51, 242, 364, 370, 374, 380.

Vindu, 55.

Vipasa, 176, 539.

Virabahu, 364 note.

Viradha, 5, 9, 229, 232, 404, 446, 502.

Viraj, 124.

Viramatsya, 178.

Virochan, 40, 43.

Virtue, 223, 272.

Virupaksha, 52, 420, 433, 459, 460, 487.

Visakhas, 144, 430.

Visala, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62.

Vishnu, 1 note, 2, 3, 25, 32, 40, _passim_.

Visravas, 35, 309, 408, 515, 516.

Visvachi, 198.

Visvajit, 24.

Visvakarma, 28, 42, 198, 376, 387, 444, 445, 448, 499, 500, 515, 556.

Visvamitra, 9, 32 ff., 39, 41, 44, 45, _passim_.

Visvarupa, 353.

Visvas, 377.

Visvavasu, 198.

Visvedevas, 162.

Vitardan, 474.

Vivasvat, 81, 171, 219, 245, 386, 532.

Vrana, 444.

Vrihadratha, 82.

Vrihaspati, 28, 31, 95, 124, 210, 307, 464, 517.

Vritra, 125, 264, 288, 387, 487, 491, 536.

Vulture-king, 9.

War-god, 124, 476.

Wind, 30, 218.

Wind-god, 10, 36, 42, 68, 325, 326, 379, 392 ff., 417 ff., 449, 470, 478,
481, 488, 502, 503.

Yavadwipa, 372.

Yajnakopa, 433 note, 459.

Yajush, 326.

Yajnasatru, 256 note.

Yaksha, 236 note, 306, 318, 363, 375, 394, 420, 422, 425, 431, 454, 458,
468.

Yama, 68, 71, 112, 117, 124, 140, 166, 171, 241, 248, 262, 275, 287, 313,
343 ff., 432, 437, 449, 472, 475, 496, 518, 554.

Yamuna, 158, 159, 160, 178, 214, 223, 372.

Yamun, 372.

Yavanas, 66, 550.

Yayati, 82, 95, 107, 119, 163, 186, 307, 344.

Yudhajit, 84, 88, 180, 190.

Yupaksha, 420, 472.

Yuvanasva, 81, 219.






FOOTNOTES


    1 The MSS. vary very considerably in these stanzas of invocation: many
      lines are generally prefixed in which not only the poet, but those
      who play the chief parts in the poem are panegyrized. It is
      self-apparent that they are not by the author of the Ramayan
      himself.

    2 "Valmiki was the son of Varuna, the regent of the waters, one of
      whose names is Prachetas. According to the _Adhyatma Ramayana_, the
      sage, although a Brahman by birth, associated with foresters and
      robbers. Attacking on one occasion the seven Rishis, they
      expostulated with him successfully, and taught him the _mantra_ of
      Rama reversed, or _Mara, Mara_, in the inaudible repetition of which
      he remained immovable for thousands of years, so that when the sages
      returned to the same spot they found him still there, converted into
      a _valmik_ or ant-hill, by the nests of the termites, whence his
      name of Valmiki."

      WILSON. _Specimens of the Hindu Theatre, Vol. I. p. 313_.

      "Valmiki is said to have lived a solitary life in the woods: he is
      called both a _muni_ and a _rishi_. The former word properly
      signifies an anchorite or hermit; the latter has reference chiefly
      to wisdom. The two words are frequently used promiscuously, and may
      both be rendered by the Latin _vates_ in its earliest meaning of
      _seer_: Valmiki was both poet and seer, as he is said to have sung
      the exploits of Rama by the aid of divining insight rather than of
      knowledge naturally acquired." SCHLEGEL.

    3 Literally, _Kokila_, the Koil, or Indian Cuckoo. Schlegel translates
      "luscinium."

    4 Comparison with the Ganges is implied, that river being called the
      purifier of the world.

    5 "This name may have been given to the father of Valmiki
      allegorically. If we look at the derivation of the word (_pra_,
      before, and _chetas_, mind) it is as if the poet were called the son
      of Prometheus, the Forethinker." SCHLEGEL.

    6 Called in Sanskrit also _Bala-Kanda_, and in Hindi _Bal-Kand_,
      _i.e._ the Book describing Rama's childhood, _bala_ meaning a boy up
      to his sixteenth year.

    7 A divine saint, son of Brahma. He is the eloquent messenger of the
      Gods, a musician of exquisite skill, and the inventor of the _vina_
      or Indian lute. He bears a strong resemblance to Hermes or Mercury.

    8 This mystic syllable, said to typify the supreme Deity, the Gods
      collectively, the Vedas, the three spheres of the world, the three
      holy fires, the three steps of Vishnu etc., prefaces the prayers and
      most venerated writings of the Hindus.

    9 This colloquy is supposed to have taken place about sixteen years
      after Rama's return from his wanderings and occupation of his
      ancestral throne.

   10 Called also Sri and Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, the Queen of
      Beauty as well as the Dea Fortuna. Her birth "from the full-flushed
      wave" is described in Canto XLV of this Book.

   11 One of the most prominent objects of worship in the Rig-veda, Indra
      was superseded in later times by the more popular deities Vishnu and
      Siva. He is the God of the firmament, and answers in many respects
      to the Jupiter Pluvius of the Romans. See _Additional Notes_.

   12 The second God of the Trimurti or Indian Trinity. Derived from the
      root _vis_ to penetrate, the meaning of the name appears to be _he
      who penetrates or pervades all things_. An embodiment of the
      preserving power of nature, he is worshipped as a Saviour who has
      nine times been incarnate for the good of the world and will descend
      on earth once more. See _Additional Notes_ and Muir's Sanskrit Texts
      _passim_.

   13 In Sanskrit _devarshi_. Rishi is the general appellation of sages,
      and another word is frequently prefixed to distinguish the degrees.
      A _Brahmarshi_ is a theologian or Brahmanical sage; a Rajarshi is a
      royal sage or sainted king; a _Devarshi_ is a divine or deified sage
      or saint.

_   14 Trikalajna_. Literally _knower of the three times_. Both Schlegel
      and Gorresio quote Homer's.

      {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH PSILI AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}, {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~},
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}.

      "That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
      The past, the present, and the future knew."

      The Bombay edition reads _trilokajna,_ _who knows the three worlds_
      (earth, air and heaven.) "It is by _tapas_ (austere fervour) that
      rishis of subdued souls, subsisting on roots, fruits and air, obtain
      a vision of the three worlds with all things moving and stationary."
      MANU, XI. 236.

   15 Son of Manu, the first king of Kosala and founder of the solar
      dynasty or family of the Children of the Sun, the God of that
      luminary being the father of Manu.

   16 The Indians paid great attention to the art of physiognomy and
      believed that character and fortune could be foretold not from the
      face only but from marks upon the neck and hands. Three lines under
      the chin like those at the mouth of a conch (_Sankha_) were regarded
      as a peculiarly auspicious sign indicating, as did also the mark of
      Vishnu's discus on the hand, one born to be a _chakravartin_ or
      universal emperor. In the palmistry of Europe the line of fortune,
      as well as the line of life, is in the hand. Cardan says that marks
      on the nails and teeth also show what is to happen to us: "Sunt
      etiam in nobis vestigia quaedam futurorum eventuum in unguibus atque
      etiam in dentibus." Though the palmy days of Indian chiromancy have
      passed away, the art is still to some extent studied and believed
      in.

   17 Long arms were regarded as a sign of heroic strength.

   18 "Veda means originally knowing or knowledge, and this name is given
      by the Brahmans not to one work, but to the whole body of their most
      ancient sacred literature. Veda is the same word which appears in
      the Greek {~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}, I know, and in the English wise, wisdom, to wit. The
      name of Veda is commonly given to four collections of hymns, which
      are respectively known by the names of Rig-veda, Yajur-veda,
      Sama-veda, and Atharva-veda."

      "As the language of the Veda, the Sanskrit, is the most ancient type
      of the English of the present day, (Sanskrit and English are but
      varieties of one and the same language,) so its thoughts and
      feelings contain in reality the first roots and germs of that
      intellectual growth which by an unbroken chain connects our own
      generation with the ancestors of the Aryan race,--with those very
      people who at the rising and setting of the sun listened with
      trembling hearts to the songs of the Veda, that told them of bright
      powers above, and of a life to come after the sun of their own lives
      had set in the clouds of the evening. These men were the true
      ancestors of our race, and the Veda is the oldest book we have in
      which to study the first beginnings of our language, and of all that
      is embodied in language. We are by nature Aryan, Indo-European, not
      Semitic: our spiritual kith and kin are to be found in India,
      Persia, Greece, Italy, Germany: not in Mesopotamia, Egypt, or
      Palestine."

      _Chips from a German Workshop_, Vol. I. pp. 8. 4.

   19 As with the ancient Persians and Scythians, Indian princes were
      carefully instructed in archery which stands for military science in
      general, of which, among Hindu heroes, it was the most important
      branch.

   20 Chief of the three queens of Dasaratha and mother of Rama.

   21 From _hima_ snow, (Greek {~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}-{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}, Latin hiems) and _alaya_ abode,
      the Mansion of snow.

   22 The moon (_Soma_, _Indu_, _Chandra_ _etc._) is masculine with the
      Indians as with the Germans.

   23 Kuvera, the Indian Plutus, or God of Wealth.

   24 The events here briefly mentioned will be related fully in the
      course of the poem. The first four cantos are introductory, and are
      evidently the work of a later hand than Valmiki's.

   25 "Chandra, or the Moon, is fabled to have been married to the
      twenty-seven daughters of the patriarch Daksha, or Asvini and the
      rest, who are in fact personifications of the Lunar Asterisms. His
      favourite amongst them was Rohini to whom he so wholly devoted
      himself as to neglect the rest. They complained to their father, and
      Daksha repeatedly interposed, till, finding his remonstrances vain,
      he denounced a curse upon his son-in-law, in consequence of which he
      remained childless and became affected by consumption. The wives of
      Chandra having interceded in his behalf with their father, Daksha
      modified an imprecation which he could not recall, and pronounced
      that the decay should be periodical only, not permanent, and that it
      should alternate with periods of recovery. Hence the successive wane
      and increase of the Moon. _Padma_, _Purana_, _Swarga-Khanda,_ Sec.
      II. _Rohini_ in Astronomy is the fourth lunar mansion, containing
      five stars, the principal of which is Aldebaran." WILSON, _Specimens
      of the Hindu Theatre. Vol. I. p._ 234.

      The Bengal recension has a different reading:

      "Shone with her husband like the light
      Attendant on the Lord of Night."

   26 The garb prescribed for ascetics by Manu.

   27 "Mount Meru, situated like Kailasa in the lofty regions to the north
      of the Himalayas, is celebrated in the traditions and myths of
      India. Meru and Kailasa are the two Indian Olympi. Perhaps they were
      held in such veneration because the Sanskrit-speaking Indians
      remembered the ancient home where they dwelt with the other
      primitive peoples of their family before they descended to occupy
      the vast plains which extend between the Indus and the Ganges."
      GORRESIO.

   28 The third God of the Indian Triad, the God of destruction and
      reproduction. See _Additional Notes_.

   29 The epithet _dwija_, or _twice-born_, is usually appropriate to
      Brahmans, but is applicable to the three higher castes. Investiture
      with the sacred thread and initiation of the neophyte into certain
      religious mysteries are regarded as his regeneration or second
      birth.

   30 His shoes to be a memorial of the absent heir and to maintain his
      right. Kalidasa (Raghuvansa, XII. 17.) says that they were to be
      _adhidevate_ or guardian deities of the kingdom.

   31 Jatayu, a semi-divine bird, the friend of Rama, who fought in
      defence of Sita.

   32 Raghu was one of the most celebrated ancestors of Rama whose
      commonest appellation is, therefore, Raghava or descendant of Raghu.
      Kalidasa in the _Raghuransa_ makes him the son of Dilipa and
      great-grandfather of Rama. See _Idylls from the Sanskrit_, "Aja" and
      "Dilipa."

   33 Dundhubi.

   34 Literally _ten yojanas_. The yojana is a measure of uncertain length
      variously reckoned as equal to nine miles, five, and a little less.

   35 Ceylon.

   36 The Jonesia Asoka is a most beautiful tree bearing a profusion of
      red blossoms.

_   37 Brahma_, the Creator, is usually regarded as the first God of the
      Indian Trinity, although, as Kalidasa says:

      "Of Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, each may be
      First, second, third, amid the blessed Three."

      Brahma had guaranteed Ravan's life against all enemies except man.

   38 Ocean personified.

   39 The rocks lying between Ceylon and the mainland are still called
      Rama's Bridge by the Hindus.

   40 "The Brahmans, with a system rather cosmogonical than chronological,
      divide the present mundane period into four ages or _yugas_ as they
      call them: the Krita, the Treta, the Dwapara, and the Kali. The
      Krita, called also the Deva-yuga or that of the Gods, is the age of
      truth, the perfect age, the Treta is the age of the three sacred
      fires, domestic and sacrificial; the Dwapara is the age of doubt;
      the Kali, the present age, is the age of evil." GORRESIO.

   41 The ancient kings of India enjoyed lives of more than patriarchal
      length as will appear in the course of the poem.

   42 Sudras, men of the fourth and lowest pure caste, were not allowed to
      read the poem, but might hear it recited.

   43 The three _slokes_ or distichs which these twelve lines represent
      are evidently a still later and very awkward addition to the
      introduction.

   44 There are several rivers in India of this name, now corrupted into
      _Tonse_. The river here spoken of is that which falls into the
      Ganges a little below Allahabad.

   45 "In Book II, Canto LIV, we meet with a saint of this name presiding
      over a convent of disciples in his hermitage at the confluence of
      the Ganges and the Jumna. Thence the later author of these
      introductory cantos has borrowed the name and person, inconsistently
      indeed, but with the intention of enhancing the dignity of the poet
      by ascribing to him so celebrated a disciple." SCHLEGEL.

   46 The poet plays upon the similarity in sound of the two words:
      _soka_, means grief, _sloka_, the heroic measure in which the poem
      is composed. It need scarcely be said that the derivation is
      fanciful.

   47 Brahma, the Creator, is usually regarded as the first person of the
      divine triad of India. The four heads with which he is represented
      are supposed to have allusion to the four corners of the earth which
      he is sometimes considered to personify. As an object of adoration
      Brahma has been entirely superseded by Siva and Vishnu. In the whole
      of India there is, I believe, but one temple dedicated to his
      worship. In this point the first of the Indian triad curiously
      resembles the last of the divine fraternity of Greece, Aides the
      brother of Zeus and Poseidon. "In all Greece, says Pausanias, there
      is no single temple of Aides, except at a single spot in Elis." See
      Gladstone's Juventus Mundi, p. 253.

   48 The _argha_ or _arghya_ was a libation or offering to a deity, a
      Brahman, or other venerable personage. According to one authority it
      consisted of water, milk, the points of Kusa-grass, curds, clarified
      butter, rice, barley, and white mustard, according to another, of
      saffron, bel, unbroken grain, flowers, curds, durba-grass,
      kusa-grass, and sesamum.

   49 Sita, daughter of Janak king of Mithila.

   50 "I congratulate myself," says Schlegel in the preface to his, alas,
      unfinished edition of the Ramayan, "that, by the favour of the
      Supreme Deity, I have been allowed to begin so great a work; I glory
      and make my boast that I too after so many ages have helped to
      confirm that ancient oracle declared to Valmiki by the Father of
      Gods and men:

      Dum stabunt montes, campis dum flumina current,
      Usque tuum toto carmen celebrabitur orbe."

   51 "The sipping of water is a requisite introduction of all rites:
      without it, says the Samha Purana, all acts of religion are vain."
      COLEBROOKE.

   52 The _darhha_ or _kusa_ (Pea cynosuroides), a kind of grass used in
      sacrifice by the Hindus as _cerbena_ was by the Romans.

   53 The direction in which the grass should be placed upon the ground as
      a seat for the Gods, on occasion of offerings made to them.

   54 Parasurama or Rama with the Axe. See Canto LXXIV.

   55 Sita. Videha was the country of which Mithila was the capital.

   56 The twin sons of Rama and Sita, born after Rama had repudiated Sita,
      and brought up in the hermitage of Valmiki. As they were the first
      rhapsodists the combined name Kusilava signifies a reciter of poems,
      or an improvisatore, even to the present day.

   57 Perhaps the bass, tenor, and treble, or quick, slow and middle
      times. we know but little of the ancient music of the Hindus.

   58 Eight flavours or sentiments are usually enumerated, love, mirth,
      tenderness, anger, heroism, terror, disgust, and surprise;
      tranquility or content, or paternal tenderness, is sometimes
      considered the ninth. WILSON. See the _Sahitya Darpana_ or _Mirror
      of Composition_ translated by Dr. Ballantyne and Babu Pramadadasa
      Mittra in the _Bibliotheca Indica._

   59 Saccharum Munja is a plant from whose fibres is twisted the sacred
      string which a Brahman wears over one shoulder after he has been
      initiated by a rite which in some respects answers to confirmation.

   60 A description of an Asvamedha or Horse Sacrifice is given in Canto
      XIII. of this Book.

   61 This exploit is related in Canto XL.

   62 The Sarju or Ghaghra, anciently called Sarayu, rises in the
      Himalayas, and after flowing through the province of Oudh, falls
      into the Ganges.

   63 The ruins of the ancient capital of Rama and the Children of the Sun
      may still be traced in the present Ajudhya near Fyzabad. Ajudhya is
      the Jerusalem or Mecca of the Hindus.

   64 A legislator and saint, the son of Brahma or a personification of
      Brahma himself, the creator of the world, and progenitor of mankind.
      Derived from the root _man_ to think, the word means originally
      _man_, the thinker, and is found in this sense in the Rig-veda.

      Manu as a legislator is identified with the Cretan Minos, as
      progenitor of mankind with the German Mannus: "Celebrant carminibus
      antiquis, quod unum apud illos memoriae et annalium genus est,
      Tuisconem deum terra editum, et filium Mannum, originem gentis
      conditoresque." TACITUS, _Germania_, Cap. II.

   65 The Sal (Shorea Robusta) is a valuable timber tree of considerable
      height.

   66 The city of Indra is called Amaravati or Home of the Immortals.

   67 Schlegel thinks that this refers to the marble of different colours
      with which the houses were adorned. It seems more natural to
      understand it as implying the regularity of the streets and houses.

   68 The _Sataghni_ _i.e. centicide_, or slayer of a hundred, is
      generally supposed to be a sort of fire-arms, or the ancient Indian
      rocket; but it is also described as a stone set round with iron
      spikes.

   69 The Nagas (serpents) are demigods with a human face and serpent
      body. They inhabit Patala or the regions under the earth. Bhogavati
      is the name of their capital city. Serpents are still worshipped in
      India. See Fergusson's _Tree and Serpent Worship_.

   70 The fourth and lowest pure caste whose duty was to serve the three
      first classes.

   71 By forbidden marriages between persons of different castes.

   72 Vahli or Vahlika is Bactriana; its name is preserved in the modern
      Balkh.

   73 The Sanskrit word Sindhu is in the singular the name of the river
      Indus, in the plural of the people and territories on its banks. The
      name appears as _Hidku_ in the cuneiform inscription of Darius' son
      of Hystaspes, in which the nations tributary to that king are
      enumerated.

      The Hebrew form is _Hodda_ (Esther, I. 1.). In Zend it appears as
      _Hendu_ in a somewhat wider sense. With the Persians later the
      signification of _Hind_ seems to have co-extended with their
      increasing acquaintance with the country. The weak Ionic dialect
      omitted the Persian _h_, and we find in Hecataeus and Herodotus {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA WITH PSILI AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}
      and {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH DASIA~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH OXIA~}. In this form the Romans received the names and
      transmitted them to us. The Arabian geographers in their ignorance
      that Hind and Sind are two forms of the same word have made of them
      two brothers and traced their decent from Noah. See Lassen's
      Indische Alterthumskunde Vol. I. pp. 2, 3.

   74 The situation of Vanayu is not exactly determined: it seems to have
      lain to the north-west of India.

   75 Kamboja was probably still further to the north-west. Lassen thinks
      that the name is etymologically connected with _Cambyses_ which in
      the cuneiform inscription of Behistun is written Ka(m)bujia.

   76 The elephants of Indra and other deities who preside over the four
      points of the compass.

   77 "There are four kinds of elephants. 1 _Bhaddar_. It is well
      proportioned, has an erect head, a broad chest, large ears, a long
      tail, and is bold and can bear fatigue. 2 _Mand_. It is black, has
      yellow eyes, a uniformly sized body, and is wild and ungovernable. 3
      _Mirg_. It has a whitish skin, with black spots. 4 _Mir_. It has a
      small head, and obeys readily. It gets frightened when it thunders."
      _Ain-i-Akbari._. Translated by H. Blochmann, Ain 41, _The Imperial
      Elephant Stables_.

   78 Ayodhya means _not to be fought against_.

   79 Attendants of Indra, eight Gods whose names signify fire, light and
      its phenomena.

   80 Kasyap was a grandson of the God Brahma. He is supposed to have
      given his name to Kashmir = Kasyapa-mira, Kasyap's Lake.

   81 The people of Anga. "Anga is said in the lexicons to be Bengal; but
      here certainly another region is intended situated at the confluence
      of the Sarju with the Ganges, and not far distant from Dasaratha's
      dominions." GORRESIO. It comprised part of Behar and Bhagulpur.

   82 The Koil or _kokila_ (Cuculus Indicus) as the harbinger of spring
      and love is a universal favourite with Indian poets. His voice when
      first heard in a glorious spring morning is not unpleasant, but
      becomes in the hot season intolerably wearisome to European ears.

   83 "Sons and Paradise are intimately connected in Indian belief. A man
      desires above every thing to have a son to perpetuate his race, and
      to assist with sacrifices and funeral rites to make him worthy to
      obtain a lofty seat in heaven or to preserve that which he has
      already obtained." GORRESIO.

   84 One of the Pleiades and generally regarded as the model of wifely
      excellence.

   85 The Hindu year is divided into six seasons of two months each,
      spring, summer, rains, autumn, winter, and dews.

   86 It was essential that the horse should wander free for a year before
      immolation, as a sign that his master's paramount sovereignty was
      acknowledged by all neighbouring princes.

   87 Called also Vidcha, later Tirabhukti, corrupted into the modern
      Tirhut, a province bounded on the west and east by the Gaudaki and
      Kausiki rivers, on the south by the Ganges, and on the north by the
      skirts of the Himalayas.

   88 The celebrated city of Benares. See Dr. Hall's learned and
      exhaustive Monograph in the _Sacred City of the Hindus_, by the Rev.
      M. A. Sherring.

   89 Kekaya is supposed to have been in the Panjab. The name of the king
      was Asvapati (Lord of Horses), father of Dasaratha's wife Kaikeyi.

   90 Surat.

   91 Apparently in the west of India not far from the Indus.

   92 "The Pravargya ceremony lasts for three days, and is always
      performed twice a day, in the forenoon and afternoon. It precedes
      the animal and Soma sacrifices. For without having undergone it, no
      one is allowed to take part in the solemn Soma feast prepared for
      the gods." Haug's _Aitareya Brahmanam_. Vol. II. p. 41. note _q.v._

_   93 Upasads_. "The Gods said, Let us perform the burnt offerings called
      Upasads (_i.e._ besieging). For by means of an _Upasad_, _i.e._
      besieging, they conquer a large (fortified) town."--_Ibid._ p. 32.

   94 The Soma plant, or Asclepias Acida. Its fermented juice was drunk in
      sacrifice by the priests and offered to the Gods who enjoyed the
      intoxicating draught.

   95 "Tum in caerimoniarum intervallis Brachmanae facundi, sollertes,
      crebros sermones de rerum causis instituebant, alter alterum
      vincendi cupidi. This public disputation in the assembly of Brahmans
      on the nature of things, and the almost fraternal connexion between
      theology and philosophy deserves some notice; whereas the priests of
      some religions are generally but little inclined to show favour to
      philosophers, nay, sometimes persecute them with the most rancorous
      hatred, as we are taught both by history and experience.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} This sloka
      is found in the MSS. of different recensions of the Ramayan, and we
      have, therefore, the most trustworthy testimony to the antiquity of
      philosophy among the Indians." SCHLEGEL.

   96 The _Angas_ or appendices of the Vedas, pronunciation, prosody,
      grammar, ritual, astronomy, and explanation of obscurities.

   97 In Sanskrit _vilva_, the _AEgle Marmelos_. "He who desires food and
      wishes to grow fat, ought to make his Yupa (sacrificial post) of
      Bilva wood." Haug's _Aitareya Brahmanam. Vol. II._ p. 73.

   98 The _Mimosa Catechu_. "He who desires heaven ought to make his Yupa
      of Khadira wood."--_Ibid._

   99 The _Butea Frondosa_. "He who desires beauty and sacred knowledge
      ought to make his Yupa of Palasa wood."--_Ibid._

  100 The _Cardia Latifolia_.

  101 A kind of pine. The word means literally the tree of the Gods.
      Compare the Hebrew {~HEBREW LETTER AYIN~}{~HEBREW LETTER TSADI~}{~HEBREW LETTER YOD~} {~HEBREW LETTER YOD~}{~HEBREW LETTER HE~}{~HEBREW LETTER VAV~}{~HEBREW LETTER HE~} "trees of the Lord."

  102 The Hindus call the constellation of Ursa Major the Seven Rishis or
      Saints.

  103 A minute account of these ancient ceremonies would be out of place
      here. "Agnishtoma is the name of a sacrifice, or rather a series of
      offerings to fire for five days. It is the first and principal part
      of the Jyotishtoma, one of the great sacrifices in which especially
      the juice of the Soma plant is offered for the purpose of obtaining
      Swarga or heaven." GOLDSTUeCKER'S DICTIONARY. "The _Agnishtoma_ is
      Agni. It is called so because they (the gods) praised him with this
      Stoma. They called it so to hide the proper meaning of the word: for
      the gods like to hide the proper meaning of words."

      "On account of four classes of gods having praised Agni with four
      Stomas, the whole was called _Chatushtoma_ (containing four
      Stomas)."

      "It (the Agnishtoma) is called _Jyotishtoma_, for they praised Agni
      when he had risen up (to the sky) in the shape of a light
      (_jyotis_)."

      "This (Agnishtoma) is a sacrificial performance which has no
      beginning and no end." HAUG'S _Aitareya Brahmanam_.

      The Atiratra, literally _lasting through the night_, is a division
      of the service of the Jyotishtoma.

      The Abhijit, _the everywhere victorious_, is the name of a
      sub-division of the great sacrifice of the Gavamanaya.

      The Visvajit, or _the all-conquering_, is a similar sub-division.

      Ayus is the name of a service forming a division of the Abhiplava
      sacrifice.

      The _Aptoryam_, is the seventh or last part of the Jyotishtoma, for
      the performance of which it is not essentially necessary, but a
      voluntary sacrifice instituted for the attainment of a specific
      desire. The literal meaning of the word would be in conformity with
      the _Praudhamanorama_, "a sacrifice which procures the attainment of
      the desired object." GOLDSTUeCKER'S DICTIONARY.

      "The _Ukthya_ is a slight modification of the Agnishtoma sacrifice.
      The noun to be supplied to it is _kratu_. It is a Soma sacrifice
      also, and one of the seven Sansthas or component parts of the
      Jyotishtoma. Its name indicates its nature. For _Ukthya_ means 'what
      refers to the Uktha,' which is an older name for Shastra, _i.e._
      recitation of one of the Hotri priests at the time of the Soma
      libations. Thus this sacrifice is only a kind of supplement to the
      Agnishtoma." HAUG. _Ai. B._

  104 "Four classes of priests were required in India at the most solemn
      sacrifices. 1. The officiating priests, manual labourers, and
      acolytes, who had chiefly to prepare the sacrificial ground, to
      dress the altar, slay the victims, and pour out the libations. 2.
      The choristers, who chant the sacred hymns. 3. The reciters or
      readers, who repeat certain hymns. 4. The overseers or bishops, who
      watch and superintend the proceedings of the other priests, and
      ought to be familiar with all the Vedas. The formulas and verses to
      be muttered by the first class are contained in the
      Yajur-veda-sanhita. The hymns to be sung by the second class are in
      the Sama-veda-sanhita. The Atharva-veda is said to be intended for
      the Brahman or overseer, who is to watch the proceedings of the
      sacrifice, and to remedy any mistake that may occur. The hymns to be
      recited by the third class are contained in the Rigveda," _Chips
      from a German Workshop._

  105 The Maruts are the winds, deified in the religion of the Veda like
      other mighty powers and phenomena of nature.

  106 A Titan or fiend whose destruction has given Vishnu one of his
      well-known titles, Madhava.

  107 The garden of Indra.

  108 One of the most ancient and popular of the numerous names of Vishnu.
      The word has been derived in several ways, and may mean _he who
      moved on the (primordial) waters_, or _he who pervades or influences
      men or their thoughts_.

  109 The Horse-Sacrifice, just described.

  110 To walk round an object keeping the right side towards it is a mark
      of great respect. The Sanskrit word for the observance is
      _pradakshina_, from pra pro, and _daksha_ right, Greek {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER XI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}, Latin
      dexter, Gaelic deas-il. A similar ceremony is observed by the Gaels.

      "In the meantime she traced around him, with wavering steps, the
      propitiation, which some have thought has been derived from the
      Druidical mythology. It consists, as is well known, in the person
      who makes the _deasil_ walking three times round the person who is
      the object of the ceremony, taking care to move according to the
      course of the sun."

      SCOTT. _The Two Drovers._

  111 The _Amrit_, the nectar of the Indian Gods.

_  112 Gandharvas_ (Southey's Glendoveers) are celestial musicians
      inhabiting Indra's heaven and forming the orchestra at all the
      banquets of the principal deities.

_  113 Yakshas_, demigods attendant especially on Kuvera, and employed by
      him in the care of his garden and treasures.

_  114 Kimpurushas_, demigods attached also to the service of Kuvera,
      celestial musicians, represented like centaurs reversed with human
      figures and horses' heads.

_  115 Siddhas_, demigods or spirits of undefined attributes, occupying
      with the _Vidyadharas_ the middle air or region between the earth
      and the sun.

      Schlegel translates: "Divi, Sapientes, Fidicines, Praepetes,
      illustres Genii, Praeconesque procrearunt natos, masculos,
      silvicolas; angues porro, Hippocephali Beati, Aligeri, Serpentesque
      frequentes alacriter generavere prolem innumerabilem."

  116 A mountain in the south of India.

  117 The preceptor of the Gods and regent of the planet Jupiter.

  118 The celestial architect, the Indian Hephaestus, Mulciber, or Vulcan.

  119 The God of Fire.

  120 Twin children of the Sun, the physicians of Swarga or Indra's
      heaven.

  121 The deity of the waters.

  122 Parjanya, sometimes confounded with Indra.

  123 The bird and vehicle of Vishnu. He is generally represented as a
      being something between a man and a bird and considered as the
      sovereign of the feathered race. He may be compared with the Simurgh
      of the Persians, the 'Anka of the Arabs, the Griffin of chivalry,
      the Phoenix of Egypt, and the bird that sits upon the ash Yggdrasil
      of the Edda.

  124 This Canto will appear ridiculous to the European reader. But it
      should be remembered that the monkeys of an Indian forest, the
      "bough-deer" as the poets call them, are very different animals from
      the "turpissima bestia" that accompanies the itinerant organ-grinder
      or grins in the Zoological Gardens of London. Milton has made his
      hero, Satan, assume the forms of a cormorant, a toad, and a serpent,
      and I cannot see that this creation of semi-divine Vanars, or
      monkeys, is more ridiculous or undignified.

  125 The consort of Indra, called also Sachi and Indrani.

  126 The _Michelia champaca_. It bears a scented yellow blossom:

      "The maid of India blest again to hold
      In her full lap the Champac's leaves of gold."

      _Lallah Rookh._

  127 Vibhandak, the father of Rishyasring

  128 A hemisloka is wanting in Schlegel's text, which he thus fills up in
      his Latin translation.

  129 Rishyasring, a Brahman, had married Santa who was of the Kshatriya
      or Warrior caste and an expiatory ceremony was necessary on account
      of this violation of the law.

  130 "The poet no doubt intended to indicate the vernal equinox as the
      birthday of Rama. For the month _Chaitra_ is the first of the two
      months assigned to the spring; it corresponds with the latter half
      of March and the former half of April in our division of the year.
      _Aditi_, the mother of the Gods, is lady of the seventh lunar
      mansion which is called _Punarvasu_. The five planets and their
      positions in the Zodiac are thus enumerated by both commentators:
      the Sun in Aries, Mars in Capricorn, Saturn in Libra, Jupiter in
      Cancer, Venus in Pisces.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} I leave to astronomers to examine whether
      the parts of the description agree with one another, and, if this be
      the case, thence to deduce the date. The Indians place the nativity
      of Rama in the confines of the second age (treta) and the third
      (dwapara): but it seems that this should be taken in an allegorical
      sense.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} We may consider that the poet had an eye to the time in
      which, immediately before his own age, the aspects of the heavenly
      bodies were such as he has described." SCHLEGEL.

  131 The regent of the planet Jupiter.

  132 Indra = Jupiter Tonans.

  133 "_Pushya_ is the name of a month; but here it means the eighth
      mansion. The ninth is called _Aslesha_, or the snake. It is evident
      from this that Bharat, though his birth is mentioned before that of
      the twins, was the youngest of the four brothers and Rama's junior
      by eleven months." SCHLEGEL.

  134 A fish, the Zodiacal sign _Pisces_.

  135 One of the constellations, containing stars in the wing of Pegasus.

  136 Rama means the Delight (of the World); Bharat, the Supporter;
      Lakshman, the Auspicious; Satrughna, the Slayer of Foes.

  137 Schlegel, in the _Indische Bibliothek_, remarks that the proficiency
      of the Indians in this art early attracted the attention of
      Alexander's successors, and natives of India were so long
      exclusively employed in this service that the name Indian was
      applied to any elephant-driver, to whatever country he might belong.

  138 The story of this famous saint is given at sufficient length in
      Cantos LI-LV.

      This saint has given his name to the district and city to the east
      of Benares. The original name, preserved in a land-grant on copper
      now in the Museum of the Benares College, has been Moslemized into
      Ghazeepore (the City of the Soldier-martyr).

  139 The son of Kusik is Visvamitra.

  140 At the recollection of their former enmity, to be described
      hereafter.

  141 The Indian nectar or drink of the Gods.

  142 Great joy, according to the Hindu belief, has this effect, not
      causing each particular hair to stand on end, but gently raising all
      the down upon the body.

  143 The Rakshasas, giants, or fiends who are represented as disturbing
      the sacrifice, signify here, as often elsewhere, merely the savage
      tribes which placed themselves in hostile opposition to Brahmanical
      institutions.

  144 Consisting of horse, foot, chariots, and elephants.

  145 "The Gandharvas, or heavenly bards, had originally a warlike
      character but were afterwards reduced to the office of celestial
      musicians cheering the banquets of the Gods. Dr. Kuhn has shown
      their identity with the Centaurs in name, origin and attributes."
      GORRESIO.

  146 These mysterious animated weapons are enumerated in Cantos XXIX and
      XXX. Daksha was the son of Brahma and one of the Prajapatis,
      Demiurgi, or secondary authors of creation.

  147 Youths of the Kshatriya class used to leave unshorn the side locks
      of their hair. These were called _Kaka-paksha_, or raven's wings.

  148 The Rakshas or giant Ravan, king of Lanka.

  149 "The meaning of Asvins (from _asva_ a horse, Persian asp, Greek
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}, Latin _equus_, Welsh ech) is Horsemen. They were twin deities
      of whom frequent mention is made in the Vedas and the Indian myths.
      The Asvins have much in common with the Dioscuri of Greece, and
      their mythical genealogy seems to indicate that their origin was
      astronomical. They were, perhaps, at first the morning star and
      evening star. They are said to be the children of the sun and the
      nymph Asvini, who is one of the lunar asterisms personified. In the
      popular mythology they are regarded as the physicians of the Gods."
      GORRESIO.

  150 The word Kumara (a young prince, a Childe) is also a proper name of
      Skanda or Kartikeya God of War, the son of Siva and Uma. The babe
      was matured in the fire.

  151 "At the rising of the sun as well as at noon certain observances,
      invocations, and prayers were prescribed which might under no
      circumstances be omitted. One of these observances was the
      recitation of the Savitri, a Vedic hymn to the Sun of wonderful
      beauty." GORRESIO.

_  152 Tripathaga_, _Three-path-go,_ flowing in heaven, on earth, and
      under the earth. See Canto XLV.

  153 Tennyson's "Indian Cama," the God of Love, known also by many other
      names.

_  154 Uma_, or _Parvati_, was daughter of Himalaya, Monarch of mountains,
      and wife of Siva. See Kalidasa's _Kumara Sambhava_, or _Birth of the
      War-God_.

_  155 Sthanu_. The Unmoving one, a name of Siva.

  156 "The practice of austerities, voluntary tortures, and mortifications
      was anciently universal in India, and was held by the Indians to be
      of immense efficacy. Hence they mortified themselves to expiate
      sins, to acquire merits, and to obtain superhuman gifts and powers;
      the Gods themselves sometimes exercised themselves in such
      austerities, either to raise themselves to greater power and
      grandeur, or to counteract the austerities of man which threatened
      to prevail over them and to deprive them of heaven.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Such
      austerities were called in India _tapas_ (burning ardour, fervent
      devotion) and he who practised them _tapasvin_." GORRESIO.

_  157 The Bodiless one._

  158 "A celebrated lake regarded in India as sacred. It lies in the lofty
      region between the northern highlands of the Himalayas and mount
      Kailasa, the region of the sacred lakes. The poem, following the
      popular Indian belief, makes the river Sarayu (now Sarju) flow from
      the Manasa lake; the sources of the river are a little to the south
      about a day's journey from the lake. See Lassen, _Indische
      Alterthumshunde_, page 34." GORRESIO. _Manas_ means mind; _manasa_,
      mental, mind-born.

_  159 Sarovar_ means best of lakes. This is another of the poet's
      fanciful etymologies.

  160 The confluence of two or more rivers is often a venerated and holy
      place. The most famous is Prayag or Allahabad, where the Sarasvati
      by an underground course is believed to join the Jumna and the
      Ganges.

  161 The botanical names of the trees mentioned in the text are Grislea
      Tormentosa, Shorea Robusta, Echites Antidysenterica, Bignonia
      Suaveolens, OEgle Marmelos, and Diospyrus Glutinosa. I have omitted
      the _Kutaja_ (Echites) and the _Tinduka_ (Diospyrus).

  162 Here we meet with a fresh myth to account for the name of these
      regions. _Malaja_ is probably a non-Aryan word signifying a hilly
      country: taken as a Sanskrit compound it means _sprung from
      defilement_. The word _Karusha_ appears to have a somewhat similar
      meaning.

  163 "This is one of those indefinable mythic personages who are found in
      the ancient traditions of many nations, and in whom cosmogonical or
      astronomical notions are generally figured. Thus it is related of
      Agastya that the Vindhyan mountains prostrated themselves before
      him; and yet the same Agastya is believed to be regent of the star
      Canopus." GORRESIO.

      He will appear as the friend and helper of Rama farther on in the
      poem.

  164 The famous pleasure-garden of Kuvera the God of Wealth.

  165 "The whole of this Canto together with the following one, regards
      the belief, formerly prevalent in India, that by virtue of certain
      spells, to be learnt and muttered, secret knowledge and superhuman
      powers might be acquired. To this the poet has already alluded in
      Canto xxiii. These incorporeal weapons are partly represented
      according to the fashion of those ascribed to the Gods and the
      different orders of demi-gods, partly are the mere creations of
      fancy; and it would not be easy to say what idea the poet had of
      them in his own mind, or what powers he meant to assign to each."
      SCHLEGEL.

  166 "In Sanskrit _Sankara_, a word which has various significations but
      the primary meaning of which is _the act of seizing_. A magical
      power seems to be implied of employing the weapons when and where
      required. The remarks I have made on the preceding Canto apply with
      still greater force to this. The MSS. greatly vary in the
      enumeration of these _Sankaras_, and it is not surprising that
      copyists have incorrectly written the names which they did not well
      understand. The commentators throw no light upon the subject."
      SCHLEGEL. I have taken the liberty of omitting four of these which
      Schlegel translates "Scleromphalum, Euomphalum, Centiventrem, and
      Chrysomphalum."

  167 I omit, after this line, eight _slokes_ which, as Schlegel allows,
      are quite out of place.

  168 This is the fifth of the _avatars_, descents or incarnations of
      Vishnu.

  169 This is a solar allegory. Vishnu is the sun, the three steps being
      his rising, culmination, and setting.

  170 Certain ceremonies preliminary to a sacrifice.

  171 A river which rises in Budelcund and falls into the Ganges near
      Patna. It is called also _Hiranyarahu_, Golden-armed, and
      _Hiranyaraha_, Auriferous.

  172 The modern Berar.

  173 According to the Bengal recension the first (Kusamba) is called
      Kusasva, and his city Kausasvi. This name does not occur elsewhere.
      The reading of the northern recension is confirmed by Foe Koue Ki;
      p. 385, where the city _Kiaoshangmi_ is mentioned. It lay 500 _lis_
      to the south-west of _Prayaga_, on the south bank of the Jumna.
      _Mahodaya_ is another name of Kanyakubja: _Dharmaranya_, the wood to
      which the God of Justice is said to have fled through fear of Soma
      the Moon-God was in Magadh. Girivraja was in the same neighbourhood.
      See Lasson's I, A. Vol. I. p. 604.

  174 That is, the City of the Bent Virgins, the modern Kanauj or Canouge.

  175 Literally, Given by _Brahma_ or devout contemplation.

  176 Now called Kosi (Cosy) corrupted from Kausiki, daughter of Kus]a.

      "This is one of those personifications of rivers so frequent in the
      Grecian mythology, but in the similar myths is seen the impress of
      the genius of each people, austere and profoundly religious in
      India, graceful and devoted to the worship of external beauty in
      Greece." GORRESIO.

  177 One of the names of the Ganges considered as the daughter of Jahnu.
      See Canto XLIV.

  178 The Indian Crane.

  179 Or, rather, geese.

  180 A name of the God Siva.

  181 Garuda.

  182 Ikshvaku, the name of a king of Ayodhya who is regarded as the
      founder of the Solar race, means also a _gourd_. Hence, perhaps, the
      myth.

  183 "The region here spoken of is called in the Laws of Manu
      _Madhyadesa_ or the middle region. 'The region situated between the
      Himalaya and the Vindhya Mountains {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} is called _Madhyadesa_, or the
      middle region; the space comprised between these two mountains from
      the eastern to the western sea is called by sages Aryavartta, _the
      seat of honourable men_.' (MANU, II, 21, 22.) The Sanskrit Indians
      called themselves Aryans, which means _honourable_, _noble_, to
      distinguish themselves from the surrounding nations of different
      origin." GORRESIO.

  184 Said to be so called from the Jambu, or Rose Apple, abounding in it,
      and signifying according to the Puranas the central division of the
      world, the known world.

  185 Here used as a name of Vishnu.

  186 Kings are called the husbands of their kingdoms or of the earth;
      "She and his kingdom were his only brides." _Raghuvansa._

        "Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
      A double marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,
      And then between me and my married wife."

      King Richard II. Act V. Sc. I.

  187 The thirty-three Gods are said in the _Aitareya Brahmana_, Book I.
      ch. II. 10. to be the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve
      Adityas, Prajapati, either Brahma or Daksha, and Vashatkara or
      deified oblation. This must have been the actual number at the
      beginning of the Vedic religion gradually increased by successive
      mythical and religious creations till the Indian Pantheon was
      crowded with abstractions of every kind. Through the reverence with
      which the words of the Veda were regarded, the immense host of
      multiplied divinities, in later times, still bore the name of the
      Thirty-three Gods.

  188 "One of the elephants which, according to an ancient belief popular
      in India, supported the earth with their enormous backs; when one of
      these elephants shook his wearied head the earth trembled with its
      woods and hills. An idea, or rather a mythical fancy, similar to
      this, but reduced to proportions less grand, is found in Virgil when
      he speaks of Enceladus buried under AEtna:"

      "adi semiustum fulmine corpus
      Urgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper AEtnam
      Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;
      Et fessum quoties mutat latus, intre mere omnem
      iam, et coelum subtexere fumo."

      AEneid. Lib. III. GORRESIO.

  189 "The Devas and Asuras (Gods and Titans) fought in the east, the
      south, the west, and the north, and the Devas were defeated by the
      Asuras in all these directions. They then fought in the
      north-eastern direction; there the Devas did not sustain defeat.
      This direction is _aparajita_, _i.e._ unconquerable. Thence one
      should do work in this direction, and have it done there; for such a
      one (alone) is able to clear off his debts." HAUG'S _Aitareya
      Brahmanam_, Vol. II, p. 33.

      The debts here spoken of are a man's religious obligations to the
      Gods, the Pitaras or Manes, and men.

  190 Vishnu.

  191 "It appears to me that this mythical story has reference to the
      volcanic phenomena of nature. Kapil may very possibly be that hidden
      fiery force which suddenly unprisons itself and bursts forth in
      volcanic effects. Kapil is, moreover, one of the names of Agni the
      God of Fire." GORRESIO.

  192 Garud was the son of Kasyap and Vinata.

  193 Garud.

  194 A famous and venerated region near the Malabar coast.

  195 That is four fires and the sun.

  196 Heaven.

  197 Wind-Gods.

  198 Siva.

  199 The lake Vindu does not exist. Of the seven rivers here mentioned
      two only, the Ganges and the Sindhu or Indus, are known to
      geographers. Hladini means the Gladdener, Pavani the Purifier,
      Nalini the Lotus-Clad, and Suchakshu the Fair-eyed.

  200 The First or Golden Age.

  201 Diti and Aditi were wives of Kasyap, and mothers respectively of
      Titans and Gods.

  202 One of the seven seas surrounding as many worlds in concentric
      rings.

  203 Sankar and Rudra are names of Siva.

  204 "Sarngin, literally _carrying a bow of horn_, is a constantly
      recurring name of Vishnu. The Indians also, therefore, knew the art
      of making bows out of the hons of antelopes or wild goats, which
      Homer ascribes to the Trojans of the heroic age." SCHLEGEL.

  205 Dhanvantari, the physician of the Gods.

  206 The poet plays upon the word and fancifully derives it from _apsu_,
      the locative case plural of _ap_, water, and _rasa_, taste.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The
      word is probably derived from _ap_, water, and _sri_, to go, and
      seems to signify _inhabitants of the water_, nymphs of the stream;
      or, as Goldstuecker thinks (Dict. s.v.) these divinities were
      originally personifications of the vapours which are attracted by
      the sun and form into mist or clouds.

  207 "_Sura_, in the feminine comprehends all sorts of intoxicating
      liquors, many kinds of which the Indians from the earliest times
      distilled and prepared from rice, sugar-cane, the palm tree, and
      various flowers and plants. Nothing is considered more disgraceful
      among orthodox Hindus than drunkenness, and the use of wine is
      forbidden not only to Brahmans but the two other orders as well.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} So
      it clearly appears derogatory to the dignity of the Gods to have
      received a nymph so pernicious, who ought rather to have been made
      over to the Titans. However the etymological fancy has prevailed.
      The word _Sura_, a God, is derived from the indeclinable _Swar_
      heaven." SCHLEGEL.

  208 Literally, high-eared, the horse of Indra. Compare the production of
      the horse from the sea by Neptune.

        209 "And Kaustubha the best
      Of gems that burns with living light
      Upon Lord Vishnu's breast."

      _Churning of the Ocean._

  210 "That this story of the birth of Lakshmi is of considerable
      antiquity is evident from one of her names _Kshirabdhi-tanaya_,
      daughter of the Milky Sea, which is found in _Amarasinha_ the most
      ancient of Indian lexicographers. The similarity to the Greek myth
      of Venus being born from the foam of the sea is remarkable."

      "In this description of Lakshmi one thing only offends me, that she
      is said to have four arms. Each of Vishnu's arms, single, as far as
      the elbow, there branches into two; but Lakshmi in all the brass
      seals that I possess or remember to have seen has two arms only. Nor
      does this deformity of redundant limbs suit the pattern of perfect
      beauty." SCHLEGEL. I have omitted the offensive epithet.

  211 Purandhar, a common title of Indra.

  212 A few verses are here left untranslated on account of the subject
      and language being offensive to modern taste.

  213 "In this myth of Indra destroying the unborn fruit of Diti with his
      thunderbolt, from which afterwards came the Maruts or Gods of Wind
      and Storm, geological phenomena are, it seems, represented under
      mythical images. In the great Mother of the Gods is, perhaps,
      figured the dry earth: Indra the God of thunder rends it open, and
      there issue from its rent bosom the Maruts or exhalations of the
      earth. But such ancient myths are difficult to interpret with
      absolute certainty." GORRESIO.

  214 Wind.

  215 Indra, with _maha_, great, prefixed.

  216 The Heavenly Twins.

  217 Not banished from heaven as the inferior Gods and demigods sometimes
      were.

  218 Kumarila says: "In the same manner, if it is said that Indra was the
      seducer of Ahalya this does not imply that the God Indra committed
      such a crime, but Indra means the sun, and Ahalya (from ahan and li)
      the night; and as the night is seduced and ruined by the sun of the
      morning, therefore is Indra called the paramour of Ahalya." MAX
      MULLER, _History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 530_.

  219 "The preceding sixteen lines have occurred before in Canto XLVIII.
      This Homeric custom of repeating a passage of several lines is
      strange to our poet. This is the only instance I remember. The
      repetition of single lines is common enough." SCHLEGEL.

  220 Divine personages of minute size produced from the hair of Brahma,
      and probably the origin of

            "That small infantry
      Warred on by cranes."

  221 Sweet, salt, pungent, bitter, acid, and astringent.

  222 "Of old hoards and minerals in the earth, the king is entitled to
      half by reason of his general protection, and because he is the lord
      paramount of the soil." MANU, Book VIII. 39.

  223 Ghi or clarified butter, "holy oil," being one of the essentials of
      sacrifice.

  224 "A Brahman had five principal duties to discharge every day: study
      and teaching the Veda, oblations to the manes or spirits of the
      departed, sacrifice to the Gods, hospitable offerings to men, and _a
      gift of food to all creatures_. The last consisted of rice or other
      grain which the Brahman was to offer every day outside his house in
      the open air. MANU, Book III. 70." GORRESIO.

  225 These were certain sacred words of invocation such a _svaha_,
      _vashat_, etc., pronounced at the time of sacrifice.

  226 "It is well known that the Persians were called Pahlavas by the
      Indians. The _Sakas_ are nomad tribes inhabiting Central Asia, the
      Scythes of the Greeks, whom the Persians also, as Herodotus tells
      us, called Sakae just as the Indians did. Lib. VII 64 {~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER GAMMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH VARIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH VARIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}. The name Yavans seems to be used
      rather indefinitely for nations situated beyond Persia to the west.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
      After the time of Alexander the Great the Indians as well as the
      Persians called the Greeks also Yavans." SCHLEGEL.

      Lassen thinks that the Pahlavas were the same people as the {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}
      of Herodotus, and that this non-Indian people dwelt on the
      north-west confines of India.

  227 See page 13, note 6.

  228 Barbarians, non-Sanskrit-speaking tribes.

  229 A comprehensive term for foreign or outcast races of different faith
      and language from the Hindus.

  230 The Kiratas and Haritas are savage aborigines of India who occupy
      hills and jungles and are altogether different in race and character
      from the Hindus. Dr. Muir remarks in his Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I. p.
      488 (second edition) that it does not appear that it is the object
      of this legend to represent this miraculous creation as the origin
      of these tribes, and that nothing more may have been intended than
      that the cow called into existence large armies, of the same stock
      with particular tribes previously existing.

  231 The Great God, Siva.

  232 Nandi, the snow-white bull, the attendant and favourite vehicle of
      Siva.

  233 "The names of many of these weapons which are mythical and partly
      allegorical have occurred in Canto XXIX. The general signification
      of the story is clear enough. It is a contest for supremacy between
      the regal or military order and Brahmanical or priestly authority,
      like one of those struggles which our own Europe saw in the middle
      ages when without employing warlike weapons the priesthood
      frequently gained the victory." SCHLEGEL.

      For a full account of the early contests between the Brahmans and
      the Kshattriyas, see Muir's Original Sanskrit Texts (Second edition)
      Vol. I. Ch. IV.

  234 "Trisanku, king of Ayodhya, was seventh in descent from Ikshvaku,
      and Dasaratha holds the thirty-fourth place in the same genealogy.
      See Canto LXX. We are thrown back, therefore, to very ancient times,
      and it occasions some surprise to find Vasishtha and Visvamitra,
      actors in these occurences, still alive in Rama's time."

  235 "It does not appear how Trisanku, in asking the aid of Vasishtha's
      sons after applying in vain to their father, could be charged with
      resorting to another _sakha_ (School) in the ordinary sense of that
      word; as it is not conceivable that the sons should have been of
      another Sakha from the father, whose cause they espouse with so much
      warmth. The commentator in the Bombay edition explains the word
      _Sakhantaram_ as Yajanadina rakshantaram, 'one who by sacrificing
      for thee, etc., will be another protector.' Gorresio's Gauda text,
      which may often be used as a commentary on the older one, has the
      following paraphrase of the words in question, ch. 60, 3. Mulam
      utsrijya kasmat tvam sakhasv ichhasi lambitum. 'Why, forsaking the
      root, dost thou desire to hang upon the branches?' " MUIR, Sanskrit
      Texts, Vol. I., p. 401.

  236 A Chandala was a man born of the illegal and impure union of a Sudra
      with a woman of one of the three higher castes.

  237 "The Chandala was regarded as the vilest and most abject of the men
      sprung from wedlock forbidden by the law (Manavadharmasastra, Lib.
      X. 12.); a kind of social malediction weighed upon his head and
      rejected him from human society." GORRESIO.

  238 This appellation, occuring nowhere else in the poem except as the
      name of a city, appears twice in this Canto as a name of Vasishtha.

  239 "The seven ancient rishis or saints, as has been said before, were
      the seven stars of Ursa Major. The seven other new saints which are
      here said to have been created by Visvamitra should be seven new
      southern stars, a sort of new Ursa. Von Schlegel thinks that this
      mythical fiction of new stars created by Visvamitra may signify that
      these southern stars, unknown to the Indians as long as they
      remained in the neighbourhood of the Ganges, became known to them at
      a later date when they colonized the southern regions of India."
      GORRESIO.

  240 "This cannot refer to the events just related: for Visvamitra was
      successful in the sacrifice performed for Trisanku. And yet no other
      impediment is mentioned. Still his restless mind would not allow him
      to remain longer in the same spot. So the character of Visvamitra is
      ingeniously and skilfully shadowed forth: as he had been formerly a
      most warlike king, loving battle and glory, bold, active, sometimes
      unjust, and more frequently magnanimous, such also he always shows
      himself in his character of anchorite and ascetic." SCHLEGEL.

  241 Near the modern city of Ajmere. The place is sacred still, and the
      name is preserved in the Hindi. Lassen, however, says that this
      Pushkala or Pushkara, called by the Grecian writers {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~}, the
      earliest place of pilgrimage mentioned by name, is not to be
      confounded with the modern Pushkara in Ajmere.

  242 "Ambarisha is the twenty-ninth in descent from Ikshvaku, and is
      therefore separated by an immense space of time from Trisanku in
      whose story Visvamitra had played so important a part. Yet Richika,
      who is represented as having young sons while Ambarisha was yet
      reigning being himself the son of Bhrigu and to be numbered with the
      most ancient sages, is said to have married the younger sister of
      Visvamitra. But I need not again remark that there is a perpetual
      anachronism in Indian mythology." SCHLEGEL..

      "In the mythical story related in this and the following Canto we
      may discover, I think, some indication of the epoch at which the
      immolation of lower animals was substituted for human sacrifice.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} So
      when Iphigenia was about to be sacrificed at Aulis, one legend tells
      us that a hind was substituted for the virgin." GORRESIO.

      So the ram caught in the thicket took the place of Isaac, or, as the
      Musalmans say, of Ishmael.

  243 The Indian Cupid.

  244 "The same as she whose praises Visvamitra has already sung in Canto
      XXXV, and whom the poet brings yet alive upon the scene in Canto
      LXI. Her proper name was _Satyavati_ (Truthful); the patronymic,
      Kausiki was preserved by the river into which she is said to have
      been changed, and is still recognized in the corrupted forms Kusa
      and Kusi. The river flows from the heights of the Himalaya towards
      the Ganges, bounding on the east the country of Videha (Behar). The
      name is no doubt half hidden in the _Cosoagus_ of Pliny and the
      _Kossounos_ of Arrian. But each author has fallen into the same
      error in his enumeration of these rivers (Condochatem, Erannoboam,
      Cosoagum, Sonum). The Erannoboas, (Hiranyavaha) and the Sone are not
      different streams, but well-known names of the same river. Moreover
      the order is disturbed, in which on the right and left they fall
      into the Ganges. To be consistent with geography it should be
      written: Erannoboam sive Sonum, Condochatem (Gandaki), Cosoagum."
      SCHLEGEL.

  245 "Daksha was one of the ancient Progenitors or Prajapatis created by
      Brahma. The sacrifice which is here spoken of and in which Sankar or
      Siva (called also here Rudra and Bhava) smote the Gods because he
      had not been invited to share the sacred oblations with them, seems
      to refer to the origin of the worship of Siva, to its increase and
      to the struggle it maintained with other older forms of worship."
      GORRESIO.

  246 Sita means a furrow.

            "Great Erectheus swayed,
      That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
      But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
      The mighty offspring of the foodful earth."

      Iliad, Book II.

  247 "The whole story of Sita, as will be seen in the course of the poem
      has a great analogy with the ancient myth of Proserpine." GORRESIO.

  248 A different lady from the Goddess of the Jumna who bears the same
      name.

  249 This is another fanciful derivation, _Sa_--with, and _gara_--poison.

_  250 Purushadak_ means a cannibal. First called _Kalmashapada_ on
      account of his spotted feet he is said to have been turned into a
      cannibal for killing the son of Vasishtha.

  251 "In the setting forth of these royal genealogies the Bengal
      recension varies but slightly from the Northern. The first six names
      of the genealogy of the Kings of Ayodhya are partly theogonical and
      partly cosmogonical; the other names are no doubt in accordance with
      tradition and deserve the same amount of credence as the ancient
      traditional genealogies of other nations." GORRESIO.

  252 The tenth of the lunar asterisms, composed of five stars.

  253 There are two lunar asterisms of this name, one following the other
      immediately, forming the eleventh and twelfth of the lunar mansions.

  254 This is another Rama, son of Jamadagni, called Parasurama, or Rama
      with the axe, from the weapon which he carried. He was while he
      lived the terror of the Warrior caste, and his name recalls long and
      fierce struggles between the sacerdotal and military order in which
      the latter suffered severely at the hands of their implacable enemy.

  255 "The author of the _Raghuvansa_ places the mountain Mahendra in the
      territory of the king of the Kalingans, whose palace commanded a
      view of the ocean. It is well known that the country along the coast
      to the south of the mouths of the Ganges was the seat of this
      people. Hence it may be suspected that this Mahendra is what Pliny
      calls 'promontorium Calingon.' The modern name, _Cape Palmyras_,
      from the palmyras Borassus flabelliformis, which abound there agrees
      remarkably with the description of the poet who speaks of the groves
      of these trees. _Raghuvansa_, VI. 51." SCHLEGEL.

  256 Siva.

  257 Siva. God of the Azure Neck.

  258 Satrughna means slayer of foes, and the word is repeated as an
      intensive epithet.

  259 Alluding to the images of Vishnu, which have four arms, the four
      princes being portions of the substance of that God.

  260 Chief of the insignia of imperial dignity.

  261 Whisks, usually made of the long tails of the Yak.

  262 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  263 The Chandrakanta or Moonstone, a sort of crystal supposed to be
      composed of congealed moonbeams.

  264 A customary mark of respect to a superior.

  265 Rahu, the ascending node, is in mythology a demon with the tail of a
      dragon whose head was severed from his body by Vishnu, but being
      immortal, the head and tail retained their separate existence and
      being transferred to the stellar sphere became the authors of
      eclipses; the first especially by endeavouring to swallow the sun
      and moon.

  266 In eclipse.

  267 The seventh of the lunar asterisms.

  268 Kausalya and Sumitra.

  269 A king of the Lunar race, and father of Yayati.

  270 Literally _the chamber of wrath,_ a "_growlery_," a small, dark,
      unfurnished room to which it seems, the wives and ladies of the king
      betook themselves when offended and sulky.

  271 In these four lines I do not translate faithfully, and I do not
      venture to follow Kaikeyi farther in her eulogy of the hump-back's
      charms.

  272 These verses are evidently an interpolation. They contain nothing
      that has not been already related: the words only are altered. As
      the whole poem could not be recited at once, the rhapsodists at the
      beginning of a fresh recitation would naturally remind their hearers
      of the events immediately preceding.

  273 The _sloka_ or distich which I have been forced to expand into these
      nine lines is evidently spurious, but is found in all the commented
      MSS. which Schlegel consulted.

  274 Manmatha, Mind-disturber, a name of Kama or Love.

  275 This story is told in the Mahabharat. A free version of it may be
      found in _Scenes from the Ramayan, etc._

  276 Only the highest merit obtains a home in heaven for ever. Minor
      degrees of merit procure only leases of heavenly mansions terminable
      after periods proportioned to the fund which buys them. King Yayati
      went to heaven and when his term expired was unceremoniously
      ejected, and thrown down to earth.

  277 See _Additional Notes_, THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

  278 Indra, called also Purandara, Town-destroyer.

  279 Indra's charioteer.

  280 The elephant of Indra.

  281 A star in the spike of Virgo: hence the name of the mouth Chaitra or
      Chait.

  282 The Rain-God.

  283 In a former life.

  284 One of the lunar asterisms, represented as the favourite wife of the
      Moon. See p. 4, note.

  285 The Sea.

  286 The Moon.

  287 The comparison may to a European reader seem a homely one. But
      Spenser likens an infuriate woman to a cow "That is berobbed of her
      youngling dere." Shakspeare also makes King Henry VI compare himself
      to the calf's mother that "Runs lowing up and down, Looking the way
      her harmless young one went." "Cows," says De Quincey, "are amongst
      the gentlest of breathing creatures; none show more passionate
      tenderness to their young, when deprived of them, and, in short, I
      am not ashamed to profess a deep love for these gentle creatures."

  288 The commentators say that, in a former creation, Ocean grieved his
      mother and suffered in consequence the pains of hell.

  289 As described in Book I Canto XL.

  290 Parasurama.

  291 The Sanskrit word _hasta_ signifies both _hand_, and the trunk of
      "The beast that bears between his eyes a serpent for a head."

  292 See P. 41.

  293 The first progeny of Brahma or Brahma himself.

  294 These are three names of the Sun.

  295 See P. 1.

  296 The saints who form the constellation of Ursa Major.

  297 The regent of the planet Venus.

  298 Kuvera.

_  299 Bali_, or the presentation of food to all created beings, is one of
      the five great sacraments of the Hindu religion: it consists in
      throwing a small parcel of the offering, _Ghee_, or rice, or the
      like, into the open air at the back of the house.

  300 In mythology, a demon slain by Indra.

  301 Called also Garud, the King of the birds, offspring of Vinata. See
      p. 53.

  302 See P. 56.

  303 See P. 43.

  304 The story of Savitri, told in the Mahabharat, has been admirably
      translated by Rueckert, and elegantly epitomized by Mrs. Manning in
      _India, Ancient and Mediaeval_. There is a free rendering of the
      story in _Idylls from the Sanskrit_.

  305 Fire for sacrificial purposes is produced by the attrition of two
      pieces of wood.

  306 Kaikeyi.

  307 The chapel where the sacred fire used in worship is kept.

  308 The students and teachers of the Taittiriya portion of the Yajur
      Veda.

  309 Two of the divine personages called _Prajapatis_ and _Brahmadikas_
      who were first created by Brahma.

  310 It was the custom of the kings of the solar dynasty to resign in
      their extreme old age the kingdom to the heir, and spend the
      remainder of their days in holy meditation in the forest:

      "For such through ages in their life's decline
      Is the good custom of Ikshvaku's line."

      _Raghuransa._

  311 See Book I, Canto XXXIX. An Indian prince in more modern times
      appears to have diverted himself in a similar way.

      It is still reported in Belgaum that Appay Deasy was wont to amuse
      himself "by making several young and beautiful women stand side by
      side on a narrow balcony, without a parapet, overhanging the deep
      reservoir at the new palace in Nipani. He used then to pass along
      the line of trembling creatures, and suddenly thrusting one of them
      headlong into the water below, he used to watch her drowning, and
      derive pleasure from her dying agonies."--History of the Belgaum
      District. By H. J. Stokes, M. S. C.

  312 Chitraratha, King of the celestial choristers.

  313 It is said that the bamboo dies after flowering.

  314 "Thirty centuries have passed since he began this memorable journey.
      Every step of it is known and is annually traversed by thousands:
      hero worship is not extinct. What can Faith do! How strong are the
      ties of religion when entwined with the legends of a country! How
      many a cart creeps creaking and weary along the road from Ayodhya to
      Chitrakut. It is this that gives the Ramayan a strange interest, the
      story still lives." _Calcutta Review: Vol. XXIII._

  315 See p. 72.

  316 Four stars of the sixteenth lunar asterism.

  317 In the marriage service.

  318 The husks and chaff of the rice offered to the Gods.

  319 An important sacrifice at which seventeen victims were immolated.

  320 The great pilgrimage to the Himalayas, in order to die there.

  321 Known to Europeans as the Goomtee.

  322 A tree, commonly called _Ingua_.

  323 Sacrificial posts to which the victims were tied.

  324 Daughter of Jahnu, a name of the Ganges. See p. 55.

  325 The _Maina_ or Gracula religiosa, a favourite cage-bird, easily
      taught to talk.

  326 The Jumna.

  327 The Hindu name of Allahabad.

  328 The Langur is a large monkey.

  329 A mountain said to lie to the east of Meru.

  330 Another name of the Jumna, daughter of the Sun.

  331 "We have often looked on that green hill: it is the holiest spot of
      that sect of the Hindu faith who devote themselves to this
      incarnation of Vishnu. The whole neighbourhood is Rama's country.
      Every headland has some legend, every cavern is connected with his
      name; some of the wild fruits are still called _Sitaphal_, being the
      reputed food of the exile. Thousands and thousands annually visit
      the spot, and round the hill is a raised foot-path, on which the
      devotee, with naked feet, treads full of pious awe." _Calcutta
      Review_, Vol. XXIII.

  332 Deities of a particular class in which five or ten are enumerated.
      They are worshipped particularly at the funeral obsequies in honour
      of deceased progenitors.

  333 "So in Homer the horses of Achilles lamented with many bitter tears
      the death of Patroclus slain by Hector:"

      "{~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER IOTA WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}' {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}, {~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~},
      {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER LAMDA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PERISPOMENI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}, {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH VARIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA WITH PERISPOMENI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER THETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}
      {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER EPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PHI~}' {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER EPSILON WITH DASIA AND OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}"

      ILIAD. XVII. 426.

      "Ancient poesy frequently associated nature with the joys and
      sorrows of man." GORRESIO.

  334 The lines containing this heap of forced metaphors are marked as
      spurious by Schlegel.

  335 The southern region is the abode of Yama the Indian Pluto, and of
      departed spirits.

  336 The five elements of which the body consists, and to which it
      returns.

  337 So dying York cries over the body of Suffolk:

          "Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk!
      My soul shall thine keep company to heaven:
      Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast."

      _King Henry V, Act IV, 6._

  338 Kausalya, daughter of the king of another Kosal.

  339 Rajagriha, or Girivraja was the capital of Asvapati, Bharat's
      maternal grandfather.

  340 The Kekayas or Kaikayas in the Punjab appear amongst the chief
      nations in the war of the Mahabharata; their king being a kinsman of
      Krishna.

  341 Hastinapura was the capital of the kingdom of Kuru, near the modern
      Delhi.

  342 The Panchalas occupied the upper part of the Doab.

  343 "Kurujangala and its inhabitants are frequently mentioned in the
      _Mahabharata_, as in the _Adi-parv._ 3789, 4337, _et al._" WILSON'S
      _Vishnu Purana,_ Vol. II. p. 176. DR. HALL'S Note.

  344 "The {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER XI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} of Arrian. See _As. Res._ Vol. XV. p. 420, 421, also
      _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. I. p. 602, first footnote."
      WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. I. p. 421. DR. HALL'S Edition. The
      Ikshumati was a river in Kurukshetra.

  345 "The Bahikas are described in the Mahabharata, Karna Parvan, with
      some detail, and comprehend the different nations of the Punjab from
      the Sutlej to the Indus." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. I. p. 167.

  346 The Beas, Hyphasis, or Bibasis.

  347 It would be lost labour to attempt to verify all the towns and
      streams mentioned in Cantos LXVIII and LXXII. Professor Wilson
      observes (_Vishnu Purana_, p. 139. Dr. Hall's Edition) "States, and
      tribes, and cities have disappeared, even from recollection; and
      some of the natural features of the country, especially the rivers,
      have undergone a total alteration.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Notwithstanding these
      impediments, however, we should be able to identify at least
      mountains and rivers, to a much greater extent than is now
      practicable, if our maps were not so miserably defective in their
      nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers have been
      oriental scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been
      conversant with the spoken language of the country. They have,
      consequently, put down names at random, according to their own
      inaccurate appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and
      corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with
      appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to past or
      present denominations. We need not wonder that we cannot discover
      Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of
      Calcutta, Barnagore represents Barahanagar, Dakshineswar is
      metamorphosed into Duckinsore, Ulubaria into Willoughbury.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} There is
      scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of
      extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an
      incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is, in some degree,
      perhaps, a national defect."

      For further information regarding the road from Ayodhya to
      Rajagriha, see _Additional Notes_.

  348 "The Satadru, 'the hundred-channeled'--the Zaradrus of Ptolemy,
      Hesydrus of Pliny--is the Sutlej." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II.
      p. 130.

  349 The Sarasvati or Sursooty is a tributary of the Caggar or Guggur in
      Sirhind.

_  350 Suryamcha pratimehatu_, adversus solem mingat. An offence expressly
      forbidden by the Laws of Manu.

  351 Bharat does not intend these curses for any particular person: he
      merely wishes to prove his own innocence by invoking them on his own
      head if he had any share in banishing Rama.

  352 The Sama-veda, the hymns of which are chanted aloud.

  353 Walking from right to left.

  354 Birth and death, pleasure and pain, loss and gain.

  355 Erected upon a tree or high staff in honour of Indra.

  356 I follow in this stanza the Bombay edition in preference to
      Schlegel's which gives the tears of joy to the courtiers.

  357 The commentator says "Satrughna accompanied by the other sons of the
      king."

  358 Not Bharat's uncle, but some councillor.

_  359 Satakratu_, Lord of a hundred sacrifices, the performance of a
      hundred _Asvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse entitling the
      sacrificer to this exalted dignity.

  360 The modern Malabar.

  361 Now Sungroor, in the Allahabad district.

  362 Rama, Lakshman, and Sumantra.

  363 The _svastika_, a little cross with a transverse line at each
      extremity.

  364 When an army marched it was customary to burn the huts in which it
      had spent the night.

  365 Yama, Varuna, and Kuvera.

  366 "A happy land in the remote north where the inhabitants enjoy a
      natural pefection attended with complete happiness obtained without
      exertion. There is there no vicissitude, nor decrepitude, nor death,
      nor fear: no distinction of virtue and vice, none of the
      inequalities denoted by the words best, worst, and intermediate, nor
      any change resulting from the succession of the four Yugas." See
      MUIR'S _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p. 492.

  367 The Moon.

  368 The poet does not tell us what these lakes contained.

  369 These ten lines are a substitution for, and not a translation of the
      text which Carey and Marshman thus render: "This mountain adorned
      with mango, jumboo, usuna, lodhra, piala, punusa, dhava, unkotha,
      bhuvya, tinisha, vilwa, tindooka, bamboo, kashmaree, urista, uruna,
      madhooka, tilaka, vuduree, amluka, nipa, vetra, dhunwuna, veejaka,
      and other trees affording flowers, and fruits, and the most
      delightful shade, how charming does it appear!"

_  370 Vidyadharis_, Spirits of Air, sylphs.

  371 A lake attached either to Amaravati the residence of Indra, or Alaka
      that of Kuvera.

  372 The Ganges of heaven.

  373 Nalini, as here, may be the name of any lake covered with lotuses.

  374 This canto is allowed, by Indian commentators, to be an
      interpolation. It cannot be the work of Valmiki.

  375 A fine bird with a strong, sweet note, and great imitative powers.

  376 Bauhinea variegata, a species of ebony.

  377 The rainbow is called the bow of Indra.

  378 Bhogavati, the abode of the Nagas or Serpent race.

  379 "The order of the procession on these occasions is that the children
      precede according to age, then the women and after that the men
      according to age, the youngest first and the eldest last: when they
      descend into the water this is reversed and resumed when they come
      out of it." CAREY AND MARSHMAN.

  380 Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the Gods.

  381 Garud, the king of birds.

  382 To be won by virtue.

  383 The four religious orders, referable to different times of life are,
      that of the student, that of the householder, that of the anchorite,
      and that of the mendicant.

  384 To Gods, men, and Manes.

  385 Gaya is a very holy city in Behar. Every good Hindu ought once in
      his life to make funeral offerings in Gaya in honour of his
      ancestors.

_  386 Put_ is the name of that region of hell to which men are doomed who
      leave no son to perform the funeral rites which are necessary to
      assure the happiness of the departed. _Putra_, the common word for a
      son is said by the highest authority to be derived from _Put_ and
      _tra_ deliverer.

  387 It was the custom of Indian women when mourning for their absent
      husbands to bind their hair in a long single braid.

      Carey and Marshman translate, "the one-tailed city."

  388 The verses in a different metre with which some cantos end are all
      to be regarded with suspicion. Schlegel regrets that he did not
      exclude them all from his edition. These lines are manifestly
      spurious. See _Additional Notes_.

  389 This genealogy is a repetition with slight variation of that given
      in Book I, Canto LXX.

  390 In Gorresio's recension identified with Vishnu. See Muir's _Sanskrit
      Texts, Vol. IV. pp 29, 30_.

  391 From _sa_ with, and _gara_ poison.

  392 See Book I. Canto XL.

  393 A practice which has frequently been described, under the name of
      _dherna_, by European travellers in India.

  394 Compare Milton's "_beseeching or beseiging_."

  395 Ten-headed, ten-necked, ten faced, are common epithets of Ravan the
      giant king of Lanka.

  396 The spouse of Rohini is the Moon: Rahu is the demon who causes
      eclipses.

  397 "Once," says the Commentator Tirtha, "in the battle between the Gods
      and demons the Gods were vanquished, and the sun was overthrown by
      Rahu. At the request of the Gods Atri undertook the management of
      the sun for a week."

  398 Now Nundgaon, in Oudh.

  399 A part of the great Dandak forest.

  400 When the saint Mandavya had doomed some saint's wife, who was
      Anasuya's friend, to become a widow on the morrow.

  401 Heavenly nymphs.

  402 The _ball_ or present of food to all created beings.

  403 The clarified butter &c. cast into the sacred fire.

  404 The Moon-God: "he is," says the commentator, "the special deity of
      Brahmans."

  405 "Because he was an incarnation of the deity," says the commentator,
      "otherwise such honour paid by men of the sacerdotal caste to one of
      the military would be improper."

  406 The king of birds.

_  407 Kalantakayamopamam_, resembling Yama the destroyer.

  408 Somewhat inconsistently with this part of the story Tumburu is
      mentioned in Book II, Canto XII as one of the Gandharvas or heavenly
      minstrels summoned to perform at Bharadvaja's feast.

  409 Rambha appears in Book I Canto LXIV as the temptress of Visvamitra.

  410 The conclusion of this Canto is all a vain repetition: it is
      manifestly spurious and a very feeble imitation of Valmiki's style.
      See _Additional Notes_.

  411 "Even when he had alighted," says the commentator: The feet of Gods
      do not touch the ground.

  412 A name of Indra.

  413 Sachi is the consort of Indra.

  414 The spheres or mansions gained by those who have duly performed the
      sacrifices required of them. Different situations are assigned to
      these spheres, some placing them near the sun, others near the moon.

  415 Hermits who live upon roots which they dig out of the earth:
      literally _diggers_, derived from the prefix _vi_ and _khan_ to dig.

  416 Generally, divine personages of the height of a man's thumb,
      produced from Brahma's hair: here, according to the commentator
      followed by Gorresio, hermits who when they have obtained fresh food
      throw away what they had laid up before.

  417 Sprung from the washings of Vishnuu's feet.

  418 Four fires burning round them, and the sun above.

  419 The tax allowed to the king by the Laws of Manu.

  420 Near the celebrated Ramagiri or Rama's Hill, now Ram-tek, near
      Nagpore--the scene of the Yaksha's exile in the _Messenger Cloud_.

  421 A hundred _Asvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse raise the sacrificer
      to the dignity of Indra.

  422 Indra.

  423 Gorresio observes that Dasaratha was dead and that Sita had been
      informed of his death. In his translation he substitutes for the
      words of the text "thy relations and mine." This is quite
      superfluous. Dasaratha though in heaven still took a loving interest
      in the fortunes of his son.

  424 One of the hermits who had followed Rama.

  425 The lake of the five nymphs.

  426 The holy fig-tree.

  427 The bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus integrifolia.

  428 A fine timber tree, Shorea robusta.

  429 The God of fire.

  430 Kuvera, the God of riches.

  431 The Sun.

  432 Brahma, the creator.

  433 Siva.

  434 The Wind-God.

  435 The God of the sea.

  436 A class of demi-gods, eight in number.

  437 The holiest text of the Vedas, deified.

  438 Vasuki.

  439 Garud.

  440 The War-God.

  441 One of the Pleiades generally regarded as the model of wifely
      excellence.

  442 The Madhuka, or, as it is now called, Mahuwa, is the Bassia
      latifolia, a tree from whose blossoms a spirit is extracted.

  443 "I should have doubted whether Manu could have been the right
      reading here, but that it occurs again in verse 29, where it is in
      like manner followed in verse 31 by Anala, so that it would
      certainly seem that the name Manu is intended to stand for a female,
      the daughter of Daksha. The Gauda recension, followed by Signor
      Gorresio (III 20, 12), adopts an entirely different reading at the
      end of the line, viz. _Balam Atibalam api_, 'Bala and Atibila,'
      instead of Manu and Anala. I see that Professor Roth s.v. adduces
      the authority of the Amara Kosha and of the Commentator on Panini
      for stating that the word sometimes means 'the wife of Manu.' In the
      following text of the Mahabharata I. 2553. also, Manu appears to be
      the name of a female: '_Anaradyam_, _Manum_, _Vansam_, _Asuram_,
      _Marganapriyam_, _Anupam_, _Subhagam_, _Bhasim iti_, _Pradha
      vyajayata_. Pradha (daughter of Daksha) bore Anavadya, Manu, Vansa,
      Marganapriya, Anupa, Subhaga. and Bhasi.' " _Muir's Sanskrit Text_,
      Vol. I. p. 116.

  444 The elephant of Indra.

_  445 Golangulas_, described as a kind of monkey, of a black colour, and
      having a tail like a cow.

  446 Eight elephants attached to the four quarters and intermediate
      points of the compass, to support and guard the earth.

  447 Some scholars identify the centaurs with the Gandharvas.

  448 The hooded serpents, says the commentator Tirtha, were the offspring
      of Surasa: all others of Kadru.

  449 The text reads Kasyapa, "a descendant of Kasyapa," who according to
      Ram. II. l0, 6, ought to be Vivasvat. But as it is stated in the
      preceding part of this passage III. 14, 11 f. that Manu was one of
      Kasyapa's eight wives, we must here read Kasyap. The Ganda recension
      reads (III, 20, 30) _Manur manushyams cha tatha janayamasa Raghana_,
      instead of the corresponding line in the Bombay edition. _Muir's
      Sanskrit Text, Vol I, p. 117._

  450 The original verses merely name the trees. I have been obliged to
      amplify slightly and to omit some quas versu dicere non est; _e.g._
      the _tinisa_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis), _punnaga_ (Rottleria
      tinctoria), _tilaka_ (not named), _syandana_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis
      again), _vandana_ (unknown), _nipa_ (Nauclea Kadamba), _lakucha_
      (Artoearpus lacucha), _dhava_ (Grislea tomentosa), Asvakarna (another
      name for the Sal), _Sami_ (Acacia Suma), _khadira_ (Mimosa catechu),
      _kinsuka_ (Butea frondosa), _patala_ (Bignonia suaveolens).

  451 Acacia Suma.

  452 The south is supposed to be the residence of the departed.

  453 The sun.

  454 The night is divided into three watches of four hours each.

  455 The chief chamberlain and attendant of Siva or Rudra.

  456 Uma or Parvati, the consort of Siva.

  457 A star, one of the favourites of the Moon.

  458 The God of love.

  459 A demon slain by Indra.

  460 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  461 Titanic.

  462 The Sarika is the Maina, a bird like a starling.

  463 Mahakapala, Sthulaksha, Pramatha, Trisiras.

  464 Vishnu, who bears a _chakra_ or discus.

  465 Siva.

  466 See _Additional Notes_--DAKSHA'S SACRIFICE.

  467 Himalaya.

  468 One of the mysterious weapons given to Rama.

  469 A periphrasis for the body.

  470 Trisiras.

  471 The Three-headed.

  472 The demon who causes eclipses.

  473 "This Asura was a friend of Indra, and taking advantage of his
      friend's confidence, he drank up Indra's strength along with a
      draught of wine and Soma. Indra then told the Asvins and Sarasvati
      that Namuchi had drunk up his strength. The Asvins in consequence
      gave Indra a thunderbolt in the form of a foam, with which he smote
      off the head of Namuchi." GARRETT'S _Classical Dictionary of India_.
      See also Book I. p. 39.

  474 Indra.

  475 Popularly supposed to cause death.

  476 Garud, the King of Birds, carried off the Amrit or drink of Paradise
      from Indra's custody.

  477 A demon, son of Kasyap and Diti, slain by Rudra or Siva when he
      attempted to carry off the tree of Paradise.

  478 Namuchi and Vritra were two demons slain by Indra. Vritra
      personifies drought, the enemy of Indra, who imprisons the rain in
      the cloud.

  479 Another demon slain by Indra.

  480 The capital of the giant king Ravan.

  481 Kuvera, the God of gold.

  482 In the great deluge.

  483 The giant Maricha, son of Tadaka. Tadaka was slain by Rama. See p.
      39.

  484 Indra's elephant.

  485 Bhogavati, in Patala in the regions under the earth, is the capital
      of the serpent race whose king is Vasuki.

  486 the grove of Indra.

  487 Pulastya is considered as the ancestor of the Rakshases or giants,
      as he is the father of Visravas, the father of Ravan and his
      brethren.

  488 Beings with the body of a man and the head of a horse.

  489 Ajas, Marichipas, Vaikhanasas, Mashas, and Balakhilyas are classes
      of supernatural beings who lead the lives of hermits.

  490 "The younger brother of the giant Ravan; when he and his brother had
      practiced austerities for a long series of years, Brahma appeared to
      offer them boons: Vibhishana asked that he might never meditate any
      unrighteousness.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} On the death of Ravan Vibhishana was installed as
      Raja of Lanka." GARRETT'S _Classical Dictionary of India_.

  491 Serpent-gods.

  492 See p. 33.

  493 The Sanskrit words for car and jewels begin with _ra_.

  494 A race of beings of human shape but with the heads of horses, like
      centaurs reversed.

  495 The favourite wife of the Moon.

  496 The planet Saturn.

  497 Another favourite of the Moon; one of the lunar mansions.

  498 The Rudras, agents in creation, are eight in number; they sprang
      from the forehead of Brahma.

  499 Maruts, the attendants of Indra.

  500 Radiant demi-gods.

  501 The mountain which was used by the Gods as a churning stick at the
      Churning of the Ocean.

  502 The story will be found in GARRETT'S _Classical Dictionary_. See
      ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  503 Mercury: to be carefully distinguished from Buddha.

  504 The spirits of the good dwell in heaven until their store of
      accumulated merit is exhausted. Then they redescend to earth in the
      form of falling stars.

  505 See The Descent of Ganga, Book I Canto XLIV.

  506 See Book I Canto XXV.

_  507 Asoka_ is compounded of _a_ not and _soka_ grief.

  508 See Book I Canto XXXI.

  509 An Asur or demon, king of Tripura, the modern Tipperah.

  510 Siva.

  511 See Book I, Canto LIX.

  512 The preceptor of the Gods.

  513 From the root _vid_, to find.

  514 Ravan.

  515 Or Curlews' Wood.

  516 Iron-faced.

  517 Kabandha means a trunk.

  518 A class of mythological giants. In the Epic period they were
      probably personifications of the aborigines of India.

  519 Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing dissensions, and seeking
      protection.

  520 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  521 Or as the commentator Tirtha says, Silapidhana, rock-covered, may be
      the name of the cavern.

  522 Pampa is said by the commentator to be the name both of a lake and a
      brook which flows into it. The brook is said to rise in the hill
      Rishyamuka.

  523 Who was acting as Regent for Rama and leading an ascetic life while
      he mourned for his absent brother.

  524 The Indian Cuckoo.

  525 The Cassia Fistula or Amaltas is a splendid tree like a giant
      laburnum covered with a profusion of chains and tassels of gold. Dr.
      Roxburgh well describes it as "uncommonly beautiful when in flower,
      few trees surpassing it in the elegance of its numerous long
      pendulous racemes of large bright-yellow flowers intermixed with the
      young lively green foliage." It is remarkable also for its curious
      cylindrical black seed-pods about two feet long, which are called
      monkeys' walking-sticks.

  526 "The Jonesia Asoca is a tree of considerable size, native of
      southern India. It blossoms in February and March with large erect
      compact clusters of flowers, varying in colour from pale-orange to
      scarlet, almost to be mistaken, on a hasty glance, for immense
      trusses of bloom of an Ixora. Mr. Fortune considered this tree, when
      in full bloom, superior in beauty even to the Amherstia.

      The first time I saw the Asoc in flower was on the hill where the
      famous rock-cut temple of Karli is situated, and a large concourse
      of natives had assembled for the celebration of some Hindoo
      festival. Before proceeding to the temple the Mahratta women
      gathered from two trees, which were flowering somewhat below, each a
      fine truss of blossom, and inserted it in the hair at the back of
      her head.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} As they moved about in groups it is impossible to imagine
      a more delightful effect than the rich scarlet bunches of flowers
      presented on their fine glossy jet-black hair." FIRMINGER,
      _Gardening for India_.

  527 No other word can express the movements of peafowl under the
      influence of pleasing excitement, especially when after the long
      drought they hear the welcome roar of the thunder and feel that the
      rain is near.

  528 The Dewy Season is one of the six ancient seasons of the Indian
      year, lasting from the middle of January to the middle of March.

  529 Rama appears to mean that on a former occasion a crow flying high
      overhead was an omen that indicated his approaching separation from
      Sita; and that now the same bird's perching on a tree near him may
      be regarded as a happy augury that she will soon be restored to her
      husband.

  530 A tree with beautiful and fragrant blossoms.

  531 A race of semi-divine musicians attached to the service of Kuvera,
      represented as centaurs reversed with human figures and horses'
      heads.

  532 Butea Frondosa. A tree that bears a profusion of brilliant red
      flowers which appear before the leaves.

  533 I omit five _slokas_ which contain nothing but a list of trees for
      which, with one or two exceptions, there are no equivalent names in
      English. The following is Gorresio's translation of the
      corresponding passage in the Bengal recension:--

      "Oh come risplendono in questa stagione di primavera i vitici, le
      galedupe, le bassie, le dalbergie, i diospyri {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} le tile, le
      michelie, le rottlerie, le pentaptere ed i pterospermi, i bombaci,
      le grislee, gli abri, gli amaranti e le dalbergie; i sirii, le
      galedupe, le barringtonie ed i palmizi, i xanthocymi, il pepebetel,
      le verbosine e le ticaie, le nauclee le erythrine, gli asochi, e le
      tapie fanno d'ogni intorno pompa de' lor fiori."

  534 A sacred stream often mentioned in the course of the poem. See Book
      II, Canto XCV.

  535 A daughter of Daksha who became one of the wives of Kasyapa and
      mother of the Daityas. She is termed the general mother of Titans
      and malignant beings. See Book I Cantos XLV, XLVI.

  536 Sugriva, the ex-king of the Vanars, foresters, or monkeys, an exile
      from his home, wandering about the mountain Rishyamuka with his four
      faithful ex-ministers.

  537 The hermitage of the Saint Matanga which his curse prevented Bali,
      the present king of the Vanars, from entering. The story is told at
      length in Canto XI of this Book.

  538 Hanuman, Sugriva's chief general, was the son of the God of Wind.
      See Book I, Canto XVI.

  539 A range of hills in Malabar; the Western Ghats in the Deccan.

  540 Valmiki makes the second vowel in this name long or short to suit
      the exigencies of the verse. Other Indian poets have followed his
      example, and the same licence will be used in this translation.

  541 I omit a recapitulatory and interpolated verse in a different metre,
      which is as follows:--Reverencing with the words, So be it, the
      speech of the greatly terrified and unequalled monkey king, the
      magnanimous Hanuman then went where (stood) the very mighty Rama
      with Lakshman.

  542 The semi divine Hanuman possesses, like the Gods and demons, the
      power of wearing all shapes at will. He is one of the _Kamarupis_.

      Like Milton's good and bad angels "as they please
        They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size
        Assume as likes them best, condense or rare."

  543 Himalaya is of course _par excellence_ the Monarch of mountains, but
      the complimentary title is frequently given to other hills as here
      to Malaya.

  544 Twisted up in a matted coil as was the custom of ascetics.

  545 The sun and moon.

  546 The rainbow.

  547 The Vedas are four in number, the Rich or Rig-veda, the Yajush or
      Yajur-veda; the Saman or Sama-veda, and the Atharvan or
      Atharva-veda. See p. 3. Note.

  548 The chest, the throat, and the head.

  549 "In our own metrical romances, or wherever a poem is meant not for
      readers but for chanters and oral reciters, these _formulae_, to meet
      the same recurring case, exist by scores. Thus every woman in these
      metrical romances who happens to be young, is described as 'so
      bright of ble,' or complexion; always a man goes 'the mountenance of
      a mile' before he overtakes or is overtaken. And so on through a
      vast bead-roll of cases. In the same spirit Homer has his eternal
      {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}'{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}' {~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH DASIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMEGA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}, or {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}'{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER PI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER PHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA~}, &c.

      To a reader of sensibility, such recurrences wear an air of
      child-like simplicity, beautifully recalling the features of Homer's
      primitive age. But they would have appeared faults to all
      commonplace critics in literary ages."

      DE QUINCEY. _Homer and the Homeridae_.

  550 Brahmans the sacerdotal caste. Kshatriyas the royal and military,
      Vaisyas the mercantile, and Sudras the servile.

  551 A protracted sacrifice extending over several days. See Book I, p.
      24 Note.

  552 Possessed of all the auspicious personal marks that indicate
      capacity of universal sovereignty. See Book I. p. 2, and Note 3.

  553 Kabandha. See Book III. Canto LXXIII.

  554 Fire for sacred purposes is produced by the attrition of two pieces
      of wood. In marriage and other solemn covenants fire is regarded as
      the holy witness in whose presence the agreement is made. Spenser in
      a description of a marriage, has borrowed from the Roman rite what
      he calls the housling, or "matrimonial rite."

      "His owne two hands the holy knots did knit
      That none but death forever can divide.
      His owne two hands, for such a turn most fit,
      The housling fire did kindle and provide."

      Faery Queen, Book I. XII. 37.

  555 Indra.

  556 Bali the king _de facto_.

  557 With the Indians, as with the ancient Greeks, the throbbing of the
      right eye in a man is an auspicious sign, the throbbing of the left
      eye is the opposite. In a woman the significations of signs are
      reversed.

  558 The Vedas stolen by the demons Madhu and Kaitabha.

      "The text has [Sanskrit text] which signifies literally 'the lost
      vedic tradition.' It seems that allusion is here made to the Vedas
      submerged in the depth of the sea, but promptly recovered by Vishnu
      in one of his incarnations, as the brahmanic legend relates, with
      which the orthodoxy of the Brahmans intended perhaps to allude to
      the prompt restoration and uninterrupted continuity of the ancient
      vedic tradition."

      GORRESIO.

  559 Like the wife of a Naga or Serpent-God carried off by an eagle. The
      enmity between the King of birds and the serpent is of very frequent
      occurrence. It seems to be a modification of the strife between the
      Vedic Indra and the Ahi, the serpent or drought-fiend; between
      Apollon and the Python, Adam and the Serpent.

  560 He means that he has never ventured to raise his eyes to her arms
      and face, though he has ever been her devoted servant.

  561 The wood in which Skanda or Kartikeva was brought up:

                      "The Warrior-God
      Whose infant steps amid the thickets strayed
      Where the reeds wave over the holy sod."

      See also Book I, Canto XXIX.

  562 "Sugriva's story paints in vivid colours the manners, customs and
      ideas of the wild mountain tribes which inhabited Kishkindhya or the
      southern hills of the Deccan, of the people whom the poem calls
      monkeys, tribes altogether different in origin and civilization from
      the Indo-Sanskrit race." GORRESIO.

  563 A fiend slain by Bali.

  564 Bali's mountain city.

  565 The canopy or royal umbrella, one of the usual Indian regalia.

  566 Whisks made of the hair of the Yak or Bos grunniers, also regal
      insignia.

  567 Righteous because he never transgresses his bounds, and

        "over his great tides
        Fidelity presides."

  568 Himalaya, the Lord of Snow, is the father of Uma the wife of Siva or
      Sankar.

  569 Indra's celestial elephant.

  570 Bali was the son of Indra. See p. 28.

  571 An Asur slain by Indra. See p. 261 Note. He is, like Vritra, a form
      of the demon of drought destroyed by the beneficent God of the
      firmament.

  572 Another name of Indra or Mahendra.

  573 The Bengal recension makes it return in the form of a swan.

  574 Varuna is one of the oldest of the Vedic Gods, corresponding in name
      and partly in character to the {~GREEK CAPITAL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON WITH PSILI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER OMICRON WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} of the Greeks and is often
      regarded as the supreme deity. He upholds heaven and earth,
      possesses extraordinary power and wisdom, sends his messengers
      through both worlds, numbers the very winkings of men's eyes,
      punishes transgressors whom he seizes with his deadly noose, and
      pardons the sins of those who are penitent. In later mythology he
      has become the God of the sea.

  575 Budha, not to be confounded with the great reformer Buddha, is the
      son of Soma or the Moon, and regent of the planet Mercury. Angara is
      the regent of Mars who is called the red or the fiery planet. The
      encounter between Michael and Satan is similarly said to have been
      as if

      "Two planets rushing from aspect malign
      Of fiercest opposition in midsky
      Should combat, and their jarring spheres compound."

      _Paradise Lost._ Book VI.

  576 The Asvins or Heavenly Twins, the Dioskuri or Castor and Pollux of
      the Hindus, have frequently been mentioned. See p. 36, Note.

  577 Called respectively Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, and Dakshina, household,
      sacrificial, and southern.

  578 The store of merit accumulated by a holy or austere life secures
      only a temporary seat in the mansion of bliss. When by the lapse of
      time this store is exhausted, return to earth is unavoidable.

  579 The conflagration which destroys the world at the end of a Yuga or
      age.

  580 Himalaya.

  581 Tara means "star." The poet plays upon the name by comparing her
      beauty to that of the Lord of stars, the Moon.

  582 Suparna, the Well-winged, is another name of Garuda the King of
      Birds. See p. 28, Note.

  583 The God of Death.

  584 The flag-staff erected in honour of the God Indra is lowered when
      the festival is over. Asvini in astronomy is the head of Aries or
      the first of the twenty-eight lunar mansions or asterisms.

  585 Indra the father of Bali.

  586 It is believed that every creature killed by Rama obtained in
      consequence immediate beatitude.

      "And blessed the hand that gave so dear a death."

  587 "Yayati was invited to heaven by Indra, and conveyed on the way
      thither by Matali, Indra's charioteer. He afterwards returned to
      earth where, by his virtuous administration he rendered all his
      subjects exempt from passion and decay." GARRETT'S C. D. OF INDIA.

  588 The ascetic's dress which he wore during his exile.

  589 There is much inconsistency in the passages of the poem in which the
      Vanars are spoken of, which seems to point to two widely different
      legends. The Vanars are generally represented as semi-divine beings
      with preternatural powers, living in houses and eating and drinking
      like men sometimes as here, as monkeys pure and simple, living is
      woods and eating fruit and roots.

  590 For a younger brother to marry before the elder is a gross violation
      of Indian law and duty. The same law applied to daughters with the
      Hebrews: "It must not be so done in our country to give the younger
      before the first-born." GENESIS xix. 26.

  591 "The hedgehog and porcupine, the lizard, the rhinoceros, the
      tortoise, and the rabbit or hare, wise legislators declare lawful
      food among five-toed animals." MANU, v. 18.

        592 "He can not buckle his distempered cause
      Within the belt of rule."

      MACBETH.

  593 The _Ankus_ or iron hook with which an elephant is driven and
      guided.

  594 Hayagriva, Horse-necked, is a form of Vishnu.

  595 "Asvatara is the name of a chief of the Nagas or serpents which
      inhabit the regions under the earth; it is also the name of a
      Gandharva. Asvatari ought to be the wife of one of the two, but I am
      not sure that this conjecture is right. The commentator does not say
      who this Asvatari is, or what tradition or myth is alluded to.
      Vimalabodha reads Asvatari in the nominative case, and explains,
      Asvatari is the sun, and as the sun with his rays brings back the
      moon which has been sunk in the ocean and the infernal regions, so
      will I bring back Sita." GORRESIO.

  596 That is, "Consider what answer you can give to your accusers when
      they charge you with injustice in killing me."

  597 Manu, Book VIII. 318. "But men who have committed offences and have
      received from kings the punishment due to them, go pure to heaven
      and become as clear as those who have done well."

  598 Mandhata was one of the earlier descendants of Ikshvaku. His name is
      mentioned in Rama's genealogy, p. 81.

  599 I cannot understand how Valmiki could put such an excuse as this
      into Rama's mouth. Rama with all solemn ceremony, has made a league
      of alliance with Bali's younger brother whom he regards as a dear
      friend and almost as an equal, and now he winds up his reasons for
      killing Bali by coolly saying: "Besides you are only a monkey, you
      know, after all, and as such I have every right to kill you how,
      when, and where I like."

  600 A name of Garuda the king of birds, the great enemy of the Serpents.

  601 Sugriva's wife.

  602 "Our deeds still follow with us from afar. And what we have been
      makes us what we are."

  603 Sugriva and Angad.

  604 Angad himself, being too young to govern, would be Yuvaraja or
      heir-apparent.

  605 Sushena was the son of Varuna the God of the sea.

  606 A demon with the tail of a dragon, that causes eclipses by
      endeavouring to swallow the sun and moon.

  607 The Lord of Stars is the Moon.

  608 Or the passage may be interpreted: "Be neither too obsequious or
      affectionate, nor wanting in due respect or love."

  609 Sacrifices and all religious rites begin and end with ablution, and
      the wife of the officiating Brahman takes an important part in the
      performance of the holy ceremonies.

  610 Visvarupa, a son of Twashtri or Visvakarma the heavenly architect,
      was a three-headed monster slain by Indra.

  611 The Vanar chief, not to be confounded with Tara.

  612 Sravan: July-August. But the rains begin a month earlier, and what
      follows must not be taken literally. The text has _purvo' yam
      varshiko masah Sravanah salilagamdh_. The Bengal recension has the
      same, and Gorresio translates: "Equesto ilmese Sravana
      (luglio-agosto) primo della stagione piovosa, in cui dilagano le
      acque."

  613 Kartik: October-November.

  614 "Indras, as the nocturnal sun, hides himself, transformed, in the
      starry heavens: the stars are his eyes. The hundred-eyed or
      all-seeing (panoptes) Argos placed as a spy over the actions of the
      cow beloved by Zeus, in the Hellenic equivalent of this form of
      Indras." DE GUBERNATIS, _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. I, p. 418.

  615 Baudhayana and others.

  616 Sugriva appears to have been consecrated with all the ceremonies
      that attended the _Abhisheka_ or coronation of an Indian prince of
      the Aryan race. Compare the preparations made for Rama's
      consecration, Book II, Canto III. Thus Homer frequently introduces
      into Troy the rites of Hellenic worship.

  617 Vitex Negundo.

  618 Malyavat: "The name of this mountain appears to me to be erroneous,
      and I think that instead of Malyavat should be read Malayavat,
      Malaya is a group of mountains situated exactly in that southern
      part of India where Rama now was, while Malyavat is placed to the
      north east." GORRESIO.

  619 Mantles of the skin of the black antelope were the prescribed dress
      of ascetics and religious students.

  620 The sacred cord worn as the badge of religious initiation by men of
      the three twice-born castes.

  621 The hum with which students conduct their tasks.

  622 I omit here a long general description of the rainy season which is
      not found in the Bengal recension and appears to have been
      interpolated by a far inferior and much later hand than Valmiki's.
      It is composed in a metre different from that of the rest of the
      Canto, and contains figures of poetical rhetoric and common-places
      which are the delight of more recent poets.

  623 Praushthapada or Bhadra, the modern Bhadon, corresponds to half of
      August and half of September.

  624 The Saman or Sama-veda, the third of the four Vedas, is really
      merely a reproduction of parts of the Rig-veda, transposed and
      scattered about piece-meal, only 78 verses in the whole being, it is
      said, untraceable to the present recension of the Rig-veda.

  625 Ashadha is the month corresponding to parts of June and July.

  626 Bharat, who was regent during Rama's absence.

  627 Or with Gorresio, following the gloss of another commentary: "Has
      completed every holy rite and accumulated stores of merit."

  628 The river on which Ayodhya was built.

  629 I omit a _sloka_ or four lines on gratitude and ingratitude repeated
      word for word from the last Canto.

  630 The Indian crane; a magnificent bird easily domesticated.

  631 The troops who guard the frontiers on the north, south, east and
      west.

  632 The Chataka, Cuculus, Melanoleucus, is supposed to drink nothing but
      the water for the clouds.

  633 The time for warlike expeditions began when the rains had ceased.

  634 The rainbow.

  635 Indra's associates in arms, and musicians of his heaven.

  636 Maireya, a spirituous liquor from the blossoms of the Lythrum
      fruticosum, with sugar, &c.

  637 Their names are as follows: Angad, Mainda, Dwida, Gavaya, Gavaksha,
      Gaja, Sarabha, Vidyunmali, Sampati, Suryaksa, Hanuman, Virabahu,
      Subahu, Nala, Kumuda, Sushena, Tara, Jambuvatu, Dadhivakra, Nila,
      Supatala, and Sunetra.

  638 The Kalpadruma or Wishing-tree is one of the trees of Svarga or
      Indra's Paradise: it has the power of granting all desires.

  639 The meaning is that if a man promises to give a horse and then
      breaks his word he commits a sin as great as if he had killed a
      hundred horses.

  640 The story is told in Book I, Canto LXIII, but the charmer there is
      called Menaka.

  641 Rohini is the name of the ninth Nakshatra or lunar asterism
      personified as a daughter of Daksha, and the favourite wife of the
      Moon. Aldebaran is the principal star in the constellation.

  642 Valmiki and succeeding poets make the second vowel in this name long
      or short at their pleasure.

  643 Some of the mountains here mentioned are fabulous and others it is
      impossible to identify. Sugriva means to include all the mountains
      of India from Kailas the residence of the God Kuvera, regarded as
      one of the loftiest peaks of the Himalayas, to Mahendra in the
      extreme south, from the mountain in the east where the sun is said
      to rise to Astachal or the western mountain where he sets. The
      commentators give little assistance: that Mahasaila, &c. are certain
      mountains is about all the information they give.

  644 One of the celestial elephants of the Gods who protect the four
      quarters and intermediate points of the compass.

  645 Vayu or the Wind was the father of Hanuman.

  646 The path or station of Vishnu is the space between the seven Rishis
      or Ursa Major, and Dhruva or the polar star.

  647 One of the seven seas which surround the earth in concentric
      circles.

  648 The title of Mahesvar or Mighty Lord is sometimes given to Indra,
      but more generally to Siva whom it here denotes.

  649 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  650 The numbers are unmanageable in English verse. The poet speaks of
      hundreds of _arbudas_; and an _arbuda_ is a hundred millions.

  651 Anuhlada or Anuhrada is one of the four sons of the mighty
      Hiranyakasipu, an Asur or a Daitya son of Kasyapa and Diti and
      killed by Vishnu in his incarnation of the Man-Lion _Narasinha_.
      According to the Bhagavata Purana the Daitya or Asur Hiranyakasipu
      and Hiranyaksha his brother, both killed by Vishnu, were born again
      as Ravan and Kumbhakarna his brother.

  652 Puloma, a demon, was the father-in-law of Indra who destroyed him in
      order to avert an imprecation. Paulomi is a patronymic denoting
      Sachi the daughter of Puloma.

  653 "Observe the variety of colours which the poem attributes to all
      these inhabitants of the different mountainous regions, some white,
      others yellow, &c. Such different colours were perhaps peculiar and
      distinctive characteristics of those various races." GORRESSIO.

  654 Sushen.

  655 Tara.

  656 Kesari was the husband of Hanuman's mother, and is here called his
      father.

  657 "I here unite under one heading two animals of very diverse nature
      and race, but which from some gross resemblances, probably helped by
      an equivoque in the language, are closely affiliated in the Hindoo
      myth {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} a reddish colour of the skin, want of symmetry and
      ungainliness of form, strength in hugging with the fore paws or
      arms, the faculty of climbing, shortness of tail(?), sensuality,
      capacity of instruction in dancing and in music, are all
      characteristics which more or less distinguish and meet in bears as
      well as in monkeys. In the _Ramayanam_, the wise Jamnavant, the
      Odysseus of the expedition of Lanka, is called now king of the bears
      (rikshaparthivah), now great monkey (_Mahakapih_)." DE GUBERNATIS:
      _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. II. p. 97.

  658 Gandhamadana, Angad, Tara, Indrajanu, Rambha, Durmukha, Hanuman,
      Nala, Da mukha, Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni.

  659 Daityas and Danavas are fiends and enemies of the Gods, like the
      Titans of Greek mythology.

  660 I reduce the unwieldy numbers of the original to more modest
      figures.

  661 Sarayu now Sarju is the river on which Ayodhya was built.

  662 Kausiki is a river which flows through Behar, commonly called Kosi.

  663 Bhagirath's daughter is Ganga or the Ganges. The legend is told at
      length in Book I Canto XLIV. _The Descent of Ganga_.

  664 A mountain not identified.

  665 The Jumna. The river is personified as the twin sister of Yama, and
      hence regarded as the daughter of the Sun.

  666 The Sarasvati (corruptly called Sursooty, is supposed to join the
      Ganges and Jumna at Prayag or Allahabad. It rises in the mountains
      bounding the north-east part of the province of Delhi, and running
      in a south-westerly direction becomes lost in the sands of the great
      desert.

  667 The Sindhu is the Indus, the Sanskrit _s_ becoming _h_ in Persian
      and being in this instance dropped by the Greeks.

  668 The Sone which rises in the district of Nagpore and falls into the
      Ganges above Patna.

  669 Mahi is a river rising in Malwa and falling into the gulf of Cambay
      after a westerly course of 280 miles.

  670 There is nothing to show what parts of the country the poet intended
      to denote as silk-producing and silver-producing.

  671 Yavadwipa means the island of Yava, wherever that may be.

  672 Sisir is said to be a mountain ridge projecting from the base of
      Meru on the south. Wilson's _Vishnu Purana_, ed. Hall, Vol. II. p.
      117.

  673 This appears to be some mythical stream and not the well-known Sone.
      The name means red-coloured.

  674 A fabulous thorny rod of the cotton tree used for torturing the
      wicked in hell. The tree gives its name, Salmali, to one of the
      seven Dwipas, or great divisions of the known continent: and also to
      a hell where the wicked are tormented with the pickles of the tree.

  675 The king of the feathered creation.

  676 Visvakarma, the Mulciber of the Indian heaven.

  677 "The terrific fiends named Mandehas attempt to devour the sun: for
      Brahma denounced this curse upon them, that without the power to
      perish they should die every day (and revive by night) and therefore
      a fierce contest occurs (daily) between them and the sun." WILSON'S
      Vishnu Purana. Vol. II. p. 250.

  678 Said in the _Vishnu Purana_ to be a ridge projecting from the base
      of Meru to the north.

  679 Kinnars are centaurs reversed, beings with equine head and human
      bodies.

  680 Yakshas are demi-gods attendant on Kuvera the God of wealth.

  681 Aurva was one of the descendants of Bhrigu. From his wrath proceeded
      a flame that threatened to destroy the world, had not Aurva cast it
      into the ocean where it remained concealed, and having the face of a
      horse. The legend is told in the _Mahabharat_. I. 6802.

  682 The word Jatarupa means gold.

  683 The celebrated mythological serpent king Sesha, called also Ananta
      or the infinite, represented as bearing the earth on one of his
      thousand heads.

  684 Jambudwipa is in the centre of the seven great _dwipas_ or
      continents into which the world is divided, and in the centre of
      Jambudwipa is the golden mountain Meru 84,000 yojans high, and
      crowned by the great city of Brahma. See WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_,
      Vol. II. p. 110.

  685 Vaikhanases are a race of hermit saints said to have sprung from the
      nails of Prajapati.

  686 "The wife of Kratu, Samnati, brought forth the sixty thousand
      Valakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger than a joint of the thumb,
      chaste, pious, resplendent as the rays of the Sun." WILSON'S _Vishnu
      Purana_.

  687 The continent in which Sudarsan or Meru stands, _i.e._ Jambudwip.

  688 The names of some historical peoples which occur in this Canto and
      in the Cantos describing the south and north will be found in the
      ADDITIONAL NOTES. They are bare lists, not susceptible of a metrical
      version.

  689 Suhotra, Sarari, Saragulma, Gaya, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena,
      Gandhamadana, Ulkamukha, and Ananga.

  690 The modern Nerbudda.

  691 Krishnaveni is mentioned in the _Vishnu Purana_ as "the deep
      Krishnaveni" but there appears to be no clue to its identification.

  692 The modern Godavery.

  693 The Mekhalas or Mekalas according to the Paranas live in the Vindhya
      hills, but here they appear among the peoples of the south.

  694 Utkal is still the native name of Orissa.

  695 The land of the people of the "ten forts." Professor Hall in a note
      on WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 160 says: "The oral
      traditions of the vicinity to this day assign the name of Dasarna to
      a region lying to the east of the District of Chundeyree."

  696 Avanti is one of the ancient names of the celebrated Ujjayin or
      Oujein in Central India.

  697 Not identified.

  698 Ayomukh means iron faced. The mountain is not identified.

  699 The Kaveri or modern Cauvery is well known and has always borne the
      same appellation, being the Chaberis of Ptolemy.

  700 One of the seven principal mountain chains: the southern portion of
      the Western Ghats.

  701 Agastya is the great sage who has already frequently appeared as
      Rama's friend and benefactor.

  702 Tamraparni is a river rising in Malaya.

  703 The Pandyas are a people of the Deccan.

  704 Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa and the
      northern Sircars to Gondwana, part of which near Ganjam is still
      called Mahendra Malay or hills of Mahendra.

  705 Lanka, Sinhaladvipa, Sarandib, or Ceylon.

  706 The Flowery Hill of course is mythical.

  707 The whole of the geography south of Lanka is of course mythical.
      Suryavan means Sunny.

  708 Vaidyut means connected with lightning.

  709 Agastya is here placed far to the south of Lanka. Earlier in this
      Canto he was said to dwell on Malaya.

  710 Bhogavati has been frequently mentioned: it is the capital of the
      serpent Gods or demons, and usually represented as being in the
      regions under the earth.

  711 Vasuki is according to some accounts the king of the Nagas or
      serpent Gods.

  712 Sailusha, Gramini, Siksha, Suka, Babhru.

  713 The distant south beyond the confines of the earth is the home of
      departed spirits and the city of Yama the God of Death.

  714 Surashtra, the "good country," is the modern Sura

  715 A country north-west of Afghanistan, Baikh.

  716 The Moon-mountain here is mythical.

  717 Sindhu is the Indus.

  718 Pariyatra, or as more usually written Paripatra, is the central or
      western portion of the Vindhya chain which skirts the province of
      Malwa.

  719 Vajra means both diamond and thunderbolt, the two substances being
      supposed to be identical.

  720 Chakravan means the discus-bearer.

  721 The discus is the favourite weapon of Vishnu.

  722 The Indian Hephaistos or Vulcan.

  723 Panchajan was a demon who lived in the sea in the form of a conch
      shell. WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, V. 21.

  724 Hayagriva, Horse-necked, is the name of a Daitya who at the
      dissolution of the universe caused by Brahma's sleep, seized and
      carried off the Vedas. Vishnu slew him and recovered the sacred
      treasures.

  725 Meru stands in the centre of Jambudwipa and consequently of the
      earth. "The sun travels round the world, keeping Meru always on his
      right. To the spectator who fronts him, therefore, as he rises Meru
      must be always on the north; and as the sun's rays do not penetrate
      beyond the centre of the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the
      north of it must be in darkness, whilst those on the south of it
      must be in light: north and south being relative, not absolute,
      terms, depending on the position of the spectator with regard to the
      Sun and Meru." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 243. Note.

  726 The Visvadevas are a class of deities to whom sacrifices should be
      daily offered, as part of the ordinary worship of the householder.
      According to the _Vayu Purana_, this is a privilege conferred on
      them by Brahma and the Pitris as a reward for religious austerities
      practised by them upon Himalaya.

  727 The eight Vasus were originally personifications like other Vedic
      deities, of natural phenomena, such as Fire, Wind, &c. Their
      appellations are variously given by different authorities.

  728 The Maruts or Storm-Gods, frequently addressed and worshipped as the
      attendants and allies of Indra.

  729 The mountain behind which the sun sets.

  730 One of the oldest and mightiest of the Vedic deities; in later
      mythology regarded as the God of the sea.

  731 The knotted noose with which he seizes and punishes transgressors.

  732 Savarni is a Manu, offspring of the Sun by Chhaya.

  733 The poet has not said who the sons of Yama are.

  734 The Lodhra or Lodh (Symplocos Racemosa) and the Devadaru or Deodar
      are well known trees.

  735 The hills mentioned are not identifiable. Soma means the Moon. Kala,
      black; Sudarasan, fair to see; and Devasakha friend of the Gods.

  736 The God of Wealth.

  737 The nymphs of Paradise.

  738 Kuvera the son of Visravas.

  739 A class of demigods who, like the Yakshas, are the attendants of
      Kuvera, and the guardians of his treasures.

  740 Situated in the eastern part of the Himalaya chain, on the north of
      Assam. The mountain was torn asunder and the pass formed by the
      War-God Kartikeya and Parasurama.

  741 "The Uttara Kurus, it should be remarked, may have been a real
      people, as they are mentioned in the Aitareya Brahmana, VIII. 14.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~}
      Wherefore the several nations who dwell in this northern quarter,
      beyond the Himavat, the Uttara Kurus and the Uttara Madras are
      consecrated to glorious dominion, and people term them the glorious.
      In another passage of the same work, however, the Uttara Kurus are
      treated as belonging to the domain of mythology." MUIR'S _Sanskrit
      Texts_. Vol. I. p. 494. See ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  742 The Moon-mountain.

  743 The Rudras are the same as the storm winds, more usually called
      Maruts, and are often associated with Indra. In the later mythology
      the Rudras are regarded as inferior manifestations of Siva, and most
      of their names are also names of Siva.

  744 Canto IX.

  745 Udayagiri or the hill from which the sun rises.

  746 Asta is the mountain behind which the sun sets.

  747 Himalaya, the Hills of Snow.

  748 Canto XI.

  749 Hanuman was the leader of the army of the south which was under the
      nominal command of Angad the heir apparent.

  750 The Bengal recension--Gorresio's edition--calls this Asur or demon the
      son of Maricha.

  751 The skin of the black antelope was the ascetic's proper garb.

  752 Usanas is the name of a sage mentioned in the Vedas. In the epic
      poems he is identified with Sukra, the regent of the planet Venus,
      and described as the preceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and
      possessor of vast knowledge.

  753 Hema is one of the nymphs of Paradise.

  754 Merusavarni is a general name for the last four of the fourteen
      Manus.

  755 Svayamprabha, the "self-luminous," is according to DE GUBERNATIS the
      moon: "In the _Svayamprabha_ too, we meet with the moon as a good
      fairy who, from the golden palace which she reserves for her friend
      Hema (the golden one:) is during a month the guide, in the vast
      cavern of Hanumant and his companions, who have lost their way in
      the search of the dawn Sita." This is is not quite accurate: Hanuman
      and his companions wander for a month in the cavern without a guide,
      and then Svayamprabha leads them out.

  756 Purandara, the destroyer of cities; the cities being the clouds
      which the God of the firmament bursts open with his thunderbolts, to
      release the waters imprisoned in these fortresses of the demons of
      drought.

  757 Perceived that Angad had secured, through the love of the Vanars,
      the reversion of Sugriva's kingdom; or, as another commentator
      explains it, perceived that Angad had obtained a new kingdom in the
      enchanted cave which the Vanars, through love of him, would consent
      to occupy.

  758 Vrihaspati, Lord of Speech, the Preceptor of the Gods.

  759 Sukra is the regent of the planet Venus, and the preceptor of the
      Daityas.

  760 The name of various kinds of grass used at sacrificial ceremonies,
      especially, of the Kusa grass, Poa cynosuroides, which was used to
      strew the ground in preparing for a sacrifice, the officiating
      Brahmans being purified by sitting on it.

  761 Sampati is the eldest son of the celebrated Garuda the king of
      birds.

  762 Vivasvat or the Sun is the father of Yama the God of Death.

  763 Book III, Canto LI.

  764 Dasaratha's rash oath and fatal promise to his wife Kaikeyi.

  765 Vritra, "the coverer, hider, obstructer (of rain)" is the name of
      the Vedic personification of an imaginary malignant influence or
      demon of darkness and drought supposed to take possession of the
      clouds, causing them to obstruct the clearness of the sky and keep
      back the waters. Indra is represented as battling with this evil
      influence, and the pent-up clouds being practically represented as
      mountains or castles are shattered by his thunderbolt and made to
      open their receptacles.

  766 Frequent mention has been made of the three steps of Vishnu
      typifying the rising, culmination, and setting of the sun.

  767 For the _Churning of the Sea_, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  768 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

  769 The architect of the gods.

  770 Garuda, son of Vinata, the sovereign of the birds.

  771 "The well winged one," Garuda.

  772 The god of the sea.

  773 Mahendra is chain of mountains generally identified with part of the
      Ghats of the Peninsula.

  774 Matarisva is identified with Vayu, the wind.

  775 Of course not equal to the whole earth, says the Commentator, but
      equal to Janasthan.

  776 This appears to be the Indian form of the stories of Phaethon and
      Daedalus and Icarus.

  777 According to the promise, given him by Brahma. See Book I, Canto
      XIV.

  778 In the Bengal recension the fourth Book ends here, the remaining
      Cantos being placed in the fifth.

  779 Each chief comes forward and says how far he can leap. Gaja says he
      can leap ten yojans. Gavaksha can leap twenty. Gavaya thirty, and so
      on up to ninety.

  780 Prahlada, the son of Hiranyakasipu, was a pious Datya remarkable for
      his devotion to Vishnu, and was on this account persecuted by his
      father.

  781 The Bengal recension calls him Arishtanemi's brother. "The
      commentator says 'Arishtanemi is Aruna.' Aruna the charioteer of the
      sun is the son of Kasyapa and Vinata and by consequence brother of
      Garuda, called Vainateya from Vinata, his mother." GORRESSIO.

  782 A nymph of Paradise.

  783 Hanu or Hanu means jaw. Hanuman or Hanuman means properly one with a
      large jaw.

  784 Vishnu, the God of the Three Steps.

  785 Narayan, "He who moved upon the waters," is Vishnu. The allusion is
      to the famous three steps of that God.

  786 The Milky Way.

  787 This Book is called Sundar or the Beatiful. To a European taste it
      is the most intolerably tedious of the whole poem, abounding in
      repetition, overloaded description, and long and useless speeches
      which impede the action of the poem. Manifest interpolations of
      whole Cantos also occur. I have omitted none of the action of the
      Book, but have occasionally omitted long passages of common-place
      description, lamentation, and long stories which have been again and
      again repeated.

  788 Brahma the Self-Existent.

  789 Mainaka was the son of Himalaya and Mena or Menaka.

  790 Thus Milton makes the hills of heaven self-moving at command:

      "At his command the uprooted hills retired
      Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
      Obsequious"

  791 The spirit of the mountain is separable from the mountain. Himalaya
      has also been represented as standing in human form on one of his
      own peaks.

  792 Sagar or the Sea is said to have derived its name from Sagar. The
      story is fully told in Book I, Cantos XLII, XLIII, and XLIV.

  793 Kritu is the first of the four ages of the world, the golden age,
      also called Satya.

_  794 Parvata_ means a mountain and in the Vedas a cloud. Hence in later
      mythology the mountains have taken the place of the clouds as the
      objects of the attacks of Indra the Sun-God. The feathered king is
      Garuda.

  795 "The children of Surasa were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents,
      traversing the sky." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 73.

  796 She means, says the Commentator, pursue thy journey if thou can.

  797 If Milton's spirits are allowed the power of infinite self-extension
      and compression the same must be conceded to Valmiki's supernatural
      beings. Given the power as in Milton the result in Valmiki is
      perfectly consistent.

  798 "Daksha is the son of Brahma and one of the Prajapatis or divine
      progenitors. He had sixty daughters, twenty-seven of whom married to
      Kasyapa produced, according to one of the Indian cosmogonies, all
      mundane beings. Does the epithet, Descendant of Daksha, given to
      Surasa, mean that she is one of those daughters? I think not. This
      epithet is perhaps an appellation common to all created beings as
      having sprung from Daksha." GORRESSIO.

  799 Sinhika is the mother of Rahu the dragon's head or ascending node,
      the chief agent in eclipses.

  800 According to De Gubernatis, the author of the very learned,
      ingenious, and interesting though too fanciful _Zoological
      Mythology_. Hanuman here represents the sun entering into and
      escaping from a cloud. The biblical Jonah, according to him,
      typifies the same phenomenon. Sa'di, speaking of sunset, says _Yunas
      andar-i-dihan-imahi shud_: Jonas was within the fish's mouth. See
      ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  801 The Buchanania Latifolia.

  802 The Bauhinia Variegata.

  803 Through the power that Ravan's stern mortifications had won for him
      his trees bore flowers and fruit simultaneously.

  804 Visvakarma is the architect of the Gods.

  805 So in Paradise Lost Satan when he has stealthily entered the garden
      of Eden assumes the form of a cormorant.

  806 Priests who fought only with the weapons of religion, the sacred
      grass used like the verbena of the Romans at sacred rites and the
      consecrated fire to consume the offering of ghee.

  807 One of the Rakshas lords.

  808 The brother Ravan.

  809 Indra's elephant.

  810 Ravan's palace appears to have occupied the whole extent of ground,
      and to have contained within its outer walls the mansions of all the
      great Rakshas chiefs. Ravan's own dwelling seems to have been
      situated within the enchanted chariot Pushpak: but the description
      is involved and confused, and it is difficult to say whether the
      chariot was inside the palace or the palace inside the chariot.

  811 Pushpak from _pushpa_ a flower. The car has been mentioned before in
      Ravan's expedition to carry off Sita, Book III, Canto XXXV.

  812 Lakshmi is the wife of Vishnu and the Goddess of Beauty and
      Felicity. She rose, like Aphrodite, from the foam of the sea. For an
      account of her birth and beauty, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  813 Visvakarma is the architect of the Gods, the Hephaestos or Mulciber
      of the Indian heaven.

  814 Ravan in the resistless power which his long austerities had endowed
      him with, had conquered his brother Kuvera the God of Gold and taken
      from him his greatest treasure this enchanted car.

  815 Like Milton's heavenly car, "Itself instinct with spirit."

  816 Women, says Valmiki. But the Commentator says that automatic figures
      only are meant. Women would have seen Hanuman and given the alarm.

  817 Ravan had fought against Indra and the Gods, and his body was still
      scarred by the wounds inflicted by the tusks of Indra's elephant and
      by the fiery bolts of the Thunderer.

  818 The Vasus are a class of eight deities, originally personifications
      of natural phenomena.

  819 The Maruts are the winds or Storm-Gods.

  820 The Adityas originally seven deities of the heavenly sphere of whom
      Varuna is the chief. The name Aditya was afterwards given to any
      God, specially to Surya the Sun.

  821 The Asvins are the Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the
      Hindus.

  822 The poet forgets that Hanuman has reduced himself to the size of a
      cat.

  823 Sita "not of woman born," was found by King Janak as he was turning
      up the ground in preparation for a sacrifice. See Book II, Canto
      CXVIII.

  824 The six _Angas_ or subordinate branches of the Vedas are 1.
      _Siksha_, the science of proper articulation and pronunciation: 2.
      _Chhandas_, metre: 3. _Vyakarana_, linguistic analysis or grammar:
      4. _Nirukta_, explanation of difficult Vedic words: 5. _Jyotishtom_,
      Astronomy, or rather the Vedic Calendar: 6. _Kalpa_, ceremonial.

  825 There appears to be some confusion of time here. It was already
      morning when Hanuman entered the grove, and the torches would be
      needless.

  826 Ravan is one of those beings who can "climb them as they will," and
      can of course assume the loveliest form to please human eyes as well
      as the terrific shape that suits the king of the Rakshases.

  827 White and lovely as the Arant or nectar recovered from the depths of
      the Milky Sea when churned by the assembled Gods. See Book I, Canto
      XLV.

  828 Ravan in his magic car carrying off the most beautiful women reminds
      us of the magician in _Orlando Furioso_, possesor of the flying
      horse.

      "Volando talor s'alza ne le stelle,
      E poi quasi talor la terra rade;
      E ne porta con lui tutte le belle
      Donne che trova per quelle contrade."

  829 Indian women twisted their long hair in a single braid as a sign of
      mourning for their absent husbands.

  830 Janak, king of Mithila, was Sita's father.

  831 Hiranyakasipu was a king of the Daityas celebrated for his
      blasphemous impieties. When his pious son Prahlada praised Vishnu
      the Daitya tried to kill him, when the God appeared in the
      incarnation of the man-lion and tore the tyrant to pieces.

  832 Do unto others as thou wouldst they should do unto thee, is a
      precept frequently occurring in the old Indian poems. This charity
      is to embrace not human beings only, but bird and beast as well: "He
      prayeth best who loveth best all things both great and small."

  833 It was the custom of Indian warriors to mark their arrows with their
      ciphers or names, and it seems to have been regarded as a point of
      honour to give an enemy the satisfaction of knowing who had shot at
      him. This passage however contains, if my memory serves me well, the
      first mention in the poem of this practice, and as arrows have been
      so frequently mentioned and described with almost every conceivable
      epithet, its occurrence here seems suspicious. No mention of, or
      allusion to writing has hitherto occurred in the poem.

  834 This threat in the same words occurs in Book III, Canto LVI.

  835 Ravan carried off and kept in his palace not only earthly princesses
      but the daughters of Gods and Gandharvas.

  836 The wife of Indra.

  837 These four lines have occurred before. Book III, Canto LVI.

  838 Prajapatis are the ten lords of created beings first created by
      Brahma; somewhat like the Demiurgi of the Gnostics.

  839 "This is the number of the Vedic divinities mentioned in the
      Rig-veda. In Ashtaka I. Sukta XXXIV, the Rishi Hiranyastupa invoking
      the Asvins says: A Nasatya tribhirekadasairiha devebniryatam: 'O
      Nasatyas (Asvins) come hither with the thrice eleven Gods.' And in
      Sukta XLV, the Rishi Praskanva addressing his hymn to Agni (ignis,
      fire), thus invokes him: 'Lord of the red steeds, propitiated by our
      prayers lead hither the thirty-three Gods.' This number must
      certainly have been the actual number in the early days of the Vedic
      religion: although it appears probable enough that the thirty-three
      Vedic divinities could not then be found co-ordinated in so
      systematic a way as they were arranged more recently by the authors
      of the Upanishads. In the later ages of Bramanism the number went on
      increasing without measure by successive mythical and religious
      creations which peopled the Indian Olympus with abstract beings of
      every kind. But through lasting veneration of the word of the Veda
      the custom regained of giving the name of 'the thirty-three Gods' to
      the immense phalanx of the multiplied deities." GORRESIO.

  840 Serpent-Gods who dwell in the regions under the earth.

  841 In the mythology of the epics the Gandharvas are the heavenly
      singers or musicians who form the orchestra at the banquets of the
      Gods, and they belong to the heaven of India in whose battles they
      share.

  842 The mother of Rama.

  843 The mother of Lakshman.

  844 In the south is the region of Yama the God of Death, the place of
      departed spirits.

  845 Kumbhakarna was one of Ravan's brothers.

  846 The guards are still in the grove, but they are asleep; and Sita has
      crept to a tree at some distance from them.

  847 "As the reason assigned in these passages for not addressing Sita in
      Sanskrit such as a Brahman would use is not that she would not
      understand it, but that it would alarm her and be unsuitable to the
      speaker, we must take them as indicating that Sanskrit, if not
      spoken by women of the upper classes at the time when the Ramayana
      was written (whenever that may have been), was at least understood
      by them, and was commonly spoken by men of the priestly class, and
      other educated persons. By the Sanskrit proper to an [ordinary] man,
      alluded to in the second passage, may perhaps be understood not a
      language in which words different from Sanskrit were used, but the
      employment of formal and elaborate diction." MUIR'S _Sanskrit
      Texts_, Part II. p. 166.

  848 Svayambhu, the Self-existent, Brahma.

  849 Vrihaspati or Vachaspati, the Lord of Speech and preceptor of the
      Gods.

  850 The Asurs were the fierce enemies of the Gods.

  851 The Rudras are manifestations of Siva.

  852 The Maruts or Storm Gods.

  853 Rohini is an asterism personified as the daughter of Daksha and the
      favourite wife of the Moon. The chief star in the constellation is
      Aldebaran.

  854 Arundhati was the wife of the great sage Vasishtha, and regarded as
      the pattern of conjugal excellence. She was raised to the heavens as
      one of the Pleiades.

  855 The Gods do not shed tears; nor do they touch the ground when they
      walk or stand. Similarly Milton's angels marched above the ground
      and "the passive air upbore their nimble tread." Virgil's "vera
      incessu patuit dea" may refer to the same belief.

  856 That a friend of Rama would praise him as he should be praised, and
      that if the stranger were Ravan in disguise he would avoid the
      subject.

  857 Kuvera the God of Gold.

  858 Sita of course knows nothing of what has happened to Rama since the
      time when she was carried away by Ravan. The poet therefore thinks
      it necessary to repeat the whole story of the meeting between Rama
      and Sugriva, the defeat of Bali, and subsequent events. I give the
      briefest possible outline of the story.

  859 DE GUBERNATIS thinks that this ring which the Sun Rama sends to the
      Dawn Sita is a symbol of the sun's disc.

  860 Sachi is the loved and lovely wife of Indra, and she is taken as the
      type of a woman protected by a jealous and all-powerful husband.

  861 The mountain near Kishkindha.

  862 Airavat is the mighty elephant on which Indra delights to ride.

  863 Vibhishan is the wicked Ravan's good brother.

  864 Her name is Kala, or in the Bengal recension Nanda.

  865 One of Ravan's chief councillors.

  866 Hanuman when he entered the city had in order to escape observation
      condensed himself to the size of a cat.

  867 The brook Mandakini, not far from Chitrakuta where Rama sojourned
      for a time.

  868 The poet here changes from the second person to the third.

  869 The whole long story is repeated with some slight variations and
      additions from Book II, Canto XCVI. I give here only the outline.

  870 The expedients to vanquish an enemy or to make him come to terms are
      said to be four: conciliation, gifts, disunion, and force or
      punishment. Hanuman considers it useless to employ the first three
      and resolves to punish Ravan by destroying his pleasure-grounds.

  871 Kinkar means the special servant of a sovereign, who receives his
      orders immediately from his master. The Bengal recension gives these
      Rakshases an epithet which the Commentator explains "as generated in
      the mind of Brahma."

  872 Rama _de jure_ King of Kosal of which Ayodhya was the capital.

_  873 Chaityaprasada_ is explained by the Commentator as the place where
      the Gods of the Rakshases were kept. Gorresio translates it by "un
      grande edificio."

  874 The bow of Indra is the rainbow.

  875 We were told a few lines before that the chariot of Jambumali was
      drawn by asses. Here horses are spoken of. The Commentator notices
      the discrepancy and says that by horses asses are meant.

  876 Armed with the bow of Indra, the rainbow.

  877 Ravan's son.

  878 Conqueror of Indra, another of Ravan's sons.

  879 The _sloka_ which follows is probably an interpolation, as it is
      inconsistent with the questioning in Canto L.:

      He looked on Ravan in his pride,
      And boldly to the monarch cried:
      "I came an envoy to this place
      From him who rules the Vanar race."

  880 The ten heads of Ravan have provoked much ridicule from European
      critics. It should be remembered that Spenser tells us of "two
      brethren giants, the one of which had two heads, the other three;"
      and Milton speaks of the "four-fold visaged Four," the four Cherubic
      shapes each of whom had four faces.

  881 Durdhar, or as the Bengal recension reads Mahodara, Prahasta,
      Mahaparsva, and Nikumbha.

  882 The chief attendant of Siva.

  883 Bali, not to be confounded with Bali the Vanar, was a celebrated
      Daitya or demon who had usurped the empire of the three worlds, and
      who was deprived of two thirds of his dominions by Vishnu in the
      Dwarf-incarnation.

  884 When Hanuman was bound with cords, Indrajit released his captive
      from the spell laid upon him by the magic weapon.

  885 "One who murders an ambassador (_raja bhata_) goes to Taptakumbha,
      the hell of heated caldrons." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p.
      217.

  886 The fire which is supposed to burn beneath the sea.

  887 Sita is likened to the fire which is an emblem of purity.

  888 I omit two stanzas which continue the metaphor of the sea or lake of
      air. The moon is its lotus, the sun its wild-duck, the clouds are
      its water-weeds, Mars is its shark and so on. Gorresio remarks:
      "This comparison of a great lake to the sky and of celestial to
      aquatic objects is one of those ideas which the view and qualities
      of natural scenery awake in lively fancies. Imagine one of those
      grand and splendid lakes of India covered with lotus blossoms,
      furrowed by wild-ducks of the most vivid colours, mantled over here
      and there with flowers and water weeds &c. and it will be understood
      how the fancy of the poet could readily compare to the sky radiant
      with celestial azure the blue expanse of the water, to the soft
      light of the moon the inner hue of the lotus, to the splendour of
      the sun the brilliant colours of the wild-fowl, to the stars the
      flowers, to the cloud the weeds that float upon the water &c."

  889 Sunabha is the mountain that rose from the sea when Hanuman passed
      over to Lanka.

  890 Three Cantos of repetition are omitted.

_  891 Madhuvan_ the "honey-wood."

  892 Indra's pleasure-ground or elysium.

  893 Janak was king of Videha or Mithila in Behar.

  894 The original contains two more Cantos which end the Book. Canto
      LXVII begins thus: "Hanuman thus addressed by the great-souled son
      of Raghu related to the son of Raghu all that Sita had said." And
      the two Cantos contain nothing but Hanuman's account of his
      interview with Sita, and the report of his own speeches as well as
      of hers.

  895 The Sixth Book is called in Sanskrit _Yuddha-Kanda_ or _The War_,
      and _Lanka-Kanda_. It is generally known at the present day by the
      latter title.

  896 Vayu is the God of Wind.

  897 Garuda the King of Birds.

  898 Serpent-Gods.

  899 The God of the sea.

  900 Indra's elephant.

  901 Kuvera, God of wealth.

  902 Kuvera's elephant.

  903 The planet Venus, or its regent who is regarded as the son of Bhrigu
      and preceptor of the Daityas.

  904 The seven _rishis_ or saints who form the constellation of the Great
      Bear.

  905 Trisanku was raised to the skies to form a constellation in the
      southern hemisphere. The story in told in Book I, Canto LX.

  906 The sage Visvamitra, who performed for Trisanku the great sacrifice
      which raised him to the heavens.

  907 One of the lunar asterisms containing four or originally two stars
      under the regency of a dual divinity Indragni, Indra and Agni.

  908 The lunar asterism Mula, belonging to the Rakshases.

  909 The Asurs or demons dwell imprisoned in the depths beneath the sea.

  910 The God of Riches, brother and enemy of Ravan and first possessor of
      Pushpak the flying car.

  911 King of the Serpents. Sankha and Takshak are two of the eight
      Serpent Chiefs.

  912 The God of Death, the Pluto of the Hindus.

  913 Literally Indra's conqueror, so called from his victory over that
      God.

  914 Their names are Nikumbha, Rabhasa, Suryasatru, Suptaghna, Yajnakopa,
      Mahaparsva, Mahodara, Agniketu, Rasmiketu, Durdharsha, Indrasatru,
      Prahasta, Virupaksha, Vajradanshtra, Dhumraksha, Durmukha, Mahabala.

  915 Similarly Antenor urges the restoration of Helen:

      "Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,
      And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
      As this advice ye practise or reject,
      So hope success, or dread the dire effect,"

      POPE'S _Homer's Iliad_, Book VII.

  916 The _Agnisala_ or room where the sacrificial fire was kept.

  917 The exudation of a fragrant fluid from the male elephant's temples,
      especially at certain seasons, is frequently spoken of in Sanskrit
      poetry. It is said to deceive and attract the bees, and is regarded
      as a sign of health and masculine vigour.

  918 Consisting of warriors on elephants, warriors in chariots,
      charioteers, and infantry.

  919 Indra, generally represented as surrounded by the Maruts or
      Storm-Gods.

  920 Janasthan, where Rama lived as an ascetic.

  921 Maya, regarded as the paragon of female beauty, was the creation of
      Maya the chief artificer of the Daityas or Danavs.

  922 One of the Nymphs of Indra's heaven.

  923 The Lotus River, a branch of the heavenly Ganga.

_  924 Trilokanatha_, Lord of the Three Worlds, is a title of Indra.

  925 The celestial elephant that carries Indra.

  926 As producers of the _ghi_, clarified butter or sacrificial oil, used
      in fire-offerings.

  927 This desertion to the enemy is somewhat abrupt, and is narrated with
      brevity not usual with Valmiki. In the Bengal recension the
      preceding speakers and speeches differ considerably from those given
      in the text which I follow. Vibhishan is kicked from his seat by
      Ravan, and then, after telling his mother what has happened, he
      flies to Mount Kailasa where he has an interview with Siva, and by
      his advice seeks Rama and the Vanar army.

  928 Vrihaspati the preceptor of the Gods.

  929 In Book II, Canto XXI, Kandu is mentioned by Rama as an example of
      filial obedience. At the command of his father he is said to have
      killed a cow.

  930 A King of the Yakshas, or Kuvera himself, the God of Gold.

  931 The brace protects the left arm from injury from the bow-string, and
      the guard protects the fingers of the right hand.

  932 The story is told in Book I, Cantos XL, XLI, XLII.

  933 Fiends and enemies of the Gods.

  934 The Indus.

  935 Cowherds, sprung from a Brahman and a woman of the medical tribe,
      the modern Ahirs.

  936 Barbarians or outcasts.

_  937 Vrana_ means wound or rent.

  938 Here in the Bengal recension (Gorresio's edition), begins Book VI.

  939 The Goomtee.

  940 The Anglicized Nerbudda.

  941 According to a Pauranik legend Kesari Hanuman's putative father had
      killed an Asur or demon who appeared in the form of an elephant, and
      hence arose the hostility between Vanars and elephants.

  942 Here follows the enumeration of Sugriva's forces which I do not
      attempt to follow. It soon reaches a hundred thousand billions.

  943 I omit the rest of this canto, which is mere repetition. Ravan gives
      in the same words his former answer that the Gods, Gandharvas and
      fiends combined shall not force him to give up Sita. He then orders
      Sardula to tell him the names of the Vanar chieftains whom he has
      seen in Rama's army. These have already been mentioned by Suka and
      Saran.

  944 Lakshmi is the Goddess both of beauty and fortune, and is
      represented with a lotus in her hand.

  945 The poet appears to have forgotten that Suka and Saran were
      dismissed with ignominy in Canto XXIX, and have not been reinstated.

  946 The four who fled with him. Their names are Anala, Panasa, Sampati,
      and Pramati.

  947 The numbers here are comparatively moderate: ten thousand elephants,
      ten thousand chariots, twenty thousand horses and ten million
      giants.

  948 The Kinsuk, also called Palasa, is Butea Frondosa, a tree that bears
      beautiful red crescent shaped blossoms and is deservedly a favorite
      with poets. The Seemal or Salmali is the silk cotton tree which also
      bears red blossoms.

  949 Varuna.

  950 The duty of a king to save the lives of his people and avoid
      bloodshed until milder methods have been tried in vain.

  951 I have omitted several of these single combats, as there is little
      variety in the details and each duel results in the victory of the
      Vanar or his ally.

  952 Yajnasatru, Mahaparsva, Mahodar, Vajradanshtra, Suka, and Saran.

  953 Angad.

  954 A mysterious weapon consisting of serpents transformed to arrows
      which deprived the wounded object of all sense and power of motion.

  955 On each foot, and at the root of each finger.

  956 Varun.

  957 The name of one of the mystical weapons the command over which was
      given by Visvamitra to Rama, as related in Book I.

  958 One of Sita's guard, and her comforter on a former occasion also.

  959 The preceptor of the Gods.

  960 Rama's grandfather.

  961 The Gandharvas are warriors and Minstrels of Indra's heaven.

  962 "It is to be understood," says the commentator, "that this is not
      the Akampan who has already been slain."

  963 Ravan's son, whom Hanuman killed when he first visited Lanka.

  964 Nila was the son of Agni the God of Fire, and possessed, like
      Milton's demons, the power of dilating and condensing his form at
      pleasure.

  965 An ancient king of Ayodhya said by some to have been Prithu's
      father.

  966 The daughter of King Kusadhwaja. She became an ascetic, and being
      insulted by Ravan in the woods where she was performing penance,
      destroyed herself by entering fire, but was born again as Sita to be
      in turn the destruction of him who had insulted her.

  967 Nandisvara was Siva's chief attendant. Ravan had despised and
      laughed at him for appearing in the form of a monkey and the
      irritated Nandisvara cursed him and foretold his destruction by
      monkeys.

  968 Ravan once upheaved and shook Mount Kailasa the favourite dwelling
      place of Siva the consort of Uma, and was cursed in consequence by
      the offended Goddess.

  969 Rambha, who has several times been mentioned in the course of the
      poem, was one of the nymphs of heaven, and had been insulted by
      Ravan.

  970 Punjikasthala was the daughter of Varun. Ravan himself has mentioned
      in this book his insult to her, and the curse pronounced in
      consequence by Brahma.

  971 Pulastya was the son of Brahma and father of Visravas or Paulastya
      the father of Ravan and Kumbhakarna.

  972 I omit a tedious sermon on the danger of rashness and the advantages
      of prudence, sufficient to irritate a less passionate hearer than
      Ravan.

  973 The Bengal recension assigns a very different speech to Kumbhakarna
      and makes him say that Narad the messenger of the Gods had formerly
      told him that Vishnu himself incarnate as Dasaratha's son should
      come to destroy Ravan.

  974 Mahodar, Dwijihva, Sanhrada, and Vitardan.

  975 A name of Vishnu.

  976 There is so much commonplace repetition in these Sallies of the
      Rakshas chieftains that omissions are frequently necessary. The
      usual ill omens attend the sally of Kumbhakarna, and the Canto ends
      with a description of the terrified Vanars' flight which is briefly
      repeated in different words at the beginning of the next Canto.

  977 Kartikeya the God of War, and the hero and incarnation Parasurama
      are said to have cut a passage through the mountain Krauncha, a part
      of the Himalayan range, in the same way as the immense gorge that
      splits the Pyrenees under the towers of Marbore was cloven at one
      blow of Roland's sword Durandal.

  978 Rishabh, Sarabh, Nila, Gavaksha, and Gandhamadan.

  979 Angad. The text calls him the son of the son of him who holds the
      thunderbolt, _i.e._ the grandson of Indra.

  980 Literally, weighing a thousand _bharas_. The _bhara_ is a weight
      equal to 2000 _palas_, the _pala_ is equal to four _karsas_, and the
      _karsa_ to 11375 French grammes or about 176 grains troy. The spear
      seems very light for a warrior of Kumbhakarna's strength and stature
      and the work performed with it.

  981 The custom of throwing parched or roasted grain, with wreaths and
      flowers, on the heads of kings and conquerors when they go forth to
      battle and return is frequently mentioned by Indian poets.

  982 Lakshman.

  983 I have abridged this long Canto by omitting some vain repetitions,
      commonplace epithets and similes and other unimportant matter. There
      are many verses in this Canto which European scholars would rigidly
      exclude as unmistakeably the work of later rhapsodists. Even the
      reverent Commentator whom I follow ventures to remark once or twice:
      _Ayam sloka prak shipta iti bahavah_, "This _sloka_ or verse is in
      the opinion of many interpolated."

  984 Narak was a demon, son of Bhumi or Earth, who haunted the city
      Pragjyotisha.

  985 Sambar was a demon of drought.

  986 Indra.

  987 Devantak (Slayer of Gods) Narantak (Slayer of Men) Atikaya (Huge of
      Frame) and Trisiras (Three Headed) were all sons of Ravan.

  988 The demon of eclipse who seizes the Sun and Moon.

  989 Lakshman.

  990 In such cases as this I am not careful to reproduce the numbers of
      the poet, which in the text which I follow are 670000000; the Bengal
      recension being content with thirty million less.

  991 The discus or quoit, a sharp-edged circular missile is the favourite
      weapon of Vishnu.

  992 To destroy Tripura the triple city in the sky, air and earth, built
      by Maya for a celebrated Asur or demon, or as another commentator
      explains, to destroy Kandarpa or Love.

  993 The Lokapalas are sometimes regarded as deities appointed by Brahma
      at the creation of the word to act as guardians of different orders
      of beings, but more commonly they are identified with the deities
      presiding over the four cardinal and four intermediate points of the
      compass, which, according to Manu V. 96, are 1, Indra, guardian of
      the East; 2, Agni, of the South-east; 3, Yama, of the South; 4,
      Surya, of the South-west; 5, Varuna, of the West; 6, Pavana or Vayu,
      of the North-west; 7, Kuvera, of the North; 8, Soma or Chandra, of
      the North-east.

  994 The chariots of Ravan's present army are said to have been one
      hundred and fifty million in number with three hundred million
      elephants, and twelve hundred million horses and asses. The footmen
      are merely said to have been "unnumbered."

  995 It is not very easy to see the advantage of having arrows headed in
      the way mentioned. Fanciful names for war-engines and weapons
      derived from their resemblance to various animals are not confined
      to India. The "War-wolf" was used by Edward I. at the siege of
      Brechin, the "Cat-house" and the "Sow" were used by Edward III. at
      the siege of Dunbar.

  996 Apparently a peak of the Himalaya chain.

  997 This exploit of Hanuman is related with inordinate prolixity in the
      Bengal recension (Gortesio's text). Among other adventures he
      narrowly escapes being shot by Bharat as he passes over Nandigrama
      near Ayodhya. Hanuman stays Bharat in time, and gives him an account
      of what has befallen Rama and Sita in the forest and in Lanka.

  998 As Garud the king of birds is the mortal enemy of serpents the
      weapon sacred to him is of course best calculated to destroy the
      serpent arrows of Ravan.

  999 The celebrated saint who has on former occasions assisted Rama with
      his gifts and counsel.

 1000 Indra.

 1001 Yama.

 1002 Kartikeya.

 1003 Kubera.

 1004 Varun.

 1005 The Pitris, forefathers or spirits of the dead, are of two kinds,
      either the spirits of the father, grandfathers and
      great-grandfathers of an individual or the progenitors of mankind
      generally, to both of whom obsequial worship is paid and oblations
      of food are presented.

 1006 The Maruts or Storm-Gods.

 1007 The Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the Hindus.

 1008 The Man _par excellence_, the representative man and father of the
      human race regarded also as God.

 1009 The Vasus, a class of deities originally personifications of natural
      phenomena.

 1010 A class of celestial beings who dwell between the earth and the sun.

 1011 The seven horses are supposed to symbolize the seven days of the
      week.

 1012 One for each month in the year.

 1013 The garden of Kuvera, the God of Riches.

 1014 The consort of Indra.

 1015 The Swayamvara, Self-choice or election of a husband by a princess
      or daughter of a Kshatriya at a public assembly of suitors held for
      the purpose. For a description of the ceremony see _Nala and
      Damayanti_ an episode of the Mahabharat translated by the late Dean
      Milman, and _Idylls from the Sanskrit_.

 1016 The Pitris or Manes, the spirits of the dead.

 1017 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

 1018 Varun, God of the sea.

 1019 Mahadeva or Siva whose ensign is a bull.

 1020 The Address to Rama, both text and commentary, will be found
      literally translated in the Additional Notes. A paraphrase of a
      portion is all that I have attempted here.

 1021 Ravan's queen.

 1022 Or Mainaka.

 1023 Here, in the North-west recension, Sita expresses a wish that Tara
      and the wives of the Vanar chiefs should be invited to accompany her
      to Ayodhya. The car decends, and the Vanar matrons are added to the
      party. The Bengal recension ignores this palpable interruption.

 1024 The _arghya_, a respectful offering to Gods and venerable men
      consisting of rice, duiva grass, flowers etc., with water.

 1025 I have abridged Hanuman's outline of Rama's adventures, with the
      details of which we are already sufficiently acquainted.

 1026 In these respectful salutations the person who salutes his superior
      mentions his own name even when it is well known to the person whom
      he salutes.

 1027 I have omitted the chieftains' names as they could not be introduced
      without padding. They are Mainda, Dwivid, Nila, Rishabh, Sushen,
      Nala, Gavaksha, Gandhamadan, Sarabh, and Panas.

 1028 The following addition is found in the Bengal recension: But
      Vaisravan (Kuvera) when he beheld his chariot said unto it: "Go, and
      carry Rama, and come unto me when my thought shall call thee, And
      the chariot returned unto Rama;" and he honoured it when he had
      heard what had passed.

 1029 Here follows in the original an enumeration of the chief blessings
      which will attend the man or woman who reads or hears read this tale
      of Rama. These blessings are briefly mentioned at the end of the
      first Canto of the first book, and it appears unnecessary to repeat
      them here in their amplified form. The Bengal recension (Gorresio's
      edition) gives them more concisely as follows: "This is the great
      first poem blessed and glorious, which gives long life to men and
      victory to kings, the poem which Valmiki made. He who listens to
      this wondrous tale of Rama unwearied in action shall be absolved
      from all his sins. By listening to the deeds of Rama he who wishes
      for sons shall obtain his heart's desire, and to him who longs for
      riches shall riches be given. The virgin who asks for a husband
      shall obtain a husband suited to her mind, and shall meet again her
      dear kinsfolk who are far away. They who hear this poem which
      Valmiki made shall obtain all their desires and all their prayers
      shall be fulfilled."

_ 1030 The Academy_, Vol. III., No 43, contains an able and interesting
      notice of this work from the pen of the Professor of Sanskrit in the
      University of Cambridge: "The _Uttarakanda_," Mr. Cowell remarks,
      "bears the same relation to the _Ramayana_ as the Cyclic poems to
      the _Iliad_. Just as the _Cypria_ of Stasinus, the _AEthiopis_ of
      Arctinus, and the little _Iliad_ of Lesches completed the story of
      the _Iliad_, and not only added the series of events which preceded
      and followed it, but also founded episodes of their own on isolated
      allusions in Homer, so the _Uttarakanda_ is intended to complete the
      _Ramayana_, and at the same time to supplement it by intervening
      episodes to explain casual allusions or isolated incidents which
      occur in it. Thus the early history of the giant Ravana and his
      family fills nearly forty Chapters, and we have a full account of
      his wars with the gods and his conquest of Lanka, which all happened
      long before the action of the poem commences, just as the _Cypria_
      narrated the birth and early history of Helen, and the two
      expeditions of the Greeks against Troy; and the latter chapters
      continue the history of the hero Rama after his triumphant return to
      his paternal kingdom, and the poem closes with his death and that of
      his brothers, and the founding by their descendants of various
      kingdoms in different parts of India."

 1031 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts,_ Part IV., pp. 414 ff.

 1032 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV., 391, 392.

 1033 See _Academy_, III., 43.

_ 1034 Academy_, Vol. III., No. 43.

 1035 E. B. Cowell. _Academy_, No. 43. The story of Sita's banishment will
      be found roughly translated from the _Raghuvansa_, in the Additional
      Notes.

 1036 E. B. Cowell. _Academy_, Vol, III, No. 43.

 1037 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV., Appendix.

 1038 Ghi: clarified butter. Gur: molasses.

 1039 Haridwar (Anglice Hurdwar) where the Ganges enters the plain
      country.

 1040 Campbell in "Journ. As. Soc. Bengal," 1866, Part ii. p. 132; Latham,
      "Descr. Eth." Vol. ii. p. 456; Tod, "Annals of Rajasthan," Vol. i.
      p. 114.

 1041 Said by the commentator to be an eastern people between the
      Himalayan and Vindhyan chains.

 1042 Videha was a district in the province of Behar, the ancient Mithila
      or the modern Tirhoot.

 1043 The people of Malwa.

 1044 "The Kasikosalas are a central nation in the Vayu Purana. The
      Ramayana places them in the east. The combination indicates the
      country between Benares and Oude.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} Kosala is a name variously
      applied. Its earliest and most celebrated application is to the
      country on the banks of the Sarayu, the kingdom of Rama, of which
      Ayodhya was the capital.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} In the Mahabharata we have one Kosala in
      the east and another in the south, besides the Prak-Kosalas and
      Uttara Kosalas in the east and north. The Puranas place the Kosalas
      amongst the people on the back of Vindhya; and it would appear from
      the Vayu that Kusa the son of Rama transferred his kingdom to a more
      central position; he ruled over Kosala at his capital of Kusasthali
      of Kusavati, built upon the Vindhyan precipices." WILSON'S _Vishnnu
      Purana_, Vol. II. pp. 157, 172.

 1045 The people of south Behar.

 1046 The Pundras are said to be the inhabitants of the western provinces
      of Bengal. "In the _Aitareyabrahmana_, VII. 18, it is said that the
      elder sons of Visvamitra were cursed to become progenitors of most
      abject races, such as Andhras, Pundras, Sabaras, Pulindas, and
      Mutibas." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_ Vol. II. 170.

 1047 Anga is the country about Bhagulpore, of which Champa was the
      capital.

 1048 A fabulous people, "men who use their ears as a covering." So Sir
      John Maundevile says: "And in another Yle ben folk that han gret
      Eres and long, that hangen down to here knees," and Pliny, lib. iv.
      c. 13: "In quibus nuda alioquin corpora praegrandes ipsorum aures
      tota contegunt." Isidore calls them Panotii.

 1049 "Those whose ears hang down to their lips."

 1050 "The Iron-faces."

 1051 "The One-footed."

      "In that Contree," says Sir John Maundevile, "ben folk, that han but
      o foot and thei gon so fast that it is marvaylle: and the foot is so
      large that it schadeweth alle the Body azen the Sonne, when thei
      wole lye and rest hem." So Pliny, Natural History, lib. vii. c. 2:
      speaks of "Hominumn gens {~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} singulis cruribus, mirae pernicitatis ad
      saltum; eosdemque Sciopodas vocari, quod in majori aestu, humi
      jacentes resupini, umbra se pedum protegant."

      These epithets are, as Professor Wilson remarks, "exaggerations of
      national ugliness, or allusions to peculiar customs, which were not
      literally intended, although they may have furnished the Mandevilles
      of ancient and modern times."

      _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. p. 162.

 1052 The Kirrhadae of Arrian: a general name for savage tribes living in
      woods and mountains.

 1053 Said by the commentator to be half tigers half men.

 1054 The kingdom seems to have corresponded with the greater part of
      Berar and Khandesh.

 1055 The Bengal recension has Kishikas, and places them both in the south
      and the north.

 1056 The people of Mysore.

 1057 "There are two Matsyas, one of which, according to the Yantra
      Samraj, is identifiable with Jeypoor. In the Digvijaya of Nakula he
      subdues the Matsyas further to the west, or Gujerat." WILSON'S
      _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. 158. Dr. Hall observes: "In the
      _Mahabharata Sabha-parwan_, 1105 and 1108, notice is taken of the
      king of Matsya and of the Aparamatsyas; and, at 1082, the Matsyas
      figure as an eastern people. They are placed among the nations of
      the south in the _Ramayana Kishkindha-kanda_, XLI., II, while the
      Bengal recension, _Kishkindha-kanda_, XLIV., 12, locates them in the
      north."

 1058 The Kalingas were the people of the upper part of the Coromandel
      Coast, well known, in the traditions of the Eastern Archipelago, as
      Kling. Ptolemy has a city in that part, called Caliga; and Pliny
      Calingae proximi mari. WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_, Vol. II. 156, Note.

 1059 The Kausikas do not appear to be identifiable.

 1060 The Andhras probably occupied the modern Telingana.

 1061 The Pundras have already been mentioned in Canto XL.

 1062 The inhabitants of the lower part of the Coromandel Coast; so
      called, after them, Cholamandala.

 1063 A people in the Deccan.

 1064 The Keralas were the people of Malabar proper.

 1065 A generic term for persons speaking any language but Sanskrit and
      not conforming to the usual Hindu institutions.

 1066 "Pulinda is applied to any wild or barbarous tribe. Those here named
      are some of the people of the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas
      are met with in many other positions, especially in the mountains
      and forests across Central India, the haunts of the Bheels and
      Gonds. So Ptolemy places the Pulindas along the banks of the
      Narmada, to the frontiers of Larice, the Lata or Lar of the
      Hindus,--Khandesh and part of Gujerat." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_,
      Vol. II. 159, Note.

      Dr. Hall observes that "in the Bengal recension of the _Ramayana_
      the Pulindas appear both in the south and in the north. The real
      _Ramayana_ K.-k., XLIII., speaks of the northern Pulindas."

 1067 The Surasenas were the inhabitants of Mathura, the Suraseni of
      Arrian.

 1068 These the Mardi of the Greeks and the two preceding tribes appear to
      have dwelt in the north-west of Hindustan.

 1069 The Kambojas are said to be the people of Arachosia. They are always
      mentioned with the north-western tribes.

 1070 "The term Yavanas, although, in later times, applied to the
      Mohammedans, designated formerly the Greeks.{~HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS~} The Greeks were known
      throughout Western Asia by the term Yavan, or Ion. That the
      Macedonian or Bactrian Greeks were most usually intended is not only
      probable from their position and relations with India, but from
      their being usually named in concurrence with the north-western
      tribes, Kambojas, Daradas, Paradas, Bahlikas, Sakas &c., in the
      Ramayana. Mahabharata, Puranas, Manu, and in various poems and
      plays." WILSON'S _Vishnu Purana_ Vol. II. p. 181, Note.

 1071 These people, the Sakai and Sacae of classical writers, the
      Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended, about the commencement of our
      era, along the west of India, from the Hindu Kosh to the mouths of
      the Indus.

 1072 The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has instead of
      Varadas Daradas the Dards or inhabitants of the modern Dardistan
      along the course of the Indus, above the Himalayas, just before it
      descends to India.

 1073 From the word yonder it would appear that the prayer is to be
      repeated at the rising of the Sun.

 1074 The creator of the world and the first of the Hindu triad.

 1075 He who pervades all beings; or the second of the Hindu triad who
      preserves the world.

 1076 The bestower of blessings; the third of the Hindu triad and the
      destroyer of the world.

 1077 A name of the War-God; also one who urges the senses to action.

 1078 The lord of creatures; or the God of sacrifices.

 1079 A name of the King of Gods; also all-powerful.

 1080 The giver of wealth. A name of the God of riches.

 1081 One who directly urges the mental faculties to action.

 1082 One who moderates the senses, also the God of the regions of the
      dead.

 1083 One who produces nectar (amrita) or one who is always possessed of
      light; or one together with Uma (Ardhanarisvara).

 1084 The names or spirits of departed ancestors.

 1085 Name of a class of eight Gods, also wealthy.

 1086 They who are to be served by Yogis; or a class of Gods named
      Sadhyas.

 1087 The two physicians of the Gods: or they who pervade all beings.

 1088 They who are immortal; or a class of Gods forty-nine in number.

 1089 Omniscient; or the first king of the world.

 1090 He that moves; life; or the God of wind.

 1091 The God of fire.

 1092 Lord of creatures.

 1093 One who prolongs our lives.

 1094 The material cause of knowledge and of the seasons.

 1095 One who shines. The giver of light.

 1096 The hymn entitled the Adityahridaya begins from this verse and the
      words, thou art, are understood in the beginning of this verse.

 1097 One who enjoys all (pleasurable) objects; The son of Aditi, the lord
      of the solar disk.

 1098 One who creates the world, i.e., endows beings with life or soul,
      and by his rays causes rain and thereby produces corn.

 1099 One who urges the world to action or puts the world in motion, who
      is omnipresent.

 1100 One who walks through the sky; or pervades the soul.

 1101 One who nourishes the world, i.e., is the supporter.

 1102 One having rays (Gabhasti) or he who is possessed of the
      all-pervading goddess Lakshmi.

 1103 One resembling gold.

 1104 One who is resplendent or who gives light to other objects.

 1105 One whose seed (Retas) is gold; or quicksilver, the material cause
      of gold.

 1106 One who is the cause of day.

 1107 One whose horses are of tawny colour; or one who pervades the whole
      space or quarters.

 1108 One whose knowledge is boundless or who has a thousand rays.

 1109 One who urges the seven (Pranas) that is the two eyes, the two ears,
      the nostrils and the organ of speech, or whose chariot, is drawn by
      seven horses.

 1110 Vide Gabhastiman.

 1111 One who destroys darkness, or ignorance.

 1112 One from whom our blessings or the enjoyments of Paradise come.

 1113 The architect of the gods; or one who lessens the miseries of our
      birth and death.

 1114 One who gives life to the lifeless world.

 1115 One who pervades the internal and external worlds; or one who is
      resplendent.

 1116 He who is identified with the Hindu triad, i.e. the creator (Brahma)
      the supporter (Vishnu) and the destroyer (Siva).

 1117 Cold or good natured. He is so called because he allays the three
      sorts of pain.

 1118 One who is the lord of all.

 1119 Vide Divakara.

 1120 One who teaches Brahma and others the Vedas.

 1121 One from whom Rudra the destroyer or the third of the Hindu triad
      springs.

 1122 One who is knowable through Aditi, i.e., the eternal Brahmavidya.

 1123 Great happiness or the sky.

 1124 The destroyer of cold or stupidity.

 1125 The Lord of the sky.

 1126 Vide Timironmathana.

 1127 One who is known through the Upanishads.

 1128 He who is the cause of heavy rain.

 1129 He who is a friend to the good, or who is the cause of water.

 1130 One who moves in the solar orbit.

 1131 One who determines the creation of the world; or who is possessed of
      heat.

 1132 One who has a mass of rays; or who has Kaustubha and other precious
      stones as his ornaments.

 1133 He who urges all to action; or who is yellow in colour.

 1134 One who is the destroyer of all.

 1135 One who is omniscient; or a poet.

 1136 One who is identified with the whole world.

 1137 One who is of huge form.

 1138 One who pleases all by giving nourishment; or who is red in colour.

 1139 One who is the cause of the whole world.

 1140 One who protects the whole world.

 1141 The most glorious of all that are glorious.

 1142 One who is identical with the twelve months.

 1143 One who gives victory over all the worlds to those who are
      faithfully devoted to him; or the porter of Brahma, named Jaya.

 1144 One who is identical with the blessing which can be obtained by
      conquering all the worlds; or with the porter of Brahma named
      Jayabhadra.

 1145 One who has Hanuman as his conveyance.

 1146 One who controls the senses; or is furious with those who are not
      his devotees.

 1147 He who is free in moving the senses; or urges all beings to action.

 1148 He who can be known through the Pranava (the mystical Om-kara.)

 1149 One who is the knowledge of Brahma.

 1150 One who devours all things.

 1151 He who is the destroyer of all pains; and of love, and hate, the
      causes of pain; and ignorance which is the cause of love and hate.

 1152 One who is bliss; or the mover.

 1153 One who destroys ignorance and its effects.

 1154 The doer of all actions.

 1155 One who beholds the universe; who is a witness of good and bad
      actions.

 1156 Sacrifice of the five sensual fires.

 1157 According to Apastamba (says the commentator) "it should have been
      placed on the nose: this must therefore have been done in conformity
      with some other Sutras."

 1158 A class of eight gods.

 1159 A class of eleven gods called Rudras.

 1160 Named Viryavan.

 1161 A class of divine devotees named Sadhyas.

 1162 One who resides in the water.

 1163 The third incarnation of Vishnu, that bore the earth on his tusk.

 1164 One whose armies are everywhere.

 1165 One who controls the senses.

 1166 He who resides in the heart, or who is full, or all-pervading.

 1167 Vamana, or the Dwarf incarnation of Vishnu.

 1168 The killer of Madhu, a demon.

 1169 He from whose navel, the lotus, from which Brahma was born, springs.

 1170 He who has a thousand horns. The horns are here the Sakhas of the
      Sama-veda.

 1171 One who has a hundred heads. The heads are here meant to devote a
      hundred commandments of the Vedas.

 1172 Siddhas are those who have already gained the summit of their
      desires.

 1173 Sadhyas are those that are still trying to gain the summit.

 1174 A mystic syllable uttered in Mantras.

 1175 A mystic syllable made of the letters which respectively denote
      Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva.

 1176 A class of divine gods.

 1177 Sanskaras are those sacred writings through which the divine
      commands and prohibitions are known.

 1178 Bali, a demon whom Vamana confined in Patala.

 1179 Vishnu, the second of the Hindu triad.

 1180 Krishna, (black coloured) one of the ten incarnations of Vishnu.

 1181 A. Weber, _Akademische Vorlesungen_, p. 181.

 1182 Systema brahmanicum, liturgicum, mythologicum, civile, exmonumentis
      Indicis, etc.

 1183 Not only have the races of India translated or epitomized it, but
      foreign nations have appropriated it wholly or in part, Persia,
      Java, and Japan itself.

 1184 In the third century B.C.

