{"name": "Book 1, Chapter 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219182819/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/the-ambassadors/summary/book-1-chapter-1", "summary": "Things start off pretty straightforward: we're following a guy named Strether. So far the weirdest thing is his name. Our buddy Strether has just arrived at a hotel to meet his buddy Waymarsh, who hasn't arrived yet. Strether is guiltily happy about this. But hey, that guy was all the way in the marsh. More background: Strether is an American traveling alone in a foreign land , and he enjoys the taste of freedom in just walking around and being a stranger somewhere new. After inquiring about Waymarsh's arrival time at the hotel, Strether realizes that a woman has been staring at him. Being a middle-aged and unmarried man, Strether can't say he minds this one bit. The woman sidles on up to him and asks if he's looking for Mr. Waymarsh of Milrose, Connecticut. What a coincidence. Little lady claims to know Waymarsh, although she isn't sure if Waymarsh would know her. Anyone intrigued yet? To show her credibility, the woman starts naming a ton of families who are mutual acquaintances of her and Waymarsh's. Strether has heard zero of the names, but the woman's confidence makes her seem legit. The two agree to take a walk together so Strether pops up to his room to change. And when he comes back down, he notices that the woman has eyes like she can take one look at you and figure out what \"type\" of person you are. Strether is understandably creeped out, so he feels a bit exposed. Finally, as they walk out together, they learn each other's names. Yes, that took awhile. The woman suggests that Strether ask the hotel worker what her name is, but Strether doesn't like that plan. Basically, he'd be embarrassed to be caught walking out with a lady whose name he doesn't even know. Which is like a early-1900s propriety thing. Or in other words, he's worried the hotel worker will think he's some sort of creepy old man. Which is kind of eternal. So the woman just gives him her card , which tells him that her name is Maria Gostrey. He quickly puts the card into his pocket, feeling a strong urge to preserve the little card at any cost. Again, creepy, much? Strether has been in England fewer than 36 hours, and already he feels like he's crossing some sort of line by going for a walk with a woman he's just met. And the discomfort continues: Miss Gostrey remarks that she likes Strether's full name, Lewis Lambert Strether. She mentions that it's the name of a Balzac novel, but can't resist dropping that it's not that great a book. Strether says he's from a place called Woollett, Massachusetts. This is basically his excuse for why he's so boring. His description of the place makes it clear that Woollett is nowhere near as glamorous as England or France. It's just a sleepy little industrial town in New England. Why does Strether want to make sure Miss Gostrey knows this much about him? In case anything happens between them, he explains. In today-land, this would be obvious hitting-on deserving a roll of the eyes or possibly a slap . You can practically see him holding the red solo cup. In accordance with the times of yesteryear, Maria perfectly politely asks to know what he means, exactly, by something \"happening\" between them. Realizing he may have sounded like a frat boy of the future, Strether just clams up and won't answer. This is the first place when a character just shuts his mouth and doesn't say what he really means. And get ready, because you're in for a whole lot more of it. Strether starts looking at his watch a lot, but not out of impatience about the \"stuff happening\" thing. It's more complicated than that. Maria says out loud that he must think he's doing something he shouldn't be. He goes for the ole blame-the-hometown bit, since he comes from a place where people act very proper and it wouldn't be appropriate for a man and woman who didn't know one another to just take a walk together. Maria Gostrey doesn't seem to think it's a big deal. But hey, that's Europe for you. Maria says that Strether's main problem is that he won't let himself enjoy life. Strether realizes that Maria has learned everything about him within ten minutes, which is freaky. He feels comforted, though, by how she sees him for who he is and doesn't seem too judgey, even though he's pretty much asking for a fat slice o' judgement pie. Strether says that this walk is pretty much the most exciting, adventurous thing that's ever happened to him. Which is kind of sad, really. Maria Gostrey says he shouldn't feel singled out. She thinks of it as her job to take new travelers and to show them around Europe. It's like a public service she performs for people who need to learn to let loose just like Strether--who she refers to as a \"client\" right about now. At this point, you have to start wondering if this woman is actually a very clever prostitute. As they walk back to the hotel, Maria tells him to trust her and to do as she says so he'll have a good time. He tentatively agrees. They get back to the hotel and Waymarsh is a-waiting. Maria greets him enthusiastically. Strether, observing Waymarsh beside Maria, realizes that Waymarsh is, and always will be, a totally buzzkill. How's that for putting life in perspective? And the trip is only just beginning...", "analysis": ""}