
SPANISH GOLD


The twins were seven years old when Dona Isabel's schemes bore their
first bitter fruit, and the occasion was a particularly uproarious
night when Don Esteban entertained a crowd of his Castilian friends.
Little Rosa was awakened at a late hour by the laughter and shouts of
her father's guests. She was afraid, for there was something strange
about the voices, some quality to them which was foreign to the child's
experience. Creeping into her brother's room, she awoke him, and
together they listened.

Don Mario de Castano was singing a song, the words of which were lost,
but which brought a yell of approval from his companions. The twins
distinguished the voice of Don Pablo Peza, too--Don Pablo, whose
magnificent black beard had so often excited their admiration. Yes, and
there was Col. Mendoza y Linares, doubtless in his splendid uniform.
These gentlemen were well and favorably known to the boy and girl, yet
Rosa began to whimper, and when Esteban tried to reassure her his own
voice was thin and reedy from fright.

In the midst of their agitation they heard some one weeping; there came
a rush of feet down the hallway, and the next instant Evangelina flung
herself into the room. A summer moon flooded the chamber with radiance
and enabled her to see the two small white figures sitting up in the
middle of the bed.

Evangelina fell upon her knees before them. "Little master! Little
mistress!" she sobbed. "You will save me, won't you? We love each
other, eh? See then, what a crime this is! Say that you will save me!"
She was beside herself, and her voice was hoarse and cracked from
grief. She wrung her hands, she rocked herself from side to side, she
kissed the twins' nightgowns, tugging at them convulsively.

The children were frightened, but they managed to quaver: "What has
happened? Who has harmed you?"

"Don Pablo Peza," wept the negress. "Your father has sold me to
him--lost me at cards. Oh, I shall die! Sebastian won't believe it. He
is praying. And Asensio--O God! But what can they do to help me? You
alone can save me. You won't let Don Pablo take me away? It would kill
me."

"Wait!" Esteban scrambled out of bed and stood beside his dusky nurse
and playmate. "Don't cry any more. I'll tell papa that you don't like
Don Pablo."

Rosa followed. "Yes, come along, brother," she cried, shrilly. "We'll
tell Don Pablo to go home and leave our Evangelina."

"My blessed doves! But will they listen to you?" moaned the slave.

"Papa does whatever we ask," they assured her, gravely. "If he should
growl we'll come back and hide you in the big wardrobe where nobody
will ever find you." Then hand in hand, with their long nightgowns
lifted to their knees, they pattered out into the hall and down toward
the living-room, whence came the shouting and the laughter.

Don Mario de Castano, who was facing the door, stopped in the midst of
a ribald song to cry: "God be praised! What's this I see?"

The others looked and then burst into merriment, for across the litter
of cards and dice and empty glasses they saw a dimpled girl and boy, as
like as two peas. They were just out of bed; they were peering through
the smoke, and blinking like two little owls. Their evident
embarrassment amused the guests hugely.

"So! You awaken the household with your songs," some one chided Don
Mario.

"Two cherubs from heaven," another exclaimed.

And a third cried, "A toast to Esteban's beautiful children."

But the father lurched forward, a frown upon his face. "What is this,
my dears?" he inquired, thickly. "Run back to your beds. This is no
place for you."

"We love Evangelina," piped the twins. "You must not let Don Pablo have
her--if you please."

"Evangelina?"

They nodded. "We love her. ... She plays with us every day. ... We want
her to stay here. ... She belongs to us."

Accustomed as they were to prompt compliance with their demands, they
spoke imperiously; but they had never seen a frown like this upon their
father's face, and at his refusal their voices grew squeaky with
excitement and uncertainty.

"Go to your rooms, my sweethearts," Don Esteban directed, finally.

"We want Evangelina. She belongs to us," they chorused, stubbornly.

Don Pablo shook with laughter. "So! She belongs to you, eh? And I'm to
be robbed of my winnings. Very well, then, come and give me a kiss,
both of you, and I'll see what can be done."

But the children saw that Don Pablo's face was strangely flushed, that
his eyes were wild and his magnificent beard was wet with wine;
therefore they hung back.

"You won your bet fairly," Esteban growled at him. "Pay no heed to
these babies."

"Evangelina is ours," the little ones bravely repeated.

Then their father exploded: "The devil! Am I dreaming? Where have you
learned to oppose me? Back to your beds, both of you." Seeing them
hesitate, he shouted for his wife. "Ho, there! Isabel, my love! Come
put these imps to rest. Or must I teach them manners with my palm? A
fine thing, truly! Are they to be allowed to roam the house at will and
get a fever?"

Mere mention of their stepmother's name was enough for Rosa and
Esteban; they scuttled away as fast as they could go, and when Dona
Isabel came to their rooms, a few moments later, she found them in
their beds, with their eyes deceitfully squeezed shut. Evangelina was
cowering in a corner. Isabel had overheard the wager, and her soul was
evilly alight; she jerked the slave girl to her feet and with a blow of
her palm sent her to her quarters. Then she turned her attention to the
twins. When she left them they were weeping silently, both for
themselves and for Evangelina, whom they dearly loved.

Meanwhile Don Mario had resumed his singing.

Day was breaking when Esteban Varona bade his guests good-by at the
door of his house. As he stood there Sebastian came to him out of the
mists of the dawn. The old man had been waiting for hours. He was half
crazed from apprehension, and now cast himself prone before his master,
begging for Evangelina.

Don Pablo, in whom the liquor was dying, cursed impatiently: "Caramba!
Have I won the treasure of your whole establishment?" he inquired.
"Perhaps you value this wench at more than a thousand pesos; if so, you
will say that I cheated you."

"No! She's only an ordinary girl. My wife doesn't like her, and so I
determined to get rid of her. She is yours, fairly enough," Varona told
him.

"Then send her to my house. I'll breed her to Salvador, my cochero.
He's the strongest man I have."

Sebastian uttered a strangled cry and rose to his feet. "Master! You
must not--"

"Silence!" ordered Esteban. Wine never agreed with him, and this
morning its effects, combined with his losses at gambling, had put him
in a nasty temper. "Go about your business. What do you mean by this,
anyhow?" he shouted.

But Sebastian, dazed of mind and sick of soul, went on, unheeding. "She
is my girl. You promised me her freedom. I warn you--"

"Eh?" The planter swayed forward and with blazing eyes surveyed his
slave. Esteban knew that he had done a foul thing in risking the girl
upon the turn of a card, and an inner voice warned him that he would
repent his action when he became sober, but in his present mood this
very knowledge enraged him the more. "You warn me? Of what?" he growled.

At this moment neither master nor man knew exactly what he said or did.
Sebastian raised his hand on high. In reality the gesture was meant to
call Heaven as a witness to his years of faithful service, but,
misconstruing his intent, Pablo Peza brought his riding-whip down
across the old man's back, crying:

"Ho! None of that."

A shudder ran through Sebastian's frame. Whirling, he seized Don
Pablo's wrist and tore the whip from his fingers. Although the Spaniard
was a strong man, he uttered a cry of pain.

At this indignity to a guest Esteban flew into a fury. "Pancho!" he
cried. "Ho! Pancho!" When the manager came running, Esteban explained:
"This fool is dangerous. He raised his hand to me and to Don Pablo."

Sebastian's protests were drowned by the angry voices of the others.

"Tie him to yonder grating," directed Esteban, who was still in the
grip of a senseless rage. "Flog him well and make haste about it."

Sebastian, who had no time in which to recover himself, made but a weak
resistance when Pancho Cueto locked his wrists into a pair of clumsy,
old-fashioned manacles, first passing the chain around one of the bars
of the iron window-grating which Esteban had indicated. Sebastian felt
that his whole world was tumbling about his ears. He thought he must be
dreaming.

Cueto swung a heavy lash; the sound of his blows echoed through the
quinta, and they summoned, among others, Dona Isabel, who watched the
scene from behind her shutter with much satisfaction. The guests looked
on approvingly.

Sebastian made no outcry. The face he turned to his master, however,
was puckered with reproach and bewilderment. The whip bit deep; it drew
blood and raised welts the thickness of one's thumb; nevertheless, for
the first few moments the victim suffered less in body than in spirit.
His brain was so benumbed, so shocked with other excitations, that he
was well-nigh insensible to physical pain. That Evangelina, flesh of
his flesh, had been sold, that his lifelong faithfulness had brought
such reward as this, that Esteban, light of his soul, had turned
against him--all this was simply astounding. More his simple mind could
not compass for the moment. Gradually, however, he began to resent the
shrieking injustice of it all, and unsuspected forces gathered inside
of him. They grew until his frame was shaken by primitive savage
impulses.

After a time Don Esteban cried: "That will do, Cueto! Leave him now for
the flies to punish. They will remind him of his insolence."

Then the guests departed, and Esteban staggered into the house and went
to bed.

All that morning Sebastian stood with his hands chained high over his
head. The sun grew hotter and ever hotter upon his lacerated back: the
blood dried and clotted there; a cloud of flies gathered, swarming over
the raw gashes left by Cueto's whip.

Before leaving for Don Pablo's quinta Evangelina came to bid her father
an agonized farewell, and for a long time after she had gone the old
man stood motionless, senseless, scarcely breathing. Nor did the other
slaves venture to approach him to offer sympathy or succor. They passed
with heads averted and with fear in their hearts.

Since Don Esteban's nerves, or perhaps it was his conscience, did not
permit him to sleep, he arose about noon-time and dressed himself. He
was still drunk, and the mad rage of the early morning still possessed
him; therefore, when he mounted his horse he pretended not to see the
figure chained to the window-grating. Sebastian's affection for his
master was doglike and he had taken his punishment as a dog takes his,
more in surprise than in anger, but at this proof of callous
indifference a fire kindled in the old fellow's breast, hotter by far
than the fever from his fly-blown scores. He was thirsty, too, but that
was the least of his sufferings.

Sometime during the afternoon the negro heard himself addressed through
the window against the bars of which he leaned. The speaker was Dona
Isabel. She had waited patiently until she knew he must be faint from
exhaustion and then she had let herself into the room behind the
grating, whence she could talk to him without fear of observation.

"Do you suffer, Sebastian?" she began in a tone of gentleness and pity.

"Yes, mistress." The speaker's tongue was thick and swollen.

"La! La! What a crime! And you the most faithful slave in all Cuba!"

"Yes, mistress."

"Can I help you?"

The negro raised his head; he shook his body to rid himself of the
insects which were devouring him.

"Give me a drink of water," he said, hoarsely.

"Surely, a great gourdful, all cool and dripping from the well. But
first I want you to tell me something. Come now, let us have an
understanding with each other."

"A drink, for the love of Christ," panted the old man, and Dona Isabel
saw how cracked and dry were his thick lips, how near the torture had
come to prostrating him.

"I'll do more," she promised, and her voice was like honey. "I'll tell
Pancho Cueto to unlock you, even if I risk Esteban's anger by so doing.
You have suffered too much, my good fellow. Indeed you have. Well, I
can help you now and in the future, or--I can make your life just such
a misery as it has been to-day. Will you be my friend? Will you tell me
something?" She was close to the window; her black eyes were gleaming;
her face was ablaze with greed.

"What can I tell you?"

"Oh, you know very well! I've asked it often enough, but you have lied,
just as my husband has lied to me. He is a miser; he has no heart; he
cares for nobody, as you can see. You must hate him now, even as I hate
him." There was a silence during which Dona Isabel tried to read the
expression on that tortured face in the sunlight. "Do you?"

"Perhaps."

"Then tell me--is there really a treasure, or--?" The woman gasped; she
choked; she could scarcely force the question for fear of
disappointment. "Tell me there is, Sebastian." She clutched the bars
and shook them. "I've heard so many lies that I begin to doubt."

The old man nodded. "Oh yes, there is a treasure," said he.

"God! You have seen it?" Isabel was trembling as if with an ague. "What
is it like? How much is there? Good Sebastian, I'll give you water;
I'll have you set free if you tell me."

"How much? I don't know. But there is much--pieces of Spanish gold,
silver coins in casks and in little boxes--the boxes are bound with
iron and have hasps and staples; bars of precious metal and little
paper packages of gems, all tied up and hidden in leather bags."
Sebastian could hear his listener panting; her bloodless fingers were
wrapped tightly around the bars above his head.--

"Yes! Go on."

"There are ornaments, too. God knows they must have come from heaven,
they are so beautiful; and pearls from the Caribbean as large as plums."

"Are you speaking the truth?"

"Every peso, every bar, every knickknack I have handled with my own
hands. Did I not make the hiding-place all alone? Senora, everything is
there just as I tell you--and more. The grants of title from the crown
for this quinta and the sugar-plantations, they are there, too. Don
Esteban used to fear the government officials, so he hid his papers
securely. Without them the lands belong to no one. You understand?"

"Of course! Yes, yes! But the jewels--God! where are they hidden?"

"You would never guess!" Sebastian's voice gathered strength. "Ten
thousand men in ten thousand years would never find the place, and
nobody knows the secret but Don Esteban and me."

"I believe you. I knew all the time it was here. Well? Where is it?"

Sebastian hesitated and said, piteously, "I am dying--"

Isabel could scarcely contain herself. "I'll give you water, but first
tell me where--where! God in heaven! Can't you see that I, too, am
perishing?"

"I must have a drink."

"Tell me first."

Sebastian lifted his head and, meeting the speaker's eyes, laughed
hoarsely.

At the sound of his unnatural merriment Isabel recoiled as if stung.
She stared at the slave's face in amazement and then in fury. She
stammered, incoherently, "You--you have been--lying!"

"Oh no! The treasure is there, the greatest treasure in all Cuba, but
you shall never know where it is. I'll see to that. It was you who sold
my girl; it was you who brought me to this; it was your hand that
whipped me. Well, I'll tell Don Esteban how you tried to bribe his
secret from me! What do you think he'll do then? Eh? You'll feel the
lash on your white back--"

"You FOOL!" Dona Isabel looked murder. "I'll punish you for this; I'll
make you speak if I have to rub your wounds with salt."

But Sebastian closed his eyes wearily. "You can't make me suffer more
than I have suffered," he said. "And now--I curse you. May that
treasure be the death of you. May you live in torture like mine the
rest of your days; may your beauty turn to ugliness such that men will
spit at you; may you never know peace again until you die in poverty
and want--"

But Dona Isabel, being superstitious, fled with her fingers in her
ears; nor did she undertake to make good her barbarous threat,
realizing opportunely that it would only serve to betray her desperate
intentions and put her husband further on his guard. Instead she shut
herself into her room, where she paced the floor, racking her brain to
guess where the hiding-place could be or to devise some means of
silencing Sebastian's tongue. To feel that she had been overmatched, to
know that there was indeed a treasure, to think that the two who knew
where it was had been laughing at her all this time, filled the woman
with an agony approaching that which Sebastian suffered from his flies.

As the sun was sinking beyond the farther rim of the Yumuri and the
valley was beginning to fill with shadows. Esteban Varona rode up the
hill. His temper was more evil than ever, if that were possible, for he
had drunk again in an effort to drown the memory of his earlier
actions. With him rode half a dozen or more of his friends, coming to
dine and put in another night at his expense. There were Pablo Peza,
and Mario de Castano, once more; Col. Mendoza y Linares, old Pedro
Miron, the advocate, and others of less consequence, whom Esteban had
gathered from the Spanish Club. The host dismounted and lurched across
the courtyard to Sebastian.

"So, my fine fellow," he began. "Have you had enough of rebellion by
this time?"

"Why did you have him flogged?" the advocate inquired.

Esteban explained, briefly, "He dared to raise his hand in anger
against one of my guests."

Sebastian's face was working as he turned upon his master to say: "I
would be lying if I told you that I am sorry for what I did. It is you
have done wrong. Your soul is black with this crime. Where is my girl?"

"The devil! To hear you talk one would think you were a free man." The
planter's eyes were bleared and he brandished his riding-whip
threateningly. "I do as I please with my slaves. I tolerate no
insolence. Your girl? Well, she's in the house of Salvador, Don Pablo's
cochero, where she belongs. I've warned him that he will have to tame
her unruly spirit, as I have tamed yours."

Sebastian had hung sick and limp against the grating, but at these
words he suddenly roused. It was as if a current of electricity had
galvanized him. He strained at his manacles and the bars groaned under
his weight. His eyes began to roll, his lips drew back over his blue
gums. Noting his expression of ferocity, Esteban cut at his naked back
with the riding-whip, crying:

"Ho! Not subdued yet, eh? You need another flogging."

"Curse you and all that is yours," roared the maddened slave. "May you
know the misery you have put upon me. May you rot for a million years
in hell." The whip was rising and falling now, for Esteban had lost
what little self-control the liquor had left to him. "May your
children's bodies grow filthy with disease; may they starve; may they--"

Sebastian was yelling, though his voice was hoarse with pain. The lash
drew blood with every blow. Meanwhile, he wrenched and tugged at his
bonds with the fury of a maniac.

"Pablo! Your machete, quick!" panted the slave-owner. "God's blood!
I'll make an end of this black fiend, once for all."

Esteban Varona's guests had looked on at the scene with the same mild
interest they would display at the whipping of a balky horse: and, now
that the animal threatened to become dangerous, it was in their view
quite the proper thing to put it out of the way. Don Pablo Peza stepped
toward his mare to draw the machete from its scabbard. But he did not
hand it to his friend. He heard a shout, and turned in time to see a
wonderful and a terrible thing.

Sebastian had braced his naked feet against the wall; he had bowed his
back and bent his massive shoulders--a back and a pair of shoulders
that looked as bony and muscular as those of an ox--and he was heaving
with every ounce of strength in his enormous body. As Pablo stared he
saw the heavy grating come away from its anchorage in the solid
masonry, as a shrub is uprooted from soft ground. The rods bent and
twisted; there was a clank and rattle and clash of metal upon the
flags; and then--Sebastian turned upon his tormentor, a free man, save
only for the wide iron bracelets and their connecting chain. He was
quite insane. His face was frightful to behold; it was apelike in its
animal rage, and he towered above his master like some fabled creature
out of the African jungle of his forefathers.

Sebastian's fists alone would have been formidable weapons, but they
were armored and weighted with the old-fashioned, hand-wrought irons
which Pancho Cueto had locked upon them. Wrapping the chain in his
fingers, the slave leaped at Esteban and struck, once. The sound of the
blow was sickening, for the whole bony structure of Esteban Varona's
head gave way.

There was a horrified cry from the other white men. Don Pablo Peza ran
forward, shouting. He swung his machete, but Sebastian met him before
the blow could descend, and they went down together upon the hard
stones. Again Sebastian smote, with his massive hands wrapped in the
chain and his wrists encased in steel, and this time it was as if Don
Pablo's head had been caught between a hammer and an anvil. The negro's
strength, exceptional at all times, was multiplied tenfold; he had run
amuck. When he arose the machete was in his grasp and Don Pablo's
brains were on his knuckles.

It all happened in far less time than it takes to tell. The onlookers
had not yet recovered from their first consternation; in fact they were
still fumbling and tugging at whatever weapons they carried when
Sebastian came toward them, brandishing the blade on high. Pedro Miron,
the advocate, was the third to fall. He tried to scramble out of the
negro's path, but, being an old man, his limbs were too stiff to serve
him and he went down shrieking.

By now the horses had caught the scent of hot blood and were plunging
furiously, the clatter of their hoofs mingling with the blasphemies of
the riders, while Sebastian's bestial roaring made the commotion even
more hideous.

Esteban's guests fought as much for their lives as for vengeance upon
the slayer, for Sebastian was like a gorilla; he seemed intent upon
killing them all. He vented his fury upon whatever came within his
reach; he struck at men and animals alike, and the shrieks of wounded
horses added to the din.

It was a frightful combat. It seemed incredible that one man could work
such dreadful havoc in so short a time. Varona and two of his friends
were dead; two more were badly wounded, and a Peruvian stallion lay
kicking on the flagging when Col. Mendoza y Linares finally managed to
get a bullet home in the black man's brain.

Those who came running to learn the cause of the hubbub turned away
sick and pallid, for the paved yard was a shambles. Pancho Cueto called
upon the slaves to help him, but they slunk back to their quarters,
dumb with terror and dismay.

All that night people from the town below came and went and the quinta
resounded to sobs and lamentations, but of all the relatives of the
dead and wounded, Dona Isabel took her bereavement hardest. Strange to
say, she could not be comforted. She wept, she screamed, she tore her
hair, tasting the full nauseousness of the cup her own avarice had
prepared. Now, when it was too late, she realized that she had
overreached herself, having caused the death of the only two who knew
the secret of the treasure. She remembered, also, Sebastian's statement
that even the deeds of patent for the land were hidden with the rest,
where ten thousand men in ten thousand years could never find them.

Impressed by her manifestations of grief, Esteban's friends reasoned
that the widow must have loved her husband dearly. They told one
another they had wronged her.



