
A CRY FROM THE WILDERNESS


New York seemed almost like a foreign city to Johnnie O'Reilly when he
stepped out into it on the morning after his arrival. For one thing it
was bleak and cold: the north wind, hailing direct from Baffin's Bay,
had teeth, and it bit so cruelly that he was glad when he found shelter
in the building which housed the offices of the Carter Importing
Company. The tropics had thinned O'Reilly's blood, for the Cuban winds
bear a kiss instead of a sting; therefore he paused in the lower
hallway, jostled by the morning crowds, and tried to warm himself. The
truth is O'Reilly was not only cold, but frightened.

He was far from weak-hearted. In fact, few O'Reillys were that, and
Johnnie had an ingrained self-assurance which might have been mistaken
for impudence, but for the winning smile that went with it. Yet all the
way from Havana he had seen in his mind's eye old Sam Carter intrenched
behind his flat-topped desk, and that picture had more than once caused
him to forget the carefully rehearsed speech in which he intended to
resign his position as an employee and his prospects as a son-in-law.

That desk of Mr. Carter's was always bare and orderly, cleared for
action, like the deck of a battle-ship, and over it many engagements
had been fought, for the man behind it never shirked a conflict. His
was a vigorous and irascible temperament, compounded of old-fashioned,
slow-burning black powder and nitroglycerine--a combination of
incalculable destructive power. It was a perilously unstable mixture,
tool, at times nothing less than a flame served to ignite it; on other
occasions the office force pussy-footed past Carter's door on felt
soles, and even then the slightest jar often caused the untoward thing
to let go. In either event there was a deafening roar, much smoke, and
a deal of damage. O'Reilly felt sure that whatever the condition of Mr.
Carter's digestion or the serenity of his mind at the beginning of
their interview, the news he had to impart would serve as an effective
detonator, after which it would be every man for himself. It was not
the effect of his report concerning the firm's unprofitable Cuban
connections which O'Reilly feared would cause the decks to heave and
the ship to rock--Samuel Carter could take calmly the most disturbing
financial reverse--it was the blow to his pride at learning that
anybody could prefer another girl to his daughter. Johnnie shook his
shoulders and stamped his feet, but the chill in his bones refused to
go.

He did gain courage, however, by thinking of Rosa Varona as he had last
seen her, with arms outstretched, with eyes tear-filled, with yearning
lips aquiver at his going. The picture warmed him magically, and it was
with a restored determination to make a clean breast of the matter and
face the worst that he took the elevator.

The office force of the Carter Importing Company looked up when the
firm's Cuban representative entered the door, but its personnel having
changed as the result of one of those periodical disruptions that
occurred in the inner office, he was not recognized until he presented
himself to Mr. Slack, Samuel Carter's private and intimidated secretary.

Mr. Slack smiled wanly, and extended a clammy, nerveless hand as cold
and limber as a dead fish.

"You're expected," said he. "Mr. Carter is waiting to see you before
leaving for California."

"Seeing me won't make his trip any pleasanter," O'Reilly said, somberly.

"We were afraid you wouldn't get out of Cuba; thought we might have to
get the American consul at work."

"Really? I didn't know I was so important."

"Oh, you're the office pet, and well you know it." Mr. Slack's
pleasantry was tinged with envy, for he had never been able to
appreciate O'Reilly. "Conditions are bad, eh?"

"Yes. Anybody can leave," the other told him. "It's getting back that's
difficult. The Spaniards don't like us, and I dare say they have good
reason, with all this talk of intervention and the secret help we're
lending the Insurrectos. They held me up in Havana; tried to prove I
was a spy. They were positively peeved when they failed. Snippy people,
those Spaniards."

"Well, I'll tell Mr. Carter you're here." The secretary glided
unobtrusively toward the private office, disappeared, glided softly
into view again, and waggled a boneless forefinger invitingly. O'Reilly
went to meet his employer as a man marches to execution.

His heart sank further at the welcome he received, for the importer
gave him a veritable embrace; he patted him on the back and inquired
three times as to his health. O'Reilly was anything but cold now; he
was perspiring profusely, and he felt his collar growing limp. To
shatter this old man's eager hopes would be like kicking a child in the
face. Carter had never been so enthusiastic, so demonstrative; there
was something almost theatrical in his greeting. It dismayed O'Reilly
immensely to realize what a hold he must have upon his employer's
affections. Although the latter had a reputation for self-control, he
appeared to be in a perfect flutter now. He assumed a boisterousness
which seemed strained and wholly out of keeping with the circumstances.
His actions vaguely reminded the younger man of an ambling draft-horse
trying to gallop; and when, for the fourth time, Mr. Carter inquired
solicitously concerning his visitor's well-being, Johnnie's dismay
turned to amazement. With a heavy playfulness Mr. Carter at length
remarked:

"Well, my boy, you made a fizzle of it, didn't you?" The tone was
almost complimentary.

"Yes, sir, I'm a bright and shining failure," O'Reilly acknowledged,
hopefully.

"Now, don't 'yes, sir' me. We're friends, aren't we? Good! Understand,
I don't blame you in the least--it's that idiotic revolution that
spoiled our business. I can't understand those people. Lord! You did
splendidly, under the circumstances."

"They have reason enough to revolt--oppression, tyranny, corruption."
O'Reilly mumbled the familiar words in a numb paralysis at Mr. Carter's
jovial familiarity.

"All Latin countries are corrupt," announced the importer--"always have
been and always will be. They thrive under oppression. Politics is
purely a business proposition with those people. However, I dare say
this uprising won't last long."

O'Reilly welcomed this trend of the conversation; anything was better
than fulsome praise, and the discussion would delay the coming crash.
It seemed strange, however, that Samuel Carter should take time to
discourse about generalities. Johnnie wondered why the old man didn't
get down to cases.

"It's more than an uprising, sir," he said. "The rebels have overrun
the eastern end of the island, and when I left Maceo and Gomez were
sweeping west."

"Bah! It takes money to run a war."

"They have money," desperately argued O'Reilly. "Marti raised more than
a million dollars, and every Cuban cigar-maker in the United States
gives a part of his wages every week to the cause. The best blood of
Cuba is in the fight. The rebels are poorly armed, but if our
Government recognizes their belligerency they'll soon fix that. Spain
is about busted; she can't stand the strain."

"I predict they'll quit fighting as soon as they get hungry. The
Government is starving them out. However, they've wound up our affairs
for the time being, and--" Mr. Carter carefully shifted the position of
an ink-well, a calendar, and a paper-knife--"that brings us to a
consideration of your and my affairs, doesn't it? Ahem! You remember
our bargain? I was to give you a chance and you were to make good
before you--er--planned any--er--matrimonial foolishness with my
daughter."

"Yes, sir." O'Reilly felt that the moment had come for his carefully
rehearsed speech, but, unhappily, he could not remember how the
swan-song started. He racked his brain for the opening words.

Mr. Carter, too, was unaccountably silent. He opened his lips, then
closed them. Both men, after an awkward pause, cleared their throats in
unison and eyed each other expectantly. Another moment dragged past,
then they chorused:

"I have an unpleasant--"

Each broke off at the echo of his own words.

"What's that?" inquired the importer.

"N-nothing. You were saying--"

"I was thinking how lucky it is that you and Elsa waited. Hm-m! Very
fortunate." Again Mr. Carter rearranged his desk fittings. "She has
deep feelings--got a conscience, too. Conscience is a fine thing in a
woman--so few of 'em have it. We sometimes differ, Elsa and I, but when
she sets her heart on a thing I see that she gets it, even if I think
she oughtn't to have it. What's the use of having children if you can't
spoil 'em, eh?" He looked up with a sort of resentful challenge, and
when his listener appeared to agree with him he sighed with
satisfaction. "Early marriages are silly--but she seems to think
otherwise. Maybe she's right. Anyhow, she's licked me. I'm done. She
wants to be married right away, before we go West. That's why I waited
to see you at once. You're a sensible fellow, Johnnie--no foolishness
about you. You won't object, will you? We men have to take our
medicine."

"It's quite out of the question," stammered the unhappy O'Reilly.

"Come, come! It's tough on you, I know, but--" The fuse had begun to
sputter. Johnnie had a horrified vision of himself being dragged
unwillingly to the altar. "Elsa is going to have what she wants, if I
have to break something. If you'll be sensible I'll stand behind you
like a father and teach you the business. I'm getting old, and
Ethelbert could never learn it. Otherwise--" The old man's jaw set; his
eyes began to gleam angrily.

"Who is--Ethelbert?" faintly inquired O'Reilly.

"Why, dammit! He's the fellow I've been telling you about. He's not so
bad as he sounds; he's really a nice boy--"

"Elsa is in love with another man? Is that what you mean?"

"Good Lord, yes! Don't you understand English? I didn't think you'd
take it so hard--I was going to make a place for you here in the
office, but of course if--Say! What the deuce ails you?"

Samuel Carter stared with amazement, for the injured victim of his
daughter's fickleness had leaped to his feet and was shaking his hand
vigorously, meanwhile uttering unintelligible sounds that seemed to
signify relief, pleasure, delight--anything except what the old man
expected.

"Are you crazy, or am I?" he queried.

"Yes, sir; delirious. It's this way, sir; I've changed my mind, too."

"Oh--! You have?"

"I've met the dearest, sweetest"--O'Reilly choked, then began
again--"the dearest, loveliest--"

"Never mind the bird-calls--don't coo! I get enough of that at home.
Don't tell me she's dearer and sweeter than Elsa. Another girl! Well,
I'll be damned! Young man, you're a fool."

"Yes, sir."

Slightly mollified by this ready acknowledgment, Mr. Carter grunted
with relief. "Humph! It turned out better than I thought. Why, I--I was
positively terrified when you walked in. And to think you didn't need
any sympathy!"

"I do need that job, though. It will enable me to get married."

"Nonsense! Better wait. I don't believe in early engagements."

"Oh yes, you do."

"Well, that depends. But, say--you're a pretty nervy youth to turn down
my daughter and then hold me up for a job, all in the same breath.
Here! Don't dance on my rug. I ought to be offended, and I am, but--Get
out while I telephone Elsa, so she can dance, too."

O'Reilly spent that evening in writing a long letter to Rosa Varona.
During the next few days his high spirits proved a trial and an affront
to Mr. Slack, who, now that his employer had departed for the West, had
assumed a subdued and gloomy dignity to match the somber
responsibilities of his position.

Other letters went forward by succeeding posts, and there was no doubt
now, that O'Reilly's pen was tipped with magic! He tingled when he
reread what he had written. He bade Rosa prepare for his return and
their immediate marriage. The fun and the excitement of planning their
future caused him to fill page after page with thrilling details of the
flat-hunting, home-fitting excursions they would take upon their return
to New York. He wrote her ecstatic descriptions of a suite of Grand
Rapids furniture he had priced; he wasted a thousand emotional words
over a set of china he had picked out, and the results of a preliminary
trip into the apartment-house district required a convulsive three-part
letter to relate. It is remarkable with what poetic fervor, what
strength of feeling, a lover can describe a five-room flat; with what
glories he can furnish it out of a modest salary and still leave enough
for a life of luxury.

But O'Reilly's letters did not always touch upon practical things;
there was a wide streak of romance in him, and much of what he wrote
was the sort of thing which romantic lovers always write--tender,
foolish, worshipful thoughts which half abashed him when he read them
over. But that Rosa would thrill to them he had no doubt, nor had he
any fear that she would hesitate to leave her native land for him.
O'Reilly's love was unlimited; his trust in the girl was absolute. He
knew, moreover, that she loved and trusted him. This, to be sure, was a
miracle--a unique phenomenon which never ceased to amaze him. He did
not dream that every man had felt the same vague wonder.

And so the time passed rapidly. But, strange to say, there came no
answer to those letters. O'Reilly chafed: he cursed the revolution
which had made communication so uncertain; at length he cabled, but
still the days dragged on with no result. Gradually his impatience gave
way to apprehension. Unreasonable conjectures besieged his mind and
destroyed his peace.

Great was his relief, therefore, when one day a worn, stained envelope
addressed in Rosa's hand was laid upon his desk. The American stamp,
the Key West postmark, looked strange, but--Her first letter! O'Reilly
wondered if his first letter to her could possibly have moved her as
this moved him. He kissed the envelope where her lips had caressed it
in the sealing. Then with eager fingers he broke it open.

It was a generous epistle, long and closely written, but as he read his
keen delight turned to dismay, and when he had turned the last thin
page his brain was in wildest turmoil. He thought he must be dreaming.
He turned sick, aching eyes upon his surroundings to prove this thing a
nightmare, but the prosaic clink of a typewriter and the drone of a
voice dictating quotations on Brazilian coffee were conclusive evidence
to the contrary. Those pages between his thumb and finger were real.
Yes, and that was Rosa's writing. Could it be that he had misunderstood
anything? He turned to the beginning and attempted to read, but his
hands shook so that he was obliged to lay the letter flat upon his desk.

Rosa's Spanish training had been severely tried. The stiff, quaint
formality of her opening paragraphs only served to emphasize her final
frightened cry for help.

MY DEARLY BELOVED,--It is with diffidence and hesitation that I take my
pen in hand, for I fear you may consider me unduly forward in writing
to you without solicitation. Believe me, I appreciate the reserve which
a young lady of refinement should practise even in her correspondence
with the gentleman who has honored her with his promise of marriage,
but my circumstances are such as to banish consideration of the social
niceties.

Alas! What events have followed your departure from Matanzas! What
misfortunes have overtaken Esteban and me. That happiness could be so
swiftly succeeded by misery, that want could follow plenty, that peril
could tread so closely upon the heels of safety! Where to begin, how to
tell you, I scarcely know; my hand shakes, my eyes are blinded--nor
dare I trust myself to believe that this letter will ever reach you,
for we are refugees, Esteban and I--fugitives, outcasts, living in the
manigua with Asensio and Evangelina, former slaves of our father. Such
poverty, such indescribable circumstances! But they were our only
friends and they took us in when we were homeless, so we love them.

I see you stare at these words. I hear you say, "That Rosa has gone
mad, like her wicked stepmother!" Indeed, sometimes I think I have.
But, no. I write facts. It is a relief to put them down, even though
you never read them. Good Asensio will take this letter on his horse to
the Insurrecto camp, many miles away, and there give it to Colonel
Lopez, our only friend, who promises that in some mysterious way it
will escape the eyes of our enemies and reach your country. Yes, we
have enemies! We, who have harmed no one. Wait until I tell you.

But if this letter reaches you--and I send it with a prayer--what then?
I dare not think too long of that, for the hearts of men are not like
the hearts of women. What will you say when you learn that the Rosa
Varona whom you favored with your admiration is not the Rosa of to-day?
I hear you murmur, "The girl forgets herself!" But, oh, the standards
of yesterday are gone and my reserve is gone, too! I am a hunted
creature.

O'Reilly felt a great pain in his breast at the thought that Rosa had
for an instant doubted him. But she did not really doubt; those
misgivings were but momentary; the abandon of her appeal showed that in
her heart of hearts she knew his love to be unshakable.

She had compelled herself to start with the death of Dona Isabel and to
give him a succinct account of all that had followed. O'Reilly read the
story, fascinated. Here, amid these surroundings, with the rattle of
typewriters and the tinkle of telephone-bells in his ears, it all
seemed wholly improbable, fancifully unreal--like the workings of some
turgid melodrama.

That is how we came to live with Asensio and his wife [the letter went
on]. Imagine it! A bohio, hidden away far up the Yumuri, and so
insignificant as to escape attention. We are no longer people of
consequence or authority; our safety depends upon our
inconspicuousness. We hide as do the timid animals, though nature has
not given us their skill in avoiding danger. I do not like the
wilderness; it frightens me. At night I hear things rustling through
the thatch above my head; in the morning my feet touch a bare earthen
floor. We live on fruits and vegetables from Evangelina's garden, with
now and then a fowl or a bite of meat when Asensio is fortunate.
Esteban does not seem to mind, but I cannot accommodate myself to these
barbarous surroundings. Sometimes I bite my tongue to keep from
complaining, for that, I know, would grieve him.

The whole country is in chaos. There is no work--nothing but suspicion,
hatred, and violence. Oh, what desolation this war has wrought! Esteban
has already become a guerrillero. He has stolen a cow, and so we have
milk for our coffee; but there is only a handful of coffee left, and
little hope of more. Marauding bands of Spaniards are everywhere, and
the country people tell atrocious tales about them. How will it end?
How long before they will discover us and the worst will happen?

Soon after our arrival Esteban went to the camp of Colonel Lopez to
arrange for us to join his army, but returned heart-broken. It was
impossible, it seems, on my account. Conditions with the patriots are
worse than with us here, and the colonel acknowledged frankly that he
could not be burdened with a woman in his command. So Esteban has given
up for the present his dream of fighting, and devotes himself to
protecting me. You see there is no sanctuary, no help but his right
arm. The towns are in Spanish hands, the manigua is infested with
lawless men, and there is no place in which to hide me. So I feel
myself a burden. Esteban has plans to arm a band of his own. I am numb
with dread of what it may lead to, for his hatred is centered upon
Cueto, that false servant whose wickedness reduced us to this
extremity. Esteban is so young and reckless. If only you were here to
counsel him.

If only you were here--Oh, my dearest Juan! If only you were here--to
take me in your arms and banish this ever constant terror at my heart.
If only you were here to tell me that you love me still in spite of my
misfortune. See! The tears are falling as I write. My eyes are dim, my
fingers trace uncertain letters on the sheet, and I can only steady
them when I remember that you promised to return. You WILL return, will
you not? I could not write like this if I were sure that you would read
these lines. My nightly prayer--But I will not tell you of my prayers,
for fate may guide this letter to you, after all, and the hearts of men
do change. In those dark hours when my doubts arise I try to tell
myself that you will surely come and search me out.

Sometimes I play a game with Evangelina--our only game. We gather wild
flowers. We assort the few belongings that I managed to bring with me
and I array myself for you. And then I smile and laugh for a little
while, and she tells me I am beautiful enough to please you. But the
flowers fade, and I know that beauty, too, will fade in such
surroundings. What then? I ask myself.

When you return to Cuba--see, my faith is strong again--avoid Matanzas,
for your own sake and mine. Don Mario wanted to marry me to save me
this exile. But I refused; I told him I was pledged to you, and he was
furious. He is powerful; he would balk you, and there is always room
for one more in San Severino. Pancho Cueto, too, living in luxury upon
the fruits of his crime, would certainly consider you a menace to his
security. You see how cunning my love for you has made me?

If I could come to you, I would, but I am marked. So if you still
desire me you must search me out. You will? I pin my faith to that as
to the Cross. To doubt would be to perish. If we should have to find
another hiding-place, and that is always likely, you can learn of our
whereabouts from Colonel Lopez.

Alas! If you had asked me to go with you that day! I would have
followed you, for my heart beat then as it beats to-day, for you alone.

The candle is burning low and it will soon be daylight, and then this
letter must begin its long, uncertain journey. I must creep into my bed
now, to pray and then to dream. It is cold, before the dawn, and the
thatch above me rustles. I am very poor and sad and lonely, O'Reilly,
but my cheeks are full and red; my lips could learn to smile again, and
you would not be ashamed of me.

Asensio is rising. He goes to find his horse and I must close. God
grant this reaches you, some time, somehow. I trust the many blots upon
the paper will not give you a wrong impression of my writing, for I am
neat, and I write nicely; only now the ink is poor and there is very
little of it. There is little of anything, here at Asensio's house,
except tears. Of those I fear there are too many to please you, my
Juan, for men do not like tears. Therefore I try to smile as I sign
myself,

Your loving and your faithful

ROSA.

O God! Come quickly, if you love me.



