
THE SPANISH DOUBLOON


On the whole, Pancho Cueto's plans had worked smoothly. After
denouncing the Varona twins as traitors he had managed to have himself
appointed trustee for the crown, for all their properties, consummation
for which he had worked from the moment he read that letter of
Esteban's on the morning after Dona Isabel's death. To be sure, the
overseer had acquired title, of a sort, to the plantation by paying the
taxes over a period of years, but it was the quinta itself which he
desired, the Quinta de Esteban with its hidden gold. That there was a
treasure Cueto had never doubted, and, once the place was his to do
with as he chose, he began his search.

Cueto was a tireless, thorough-going man, therefore he did not set
about his explorations in the haphazard manner of Dona Isabel.
Commencing at the lower edge of the grounds, he ripped them up with a
series of deep trenches and cross-cuts. It was a task that required the
labor of many men for several weeks, and when it was finished there was
scarcely a growing thing left upon the place. Only a few of the larger
trees remained. Cueto was disappointed at finding nothing, but he was
not discouraged. Next he tore down the old slave barracoons and the
outbuildings, after which he completely wrecked the residence itself.
He pulled it apart bit by bit, brick by brick. He even dug up its
foundations, but without the reward of so much as a single peseta.
Finally, when the villa was but a heap of rubbish and the grounds a
scar upon the slope of La Cumbre, he desisted, baffled, incredulous,
while all Matanzas laughed at him. Having sacrificed his choicest
residence, he retired in chagrin to the plantation of La Joya.

But Cueto was now a man with a grievance. He burned with rage, and his
contempt for the boy and girl he had wronged soured into hatred. Such
time as he did not spend in racking his brain to explain the
disappearance of the dead Esteban's riches, he devoted to cursing the
living Esteban and his sister, who, it seemed to him, were somehow to
blame for his wrecked hopes.

In time he began to realize also that so long as they lived they would
jeopardize his tenure of their property. Public feeling, at present,
was high; there was intense bitterness against all rebels; but the war
would end some day. What then? Cueto asked himself. Sympathy was ever
on the side of the weak and oppressed. There would come a day of
reckoning.

As if to swell his discomfiture and strengthen his fears, out from the
hills at the head of the Yumuri issued rumors of a little band of
guerrilleros, under the leadership of a beardless boy--a band of blacks
who were making the upper valley unsafe for Spanish scouting parties.

Cursing the name of Varona, Pancho Cueto armed himself. He did not
venture far alone, and, like Dona Isabel before him, he began to have
bad dreams at night.

One day a field of Cueto's cane was burned, and his laborers reported
seeing Esteban and some negroes riding into the wood. The overseer took
horse within the hour and rode pell-mell to Matanzas. In the city at
this time was a certain Colonel Cobo, in command of Spanish Volunteers,
those execrable convict troops from the Isle of Pines whose atrocities
had already marked them as wolves rather than men, and to him Pancho
went with his story.

"Ah yes! That Varona boy. I've heard of him," Cobo remarked, when his
caller had finished his account. "He has reason to hate you, I dare
say, for you robbed him." The Colonel smiled disagreeably. He was a
disagreeable fellow, so dark of skin as to lend credence to the gossip
regarding his parentage; a loud, strutting, domineering person, whose
record in Santa Clara Province was such that only the men discussed it.

Cueto murmured something to the effect that the law had placed him in
his position as trustee for the crown, and should therefore protect
him; but Colonel Cobo's respect for the law, it seemed, was slight. In
his view there was but one law in the land, the law of force.

"Why do you come to me?" he asked.

"That fellow is a desperado," Pancho declared. "He should be destroyed."

"Bah! The country is overrun with desperadoes of his kind, and worse.
Burning crops is nothing new. I'd make an end of him soon enough, but
nearly all of my men are in Cardenas. We have work enough to do."

"I'd make it worth while, if you could put an end to him," Pancho said,
hesitatingly. Then, recalling some of those stories about Colonel Cobo,
he added, "There are two of them, you know, a boy and a girl."

"Ah yes! I remember."

"I can direct you to the house of Asensio, where they live."

"Um-m!" Cobo was thoughtful. "A girl. How old is she?"

"Eighteen."

"Ugly as an alligator, I'll warrant."

"Ha! The most ravishing creature in all Matanzas. All the men were mad
over her." Cueto's eyes gleamed craftily, for he believed he had
measured Cobo's caliber. "She should have married old Castano and all
his money, but she was heart and soul in the revolution. She and the
boy were spying on us, you know, and sending the information to that
rebel, Lopez."

"Lopez! Spies, were they?"

"The worst kind. You'd scarcely believe it of a beautiful girl, with
her culture and refinement. I tell you it broke more than one heart. De
Castano, for instance, has never recovered. He sits all day in the
Casino and grieves for her. Such hair and eyes, such skin--as white as
milk--and flesh as pure as the petals of a flower. Well, you wouldn't
believe such charms existed."

Colonel Cobo, the guerrilla, licked his full, red lips and ran a
strong, square hand over his curly, short-cropped hair. "You say you
know where she--where they are living?"

"Ah, perfectly! It's less than a night's ride. There's no one except
the boy to reckon with."

"How much is he worth to you?" bluntly inquired the soldier, and Cueto
sat down to make the best terms possible.

"Do you think he received my letter?" Rosa asked of her brother one
evening as they sat on the board bench by Asensio's door. It was a
familiar question to Esteban; he had answered it many times.

"Oh yes!" he declared. "Lopez's messenger got through to Key West."

"Then why doesn't he come?"

"But, my dear, you must be patient. Think of his difficulties."

The girl sighed. "I do. I think of nothing else. Sometimes I feel that
he is here--I seem to feel his presence--then again the most terrible
doubts assail me. You know there was another woman. Perhaps."

"What an idea!" Esteban exclaimed. "As if he could think of any one
after knowing you. Did he not assure you that he was going to New York
for the sole purpose of breaking off that affair? Well, then!" This
subject always distressed young Varona; therefore he changed it. "Come!
You haven't heard of my good fortune. I captured another fine snake
to-day, a big, sleepy fellow. Believe me, he'll wake up when I set fire
to his tail. He'll go like the wind, and with every foot he goes away
will go more of Pancho Cueto's profits."

"You intend to burn more of his fields?" absently inquired the girl.

"Every one of them. You should have seen those rats when we soaked them
with oil and set them afire. They scampered fast; but their hair is
short; they don't run far. These snakes will be better."

"It seems terrible to destroy our own property."

Esteban broke out excitedly; he could not discuss Pancho Cueto without
losing control of himself. "Would you permit that traitor to fatten
upon the profits of our plantations? He thinks he is safe; he is
preparing for a rich crop at high prices, but he shall never reap a
dollar from Varona land as long as I live. I shall ruin him, as he
ruined us."

Rosa shook her dark head sadly. "And we are indeed ruined. Think of our
beautiful house; all our beautiful things, too! We used to consider
ourselves poor, but--how little we knew of real poverty. There are so
many things I want. Have we nothing left?"

"I thought it best to buy those rifles," the brother murmured, dropping
his eyes. "It was one chance in a million."

"No doubt it was. It seems those Spaniards will sell their souls."

"Exactly. We can dig food from the earth and pluck it from the trees,
but good Mausers don't grow on every bush. Besides, of what use would
money be to us when we have no place to spend it?"

"True!" After a moment Rosa mused aloud: "I wonder if Cueto found the
treasure? If only we had that--"

"He didn't find it," Esteban declared, positively. "I"--he
hesitated--"I think I know why he didn't."

"Yes?"

"I think I know where it is."

"Esteban!" Rosa stared, round-eyed, at her brother.

"Oh, I mean it. I've been thinking so ever since--"

"Where is it?" breathlessly inquired the girl.

After a furtive look over his shoulder Esteban whispered, "In the well."

"You're joking!"

"No, no! Think for yourself. It was old Sebastian who dug that well--"

"Yes."

"And he alone shared father's confidence. That sunken garden was all
Sebastian's work; he spent all his time there, although he was a big,
strong man and capable of any task. No one else was allowed to tend it.
Why? I'll tell you. They feared to let any one else draw the water.
Isabel searched for years: if that treasure had been above ground her
sharp nose would have smelled it out, and now Cueto has moved the very
earth."

Rosa sat back, disappointed. "So that's your theory?"

"It's more than a theory," the boy insisted. "Look at this!" From the
pocket of his cotton trousers he produced an odd-looking coin which he
placed in Rosa's hand.

"Why, it's gold! It's a Spanish doubloon," she said. "It's the first
one I ever saw. Where did you find it?"

"You'll think I'm crazy when I tell you--sometimes I think so myself. I
found it in Isabel's hand when I took her from the well!"

Rosa was stricken speechless.

"She clutched it tightly," Esteban hurried on, "but as I made the rope
fast her hand relaxed and I saw it in the lantern-light. It was as
if--well, as if she gave it to me. I was too badly frightened to think
much about it, as you may imagine. It was a horrible place, all slime
and foul water; the rocks were slippery. But that coin was in her
fingers."

Rosa managed to say: "Impossible! Then she must have had it when she
fell."

"No, no! I saw her hands upstretched, her fingers open, in the
moonlight."

"It's uncanny. Perhaps--"

"Yes. Perhaps some unseen hand led her to the place so that we should
at last come into our own. Who knows? I didn't bother my head about the
matter at first, what with our flight and all, but now I reason that
there must be other coins where this one came from. There's no doubt
that father hid his money. He turned his slaves into gold, he bought
jewels, precious metal, anything he could hide. Well, perhaps there
were old coins in the lot. The water in the well is shallow; Isabel
must have groped this piece from the bottom. Some day I shall explore
the hole and--we shall see."

Rosa flung her arms rapturously about her brother's neck and kissed
him. "Wouldn't it be glorious?" she cried. "Wouldn't it be wonderful,
to be rich, and to want for nothing; to have fine clothes and good
things to eat once more? Good things to eat!" Her lip quivered.
"Oh--I'm so hungry."

"Poor little girl!"

"Wait till O'Reilly hears about this." Rosa was all excitement once
more. "He'll be glad he came and got me, if he does come."

Esteban caressed her. "He'll come, never fear. You remember he warned
me to be careful? Well I--I blame myself for bringing you to this. For
myself, of course I don't mind, but for you this life must be terrible.
I know it. Every time I leave you my heart is in my throat for fear of
what may happen in my absence--and yet I can't always be at your side."

"There! You acknowledge that I handicap you. Except for me you would be
making a glorious name for yourself."

"Nothing of the sort. More probably I'd be getting myself killed. No!
It's better this way. We must be brave and patient and--think of what
is waiting for us at the bottom of that well."

It was indeed a great piece of luck which had enabled Esteban Varona to
buy a half-dozen Mausers from a Spanish soldier. Through Asensio's
acquaintance he had profited by the dishonesty of an enemy, and,
although it had taken all his money to effect the purchase, Esteban
considered the sacrifice well worth while. The fire of patriotism
burned fiercely in him, as did his hatred of Pancho Cueto, and the four
trusty young negroes to whom he had given rifles made, with Asensio and
himself, an armed party large enough to be reckoned with. These blacks
were excitable fellows, and wretched marksmen, but, on the other hand,
each and every one had been raised with a machete at his hip and knew
how to use it. After a few preliminary forays under Esteban's
leadership they had absorbed a bit of discipline and were beginning to
feel a military ardor.

In the Cuban field forces there were many negroes, and many of their
fellow-patriots fought better, or endured the hardships of guerrilla
warfare more cheerfully, than they. Gen. Antonio Maceo was of mixed
blood, and yet his leadership was characterized not only by rare
judgment and ability, but also by an exalted abandon of personal
bravery. His several brothers rendered Cuba services scarcely less
distinguished, and they were but of a few of many dark-skinned heroes.
This struggle for independence was no patrician's war; the best stock
of the island fought side by side with field-hands.

At dawn of the morning following his talk with Rosa, when the members
of his command assembled, Esteban was up and ready. He had made his
preparations to destroy Pancho Cueto's fields, and since the road over
the hills to La Joya was long he had summoned them early.

"Be careful!" Rosa implored him. "I shall die of suspense."

"It is for you to be careful," he laughed. "Keep a good watch, and
conceal yourself at the first alarm. However, I think we have taught
these bandits a lesson. As for Cueto, he would run to the jungle if he
saw us. He has the heart of a mouse." He kissed his sister
affectionately and then rode off at the head of his tattered band.

Rosa waved him a last farewell as he disappeared into the woods, then,
to occupy herself, she helped Evangelina with what little housework
there was to do, later going with her to the garden patch where the
viandas grew.

Evangelina's early devotion to her mistress had not diminished with
time; if anything, it had deepened. When emancipation came she would
have returned to the service of her beloved twins had it not been for
Dona Isabel's refusal to accept her. As it was, she and Asensio had
married, and by means of Rosa's surreptitious help they had managed to
buy this little piece of land. Rosa had practised self-denial to make
the purchase possible, and her self-sacrifice had borne fruit: that act
of childish beneficence had created a refuge for Esteban and herself
and had ripened the negro woman's affection into idolatry.

Evangelina's joy at having the girl to herself, where she could daily
see her, touch her, serve her, was tempered only by the knowledge of
Rosa's unhappiness. She scolded and tyrannized, she mothered and adored
the girl to her heart's content; she watched over her like a hawk; she
deemed no labor in her service too exacting. It would have gone ill
with any one who offered harm to Rosa, for Evangelina was strong and
capable; she had the arms and the hands of a man, and she possessed the
smoldering black temper of Sebastian, her father.

Even in peaceful times few people came to this clearing, in the woods,
far off from the main-traveled roads of the Yumuri, and the day, as
usual, passed uneventfully. Evangelina worked, with one eye upon her
Rosa, the other watchfully alert for danger. When evening came she
prepared their scanty meal, upbraiding Rosa, meanwhile, for her
attempts to assist her. Then they sat for an hour or two on the bench
outside the door, talking about Juan O'Rail-ye and the probable hour of
his coming.

There were no candles in Asensio's house now, and had there been,
neither woman would have dared light one. To hunted creatures darkness
is a friend; danger stalks under the sun.

When Rosa fretted about her brother, the negress reassured her. "Don't
be frightened, little dove; he has the makings of a great soldier. It's
a good thing for the Spaniards that he isn't general. Cuba would be
free in no time."

"He's so reckless."

"Oh, he knows what he's doing. Besides, Asensio wouldn't let him be
hurt. I took pains to tell him that if ever he permitted Esteban to
suffer so much as a scratch I would disembowel him with his own
machete. He knows me. Now, then, it is growing cool and the night air
carries fevers. Creep into your bed and dream about that handsome lover
of yours."

"No, I'll keep watch with you."

Evangelina was indignant. "Go!" she stormed. "What will happen to those
red cheeks if you don't sleep? Do you think the American will want to
marry an old woman with wrinkles? He may be here to-morrow--yes, I have
a certain feeling about it."

Rosa obeyed, although reluctantly. "I'll sleep for a while," she
compromised, "then I'll come out and take my turn."

This exactly suited the elder woman, who knew something about the
slumbers of youth. Nevertheless, dawn was still a long way off when,
true to her promise, Rosa emerged from the hut with an apology for
having slept so long. Evangelina protested, though her eyes were heavy
and she had been yawning prodigiously for hours. But for once the girl
was firm. "I can't sleep," she declared. "Why force me to lie staring
into the dark while you suffer?" Having finally prevailed in her
determination, she seated herself in the warm place Evangelina had
vacated, and, curling her small feet under her, she settled herself,
chin in hand, to think of O'Reilly. It was a good time to think, for
the jungle was very still and the night like a velvet curtain.

"We had better leave the horses here." Pancho Cueto hesitatingly
addressed the dim blur which he knew to be Colonel Cobo. The Colonel of
Volunteers was in a vile temper, what with the long night ride and an
error of Cueto's which had considerably lengthened the journey.

"Where is the house?" growled the officer.

"Not far. But the path is rocky and the horses' feet--"

"God, yes!" There was a creak of saddle leathers and a groan as the
colonel dismounted. "Now, my good Cueto," he threatened, "another of
your mistakes and I'll give you something to remember me by. Damnation!
What a night! As black as hell."

"It will be daylight before we know it," the other said, nervously.

"Excellent! Then I can see to deal with you if you've fooled me." A
curt order brought his men out of their saddles. One of their number
was detailed to guard the animals, while the rest fell in behind Cueto
and followed him up the trail by the starglow.



