
MARAUDERS


The surprise was easily effected, for Colonel Cobo's men were
accomplished in this sort of work. Rosa, crouching upon her bench,
heard nothing, saw nothing, until out of the shadows beside her human
forms materialized. Her white dress, like a dim phosphorescent glow in
dark waters, betrayed her presence, and as she sprang to her feet rough
hands seized her. She screamed once, twice; then a palm closed over her
mouth and she began to struggle like a cat.

Evangelina, who had waked at the first outcry, met the marauders as
they rushed through the door. The hush of the sleeping Jungle was
shattered now; there were shouts and curses, loudly bellowed orders, a
great scuffling and pounding of feet upon the dirt floor of the hut,
the rickety, bark-covered walls bulged and creaked. Over all sounded
the shrieks of the negress battling in the pitch-black interior like an
animal in its lair. Then some one set fire to the thatch; the flames
licked up the dead palm-leaves to the ridge-pole, and the surroundings
leaped into view.

Rosa saw a swarthy, thick-set man in the uniform of a Colonel of
Volunteers, and behind him Pancho Cueto. Tearing the hand from her lips
for a moment, she cried Cueto's name, but he gave no heed. He was
straining his gaze upon the door of the bohio in the immediate
expectation of seeing Esteban emerge. He clutched a revolver in his
hand, but it was plain from the nerveless way in which he held the
weapon that he had little stomach for the adventure. He was, in fact,
more inclined to run than to stand his ground. Rosa shrieked his name
again; then she heard the officer say:

"Where is the young fellow? I hear nothing but the squeals of that
common wench."

Evangelina's cries of rage and defiance suddenly ceased, and with them
the sounds of combat. From the blazing bohio ran two armed men,
brushing sparks from their clothing. A third followed, dragging
Evangelina by one naked arm. The black woman was inert; her scanty
garments were well-nigh ripped from her body: she lay huddled where the
soldier flung her.

Rosa felt herself swooning, and she knew nothing of what immediately
followed. After a time she felt herself shaken, and heard the colonel
addressing her.

"Come, come!" he was saying. "Why don't you answer me?" He dragged her
farther from what was now a roaring furnace. "Where is your precious
brother and that black fellow?"

Rosa could only stare dully.

"It seems we missed them," said Cueto.

"More of your bungling," Cobo broke out at him, wrathfully. "God! I've
a mind to toss you into that fire." He turned his attention once more
to Rosa, and with a jerk that shook her into fuller consciousness
repeated: "Where are they? Speak to me."

"Gone!" she gasped. "Gone!" She struggled weakly toward Cueto,
imploring him, "Pancho, don't you know me?"

"Well, we've taught him a lesson," said Cueto, grinning apprehensively
at Cobo. "We've accomplished something, anyhow, eh?" He nodded at Rosa.
"She's all that I told you. Look at her!"

Colonel Cobo took time to scrutinize his prisoner. He turned her about
in the light from the burning dwelling; then he agreed.

"Yes! She's a pretty little spy--quite a prize, truly. Now then!" His
thick lips spread; he spoke to her more gently. "I want you to tell me
about that brother of yours, eh? Cueto said I would find him here. Ha!
Still frightened, I see. Well, I have a way with women; I dare say
you'll be glad to tell me everything by and by." Then, seeing that his
men risked a scorching in their search of the hut and were already
quarreling over the scanty plunder which it afforded, he turned from
Rosa to call them away.

Profiting by his inattention, Rosa wriggled out of his grasp and ran to
Evangelina, who lay face down in the dirt, her limbs sprawled loosely.
She flung herself upon the prostrate body and cried the black woman's
name, but she could awaken no response.

The first pink of dawn was now deepening in the east, and as soon as it
had grown light enough to see to travel Colonel Cobo prepared to return
to his horses. The roof and walls of the bohio had fallen away to
ashes, its skeleton of poles and its few pieces of crude furniture
alone were smoldering when he called his men together and gave the word
to go.

"Come, my sweetheart." He addressed himself to the girl. "Leave that
carrion for the buzzards."

Rosa looked up to find him leering at her. She brushed the tears from
her eyes, crying:

"Go away! In God's name haven't you done harm enough?"

"Oh, but you're going with me."

The girl rose; her face was colorless; she was aquiver with
indignation. "Leave me!" she stormed. "What have I done to you? Don't--"

"Caramba! A temper. And you have strength, too, as I discovered. Must I
bind those pretty hands or--"

Colonel Cobo reached forth, laughing, and encircled her in his powerful
arms. Rosa fought him as she had fought at the first moment of
desperation, but he lifted her easily and went striding across the
field behind his men.

Esteban's party made good time over the hills and into the San Juan,
for Asensio knew the country well. Mid-afternoon found them in sight of
La Joya. Cueto's cane was thick and high; it was ready for the knife or
for the torch. Making a detour, the incendiaries approached it from the
east in order to have the trade-winds at their backs. They dismounted
in the shelter of a wood and removed the bags which they had carried on
their saddles. Inside these bags were several snakes, the largest
perhaps eight feet in length. To the tail of each the negroes fastened
a leather thong, and then to each thong a length of telegraph-wire, the
end of which had been bent into a loop to hold a bundle of oil-soaked
waste. These preliminaries accomplished, they bore the reptiles into
the cane-fields at widely separated places and lighted the waste.

Esteban, from his saddle, saw the first wisps of smoke arise and grow
and unwind into long ribbons, reaching deep into the standing crop.
Soon tongues of flame appeared and the green tops of the cane began to
shrivel and to wave as the steady east wind took effect. From the
nearest conflagration a great snapping and crackling of juicy stalks
arose. The thin, dry strippings with which the earth was carpeted
formed a vast tinder bed, and once the fire was started there was no
checking it. Smoke billowed upward and was hurried westward before the
breeze; in a dozen places the fields burst into flame. From somewhere
came a faint shouting, then a shot or two, and finally the ringing of a
bell.

Esteban waited only until he saw that his work of devastation was well
under way, then he led his followers back toward the hills. At sunset
he reined in upon the crest of a ridge and looked behind him into the
valley. The whole sky was black with smoke, as if a city were in flames.

Removing his wide jipi-japa hat, the young man swept a mocking
salutation to the east.

"So now, good Pancho Cueto," he cried, "I leave you the compliments of
those twins you love so well."

In the shelter of a ravine the party took time to eat supper, their
first meal since leaving home, and it was after dark when they
finished. The negroes, who were thoroughly tired, were for spending the
night here, but Esteban, more cautious than they, would not have it so.
Accordingly, the men remounted their weary horses, though not without
some grumbling, and set out. It was slow traveling, for the woods were
dark and the trails were blind; the men were fairly obliged to feel
their way. At length they crossed the summit and worked down toward the
Yumuri, but it seemed as if daylight would never come.

"A weary ride," Esteban yawned. "I shall sleep for a week."

Asensio agreed. "That Cueto will be furious," said he. "Some day,
perhaps, he and I will meet face to face. Then I shall kill him."

Esteban reined in his horse. "Look!" said he. "Yonder is a light."

The other horsemen crowded close, staring through the darkness. It was
very still in the woods; dawn was less than half an hour away.

"What is Evangelina thinking about?" Asensio muttered.

"But, see! It grows brighter." There followed a moment or two during
which there was no sound except the breathing of the horses and the
creak of saddle leathers as the riders craned their necks to see over
the low tree-tops below them. Then Esteban cried:

"Come! I'm--afraid it's our house." Fear gripped him, but he managed to
say, calmly, "Perhaps there has been an--accident."

Asensio, muttering excitedly, was trying to crowd past him; for a few
yards the two horses brushed along side by side. The distant point of
light had become a glare now; it winked balefully through the openings
as the party hurried toward it. But it was still a long way off, and
the eastern sky had grown rosy before the dense woods of the hillside
gave way to the sparser growth of the low ground.

Esteban turned a sick, white face over his shoulder and jerked out his
orders; then he kicked his tired mount into a swifter gallop. It was he
who first broke out into the clearing. One glance, and the story was
told.

The hut was but a crumbling skeleton of charred poles. Strung out
across the little field of malangas, yuccas, and sweet-potatoes were
several hilarious Volunteers, their arms filled with loot from the
cabin. Behind them strode an officer bearing Rosa struggling against
his breast.

Esteban did not pause; he drove his horse headlong through the soft red
earth of the garden. His sudden appearance seemed briefly to paralyze
the marauders. It was a moment before they could drop their spoils,
unsling their rifles, and begin to fire at him, and by that time he had
covered half the distance to his sister. Those rifle-shots came faintly
to Esteban's ears; he scarcely heard them; he merely lowered his head
and rode straight at that black-visaged colonel, sobbing and whimpering
in his fury.

But in spite of his speed he made no difficult target. A bullet brought
his horse down and the boy went flying over its neck. Nothing but the
loose loam saved him from injury. As he rose to his feet, breathless
and covered with the red dirt, there came a swift thudding of hoofs and
Asensio swept past him like a rocket. Esteban caught one glimpse of the
negro's face, a fleeting vision of white teeth bared to the gums, of
distended yellow eyes, of flat, distorted features; then Asensio was
fairly upon Colonel Cobo. The colonel, who had dropped his burden, now
tried to dodge. Asensio slashed once at him with his long, murderous
machete, but the next instant he was engaged with a trooper who had
fired almost into his face.

The other negroes also were in the open by this time, yelling and
firing as fast as they could work the bolts of their rifles, and
although they aimed at nothing in particular, the effect of their
fusillade was all that could be wished. Cobo's men, led by the
terrified Pancho Cueto, turned and fled for cover, believing themselves
in danger of annihilation. Nor was the colonel himself in any condition
to rally them, for Asensio's blade had cloven one full dark cheek to
the bone, and the shock and pain had unnerved him; he was frightened at
sight of the blood that streamed down over the breast of his white
tunic, and so, when he saw his men turn tail, he followed suit, lunging
through the lush garden growth, holding his wound in his hand and
shrieking profane commands which went unheeded.

The field was small, the jungle was close at hand. A moment and the
interlopers had vanished into it, all but one, who lay kicking among
the broad malanga-leaves, and over whom Asensio kept spurring his
terrified horse, hacking downward with insane fury.

This was the first hand-to-hand encounter Esteban's men had had, and
their swift victory rendered them ferocious. Flinging their guns aside,
they went crashing into the brush on the trail of their enemies.

Rosa found herself in her brother's arms, sobbing out the story of the
outrage and quivering at every sound of the chase. He was caressing
her, and telling her to have no further fears; both of them were fairly
hysterical. Even before Esteban had heard all, Lorenzo, the mulatto,
reappeared, leading three cavalry horses and shouting extravagant
praises of his own bravery. Esteban complimented him and the fellow
galloped away again, voicing the most blood-curdling threats.

Evangelina, thanks to her thick skull, was not dead. In the course of
time under Rosa's and Esteban's ministrations she regained her senses,
and when the other men returned they found her lying sick and dazed,
but otherwise quite whole.

Then, there beside the ruins of the hut, was a strange scene of
rejoicing. Asensio, recovered now from his burst of savagery, was
tearful, compassionate; his comrades laughed and chattered and bragged
about their prodigious deeds of valor. Over and over they recounted
their versions of the encounter, each more fanciful than the other,
until it seemed that they must have left the forest filled with corpses.

Esteban alone was grave. He had heard of Colonel Cobo, and, remembering
that denim-clad figure out yonder in the trampled garden, he knew that
serious consequences would follow. The Volunteers were revengeful;
their colonel was not the sort of man to forgive a deep humiliation.
Doubtless he would put a price upon the heads of all of them, and
certainly he would never allow them another encounter upon anything
like even terms. Then, too, the narrowness of Rosa's escape caused the
boy's heart to dissolve with terror.

After a conference with Asensio he decided that they must prepare for
flight, and late that afternoon they all set out to seek a safer
refuge, Evangelina in tears at leaving her precious garden plot. Their
led horse, one of those Lorenzo had captured, carried a pitifully light
burden--only some tools, some pans and kettles, and a roll of charred
bedclothes. Johnnie O'Reilly had no difficulty in locating the
Residence of Ignacio Alvarado, but to communicate with him was quite
another matter, inasmuch as his every step was dogged by that
persistent shadow from Neuvitas. Leslie Branch had told him enough
about conditions here in Puerto Principe to make him extremely
cautious, and after their first talk he had once more concealed his
revolver in a safe hiding-place, taking good care thereafter that
nothing in his conduct should awaken suspicion.

Unfortunately his room was on the second floor of the hotel, and hence
his goings and comings were always open to observation. But he noted
that a window at one end of the upper hall overlooked a sloping,
tile-roofed shed, and that the garden wall behind the hotel premises
was not provided with those barbarous spikes or broken bottles which
decorate so many Cuban walls. It promised him a means of egress when
the time should come to use it. In this hall, moreover, directly
opposite his door there was an oil bracket-lamp which gave light to the
passageway, and which was forever going out, a fact which the young man
noted with satisfaction.

One evening, several days after his arrival, a sudden rain-storm drove
O'Reilly indoors, and as he ascended to his room he saw that the lamp
in the hallway flared and smoked at every gust of wind. It was very
dark outside; he reasoned that the streets would be deserted. Hastily
securing that book which Alvarado, the dentist, had given him, he took
a position close inside his door. When he heard the spy pass and enter
the next chamber he stole out into the hall and breathed into the
lamp-chimney. A moment later he was safely through the window and was
working his way down the shed roof, praying that his movements had not
been seen and that the tiles were firm. The rain was driving in sheets
and he was wet to the skin when he dropped into the patio; nevertheless
he was laughing to himself. He nimbly scaled the wall, crossed an
inclosure, climbed a second wall, and descended into a dark side
street. Taking advantage of the densest shadows and the numerous
overhanging balconies, he set out at a brisk trot.

A light showed through the barred windows of the Alvarado home,
indicating that the family was in. After some fumbling O'Reilly laid
hold of the latch; then, without knocking, he opened the front door and
stepped in.

He found himself, as he had expected, in the parlor, a high-ceilinged,
sparsely furnished room with a glazed floor of Spanish mosaics. His
sudden appearance threw the occupants into alarm: a woman cried out
sharply; a man whom O'Reilly identified as Ignacio Alvarado himself
leaped to his feet and faced him, exclaiming:

"Who are you?"

"I'm a friend. Don't be alarmed." Johnnie summoned his most agreeable
smile, then he extended the sodden package he had carried beneath his
arm. "I come from your brother Tomas. He asked me to hand you this book
and to say that he is returning it with his thanks."

"What are you saying?" Plainly the speaker did not comprehend; there
was nothing but apprehension in his voice.

O'Reilly tore the wet paper from the volume and laid it in Alvarado's
hand. "Look at it, please, and you'll understand. I didn't take time to
knock, for fear I might be followed."

Alvarado stared first at the book, then at his caller. After a moment
he made a sign to his wife, who left the room. Wetting his lips, he
inquired, with an effort, "What do you want?"

O'Reilly told him in a few words. Alvarado showed relief; he even
smiled. "I see, but--Caramba! You gave me a start. And this book! Ha!
Tomas will have his jokes. It is well you took precautions, for I am
under surveillance. I'll help you, yes! But you must not come here
again. Return to your hotel and--Let me think." Senor Alvarado frowned
in deepest thought; then he said: "I have it! Every morning at half
past nine a man wearing a Panama hat and a gray silk necktie with a
large gold pin will pass along the sidewalk across the street from the
Isla de Cuba. You will know him. One day, I cannot promise how soon, he
will lift his hat thus, and wipe his face. You understand? Good. Follow
him. He will give you final directions. Meanwhile I will make known
your presence to certain of our friends who can be trusted. You know
Manin, the druggist? Well, you can talk to him, and he will keep you
posted as to our progress. Now go before some one comes."

O'Reilly wrung the Cuban's hand. Then he stepped out into the night,
leaving a pool of water on the clean blue tiles where he had stood.



