
WHEN THE WORLD RAN BACKWARD


Esteban went about his plan of destroying Pancho Cueto with youthful
energy and zest. First he secured, at some pains, a half-stick of
dynamite, a cap and fuse, and a gallon or more of kerosene; then he
assembled his followers and led them once again into the San Juan.

This time the ride to La Joya was longer than before, and since every
member of the little band was proscribed, Esteban insisted upon the
greatest caution. But there was little need of especial care, for the
country was already depopulated, as a result of Weyler's proclamation.
Fields were empty, houses silent; no living creatures stirred, except
in the tree-tops, and the very birds seemed frightened, subdued. It
struck young Varona queerly. It was as if the whole land was in
mourning; he saw nothing but blackbirds, somber-hued vultures, dismal
Judea-birds with their ebony plumage and yellow beaks. Far up the
valley a funeral pall of smoke hung in the sky itself; that was where
the Spaniards were burning the houses of those too slow in obeying the
order of concentration.

La Joya, however, was still tenanted when early in the evening its
rightful owner arrived; the house and some of its outbuildings showed
lights. Esteban concealed his men. While the horses cropped and the
negroes rested he fitted fuse and cap to his precious piece of
dynamite. It was likely, he thought, that Cueto had provided himself
with a body-guard, and knowing the plantation house as he did, he had
no intention of battering weakly at its stout ironwood door while his
quarry took fright and slipped away.

Now while Esteban was thus busied, Pancho Cueto was entertaining an
unwelcome guest. In the late afternoon he had been surprised by the
visit of a dozen or more Volunteers, and inasmuch as his relations with
their colonel had been none of the friendliest since that ill-starred
expedition into the Yumuri, he had felt a chill of apprehension on
seeing the redoubtable Cobo himself at their head.

The colonel had explained that he was returning from a trip up the San
Juan, taken for the purpose of rounding up those inhabitants who had
been dilatory in obeying the new orders from Havana. That smoke to the
southward was from fires of his kindling: he had burned a good many
crops and houses and punished a good many people, and since this was
exactly the sort of task he liked he was in no unpleasant mood. He had
demanded of Cueto lodging for himself and his troop, announcing that a
part of his command was somewhere behind and would rejoin him later in
the night.

Cueto had welcomed his visitor in all humility; he put up the soldiers
in the bate of the sugar-mill, and then installed Cobo in his best
room, after which he ransacked the house for food and drink and tobacco.

Later he and the colonel sat long over their supper, for the latter's
exultant humor continued. Cobo, it transpired, was delighted with the
new captain-general, a man of blood and iron, a man after his own
heart. This Weyler, he predicted, would put an end to the insurrection;
there would be no more of Campos's weak, merciful methods, which were,
in reality, nothing less than encouragement to revolt. Cueto, of
course, agreed.

"We're sweeping the country as with a broom, and already Matanzas is
bulging with refugees," the officer told him. "They call themselves
pacificos, but they carry information and aid our enemies. We'll have
no more of that."

"Will it not be a great expense to feed so many people?" Cueto ventured.

"Let them feed themselves. Is it our fault that they make such measures
necessary? By no means. Once we have them safe, we shall exterminate
all whom we encounter in the country." The speaker drank deeply of
Cueto's good wine and smacked his lips. "It's the kind of work I like.
Extermination! They have had their warning. From now on we shall spare
neither man, woman, nor child. The men are traitors, the women breed,
and the children grow up."

Cueto nodded his complete approval of this program. "Oh, decidedly,"
said he. "This spirit of violence must be stamped out or none of us
will be safe. Let me tell you I myself live in constant dread of that
young villain, Varona. I--hope you haven't forgotten him."

"Forgotten him?" Colonel Cobo fingered a lately healed scar which
further disfigured his ugly face, then he cursed frightfully. "It's by
God's mercy alone that I'm alive to-night. And I haven't forgotten the
girl, either. She'll have to come in, along with the others. The boy
may stay out, but she can't." He licked his lips. "Wait until I have
finished with this valley. I'll drive the Yumuri next, as a hunter
drives a thicket for his game, and nothing will slip through."

His thoughts once turned upon Rosa, the colonel could talk of little
else, and Cueto realized that the girl had indeed made a deep
impression upon him. The overseer was well pleased, and when Cobo
finally took himself off to bed he followed in better spirits than he
had enjoyed for some time. For one thing, it was agreeable to look
forward to a night of undisturbed repose. Pancho's apprehensions had
fattened upon themselves, and he had been living of late in a nightmare
of terror.

But it seemed to him that he had barely closed his eyes when he was
awakened by a tremendous vibration and found himself in the center of
the floor, undecided whether he had been hurled from his bed or whether
he had leaped thither. Still in a daze, he heard a shout from the
direction of Cobo's room, then a din of other voices, followed by a
rush of feet; the next instant his door was flung back and he saw, by
the light of high-held torches, Esteban Varona and a ragged rabble of
black men. Cueto knew that he faced death. He uttered a shrill scream
of terror, and, seizing the revolver which was always close at his
hand, he fired blindly. Then his foes were upon him. What happened
thereafter took but an instant. He dodged a blow from Esteban's clubbed
rifle only to behold the flash of a machete. Crying out again, he tried
to guard himself from the descending blade, but too late; the sound of
his hoarse terror died in his throat, half born.

"Quick! Soak the bed with oil and fire it," Esteban directed; then he
ran out into the hall to investigate that other shouting. He found the
chamber whence it issued and tried to smash the door; but at the second
blow he heard a gun-shot from within and the wood splintered outward
almost into his face. Simultaneously, from somewhere outside the house,
arose the notes of a Spanish bugle-call.

Young Varona waited to hear no more. Nor did his men; realizing the
peril into which they had been led, they bolted from the house as fast
as they could go. There was no need for questions; from the direction
of the sugar-mill came bellowed orders and the sound of men shouting to
their horses. Evidently those were troops--and trained troops, too, for
they took no time to saddle; they were up and mounted almost before the
marauders had gained the backs of their own animals. There was no
opportunity to choose a retreat across the fields; Esteban spurred down
the driveway toward the main calzada, yelling to his men to follow him.

The approach to La Joya was by way of a notable avenue, perhaps a
half-mile in length, and bordered by tall, even rows of royal palms.
These stately trees shaded the avenue by day and lent it a cavern-like
gloom by night. Near the public causeway the road was cut through a bit
of rising ground, and was walled by steep banks overgrown with vines.

Into the black tunnel formed by the palms the fugitives plunged, with
the clatter of hoofs close behind them. Those of the Volunteers who
pressed them hardest began to shoot wildly, for this typically Cuban
refusal to stand ground enraged them beyond measure.

Esteban's party would doubtless have made good their escape had it not
been for that other guerrillero returning from its raid; but, as it
happened, the two forces met in the sunken road. Nothing but the
darkness and the head-long approach of the fleeing men saved them from
immediate destruction, for the collision occurred between banks too
steep for a horse to climb, and with that yelling pack too close behind
to permit of retreat.

Instantly there began a blind battle in these desperately cramped
quarters. After the first moment or two friend and foe were
indistinguishable and the men of both parties began firing or thrusting
at whatever loomed nearest out of the gloom. The narrow ravine quickly
became a place of utter confusion, a volcano of blasphemies, a press of
jostling, plunging, struggling bodies. Horses reared and bit at one
another. Riders fought stirrup to stirrup with clubbed rifles and
machetes; saddles were emptied and the terrified horses bolted. Some of
them lunged up the banks, only to tumble down again, their threshing
limbs and sharp-shod hoofs working more havoc than blows from old-time
battle-hammers. Meanwhile those of Cobo's men who had ridden out from
the sugar-mill naturally attributed this new uproar to a stand of their
enemies, and began to rake the road with rifle fire; then, in obedience
to the commands of their half-clad colonel, they charged. A moment and
they were fighting hand to hand with their returning comrades. Spaniard
clashed with Spaniard, and somewhere in the melee the six marauders
battled for their lives.

Of course, after the first moment of conflict, Esteban had not been
able to exert the least control over his men; in fact, he could not
make himself heard. Nor could he spare the breath to shout; he was too
desperately engaged. When the full truth of the situation dawned upon
him he gave up hope for his life and at first merely strove to wreak
such havoc as he could. Yet while some of his faculties were completely
numbed in the stress of that white-hot moment, others remained
singularly clear. The shock of his surprise, the imminence of his
peril, rendered him dead to any emotion save dismay, and yet, strangely
enough, he remembered Rosa's pressing need for him and, more for her
sake than for his own, fought to extricate himself from the confusion.
His rifle was empty, he had its hot barrel in his hands; he dimly
distinguished Asensio wielding his machete. Then he found himself down
and half stunned. He was running here and there to avoid lunging
horses; he was tripping and falling, but meanwhile, as opportunity
offered, he continued to use his clubbed weapon. Something smote him
heavily, at last--whether a hoof or a gun-stock he could not tell--and
next he was on all-fours, trying to drag himself out of this rat-pit.
But his limbs were queerly rebellious, and he was sick; he had never
experienced anything quite like this and he thought he must be wounded.
It greatly surprised him to find that he could struggle upward through
the brambles, even though it was hard work. Men were fighting all
around and below him, meanwhile, and he wondered vaguely what made them
kill one another when he and his negroes were all dead or dying. It
seemed very strange--of a piece with the general unreality of
things--and it troubled him not a little.

At last he gained the top of the bank and managed to assume an upright
position, clinging to the bole of a palm-tree. One of his arms was
useless, he discovered, and he realized with a curious shock that it
was broken. He was bleeding, too, from more than one wound, but he
could walk, after a fashion.

He was inclined to stay and finish the fight, but he recollected that
Rosa would be waiting for him and that he must go to her, and so he set
out across the fields, staggering through the charred cane stubble. The
night was not so black as it had been, and this puzzled him until he
saw that the plantation house was ablaze. Flames were belching from its
windows, casting abroad a lurid radiance; and remembering Pancho Cueto,
Esteban laughed.

By and by, after he was well away, his numbness passed and he began to
suffer excruciating pain. The pain had been there all the time, so it
seemed; he was simply gaining the capacity to feel it. He was ready to
die now, he was so ill; moreover, his left arm dangled and got in his
way. Only that subconscious realization of the necessity to keep going
for Rosa's sake sustained him.

After a while he found himself on a forest trail; then he came to other
fields and labored across them. Fortune finally led his feet down into
a creek-bed, and he drank greedily, sitting upon a stone and scooping
the water up in his one useful hand. He was a long time in quenching
his thirst, and a longer time in getting up, but he finally managed
this, and he succeeded thereafter in keeping on his feet. Daylight came
at last to show him his way. More than once he paused, alarmed, at
voices in the woods, only to find that the sounds issued from his own
throat.

It had grown very hot now, so hot that heat-waves obscured his vision
and caused the most absurd forms to take shape. He began to hunt
aimlessly for water, but there was none. Evidently this heat had
parched the land, dried up the streams, and set the stones afire. It
was incredible, but true.

Esteban reasoned that he must be near home by this time, for he had
been traveling for days--for years. The country, indeed, was altogether
unfamiliar; he could not recall ever having seen the path he trod, but
for that matter everything was strange. In the first place he knew that
he was going west, and yet the morning sun persisted in beating hotly
into his face! That alone convinced him that things had gone awry with
the world. He could remember a great convulsion of some sort, but just
what it was he had no clear idea! Evidently, though, it had been
sufficient to change the rotation of the earth. Yes, that was it; the
earth was running backward upon its axis; he could actually feel it
whirling under his feet. No wonder his journey seemed so long. He was
laboring over a gigantic treadmill, balancing like an equilibrist upon
a revolving sphere. Well, it was a simple matter to stop walking, sit
down, and allow himself to be spun backward around to the place where
Rosa was waiting. He pondered this idea for some time, until its
absurdity became apparent. Undoubtedly he must be going out of his
head; he saw that it was necessary to keep walking until the back-spin
of that treadmill brought Rosa to him.

But the time came when he could walk no farther. He tried repeatedly
and failed, and meanwhile the earth spun even more rapidly, threatening
to whirl him off into space. It was a terrible sensation; he lay down
and hugged the ground, clinging to roots and sobbing weakly. Rosa, he
knew, was just around the next bend in the trail; he called to her, but
she did not answer, and he dared not attempt to creep forward because
his grip was failing. He could feel his fingers slipping--slipping. It
was agony. He summoned his last atom of determination, but to no avail.
He gave up finally, and felt himself propelled dizzily outward into
immeasurable voids. His last thought, as he went whirling end over end
through space, was of his sister. She would never know how hard he had
tried to reach her.



