
SPEAKING OF FOOD


It was part of the strategy practised by the Cuban leaders to divide
their forces into separate columns for the purpose of raiding the
smaller Spanish garrisons and harassing the troops sent to their
relief, reassembling these bands only when and where some telling blow
was to be struck. Not only had the military value of this practice been
amply demonstrated, but it had been proved a necessity, owing to the
fact that the Insurrectos were compelled to live off the country.

When O'Reilly and Branch enlisted in the Army of the Orient they were
assigned to the command of Colonel Miguel Lopez, and it was under his
leadership that they made their first acquaintance with the peculiar
methods of Cuban warfare.

Active service for the two Americans began at once; scarcely a week had
passed before Leslie Branch gained his opportunity of tasting the "salt
of life" in its full flavor, for the young Matanzas colonel was one of
the few Cuban commanders who really enjoyed a fight.

There had been, at first, some doubt of Branch's fitness to take the
field at all--he had suffered a severe hemorrhage shortly after his
arrival at Cubitas--and it was only after a hysterical demonstration on
his part that he had been accepted as a soldier. He simply would not be
left behind. At first the Cubans regarded him with mingled contempt and
pity, for certainly no less promising volunteer had ever taken service
with them. Nevertheless, he would doubtless have made many friends
among them had he not begun his service by refusing to abide by
discipline of any sort and by scorning all instruction in the use of
arms, declaring this to be, in his case, a silly waste of effort. Such
an attitude very naturally aroused resentment among the other men; it
was not long before they began to grumble at the liberty allowed this
headstrong weakling. But upon the occasion of the very first fight this
ill-will disappeared as if by magic, for, although Branch deliberately
disobeyed orders, he nevertheless displayed such amazing audacity in
the face of the enemy, such a theatrical contempt for bullets, as to
stupefy every one. Moreover, he lived up to his reputation; he
continued to be insanely daring, varying his exploits to correspond
with his moods, with the result that he attained a popularity which was
unique, nay, sensational.

His conduct in the face of this general admiration was no less
unexpected than his behavior under fire: Branch gruffly refused to
accept any tribute whatever; he snarled, he fairly barked at those of
his comrades who tried to express their appreciation of his conduct--a
demeanor which of course awakened even greater admiration among the
Cubans. He was uniformly surly and sour; he sneered, he scoffed, he
found fault. He had the tongue of a common scold, and he used it with
malevolent abandon.

It was fortunate indeed that he knew no Spanish and that most of his
companions were equally ignorant of English, for mere admiration, even
of the fervent Latin quality, would scarcely have been proof against
his spleen. As it was, his camp-mates endured his vituperations
blandly, putting him down as a pleasing eccentric in whom there blazed
a curious but inspiring spirit of patriotism.

O'Reilly alone understood the reason for the fellow's morbid
irritability, his suicidal recklessness; but when he privately
remonstrated he was gruffly told to mind his own business. Branch
flatly refused to modify his conduct; he seemed really bent upon
cheating the disease that made his life a misery.

But, as usual, Fate was perverse; she refused to humor the sick man's
hope. When, after blindly inviting death, Leslie had emerged from
several engagements unscathed, his surprise--and perhaps a natural
relief at finding himself whole--became tinged with a certain
apprehension lest he survive those deliberately courted dangers, only
to succumb to the ills and privations of camp life. Cuban equipment was
of the scantiest. Cuban dews are heavy; Cuban nights are cool--these
were perils indeed for a weak-lunged invalid. Branch began to fret.
Rain filled him with more terror than fixed bayonets, a chill caused
him keener consternation than did a thousand Spaniards; he began to
have agonizing visions of himself lying in some leaky hovel of a
hospital. It was typical of his peculiar irritability that he held
O'Reilly in some way responsible, and vented upon him his bitterness of
spirit.

The fellow's tongue grew ever sharper; his society became intolerable,
his gloom oppressive and irresistibly contagious. When, after several
weeks of campaigning, the column went into camp for a short rest,
O'Reilly decided that he would try to throw off the burden of Leslie's
overwhelming dejection, and, if possible, shift a portion of it upon
the shoulders of Captain Judson.

On the day after their arrival O'Reilly and the big artilleryman took
advantage of a pleasant stream to bathe and wash their clothes; then,
while they lay in their hammocks, enjoying the luxury of a tattered
oil-cloth shelter and waiting for the sun to dry their garments,
O'Reilly spoke what was in his mind.

"I'm getting about fed up on Leslie," he declared. "He's the world's
champion crepe-hanger, and he's painted the whole world such a deep,
despondent blue that I'm completely dismal. You've got to take him off
my hands."

Judson grunted. "What ails him?"

"Well, he wears a wreath of immortelles day and night. Haven't you
guessed why he runs such desperate chances? He's sick--thinks he's
going to die, anyhow, and wants to finish the job quick. I'm the one
who has to endure him."

"Suicide?"

"It amounts to that."

"The devil!" Judson pondered for a moment. "Can't you cheer him up?"

"I?" O'Reilly lifted his hands in a gesture of helplessness. "When I
try he gets sore at my heartless indifference; when I sympathize he
declares I'm nudging him closer to his grave--says I'm kicking the
crutches out from under him. He's just plain vitriol. I--I'd rather
live with an adder!"

O'Reilly's youthful asistente, who at the moment was painstakingly
manufacturing a huge, black cigar for himself out of some purloined
tobacco, pricked up his ears at the mention of Branch's name and now
edged closer, exclaiming:

"Carumba! There's a hero for you. Meester Branch is the bravest man I
ever seen. Our people call him 'El Demonio'!"

O'Reilly jerked his head toward the Cuban. "You see? He's made the hit
of his life, and yet he resents it. The Cubans are beginning to think
he carries a rabbit's foot."

"No rabbit's foot about it," the captain asserted. "He's just so blamed
thin the Spaniards can't hit him; it's like shooting at the edge of a
playing-card. Annie Oakley is the only one who can do that."

"Well, my nerves are frayed out. I've argued myself hoarse, but he
misconstrues everything I say. I wish you'd convince him that he has a
chance to get well; it might alter his disposition. If SOMETHING
doesn't alter it I'll be court-martialed for shooting a man in his
sleep--and I'll hit him, right in the middle, no matter how slim he
is." O'Reilly compressed his lips firmly.

The asistente, who had finished rolling his cigar, now lighted it and
repeated: "Yes, sir, Meester Branch is the bravest man I ever seen. You
remember that first battle, eh? Those Spaniards seen him comin' and
threw down their guns and beat it. Jesus Cristo! I laugh to skill
myself that day."

"Jacket" was at once the youngest and the most profane member of
Colonel Lopez's entire command. The most shocking oaths fell from his
beardless lips whenever he opened them to speak English, and O'Reilly's
efforts to break the boy of the habit proved quite unavailing.

"Colonel Miguel," continued Jacket, "he say if he's got a hunnerd sick
men like El Demonio he'll march to Habana. By God! What you think of
that?"

Judson rolled in his hammock until his eyes rested upon the youth. Then
he said, "You're quite a man of arms yourself, for a half-portion."

"Eh?" The object of this remark was not quite sure that he understood.

"I mean you're a pretty good fighter, for a little fellow."

"Hell, yes!" agreed the youth. "I can fight."

"Better look out that some big Spaniard doesn't carry you off in his
pocket and eat you," O'Reilly warned; at which the boy grinned and
shook his head. He was just becoming accustomed to the American habit
of banter, and was beginning to like it.

"Jacket would make a bitter mouthful," Judson ventured.

The lad smiled gently and drew on his huge cigar. "You betcher life.
That----Spaniard would spit me out quick enough."

This Camagueyan boy was a character. He was perhaps sixteen, and small
for his age--a mere child, in fact. Nevertheless, he was a seasoned
veteran, and his American camp-mates had grown exceedingly fond of him.
He was a pretty, graceful youngster; his eyes were large and soft and
dark; his face was as sensitive and mobile as that of a girl; and yet,
despite his youth, he had won a reputation for daring and ferocity
quite as notable in its way as was the renown of Leslie Branch.

There were many of these immature soldiers among the Insurrectos, and
most of them were in some way distinguished for valor. War, it seems,
fattens upon the tenderest of foods, and every army has its boys--its
wondrous, well-beloved infants, whom their older comrades tease,
torment, and idolize. Impetuous, drunk with youth, and keeping no
company with care, they form the very aristocracy of fighting forces.
They gaily undertake the maddest of adventures; and by their examples
they fire the courage of their maturer comrades. All history is spiced
with their exploits.

Jacket was one of these, and he was perhaps the truest patriot of any
soldier in Miguel Lopez's band; for liberty, to him, was not a mere
abstraction or a principle, but something real, tangible,
alive--something worthy of the highest sacrifice. In his person all the
wrongs of Cuba burned perpetually. It mattered not that he himself had
never suffered--his spirit was the spirit of his country, pure,
exalted, undefiled. He stood for what the others fought for.

In order to expand his knowledge of English--of which, by the way, he
was inordinately proud--Jacket had volunteered to serve as O'Reilly's
striker, and the result had been a fast friendship. It was O'Reilly who
had given the boy his nickname--a name prompted by a marked
eccentricity, for although Jacket possessed the two garments which
constituted the ordinary Insurrecto uniform, he made a practice of
wearing only one. On chilly nights, or on formal occasions, he wore
both waistcoat and trousers, but at other times he dispensed entirely
with the latter, and his legs went naked. They were naked now, as, with
the modesty of complete unconsciousness, he squatted in the shade,
puffing thoughtfully at his giant cheroot.

Once Jacket's mind was fastened upon any subject, it remained there,
and after a time he continued:

"Yes, I bet I don't taste good to no Spaniard. Did I told you about
that battle of Pino Bravo? Eh?" He turned his big brown eyes upward to
O'Reilly. "Cristo! I skill more'n a dozen men that day!"

"Oh, Jacket!" the Americans cried. "You monstrous little liar!"
commented O'Reilly.

"Si, senors," the boy went on, complacently. "That day I skill more'n
six men. It was this way; we came on them from behind and they don't
see us. Phui! We skill plenty, all right!"

"It was a hot scrimmage," Judson attested. "Some of Luque's niggers,
those tall, lean, hungry fellows from Santiago, managed to hack their
way through a wire fence and get behind a detachment of the enemy who
had made a stand under a hill. They charged, and for a wonder they got
close enough to use their machetes. It was bloody work--the kind you
read about--no quarter. Somehow Jacket managed to be right in the
middle of the butchery. He's a bravo kid, all right. Muy malo!"

There was a moment's silence, then Judson continued: "Funny thing
happened afterward, though. Jacket had to do his turn at picket duty
that night, and he got scared of the dark. We heard him squalling and
screaming--"

Jacket started to his feet. "That's a dam' lie." he exclaimed,
resentfully. "I'm not scared of no dark."

"Didn't you holler till you woke the whole camp?"

"I ain't scared of no dark," the boy repeated; but his pride, his
complacency, had suddenly vanished. He dug his toes into the dirt; in
his eyes were tears of mortification. His cigar had evidently become
tasteless, for he removed it from his lips and gazed at it
indifferently.

"Did you cry?" O'Reilly smiled; and the lad nodded reluctantly.

"Did he cry?" Judson echoed. "Why, we thought we were attacked. He put
the whole camp in an uproar."

"What was the trouble, Jacket?"

"I--I was--" The boy's smooth brown cheeks paled, and his moist eyes
dilated at the memory. "I ain't scared of any-------Spaniard when he's
ALIVE, but--it's different when he's dead. I could see dead ones
everywhere!" He shuddered involuntarily. "They fetched me to General
Gomez and--Caramba! he's mad. But after I tell him what I seen in the
dark he say I don't have to go back there no more. He let me go to
sleep 'longside of his hammock, and bimeby I quit cryin'. I ain't never
stood no picket duty since that night. I won't do it."

It was plain that discussion of this unhappy subject was deeply
distasteful to the youthful hero of Pino Bravo, for he edged away, and
a moment later disappeared. "Queer little youngster," Captain Judson
said, meditatively. "He idolizes you."

O'Reilly nodded. "Yes, poor little kid. I wonder what will become of
him after the war? After the war!" he mused. "I wonder if it will ever
end."

"Humph! If we had more generals like Gomez and Garcia and Maceo--"

"We've got three better generals than they."

"You mean---"

"Generals June, July, and August."

"Oh yes!" The artilleryman nodded his understanding. "There's no end of
yellow-jack among the Spaniards. Speaking of that, what do you think of
Miss Evans's work in the field hospitals?"

Judson shifted his weight so that his eyes could rest upon a white tent
which showed through the greenery at a distance; it was the one tent in
all the encampment, and it had been erected that very morning to
shelter Norine Evans, but just arrived from headquarters in the Cubitas
hills. The captain's lids were half closed; his heavy, homely face was
softened by a peculiar rapt expression. He did not seem to expect an
answer to his question.

"I don't think much of it," O'Reilly confessed.

"You don't!" Judson brought himself back to earth with a start. "Humph!
Well, I think it's perfectly wonderful. I think she's the most
wonderful woman, and--" His voice died out; he turned once more in the
direction of the tent.

O'Reilly smiled, understanding now the reason for his companion's
reckless, almost frenzied use of soap and water that morning, and his
cheerful stoicism in the hands of a volunteer barber more accustomed to
the uses of a machete than a razor.

Evidently Judson had fallen, too--along with Major Ramos, and Colonel
Lopez, and Leslie Branch, and all the rest. Well, it was to be
expected. Before he had been a week in Cuba O'Reilly had noticed that
Miss Evans was a mystery and a delight to nearly every man she met.

"So YOU'VE got it, eh?" he inquired.

"Got what?" Judson did not turn his eyes.

"It."

"It? If you can't talk English, talk Spanish."

O'Reilly was not perturbed by this gruffness. "I think her presence
here is the silliest, the most scandalous thing I ever heard of," said
he. "The idea of a girl of her accomplishments, her means, alone in
Cuba! Why, it's criminal!"

Judson's gunny-sacking hammock bulged beneath him. It threatened to
give way as he sat up with a jerk and swung his bare legs over the
side. His face was dark; he was scowling; his chin was pugnaciously
outthrust and his voice rumbled as he exclaimed:

"The deuce it is! Say! I don't like the way you talk about that girl."

"You don't, eh?" O'Reilly eyed him quizzically. "Would you care to have
your sister do what she's doing?"

"That's not the point. You can't compare her with ordinary women."

"Well, this isn't an ordinary environment for a woman, no matter who
she is. These Cubans are bound to talk about her."

"Are they?" Judson glared at the speaker. "I'd like to hear 'em. I'd
like to see somebody get fresh. Why, SAY!"--he clenched his powerful
hands--"I'd fill their hospitals until they bulged." After a moment he
continued: "I s'pose it's natural for you to worry, since you're
responsible for her being here, in a way, but--" His tone changed, he
relaxed and lay back in his hammock. "Oh, well, you're about the only
man I can't hate."

"Jealous, are you? I didn't know you were in so deep."

The other shook his head. "Oh, I'm daffy. D'you think she'd have me?"

"Not a chance."

"Hey? Why not? I'm a good big husky--I'll get a Government job when the
war is over and---"

"That's just the trouble. She'll fall for some poor, sickly
unfortunate, with one leg. She's the sort that always does. She's the
sort that has to have something to 'mother.' Lord, I'd give a good deal
to see her safely back in New York!"

Judson, it seemed, had a better understanding of artillery than of
women; he pondered O'Reilly's statement seriously, and his face clouded.

"Some sickly fellow. Some fellow like Branch, eh?" After a moment he
continued, more hopefully: "Well, it won't be HIM; he'll soon be dead.
There's some consolation in that. I could almost--"

O'Reilly motioned for silence, for at that moment Branch himself
approached, his long face set in lines of discontent, even deeper than
usual. He had been wandering about the camp in one of his restless
fits, and now he began:

"Say, what do you think I've been doing?"

"I dun'no'," Captain Judson answered, morosely. "Cheering the sick and
wounded; shedding smiles and sunshine as usual, I suppose?"

"Hunh! You're a funny guy, aren't you?--about as comical as a
chloroform cone. You make me laugh, you do--just like a broken leg.
Well, I've been looking up some grub for Miss Evans, and I can't find
any."

"Can't find any?"

"Nothing fit for her to eat. You don't expect her to live on this
infernal, eternal, and internal beef stew." Branch shuddered and gagged
slightly. "I've eaten parts of animals that were never intended to be
eaten. This rebel grub is killing ME. What'll it do to her?"

"Didn't Major Ramos bring anything along?" O'Reilly asked.

"He says there's a famine at Cubitas."

"We'd better look into this," Judson exclaimed, and, finding that his
clothes were dry, he hurriedly began to dress himself.

Together, the three men made an investigation of the camp's resources,
only to discover that Branch was right. There was, indeed, but little
food of any kind, and that little was of the coarsest. Ordinarily, such
a condition of affairs would have occasioned them no surprise, for the
men were becoming accustomed to a more or less chronic scarcity of
provisions; but the presence of Norine Evans put quite a different
complexion upon the matter. They were still discussing the situation
when Miss Evans, having finished her afternoon nap, threw open the
flaps of her tent and stepped out.

When she had listened to the account apologetically submitted by her
three friends, she drew her brows together, saying, plaintively: "Oh
dear! We've been going short for a week, and Major Ramos told me we'd
fare better when we got here. I had my mouth all set for a banquet.
Couldn't you even find the poor dog a bone?"

Norine was thinner and browner than when she had come to Cuba, but she
in no way showed the effect of any serious or continued lack of
nourishment. In fact, a simple diet and an outdoor life had agreed with
her amazingly.

"I'm afraid the cupboard is bare," O'Reilly acknowledged.

"They're getting ready to slaughter another guttapercha ox," Branch
said, gloomily. "He's a veteran of the Ten Years' War. That means STEW
again! STEW! One puncture-proof, rubber ox and a bushel of
sweet-potatoes for four hundred men!"

"Do you know what I want for dinner?" Norine inquired. "Lamb chops with
green peas, some nice white bread, a salad, and coffee."

The three men looked at her anxiously. Judson stirred uneasily.

"That's what I want. I don't expect to get it."

With a sigh of relief the captain exclaimed, "I thought you were giving
your order."

"Goodness, no!" With a laugh the girl seated herself upon her one
camp-chair, inviting her callers to dispose themselves on the ground
about her. "If you can stand the food, I dare say I can. Now then, tell
me what you've been doing since you left Cubitas. I've been frightened
to death that some of you would be hurt. That's one reason why I've
been working night and day helping to get the hospitals in shape. I
can't bear to think of our boys being wounded."

"Not much chance of OUR getting shot," O'Reilly told her. "But
Leslie--he needs a good talking to. He has gone into the hero business."

Branch uttered a disdainful grunt. "Nothing of the sort. I'm a sick
man; if I'd rather get shot than suffer a slow death from neglect, it's
my own business, isn't it? Imagine feeding an invalid on boiled bicycle
tires! Gee! I'd like to have a meal of nice nourishing ptomaines for a
change. Hero? Humph!"

Norine eyed the complainant critically, then said: "The diet agrees
with you. You look better than you did."

Branch turned a somber glance upon her and gave vent to a bitter,
sneering laugh. It was plain that he believed she, too, was attempting
to pull the wool over his eyes. "I wish I could find some poisonous
toadstools. I'd eat 'em raw."

"Listen," Norine went on. "Let's play a game. We'll imagine this is
Delmonico's and we'll all take turns ordering the best things to eat
that we can think of. The one who orders best, wins. We'll call the
game--" She frowned thoughtfully.

"Call it 'Vittles,'" O'Reilly suggested.

"'Vittles' it is. Maybe it will give us an appetite for supper. Leslie,
you begin. Come now, hand your hat to the hat-boy, then follow the head
waiter. This way, sir. Table for one? Very good, sir. Here's a cool
one, in front of the electric fan. We have an exceptional selection of
cold dishes to-day, sir. Perhaps you would like a nice halibut salad--"

"No halibut salad," Branch answered, striving valiantly to enter into
the spirit of Norine's pretending. "I had it for breakfast. And say,
turn off that fan; I'm just back from Cuba. Now then, you may bring me
some oysters--"

"Oysters are out of season," O'Reilly murmured, politely, "but our
clams are very fine."

"Some oysters," Branch insisted, stubbornly. "After that, a cup of
chicken broth, a grilled sweetbread, and toast Melba."

Joe Judson put an abrupt end to the invalid's meal by hurling a clod at
him, crying: "You're in Delmonico's, not in Battle Creek. Let somebody
order who knows how. We'll have steak and onions all around."

"I want strawberries!" Norine cried. "They're ripe now. Strawberries
and cream--Oh-h! Think of it!"

There was a tense silence, which O'Reilly broke by saying, "I guess
'Vittles' isn't a very good game, after all."

"It doesn't seem to fill MY wants," the girl acknowledged. "Let's talk
about something else."

Miss Evans did seem truly concerned for the welfare of her "boys," as
she termed the little group of Americans whom she had met, and she
showed, by asking numerous questions, that her interest was keen.

The men were glad to talk and she soon gained an insight into the
peculiar, aimless, unsatisfactory, and yet effective method of warfare
practised by the Insurrecto armies; they told her of the endless
marches and counter-marches, the occasional skirmishes, the feints, the
inconclusive engagements which were all a part of the general
strategy--operations which served to keep the enemy constantly on
guard, like a blind swordsman, and would, it was hoped, eventually wear
down his patience and endurance. In her turn, Norine related something
of what she was doing and how her labor of mercy progressed.

"I'm nearly discouraged," she confessed, finally. "Everything is so
different to what I thought it would be, and I'm so weak and
ineffective. The medical supplies I brought are nearly all gone, and
I've learned what hard work it is fitting up hospitals when there's
nothing to fit them up with. I can't teach these people to take care of
themselves--they seem to consider precautions against disease as a
confession of cowardice. Summer, the yellow-fever season, is here
and--well, I'm getting disheartened. Disheartened and hungry! They're
new sensations to me." She sighed. "I imagined I was going to work
wonders--I thought I was going to be a Florence Nightingale, and the
men were going to idolize me."

"Don't they?" Judson demanded.

"No. That is--not in exactly the way I expected."

"They all want to marry her," O'Reilly explained.

"Insolent bunch!" growled the captain. Then he swallowed hard and said,
"But for that matter, so do I."

"Why, Joe!" Norine cast a startled glance at the big fellow.

"It's a fact," he asserted, doggedly. "I might as well declare myself
here and now. There's always a gang of eavesdroppers hanging around
you."

"He means you, Leslie," O'Reilly said. "Hadn't you better take a walk?"

Branch rolled a hostile eye at the artilleryman, and his lip curled.
"I'll not move. When he gets through, I'll propose."

"How silly you boys can be!" Norine laughed. "I dare say the others are
joking too, but--"

"Joking?" O'Reilly grinned. "Not at all. I'm the only single man in
camp who isn't in love with you. When you arrived this morning there
was a general stampede for the river. I'll bet the fish in this stream
will taste of soap for years to come."

As if to point O'Reilly's words at the moment appeared Colonel Lopez,
shaved blood-raw and clad in a recently laundered uniform which was
still damp. The three Americans rose to salute him, but discipline was
lax and he waved them back to their seats. Other eyes than his, too,
had noted Miss Evans's reappearance after her siesta, for Major Ramos,
Norine's escort from headquarters, soon joined the group, and he was
followed by two Camagueyan lieutenants.

These latter were youths of some family standing. Before the war they
had been dandies, and they still had an excellent opinion of their
physical charms, but, unfortunately, they spoke no English and hence
their attentions to Norine had been somewhat vague and pointless. They
possessed eloquent eyes, however, and now they languished melting
glances upon her, the meaning of which she had no difficulty in
translating.

"We've been talking about food," Leslie Branch advised his commanding
officer. "Miss Evans isn't a burning patriot like the rest of us, and
so of course she can't share our ravenous appetite for beef cooked and
eaten on the hoof."

"So?" Lopez's handsome face clouded. "You are hungry, then?"

Norine confessed that she was. "I'm starving!" said she. "I haven't had
a decent meal for a week."

"God be praised! I know where there is a goat, not two leagues away!"
said the colonel.

"But I don't want a goat," Norine complained. "I want--well, pickles,
and jam, and sardines, and--candy, and--tooth-powder! Real
boarding-school luxuries. I'd just like to rob a general store."

Lopez furrowed his brows and lost himself in thought. Later, while the
others were talking, he drew Ramos aside and for a while they kept
their heads together; then they invited Judson to join their council.

It was not until perhaps an hour later that O'Reilly had a chance for a
confidential talk with Norine, for in the mean time other officers came
to pay their respects. But when the last one had reluctantly departed
he said:

"I've been talking to Joe about you, and I don't think it's right for
you to be running around alone this way."

"You know how mad that sort of talk makes me," she warned him.

"Yes. Just the same, I'll never feel easy until you're safe home again.
And I'll never stop bothering you until--"

"In the first place, I'm not alone. I take a woman with me everywhere,
a Mrs. Ruiz."

"Bah! She's no more of a chaperon than I am."

Norine uttered an impatient exclamation. "Is this a time to consider
such things?"

"Oh, I dare say the nature of your work is unconventional and excuses a
good deal, but you don't understand the Latin mind as I do. These
Cubans have different standards than ours. They're very apt to think--"

"I don't care what they think," the girl declared, "so long as _I_
think I'm doing right. That's final."

There was a brief pause. Then O'Reilly admitted: "I'm not seriously
concerned over that part of it, either, for you are the best judge of
what is right and proper. What does concern me, however, is the effect
all this may have upon you, yourself. You're impractical,
romantic"--Norine laughed shortly, but he went on, stubbornly--"and
just the sort of girl to be carried away by some extravagant impulse."

"What makes you think I'm impractical and romantic?"

"You wouldn't be here, otherwise."

"Very well. What are you trying to get at? What do you mean by 'some
extravagant impulse'?"

"I'm afraid"--O'Reilly hesitated, then voiced a fear which had troubled
him more than he cared to acknowledge--"I'm afraid of some silly
entanglement, some love affair--"

Norine's laughter rang out, spontaneous, unaffected. It served to
relieve the momentary tension which had sprung up between them.

"All these men are attracted to you, as it is quite natural they should
be," O'Reilly hurried on. "I'm worried to death for fear you'll forget
that you're too blamed good for any of them."

"What a conscientious duenna you are!" she told him, "but rest easy;
I'm thoroughly homesick, and ready to flunk it all at the first good
excuse. I'll make you a promise, Johnnie. If I decide to fall in love
with any of these ragged heroes I'll choose you. Most of them think
there is something between us, anyhow."

"I don't quite understand how I manage to resist you," O'Reilly told
her, "for I think you're perfectly splendid. Probably that's why I'd
hate to see you married to some one-legged veteran of this amateur war."

"Women don't marry legs," she told him, lightly. Then, more seriously,
she asked, "What are you doing about Rosa?"

"I'm waiting to hear from Matanzas Province. When I joined the army I
had to go where I was sent, of course, but General Gomez has started
inquiries, and as soon as I learn something definite I shall follow it
up. I shall go where the trail leads."

"You still have hope?"

He nodded. "I refuse to let myself doubt."

When O'Reilly joined Judson for supper the latter met him with a broad
grin on his face. "Well," said he, "it seems you started something with
your game of 'Vittles.' You can get ready to saddle up when the moon
rises."

"What do you mean?"

"The colonel took Miss Evans at her word. We're going to raid San
Antonio de los Banos--two hundred of us--to get her some pickles, and
jam, and candy, and tooth-powder."



