
THAT SICK MAN FROM SAN ANTONIO


Certain histories of the Cuban War for Independence speak of "The
Battle of San Antonio de los Banos." They relate how one thousand
patriots captured the village after a gallant and sanguinary resistance
by its Spanish garrison; how they released the prisoners in the local
jail, replenished their own supplies, and then retired in the face of
enemy reinforcements. It is quite a stirring story to read and it has
but one fault, a fault, by the way, not uncommon in histories--it is
mainly untrue.

In the first place, the engagement was in no sense a battle, but merely
a raid. The number of troops engaged was, perhaps, one-fifth of the
generous total ascribed by the historians, and as a military manoeuver
it served no purpose whatsoever. That the Cubans delivered a spirited
attack there is no denying. As a matter of fact, the engagement was
characterized by an abandon, by a lack of caution, truly sensational,
the reason being that the Insurrectos were half starved and stormed the
town much as hungry hoboes attack a lunch-counter. Nevertheless, since
the affair had a direct bearing upon the fortunes of several people
connected with this story, it is, perhaps, worth relating.

The Baths of St. Anthony consisted of a sulphur spring which for many
years had been held in high regard by gouty and rheumatic Camagueyans;
around this spring a village had arisen which boasted rather better
shops than the ordinary country town. It was this fact which had
induced the gallant and obliging Colonel Lopez to attack it, for, as he
explained to his American friends, if any place outside of Habana was
likely to contain pickles, jam, sardines, candy, tooth-powder, and such
other delicacies as appeared necessary to the contentment of a visiting
American lady, San Antonio de los Banos was the one. Colonel Lopez did
not believe in half measures: once he had determined to prove his
devotion to Norine Evans, he would have sacrificed himself and the
flower of his command; he would have wasted his last precious
three-pound shell in breaching the walls of San Antonio de los Banos
rather than fail. But as a matter of fact the village had no walls and
it was defended only by a couple of blockhouses. Therefore the colonel
left his artillery behind.

Perhaps its name was the most impressive thing about San Antonio de los
Banos. Its streets were narrow and steep and stony, and its flinty
little plaza was flanked by stores of the customary sort, the fronts of
which were open so that mounted customers from the country might ride
in to make their purchases. Crowning two commanding eminences just
outside the village limits were the loopholed fortinas, where for
months past the Spanish garrison had been dozing.

Lopez and his troop approached the town in the early morning. As they
deployed for the attack the colonel issued private instructions to
certain members of his command.

"O'Reilly, you and Senor Branch will enter one grocery-store after
another. You will purchase that jam, those sardines, and whatever else
you think Miss Evans would like. Captain Judson, you and Major Ramos
will go to the apothecary-shop--I understand there is a very good
one--and look for tooth-powder and candy and the like, I shall see that
the streets are cleared, then I shall endeavor to discover some
pickles; but as God is my judge, I doubt if there is such a thing this
side of Habana."

Leslie Branch, whose temper had not improved with the long night ride,
inquired, caustically: "Do you expect us to buy the groceries? Well,
I'm broke, and so is O'Reilly."

"Have you no money?" asked the colonel, vastly surprised.

"I haven't tipped my hat to a dollar since I quit newspaper work.
What's more, I want to do a little shopping for myself."

O'Reilly agreed: "If you don't give us some change, Colonel, we'll have
to open a charge account in your name."

"Carmaba!" muttered Lopez. "I intended to borrow from you gentlemen.
Well, never mind--we'll commandeer what we wish in the name of the
Republic."

Lopez's attack proved a complete surprise, both to the citizens and to
the garrison of the town. The rebel bugle gave the first warning of
what was afoot, and before the Castilian troops who were loitering off
duty could regain their quarters, before the citizens could take cover
or the shopkeepers close and bar their heavy wooden shutters, two
hundred ragged horsemen were yelling down the streets.

There followed a typical Cuban engagement--ten shouts to one shot.
There was a mad charge on the heels of the scurrying populace, a
scattering pop-pop of rifles, cheers, cries, shrieks of defiance and
far-flung insults directed at the fortinas.

Bugles blew on the hilltops; the defenders armed themselves and began
to fire into the village. But since the Insurrectos were now well
sheltered by the houses and only a portion of certain streets could be
raked from the forts, the Spanish bullets did no harm. Obedient to
orders, a number of Lopez's men dismounted and took positions whence
they could guard against a sally, thus leaving the rest of the command
free to raid the stores. In the outskirts of the town Mausers spoke,
the dust leaped, and leaden messengers whined through the air.

As locusts settle upon a standing crop, so did the army of liberators
descend upon the shops of San Antonio de los Banos. It was great fun,
great excitement, while it lasted, for the town was distracted and its
citizens had neither time nor inclination to resist. Some of the
shop-keepers, indeed, to prove their loyalty, openly welcomed the
invaders. Others, however, lacking time to close up, fled
incontinently, leaving their goods unguarded.

O'Reilly, with Branch and Jacket close at his heels, whirled his horse
into the first bodega he came to. The store was stocked with general
merchandise, but its owner, evidently a Spaniard, did not tarry to set
a price upon any of it. As the three horsemen came clattering in at the
front he went flying out at the rear, and, although O'Reilly called
reassuringly after him, his only answer was the slamming of a back
door, followed by swiftly diminishing cries of fright. Plainly, that
rush of ragged men, those shots, those ferocious shouts from the plaza,
were too much for the peaceful shopkeeper and his family, and they had
taken refuge in some neighbor's garden.

There was no time to waste. Johnnie dismounted and, walking to the
shelves where some imported canned goods were displayed, he began to
select those delicacies for which he had been sent. The devoted Jacket
was at his side. The little Cuban exercised no restraint; he seized
whatever was most handy, meanwhile cursing ferociously, as befitted a
bloodthirsty bandit. Boys are natural robbers, and at this opportunity
for loot Jacket's soul flamed savagely and he swept the shelves bare as
he went.

"Hey, Leslie! Get something to carry this stuff in," O'Reilly directed
over his shoulder. Receiving only a muttered reply, he turned to find
that his fellow-countryman had cut down a string of perhaps two dozen
large straw sombreros and was attempting to select one that fitted his
head.

"Oh, look!" Branch murmured. "Forty dollars' worth of lids, but--all
too small. They must have been made on the head of a cane."

"Take the whole string, but get us something to wrap up this grub in.
Hurry!"

Spurred by O'Reilly's tone and by a lively rattle of rifle-shots
outside, Leslie disappeared into the living-quarters at the back of the
store. A moment later he emerged with a huge armful of bedclothes,
evidently snatched at random. Trailing behind him, like a bridal veil,
was a mosquito-net, which in his haste he had torn from its fastenings.

"I guess this is poor!" he exulted. "Bedding! Pillows! Mosquito-net!
I'll sleep comfortable after this."

From somewhere came the faint smothered wailing of a baby--eloquent
testimony of the precipitate haste with which the terrified storekeeper
and his wife had fled. Dumping his burden of sheets, blankets, and
brilliantly colored cotton quilts upon the floor, Branch selected two
of the stoutest and began to knot the corners together.

He had scarcely finished when Judson reined in at the door and called
to O'Reilly: "We've cleaned out the drugstore. Better get a move on
you, for we may have to run any minute. I've just heard about some
Cuban prisoners in the calaboose. Gimme a hand and we'll let 'em out."

"Sure!" O'Reilly quickly remounted, meanwhile directing Jacket to load
the canned goods upon his horse and ride for the open country. He
looked back a few moments later, to see his asistente emerge from the
bodega perched between two queer-looking improvised saddlebags bulging
with plunder. The pony was overloaded, but in obedience to the frantic
urgings of its barelegged rider it managed to break into a shambling
trot. Branch reappeared, too, looping the eight-foot string of straw
hats to his saddle-horn, and balancing before him the remainder of the
bedding, done up in a gaudy quilt.

Sharing in the general consternation at the attack, the jail guards had
disappeared, leaving Lopez's men free to break into the prison. When
O'Reilly joined them the work was well under way. The municipal
building of San Antonio was a thick-walled structure with iron-barred
windows and stout doors; but the latter soon gave way, and the
attackers poured in. Seizing whatever implements they could find,
Judson and O'Reilly went from cell to cell, battering, prying,
smashing, leaving their comrades to rescue the inmates. This jail was a
poor affair. It could scarcely be dignified by the name of a prison;
nevertheless, true prison conditions prevailed in it and it was
evidently conducted in typically Spanish fashion. The corridors were
dark and odorous, the cells unspeakably foul; O'Reilly and Judson saw,
heard, smelled enough to convince them that no matter how guilty the
prisoners might be they had been amply punished for their crimes.

This, too, was swift work. The building echoed to rushing, yelling men,
while outside a fitful accompaniment of gun-shots urged the rescuers to
greater haste. While the Americans smashed lock after lock, their
comrades dragged the astonished inmates from their kennels, hustled
them into the street, and took them up behind their saddles.

The raid was over, "retreat" was sounding, when Judson and O'Reilly ran
out of the prison, remounted, and joined their comrades, who were
streaming back toward the plaza.

"Whew!" Judson wiped the sweat out of his eyes. "No chance to ask these
fellows what they were in for."

"No need to ask them," said Johnnie. "A month in there would be too
much for a murderer."

"The druggist said most of 'em are just patriots, and every holiday the
Spaniards shoot one or two. There's no cock-fighting, so it's the only
Sunday amusement they have. Did you notice that sick guy?"

"Yes."

"He looked to me like he was plain starved. Our fellows had to carry
him."

Colonel Lopez galloped up to inquire, anxiously, "Did you find those
eatables, eh?"

"Yes, sir, and a lot more."

"Good! But I failed. Pickles? Caramba! Nobody here ever heard of one!"

"Did we lose any men?" Judson asked.

"Not one. But Ramos was badly cut."

"So? Then he got to close quarters with some Spaniard?"

"Oh no!" The colonel grinned. "He was in too great a hurry and broke
open a show-case with his fist."

The retreating Cubans still maintained their uproar, discharging their
rifles into the air, shrieking defiance at their invisible foes, and
voicing insulting invitations to combat. This ferocity, however, served
only to terrify further the civil population and to close the shutters
of San Antonio the tighter. Meanwhile, the loyal troops remained safely
in their blockhouses, pouring a steady fire into the town. And despite
this admirable display of courage the visitors showed a deep respect
for their enemies' markmanship, taking advantage of whatever shelter
there was.

Leslie Branch, of course, proved the solitary exception; as usual, he
exposed himself recklessly and rode the middle of the streets,
regardless of those sudden explosions of dust beneath his horse's feet
or those unexpected showers of plaster from above.

He had spent his time assiduously ransacking the deserted shops, and in
addition to his huge bundle of bedding and his long string of straw
hats he now possessed a miscellaneous assortment of plunder, in which
were a bolt of calico, a pair of shoes, a collection of
cooking-utensils, an umbrella, and--strangest of all--a large
gilt-framed mirror. The safety of these articles seemed to concern him
far more than his own. Spying O'Reilly, he shouted:

"Say! What's the Spanish word for 'clothing-store'? I need a new suit."

"Don't be an idiot!" Johnnie yelled at him. "Keep under cover."

But Branch only shook his head. "They couldn't hit anything," he cried.

The next instant, as if to punctuate his remark, a spent bullet smashed
the mirror and sprinkled the speaker with particles of glass. It was
only by a miracle that he escaped injury. Branch reined in his horse,
examined the wreck, then with a petulant exclamation cast the useless
frame away.

"Come on, Johnnie," Judson growled. "The damn fool wants to get shot."

The sick man's bravado roused in O'Reilly a feeling of mingled
resentment and apprehension, but further warning would obviously be a
waste of breath. Nevertheless, being a little too tender-hearted to
follow Judson's nonchalant example and ride on, O'Reilly held in his
horse, meanwhile keeping an anxious eye upon his friend.

The latter was in no hurry; he jogged along leisurely, evidently on the
lookout for an opportunity to replenish his wardrobe. Truth to say,
this needed replenishing--Leslie resembled a scarecrow clad in a suit
of soiled pajamas. But by this time most of the shops had their
shutters up. When the last one had been left behind O'Reilly spurred
his horse into a gallop, relieved to know that the worst was over.

The raiders had approached San Antonio de los Banos across the fields
at the rear, but Colonel Lopez led their retreat by way of the camino
real which followed the riverbank. This road for a short distance was
exposed to the fire from one fort; then it was sheltered by a bit of
rising ground.

O'Reilly, among the last to cross the zone of fire, was just
congratulating himself upon the fortunate outcome of the skirmish when
he saw Colonel Lopez ride to the crest of a knoll, rise in his stirrups
and, lifting his cupped hands to his lips, direct a loud shout back
toward the town. Lopez was followed by several of his men, who likewise
began to yell and to wave their arms excitedly.

Johnnie turned to discover that Leslie Branch had lagged far behind,
and now, as if to cap his fantastic performances, had dismounted and
was descending the river-bank to a place where a large washing had been
spread upon the stones to dry. He was quite exposed, and a spiteful
crackle from the nearest blockhouse showed that the Spaniards were
determined to bring him down. Mauser bullets ricocheted among the
rocks--even from this distance their sharp explosions were
audible--others broke the surface of the stream into little geysers, as
if a school of fish were leaping.

While Johnnie looked on in breathless apprehension Branch appropriated
several suits that promised to fit him; then he climbed up the bank,
remounted his horse, and ambled slowly out of range.

Now this was precisely the sort of harebrained exploit which delights a
Cuban audience. When Leslie rejoined his comrades, therefore, he was
greeted with shouts and cheers.

"Caramba! He would risk his life for a clean shirt. ... There's a
fellow for you! He enjoys the hum of these Spanish bees! ... Bravo!
Tell us what the bullets said to you," they cried, crowding around him
in an admiring circle.

O'Reilly, unable to contain himself, burst forth in a rage: "You
infernal fool! Do you want to be shot robbing a clothes-line?"

"Rats!" ejaculated Leslie, sourly. "I TOLD you I had to have some
clothes."

"Lopez ought to court-martial you. What are you going to do with that
junk, now that you have it? You can't take it with you on the march."

"You wait and see," said the other. "I'm going to be comfortable, if--"
He paused, with a peculiar, startled expression on his face. "Did you
hear anything?" he queried after a moment. "No. What?"

"Oh, nothing." The two men rode on in silence for a time, then Leslie
said: "Queer thing happened back there while those Romeos were popping
at me. I heard a baby crying."

"A baby?"

"Sure. I suppose it was the washerwoman's kid. When we flushed her she
probably vamped out and left it in the grass. Anyhow, it let up an
awful holler."

Jacket and the other loot-laden soldiers had been sent on ahead,
together with those troopers who were sharing mounts with the rescued
prisoners; they were now waiting perhaps two miles from town for their
companions to overtake them. As the column came up and halted, O'Reilly
addressed a remark to Leslie Branch, but in the middle of it the faint,
unmistakable complaint of a child came to his ears.

"Listen!" he exclaimed. "What on earth--"

"I've been hearing it right along," Branch said. "I--I thought I had
the willies."

The nearest riders abruptly ceased their chatter; they questioned one
another mutely, doubting their own ears. Again came that thin, muffled
wail, whereupon O'Reilly cried in astonishment:

"Leslie! Why, it--it's in YOUR BUNDLE!" He pointed to the formless roll
of bedding which hung from his friend's saddle-horn.

"G'wan! You're crazy!" Branch slipped to the ground, seized the bundle
in his arms, and bore it to the roadside. With shaking hands he tugged
at the knotted corners of the comforter. "Pure imagination!" he
muttered, testily. "There's nothing in here but bedclothes. I just
grabbed an armful--" The last word ended in a yell. Leslie sprang into
the air as if his exploring fingers had encountered a coiled serpent.
"Oh, my God!" He poised as if upon the point of flight. "Johnnie! Look!
It's ALIVE!"

"What's alive? What is it?"

With a sudden desperate courage Branch bent forward and spread out the
bedding. There, exposed to the bulging eyes of the onlookers, was a
very tiny, very brown baby. It was a young baby; it was quite naked.
Its eyes, exposed to the sudden glare of the morning sun, closed
tightly; one small hand all but lost itself in the wide, toothless
cavity that served as a mouth. Its ten ridiculous toes curled and
uncurled in a most amazing fashion.

"Oh, my God!" Branch repeated, aghast. "It's just b-born! Its eyes
aren't open."

The Cubans, who had momentarily been stricken dumb with amazement,
suddenly broke into voluble speech. The clamor served to attract
Colonel Lopez, who was riding past.

"What's the matter here?" he demanded, forcing his horse through the
ring which had formed about El Demonio and his bundle. One startled
look and the colonel flung himself out of his saddle. "Whose baby is
that?" he demanded.

"I--I--Why, it's mine. I mean, I--" Branch's eyes were glued upon the
child in horrified fascination. He choked and stammered and waved his
hands impotently.

"Come, come! Speak up! What does this mean?" Lopez's voice grew stern.

"She must have be-been asleep. I just grabbed--You know. I--" Branch's
face became suddenly stricken. "Look out!" he shouted, hoarsely. "She's
going to cry, or something."

He was right; the baby showed every sign of a firm determination to
voice her indignation at the outrage she had suffered. Her hand stole
out of her mouth, her fists closed, her face puckered ominously. Lopez
stooped, wrapped her in a sheet, then took her awkwardly in his arms.
He bent a blazing glance upon the kidnapper, but he had no chance to
speak before the storm of wailings broke.

News of Leslie's exploit was spreading. Men were shouting and
gesticulating to their comrades to come and see El Demonio's spoils.
There was a great chattering and crowding and no little smothered
laughter. Meanwhile, Colonel Lopez was using every desperate device to
soothe the infant, but without success. At last he strode up to Leslie
and extended his burden.

"Here," he said, harshly, "she's yours. I surrender her."

Leslie drew back. "No, you don't! I wouldn't touch her for a thousand
dollars!" he cried.

But Lopez was firm. He spoke in a tone of command: "Do as I tell you.
Take her. A fine outrage, to steal a baby! What are we going to do with
her? We can't send her back--the town is crazy. I've no doubt I shall
hear from this."

In spite of Leslie's choking protests, in spite of his feeble
resistance, Lopez pressed the noisy stranger into his arms, then turned
to his men and directed them to be off.

Branch remained motionless. He was stupefied; he held the baby
gingerly, not daring to put it down, dreading to keep it; his eyes were
rolling, he began to perspire freely. Stretching a timid, detaining
hand toward Lopez, he inquired, huskily, "What shall I do with her?"

"God knows. I don't," snapped the officer. "I shall have to think, but
meanwhile I hold you responsible for her. Come now, we must be going."

Leslie swallowed hard; his face became overspread with a sicklier
pallor. "What'll I do--when she gets HUNGRY?"

Lopez could not restrain a smile. "You should have thought about that,
compadre. Well, I know where there is a milk cow not three leagues from
here. I'll send a man to borrow it from the owner and drive it to our
camp. Or perhaps"--his handsome face hardened again--"perhaps you would
prefer to take this child back where you found it?"

"No--I--Oh, they'd tear me limb from limb!"

"Exactly."

Branch turned his head from side to side in desperation. He wet his
lips. "It's the youngest one I ever had anything to do with. Maybe it
isn't used to cow's milk," he ventured.

"Unfortunately that is the only kind I can offer it. Take care of it
until I find some way of notifying its people."

O'Reilly had looked on at his friend's embarrassment with malicious
enjoyment, but, realizing that Branch would undoubtedly try to foist
upon him the responsibility of caring for the baby, he slipped away and
rode over to where Captain Judson was engaged in making a litter upon
which to carry the sick prisoner they had rescued from the jail. When
he had apprised the artilleryman of what Branch had found in his roll
of purloined bedding the latter smiled broadly.

"Serves him right," Judson chuckled. "We'll make him sit up nights with
it. Maybe it'll improve his disposition." More seriously he explained:
"This chap here is all in. I'm afraid we aren't going to get him
through."

Following Judson's glance, O'Reilly beheld an emaciated figure lying in
the shade of a near-by guava-bush. The man was clad in filthy rags, his
face was dirty and overgrown with a month's beard; a pair of restless
eyes stared unblinkingly at the brazen sky. His lips were moving; from
them issued a steady patter of words, but otherwise he showed no sign
of life.

"You said he was starving." Johnnie dismounted and lent Judson a hand
with his task.

"That's what I thought at first, but he's sick. I suppose it's that
damned dungeon fever."

"Then we'd better look after him ourselves. These Cubans are mighty
careless, you know. We can swing him between our horses, and--"

Judson looked up to discover that Johnnie was poised rigidly, his mouth
open, his hands halted in midair. The sick man's voice had risen, and
O'Reilly, with a peculiar expression of amazement upon his face, was
straining his ears to hear what he said.

"Eh? What's the matter?" Judson inquired.

For a moment O'Reilly remained frozen in his attitude, then without a
word he strode to the sufferer. He bent forward, staring into the
vacant, upturned face. A cry burst from his throat, a cry that was like
a sob, and, kneeling, he gathered the frail, filthy figure into his
arms.

"ESTEBAN!" he cried. "ESTEBAN! This is O'Reilly. O'Rail-ye! Don't you
know me? O'Reilly, your friend, your brother! For God's sake, tell me
what they've done to you! Look at me, Esteban! Look at me! LOOK AT ME!
Oh, ESTEBAN!"

Such eagerness, such thankfulness, such passionate pity were in his
friend's hoarse voice that Judson drew closer. He noticed that the
faintest flame of reason flickered for an instant in the sick man's
hollow eyes; then they began to rove again, and the same rustling
whisper recommenced. Judson had heard something of O'Reilly's story; he
had heard mention of Esteban and Rosa Varona; he stood, therefore, in
silent wonderment, listening to the incoherent words that poured from
his friend's lips. O'Reilly held the boy tenderly in his arms; tears
rolled down his cheeks as he implored Esteban to hear and to heed him.

"TRY to hear me! TRY!" There was fierce agony in the cry. "Where is
Rosa? ... Rosa? ... You're safe now; you can tell me. ... You're safe
with O'Reilly. ... I came back ... I came back for you and Rosa. ...
Where is she? ... Is she--dead?"

Other men were assembling now. The column was ready to move, but Judson
signaled to Colonel Lopez and made known the identity of the sick
stranger. The colonel came forward swiftly and laid a hand upon
O'Reilly's shoulder, saying:

"So! You were right, after all. Esteban Varona didn't die. God must
have sent us to San Antonio to deliver him."

"He's sick, SICK!" O'Reilly said, huskily. "Those Spaniards! Look what
they've done to him." His voice changed. He cried, fiercely: "Well, I'm
late again. I'm always just a little bit too late. He'll die before he
can tell me--"

"Wait! Take hold of yourself. We'll do all that can be done to save
him. Now come, we must be going, or all San Antonio will be upon us."

O'Reilly roused. "Put him in my arms," he ordered. "I'll carry him to
camp myself."

But Lopez shook his head, saying, gently: "It's a long march, and the
litter would be better for him. Thank Heaven we have an angel of mercy
awaiting us, and she will know how to make him well."

When the troop resumed its retreat Esteban Varona lay suspended upon a
swinging bed between O'Reilly's and Judson's horses. Although they
carried him as carefully as they could throughout that long hot
journey, he never ceased his babbling and never awoke to his
surroundings.



