
EL DEMONIO'S CHILD


During the next few days O'Reilly had reason to bless the happy chance
which had brought Norine Evans to Cuba. During the return journey from
San Antonio de los Banos he had discovered how really ill Esteban
Varona was, how weak his hold upon life. The young man showed the marks
of wasting illness and of cruel abuse; starvation, neglect, and disease
had all but done for him. After listening to his ravings, O'Reilly
began to fear that the poor fellow's mind was permanently affected. It
was an appalling possibility, one to which he could not reconcile
himself. To think that somewhere in that fevered brain was perhaps
locked the truth about Rosa's fate, if not the secret of her
whereabouts, and yet to be unable to wring an intelligent answer to a
single question, was intolerable. The hours of that ride were among the
longest O'Reilly had ever passed.

But Norine Evans gave him new heart. She took complete charge of the
sick man upon his arrival in camp; then in her brisk, matter-of-fact
way she directed O'Reilly to go and get some much-needed rest. Esteban
was ill, very ill, she admitted; there was no competent doctor near,
and her own facilities for nursing were primitive indeed; nevertheless,
she expressed confidence that she could cure him, and reminded O'Reilly
that nature has a blessed way of building up a resistance to
environment. As a result of her good cheer O'Reilly managed to enjoy a
night's sleep.

Leslie Branch was later than the others in arriving, for the baby
proved to be a trial and a handicap. His comrades had refused him any
assistance on the homeward journey. They expressed a deep, hoarse
condemnation of his conduct, and pretended to consider that he had
sacrificed all claims to their friendship and regard.

Branch took this seriously, and he was in a state bordering upon
desperation when he reached camp. In the hope of unloading his
unwelcome burden upon Norine Evans he hurried directly to her tent. But
Norine had heard the story; Lopez had warned her; therefore she waved
him away.

"Don't ask me to mother your stolen child," she said.

"Oh, but you've GOT to," he declared in a panic. "You've just GOT to."

"Well, I won't. In the first place, I have a sick man in my tent."

"But look! Listen! This baby dislikes me. I've nearly dropped it a
dozen times. I--I'm going to leave it, anyhow."

But Norine remained firm in her refusal. "You sha'n't leave your
foundling at MY door. If you intend to steal babies you should make up
your mind to take care of them." She was itching to seize the hungry
little mite, but she restrained the impulse. "Go ahead and keep it
amused until the cow arrives," she told him.

"Keep it AMUSED! Amuse a starving brat!" tragically cried the man. "In
Heaven's name, how?"

"Why, play with it, cuddle it, give it your watch--anything! But don't
allow it to cry--it may injure itself."

Branch glared resentfully; then he changed his tactics and began to
plead. "Oh, Norine!" he implored. "I--just can't do it. I'm all fagged
out now, and, besides, I've got the only watch in camp that keeps time.
I didn't sleep any last night, and it'll keep me awake all to-night.
It's a nice baby, really. It needs a woman---"

Norine parted the flaps of her tent and pointed inside, where Esteban
Varona lay upon her cot. His eyes were staring; his lips were moving.
"Mrs. Ruiz and I will have our hands full with that poor chap. For all
we know, he may have some contagious disease."

Branch was utterly shameless, utterly selfish and uncompassionate. "I'm
sick, too--sicker than he is. Have a heart! Remember, I risked my life
to get you something nice to eat---"

"Yes! The most ridiculous procedure I ever heard of. What ever made you
do such a crazy thing?" Norine was honestly indignant now.

"I did it for you. It seems to me that the least you can do in
return---"

"The least, and the most, I can do is to try and save this poor man's
life," she firmly reasserted. "Now run along. I'd take the baby if I
could, but I simply can't."

"It'll die on me," Branch protested.

"Nonsense! It's the healthiest little thing I ever saw. Wait until it
has its supper. You'll see." She disappeared into her tent and Branch
reluctantly turned away.

Next he bore the infant to Judson and O'Reilly in turn; but both
gruffly refused to assume the least responsibility for it. In the
matter of advice concerning its welfare, however, they were more
obliging. They were willing to discuss the theory of child-rearing with
him as long as he would listen, but their advice merely caused him to
glare balefully and to curse them. Nor did he regard it as a mark of
friendship on their part when they collected an audience that evening
to watch him milk the cow--a procedure, by the way, not devoid of
excitement and hazard, inasmuch as Branch's knowledge of cows was even
more theoretical than his knowledge of babies.

Leslie had begun by this time to realize that there existed a general
conspiracy against him; he met it with sullen resentment. He deeply
regretted his ignorance of the Spanish language, however, for a
thousand epithets and insults clamored for translation.

Now there are cows which an amateur can milk, and there are other
kinds. This particular cow was shy, apprehensive, peevish; Branch's
unpractised fumbling irritated her. Being herself a nomad of the
savannas, she was accustomed to firm, masterful men, therefore when
Leslie attempted courteously, apologetically, to separate her from her
milk she turned and hooked him.

El Demonio's audience, who had been looking on with rapt attention,
applauded this show of spirit. Branch was unwontedly meek. He
acknowledged his total inexperience, and begged his friends, almost
politely, to call for a substitute.

Judson explained, gravely, "These Cubans don't know any more about cows
than you do."

O'Reilly agreed, "They're good bull-fighters, but they can't milk."

Leslie eyed the speakers, white with rage; he was trembling. "You think
you're damned funny, don't you? You're having a jubilee with me. Well,
I'm game. I'll go through with it. If you'll hold her, I'll milk her.
I'll milk her till she hollers."

Obligingly, O'Reilly took the animal by the horns and Judson laid hold
of her tail.

"Stretch her tight," Leslie commanded. "Don't give her an inch of
slack, or I'll quit." When his friends had braced themselves he moved
toward the cow once more, but this time from the opposite quarter.
Noting the direction of his approach, the onlookers gave vent to a low
murmur of expectancy. They drew closer. Strangely enough, the animal
stood quiet for a time--lost in amazement, perhaps--and Leslie managed
to cover the bottom of his big tin cup with milk. But at last the
outrage proved too much for her; she slowly lifted one hind foot and
poised it jerkily. She seemed to consider the next move for a moment;
then she kicked forward and sent Branch flying.

"Can you beat that?" O'Reilly exclaimed in apparent wonderment. "Why,
she walloped you with the back of her hand."

Judson, too, affected great amazement. "Most cows are left-handed," he
declared. "Try her on the other side."

Branch dried the milk from his face, then in a shaking voice cried:
"Have a good time with me. It's your last chance."

It seemed for a while that the enterprise was doomed to failure; but at
last a pint or more of milk was secured, and this Leslie proceeded to
dilute with warm water from a near-by camp-fire. Even then, however,
his difficulties were not over. He had supposed that any baby knew
enough to drink. It took him half an hour to discover his mistake.
Having long since given up the hope of any active assistance from his
audience, he doggedly set to work to fashion a nursing-bottle. He
succeeded in due time, after making use of a flask, the stem of an
unused cigarette-holder, and a handkerchief.

When he finally took seat and began awkwardly coaxing the fretful child
to drink, the Cubans voiced their appreciation of the picture. They
were courteous, they did not laugh; nevertheless, the sight of their
eccentric, irascible, rebellious El Demonio tamely nursing a child in
the fire-light filled them with luxurious, soul-satisfying enjoyment.

O'Reilly was up at daylight to offer his services in caring for Esteban
Varona, but Norine declined them.

"His fever is down a little and he has taken some nourishment," she
reported. "That food you boys risked your silly lives for may come in
handy, after all."

"I dare say he won't be able to talk to me to-day?" O'Reilly ventured.

"Not to-day, nor for many days, I'm afraid."

"If you don't mind, then, I'll hang around and listen to what he says,"
he told her, wistfully. "He might drop a word about Rosa."

"To be sure. So far he's scarcely mentioned her. I can't understand
much that he says, of course, but Mrs. Ruiz tells me it's all jumbled
and quite unintelligible. How is Leslie's baby this morning?"

"Oh, it passed a good night. It was awake and had ordered breakfast
when I got up. Leslie was making a fire to scald out its bottle. He
says he didn't close his eyes all night."

"Poor fellow! I'm going to help him," Norine declared.

"Please don't. Lopez wants to teach him a lesson, and this is the best
thing that could possibly have happened. We have told him that there's
no chance of returning the baby, and he thinks he's elected to keep it
indefinitely. As a matter of fact, Jacket is going to take a letter to
the comandante at San Antonio this morning, advising him that the child
is safe, and asking him to send for it at once."

"Isn't that risky?" Norine inquired. "Won't the comandante attack us if
he learns where we are?"

"Lopez doesn't think so. Those Spaniards are usually pretty scrupulous
on points of honor. There was some difficulty in getting a messenger,
but Jacket volunteered. He volunteers for anything, that boy. They
wouldn't be likely to hurt a kid like him. If they should, why, we have
the baby, you see."

Although Norine had pretended to wash her hands of all responsibility
for Branch's little charge, she was by no means so inhuman as she
appeared. During the day she kept a jealous eye upon it, and especially
upon its diet.

Fortunately for all concerned, it was a good-natured child; so long as
its stomach was full it was contented. It slept a good deal, and what
time it was awake it sucked its fist and suffered itself to be
variously entertained by the men. There were, of course, a number of
fellows who could see no humor at all in El Demonio's plight, nor any
reason for adding to his embarrassments. These came to his aid in
numerous ways.

It was an idle day; there was nothing to do except play with the baby;
before night came the child had established itself as a general
favorite. Even Branch himself had become interested in it.

"Say, I've learned a lot about kids from this one," he confided to
O'Reilly at dinner-time. "I always thought young babies were just damp,
sour-smelling little animals, but this one has character. She knows me
already, and I'm getting so I can pick her up without feeling that I'm
going to puncture her. She's full of dimples, too. Got 'em everywhere.
What do you think we'd better name her?"

"She probably has a name. Do you expect to keep her permanently?"

Branch considered. "I wouldn't have thought of such a thing yesterday,
but how are we going to get rid of her? That's the question. We can't
just leave her with the first family we come to. These country people
have more kids than they know what to do with."

"Thinking about taking her on the march with us?" O'Reilly looked up,
much amused.

"I don't see why it couldn't be done. The men wouldn't mind and she'd
make a dandy mascot."

O'Reilly shook his head. "This isn't a baseball team. What about the
baby's mother?"

"Bullets! Fine mother SHE was, to desert her child. I'll bet she's glad
to get rid of it. People like that don't have any more affection
than--cattle. They don't deserve to have children. What's more, they
don't know how to care for them. I'd like to raise this kid according
to my own ideas." Branch's face lightened suddenly. "Say! I've just
thought of a name for her!"

"What?"

"Bullets!"

"Are you swearing or naming her?"

"Wouldn't that be a good name? It's new, and it means something. Raid,
battle, rain of bullets! See? Bullets Branch--that doesn't sound bad."

With deliberate malice O'Reilly said, gravely: "Of course, if you adopt
her, you can name her what you choose--but she's a mighty brown baby! I
have my suspicions that--she's a mulatto." Branch was shocked,
indignant. "That child's as white as you are," he sputtered. Then
noting the twinkle in O'Reilly's eyes he turned away, muttering angrily.

Strangely enough, Leslie's fantastic suggestion found echo in more than
one quarter, and many of his camp-mates began to argue that El
Demonio's baby would certainly bring the troop good luck, if it could
keep her. Adoption of some sort was gravely discussed that evening
around more than one camp-fire.

After breakfast on the following morning the baby was bathed. This was
an event, and it had been advertised as such. An interested and
admiring group of swarthy cigarette-smokers looked on while Branch
officiated, Norine's offer to perform the service less publicly having
been refused. Leslie was just drying off the chubby form when he was
unexpectedly interrupted.

Jacket had made his round trip in safety, but instead of bringing a
squad of the enemy's soldiers with him he had brought the child's
parents, which was a much more sensible thing to do.

The storekeeper and his wife arrived unheralded; they gave no warning
of their coming, and they exchanged no amenities with the ravagers of
their home. Hearing the shrill, petulant voice of their beloved, they
made directly for it, as eagles swoop from the sky at threat to their
nest.

Branch looked up at the sound of some swift approach. He beheld an
entirely strange woman bearing down upon him. Her face was white,
frantic, terrible; her arms were outstretched; she gave utterance to a
peculiar, distressing cry. Snatching the baby from his lap without so
much as "by your leave," she clutched it to a billowing brown bosom.

Leslie rose, protesting, just in time to receive the full onslaught of
the child's distracted father. He went down in a swirl of arms and
legs; he felt himself kicked, pounded, trampled, beaten, scratched,
until his friends came to the rescue and dragged him to his feet. He
rose to behold a small, fat, disheveled Spaniard who had turned from
assaulting him and now appeared to be engaged in biting mouthfuls from
such portions of the baby's anatomy as were not hidden in its mother's
embrace.

A clamor of voices breaking the Sabbath calm of the morning brought
Norine Evans running from her tent. One look, and its cause was plain.
Fifty men were talking loudly; fifty pairs of arms were waving. In
consequence of the torrent of words that beat upon their ears it was
some time before the merchant and his wife could be made to fully
understand the peculiar circumstances of the kidnapping, and that no
harm had been intended to their darling. Slowly, bit by bit, they
learned the truth, but even then the mother could not look upon Leslie
Branch without a menacing dilation of the eyes and a peculiar
expression of restrained ferocity.

The father was more reasonable, however; once he was assured of his
daughter's safety, his thankfulness sought outlet. He began by
embracing every one within his reach. He kissed Norine, he kissed
O'Reilly, he kissed Judson, he made a rush at Leslie himself; but the
latter, suspicious of his intent, fled. Unmindful of the fact that
these were the men who had relieved him of a considerable stock of
goods and profaned his holy of holies, he recklessly distributed among
them what money he had upon his person and then gave away the remaining
contents of his pockets. He swore his undying love for them all.
Smiting his breast excitedly, he urged them as a personal favor and a
mark of his overflowing gratitude to return to San Antonio de los
Banos, make themselves masters of all his worldly possessions, and then
burn his store.

While this was going on, Jacket was proudly advertising his share of
the enterprise, not failing to give himself full credit.

"By----! I made a big hit with that comandante," he told his American
friends. "Those people in San Antonio say I'm the bravest boy they ever
seen, and they give me more'n a thousand cigars. When I rode away I
saluted the comandante; then I yelled, 'Vive Cuba Libre!' and everybody
laughed like hell. I guess those people never seen nobody like me
before."

That afternoon, when it came time for the merchant and his little
family to set out for home, a crowd of regretful Insurrectos assembled
to bid them farewell and to look for the last time upon the baby. By
now the mother's apprehensions had given way to pride and she could
bring herself to smile at the compliments showered upon her offspring
and to answer in kind those which were aimed at herself. She even
permitted El Demonio to kiss the child good-by. Her husband, since his
arrival in camp, had heard much about the eccentric American, and now,
after apologizing abjectly for his unwarranted attack, he invited
Branch to visit his store when this hideous war was over and Cuba was
free. Finally, in spite of Leslie's frantic struggles, he embraced him
and planted a moist kiss upon either cheek.

Amid loud and repeated good wishes and a cheer for the baby the
visitors rode away.

Lopez linked his arm within O'Reilly's as they turned back into the
palm-grove. With a smile he said:

"Well, I hope this has taught your friend to steal no more babies."

"I'm afraid he'll steal the very next one he sees. He fell in love with
that one and wanted to keep it."

"Oh, he wasn't alone in that. It's queer how sentimental soldiers
become. I've often noticed it. When I was in the Rubi Hills some of my
fellows adopted a goat. We had to eat it finally, but those men
wouldn't touch a piece of the flesh--and they were starving. By the
way, how is Varona doing?"

"About the same."

Lopez frowned. "I shall have to send him to Cubitas to-morrow, for we
must be under way."

"If he has to be moved, let me do it. I'd like to be with him when he
comes out of his fever, and learn what he knows about his sister."
O'Reilly's appeal was earnest.

The colonel readily yielded. "Go, by all means. Report to General
Gomez, and he no doubt will let you stay until the boy can talk. He may
have news from Matanzas by that time."

O'Reilly pressed his colonel's hand gratefully. "You're mighty good,"
said he. "There's one thing more. Will you look out for Branch while
I'm gone, and--hold him down?"

Lopez laughed lightly. "Oh, he'll soon get over his recklessness. This
life agrees with him. Why, he's a different man already! When he gets
well and has something to live for he will want to live. You'll see."



