{"name": "Chapter 20", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20", "summary": "On Friday morning, Mrs. Ochiltree's cook, Dinah, goes to wake her and find her murdered body lying on the floor. Dinah hurries over to Mrs. Carteret's house and announces the death in a terrified fashion. Olivia is filled with terror but also remembers that she had meant to ask her Aunt Polly about the papers that she mentioned that might give legitimacy to her father's black mistress. When she enters the room, she quickly searches for the papers and finds a wrinkled envelope amongst the scattered belongings of her dead aunt. A committee is formed to track down the killer. The entire black population of the town is immediately suspected. The suspicion was not entirely an illogical one. Having been, for generations, trained up to thriftlessness, theft, and immorality, against which only thirty years of very limited opportunity can be offset, during which brief period they have been denied in large measure the healthful social stimulus and sympathy which holds most men in the path of rectitude, colored people might reasonably be expected to commit at least a share of crime proportionate to their numbers. The Southern tendency to charge the negroes with all the crime and immorality of that region, unjust and exaggerated as the claim may be, was therefore not without logical basis. Wellington's black population goes into spontaneous hibernation. Everyone knows that there will be calls for a lynching and the best way to gain immunity was \"a temporary disappearance from public view", "analysis": "Chesnutt continues this theme of economic justice in the next chapter focusing on Captain McBane. In Southern hierarchy, the slave drivers and poor whites of the antebellum South have retained few rights and those that they did have come only because of race. McBane represents this crude class of poor white Southerners who, by the fortune of capitalism, was able to pull himself into respectable society. Chesnutt uses an aside by his narrator in Chapter Seventeen to reveal to the reader McBane's true feelings and aspirations -- just as McBane seeks to attack the black community, he also plans to \"assault society in its citadel\" by seeking to become a member at the Clarendon Club. That Tom Delamere speaks on his behalf is only a demonstration of the decline of white aristocracy from its principles and its past. The narrative of Sandy's false imprisonment and near lynching in the book's middle chapters is a sub-plot of the novel's larger narrative. Chesnutt has been slowly building up this sub-plot, with Sandy's dismissal from the Methodist Church and Delamere's gambling problems as the crises leading to the murder of Mrs. Ochiltree. This sub-plot foreshadows the riot that will take place in the novel's closing chapters. It also involves several characters that will prove pivotal during the riot, most importantly Josh Green. Chesnutt uses this sub-plot to illustrate the common practice of false accusations that often led to the lynchings of black men. Though Polly Ochiltree is a despised woman, Chesnutt demonstrates how the town's white males will use her murder and alleged rape to persecute a black man -- any black man -- as a defense of feminine honor. Chesnutt suggests that Southern white culture used female sexuality as a veil to disguise their racial hatred and contempt. This also ties into laws of mixed marriage and mixed race children, which were considered impure. Chesnutt argues that racial purity is a delusion of hatred, not of honor. This \"shocking crime\" is the basis for a proposed lynching. Lynching was a crime committed by white mobs throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries against black men and, sometimes, women. The black person would be accused of a crime, often rape, and the mob would carry out a violent act of justice, usually hanging or burning at the stake, as a way to punish the criminal. The act, however, was actually meant as a mode of violent oppression and warning to the black community. The Marrow of Tradition can be seen as an argument through storytelling against the practice of lynching. According to Chesnutt, lynching is a misuse of justice because it undermines the democratic legal proceedings upheld by the public. It is a perversion of justice meant not to keep order but to subject a people to an unjust order of racial domination."}