{"name": "Chapter 24", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-25", "summary": "In the jail, Mr. Delamere questions Sandy. Sandy pleads his innocence and Mr. Delamere believes him without question. Delamere tells Sandy that it has been his love for his grandson and Sandy's care that has kept him alive. Sandy then tells him the whole tale of the evening, how he was with Josh Green, and how he went straight home. He tells him that the biggest mystery is that he found his clothes -- his old fashioned jacket and pants -- on the floor as if someone else had worn them. Sandy suspects that it is either witchcraft or the devil that is responsible. Sandy also tells him about the ghost that he saw that evening and Delamere agrees that it all quite a mystery but that he is certain Sandy will be vindicated. Mr. Delamere then asks where Sandy got the gold and the purse. Sandy hesitates. He then begins to remind Delamere of all the good that he has done in his life. He reminds him how he bought his father and set him free after ten years and how he sheltered him during the war as his servant. Delamere acknowledges this and reminds Sandy that he has done some great services to the Delamere family as well. Sandy insists that, no matter what happens, Mr. Delamere will not get excited and that he will know that \"I wuz raise' by a Delamere, suh, an' all de ole Delameres wuz gent'emen. I kin die, suh, like a gent'eman. Sandy respectfully declines to tell old Delamere where he got the coins. As he leaves, Mr. Delamere tells the sheriff not to let anything happen to Sandy since \"The officer who is intimidated by threats, or by his own fears, is recreant to his duty, and no better than the mob which threatens him", "analysis": "The placement of Sandy's attempted lynching in the novel is important to note. This sub-plot develops throughout the novel, but occurs in the novel's middle chapters. It is therefore not only meant to provide an intriguing sub-plot or an exciting diversion from the novel's larger narrative arc, but it is meant to be crucial to the novel's structural development. The causes of the riot which occurs on a community scale are all present in the attempted lynching -- economic and social anxiety, prejudice, unjust accusations, and the beliefs in a privileged race. It's placement at the novel's center is meant to transition the reader from the novel's first half, which dealt largely with psychological violence, to the novel's second half which deals with physical violence. In the first half of the book, the psychological violence is demonstrated through such scenes as Miller's humiliating ride on the Jim Crow car of a train. They physical violence of the riot is anticipated, but not fulfilled, in the attempted lynching. Though the lynching is avoided, justice is not accomplished. Polly Ochiltree's murderer is never identified, and Tom Delamere is never punished for a crime that several people know he committed. Chesnutt means to present this sub-plot as a demonstration of the supposed essence of the white Southern ideal of antebellum cultural dominance. This ideal is predicated on a tradition of white domination of blacks. The essence, or the marrow, of this tradition is the nature of white male masculinity and female sexuality. The attempted lynching of Sandy, and the race riots in the later chapters, are the violent projections of this tradition onto the black community. Chesnutt saves a special kind of sarcasm and disgust for Jerry. Jerry has a keen innate intelligence for survival -- on several occasions he schemes and plots against his white superiors in order to keep some change or to escape some kind of harshness. This quest for survival is similar to his Aunt's, Mammy Jane. Chesnutt suggests that Jane's instincts, however, are based out of slavery and so she cannot be held responsible for them. Jerry was not born a slave but, instead, refuses to wear the responsibilities of his freedom. He is therefore a despicable character and a traitor to his race. This fact becomes palpable after he turns in Sandy for a crime he did not commit. The chapters that deal with Sandy's acquittal through the lying of Mr. Delamere represent the taint of racism that finally brings down a prominent family of integrity. The Delameres are considered the novel's most upright family, but Chesnutt shows that even such dignity and honesty cannot be saved in an environment of racism and prejudice. Though Tom's faults brought shame to the Delamere family, it is the prejudiced beliefs of white society that are at fault for destroying the Delamere family."}