{"name": "Chapter 36", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-31-37", "summary": "Carteret returns home and finds the door locked. When a servant lets him in, he finds that his child has become sick with the croup and that the situation has become quite severe. Carteret begins questioning whom they contacted about the situation, but Mrs. Carteret and the nurse tells him that no doctor was available and that medicine and ice were not available either because all stores were closed for the riot. Carteret rushes out of the house and knocks on the doors of several of the town's doctors. All are out seeing other patients. At Dr. Yates's house, Carteret meets a young student who offers to treat the baby if he can. When this young doctor, Dr. Evans, finds Dodie, however, he realizes the situation is worse than he suspected. He tells the family that he does not have the expertise or tools to perform a tracheotomy, the only operation that will save the child. Evans tells Carteret that only one other doctor in town can save his child, Dr. Miller. Evans goes to Miller's house to request his services but returns shortly to tell Carteret that Miller would not come without the Major's personal request for he had been turned away at an earlier call. Carteret feels that this is justifiable and rushes out of the house. He arrives at Miller's in only a few minutes and tells Miller that his child is sick and that he requests his services. Miller is furious and opens the door to his house to reveal his wife, kneeling over the rigid dead body of his own son. There lies my only child, laid low by a stray bullet in this riot which you and your paper have fomented; struck down as much by your hand as though you had held the weapon with which his life was taken. Miller refuses to see Carteret's child. Carteret has a brief moment of clarity. In the agony of his own predicament. for a moment the veil of race prejudice was rent in twain, and he saw things as they were, in their correct proportions and relations, -- saw clearly and convincingly that he had no standing here, in the presence of death, in the home of this stricken family. Carteret returns home with the news. All of the others present seem to understand the doctor's position, but Olivia Carteret refuses to accept his answer. She dashes out into the street to go to the doctor", "analysis": "The title of Chapter 31 is \"The Shadow of a Dream.\" This title is a reference to Shakespeare's Hamlet in which Guildenstern says, \"Which dreams, indeed, are ambition, for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.\" Olivia's dream, Dodie as a \"fairy prince,\" is meant to represent the anxiety of the white ruling class over the future of their race. This anxiety is through Dodie's character. The Carteret's ambitions for their child are representative of the larger ambitions that white Southern culture has for its future. These ambitions, like Hamlet's own, are but \"the shadow of a dream,\" as the novel will show in the final chapters. The placement of Chapter 31 is important to note. Olivia's concern over her child's future and her concern over her sister's property rights come just before the outbreak of the Wellington riot. By placing this particular plot point at this juncture of the story, Chesnutt is suggesting that property rights and questions of inheritance are pivotal to the issues of racial identity and compassion. Olivia's denial of her sister's identity and inheritance is representative of the larger cultural problem of racial disinheritance. Thus, in the next chapter, the violence begins. In the chapters depicting the riots, Chesnutt is careful to demonstrate that the order perceived by the white ruling class  is a false perception. In fact, the white community dominates the black community. This is readily apparent in the ease with which the white mob participants are able to overtake, bully, and kill any black person that stands in their way. Chesnutt uses several juxtapositions of belief, especially religious belief, to demonstrate the insanity and false underpinnings of white aggression. He sarcastically notes that it would be impossible for anyone not of Southern heritage to believe that the \"good Christian people, who thronged the churches on Sunday, and wept over the sufferings of the lowly Nazarene...could be thirsting for the blood of their fellow men.\" Chesnutt's theological point is that one cannot serve the \"lowly Nazarene,\" Jesus, who submitted his own life to death for the salvation of others, while also propagating messages of hate and prejudice. These belief systems are incompatible. Chapters 33 and 34 are also named after concepts from the Bible. \"Into the Lion's Jaws\" is a play on the phrase \"into the lion's den.\" This phrase is taken from the book of Daniel from the Hebrew Bible. In this story, Daniel is sent by King Nebakanezer into a lion's den to be executed. God closes the jaws of the lions, however, and Daniel is saved. The title of this chapter is meant to suggest that God is not willing, or able, to save the black community on the day of the riot and sends them not just into the lion's den but into their open jaws. This idea is alluded to by Josh in Chapter 32 when he tells Dr. Miller that God \"mus' be 'sleep, er busy somewhar e'se ter-day.\" The title of Chapter 34, \"The Valley of the Shadow,\" is an allusion to Pslam 23 from the Hebrew Bible, \"Yeah, htough I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and they staff they comfort me.\" This title expresses the situation that Dr. Miller is walking into, finding his child dead upon the streets of Wellington. The title does not allude to God's comfort, however. The novel's climax is actually a reflection on justice and compassion. These are two traits that are interposed with each other through the actions of the Carteret and Miller families and the situations that they find themselves in. The title of Chapter 36 is \"Fiat Justitia,\" latin for \"Let justice be done.\" This phrase would have been written in parliamentary law on a bill brought before parliament to correct an error in law. For Miller, his refusal to treat Dodie Carteret is his fiat justitia; his attempt to correct the injustice done to both him and his family through the riots. Carteret has a brief moment of clarity as he sees that this act of justice is warranted and fair, regardless of race. Compassion, however, wins the day in the novel's closing pages. Compassion does not mean a lack of anger or bitterness. Janet Miller remains extremely bitter for the wrong that is done to her by her sister. Chesnutt suggests, though, that this bitterness can be overcome with the hope of reconciliation between the races. Chesnutt proposes that Janet's acceptance into and inheritance from the Carteret family is the basis for moving forward. Chesnutt's message of acceptance is directed towards his white audience; his message of compassion is directed towards his black audience. The novel does not end with a denouement. The narrative ends before the reader learns if Dodie Carteret survives. This is meant to leave a question in the reader's mind -- will the legacy of lynching, violence, and prejudice survive, or will it be changed in a fundamental way?"}