{"name": "Chapter XX", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XX<PARAGRAPH>The day before Christmas, Bass returns again from Marksville. He gives Solomon a nod to meet him after dark. He does not show up, and Solomon assumes correctly that they should meet the next morning before the rest of the household awakes. Bass tells him he has heard nothing, and Solomon despairs. Bass adds quickly that he has planned to go to Saratoga himself. Shocked, Solomon listens as Bass says that he is tired of the South and slavery; he will go to Saratoga to see the people Solomon mentioned. PARAGRAPH>During the Christmas holidays, Solomon has to play his violin for local planters. One day, he plays for Madam McCoy and her household. He states that McCoy is a delightful, lovely, and benevolent young woman who treats her slaves well and proves that not all slaveholders are monsters. PARAGRAPH>On the morning of January 3rd, Solomon is working in the cold fields with Abram, Patsey, Bob, and Wiley. Epps yells at them for not picking cotton well, but their fingers are numb with the cold. PARAGRAPH>The slaves look up and see two men approaching on horseback. Solomon writes that he will now double back in the narrative to follow the movement of Bass's letter", "analysis": "Though Northup is eventually rescued, he seeks to make clear that this was not at all a guarantee, and that getting out of slavery in any way is almost impossible. For himself, procuring paper and pen is rare, and getting the letter to the right person is also difficult . He is lucky because he knows how to read and write, unlike most slaves, who do not have this vital tool at their disposal. Northup details the various reasons that running away, especially deep in the Louisiana bayou, is rarely successful. There are slave patrols and vicious dogs sent after fugitives, terrifying wild animals in the swamp, a lack of food and drinkable water, and a high likelihood of getting lost. Many slaves return to their plantation after a time because trying to survive in the wild is sure death, while returning home brings with it punishment but life as well. Northup uses Wiley and Celeste's experiences to provide specific anecdotes about slaves who tried and failed to achieve freedom. His own experience in the bayou after running from Tibeats also adds to the sense of terrifying isolation amid the slimy, deadly creatures of the swamp.<PARAGRAPH>Northup's background as a free man, however, makes his case a bit different and ultimately allows him to succeed in becoming free. He meets the rectitudinous and kindhearted Bass, who recognizes the grievous inhumanity and injustice of this free man being enslaved. Bass is ardently anti-slavery anyway, and Northup's story shocks him into taking action. It is through his brave and tireless efforts on behalf of Northup, as well as those of Henry B. Northup, that the wrongly enslaved man's liberty is secured.<PARAGRAPH>Northup doesn't make this sound like a miracle, however: he details in exacting fashion just how many steps it took to get a single man out of bondage. Governors, senators, lawyers, sheriffs, and more are needed to right this wrong, revealing that the South was desperate to hold onto its \"property\" and would only relinquish it after an exhausting process. For historians and scholars, this part of the book is a useful way of looking at the real debates about the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, which had been passed just a few years prior to Twelve Years a Slave's publication.<PARAGRAPH>Even though he gains his freedom, Northup cannot win in the courtroom against Burch. He cannot be a witness because of the color of his skin: \"objection being made, the court decided my evidence inadmissible. It was rejected solely on the ground that I was a colored man--the fact of my being a free citizen of New-York not being disputed\" . Due to Northup's elided evidence and the lies of Burch's former partner, \"the court held the fact to be established, that Burch came innocently and honestly by me, and accordingly he was discharged\" . This reveals the extreme ways in which black people were marginalized legally and politically, even if they were free citizens.<PARAGRAPH>It should not be surprising that Northup's narrative became a bestseller after it was published. The trial had riveted the North and the book was full of damning evidence that the system of slavery was indeed as monstrous as the abolitionists were claiming. Inefficiency and waste; rape and sexual abuse; the separation of mothers and their children; cruel punishments; limited provisions; backbreaking labor; the deleterious effects on white people, making them inured to evil; hypocrisy in religion; and many more examples of slavery's immoral, inhumane, and unjust characteristics make this work profoundly important during its own time and in the contemporary moment.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-xix-xxii"}