{"name": "Chapter V", "summary": "Chapter V<PARAGRAPH>The brig Orleans heads downriver and arrives at Norfolk, where it takes on four more slaves. One, Arthur, had also been a free man, and he struggles mightily before he is subdued. During the day, the slaves are allowed to remain on deck. Solomon is in charge of cooking. In the evening, they are locked in the hold. PARAGRAPH>Solomon asks the reader not to judge him too harshly for what he is about to relate: he and the other slaves planned a mutiny, and they were going to have to kill the first mate and the captain. Unfortunately, though, Robert contracts smallpox and he dies when the brig reaches New Orleans. PARAGRAPH>Everyone on board is panic-stricken by smallpox, which compounds Solomon's frustration that the mutiny could not occur. PARAGRAPH>One sailor kindly asks Solomon why he is so down, and, trusting the man's warm mien, Solomon tells him the truth. The man promises to take a letter from Solomon and mail it to Henry B. Northup. Solomon later learns it did reach Sandy Hill and that Northup took it to Governor Seward, but there was no info about Solomon's location at the time so there was nothing to do but wait. PARAGRAPH>On the crowded wharf in New Orleans, Solomon realizes that he knows no one. His wrongs will not be avenged and he feels desolate. PARAGRAPH>Traders and consignees come aboard the ship. Burch's gang is consigned to Burch's partner, Theophilus Freeman. Freeman calls out for \"Platt\" and no one answers. He consults his list, looks at Solomon, and tells him he answers the description so therefore must be Platt. From now on, this will be his name. PARAGRAPH>The group is taken to Freeman's slave pen, where about fifty people are staying. PARAGRAPH>That night, Solomon is still overcome by the absurdity and horror of his situation. Is this real. His sorrow seems to be overflowing, and he cries out to God", "analysis": "Northup spends a good deal of time painting the terrible picture of Eliza and her children, demonstrating beyond a shadow of a doubt that the separation of a mother from her children was one of slavery's grossest inhumanities. The mournful, hysterical, and disconsolate Eliza would have garnered sympathy from Northern white women who would not have been able to fathom such a monstrous thing happening to them. Critic Vanessa Vaughn writes of this scene that \"the description is... aimed at the white reader and seeks to reinforce the overall argument that slavery was an inhumane and unjust institution that inflicted legal, physical, and emotional damage upon those who suffered under it.\"<PARAGRAPH>Indeed, the slave auction was one of the most potent images of abolitionists seeking to reveal to their audiences just how unjust and immoral nearly every single aspect of the system of slavery was. It humiliated and stripped slaves of their humanity, reduced them to the property and chattel they were perceived to be, and reminded them that they had no control over their own body and fate of their family members. Nothing Eliza did could preclude her children from being taken from her, and, as Northup recounts, nothing could ever fill that hole in her heart.<PARAGRAPH>Northup's first master, the minister William Ford, is a good, kind, Christian man whom Northup is careful to present as evidence that not every Southerner was a monster. For Northup, Ford is simply a reminder of how slavery wasn't just an economic system but rather an entire way of life that permeated the South's consciousness. He writes that Ford was blinded to the wrongs of slavery, that \"he never doubted the moral right of one man holding another in subjection. Looking through the same medium with his fathers before him, he saw things in the same light. Brought up under other circumstances and other influences, he is notions would undoubtedly be different\" . It might seem unbelievable to modern readers that a man as Christian and benevolent as Ford would think slavery was okay, but Northup's words remind us of slavery's power and prominence in the South. It is no wonder that slavery was only exterminated with a brutal war, given its entrenchment.<PARAGRAPH>Unfortunately for Northup, his time with Ford is relatively short-lived and he is forced to work for the coarse, ruthless, and vengeful Tibeats. For Northup and the reader, Tibeats is a prominent example of how a man's whiteness allows him a more elevated social position despite his shortcomings in intellect, morality, and work ethic. Northup is Tibeats's superior in every possible respect, but the color of his skin means that he has to submit to the man. For a man like Northup who was -- and still is, at least legally -- free, offering obeisance to a man like Tibeats is nearly impossible. Thankfully, Tibeats's reputation is well-known in the area, and Ford and Chapin's intervention is seen as right; all the same, Northup has the chilling reminder that his blackness means he is considered the lowliest of all men.<PARAGRAPH>Working under Tibeats also reveals to Northup what most slave labor is actually like. He did work hard for Ford, yes, but he was not privy to the capricious punishments, unrealistic expectations, or backbreaking tasks that Tibeats and especially Epps require of their slaves. Now under, Tibeats, he is \"forced to labor very hard. From earliest dawn until late at night, I was not allowed to be a moment idle. Notwithstanding which, Tibeats was beer satisfied... I was his faithful slave, and earned him large wages every day, and yet I went to my cabin nightly, loaded with abuse and stinging epithets\" . Life was labor for most slaves, which is something that will only become more apparent to Northup when he is sold to Edwin Epps.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-v-ix"}