{"name": "Chapter VII", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter VII<PARAGRAPH>The steamboat Rodolph begins its trek up the Mississippi to the Red River. Solomon's new owner is William Ford, who resides in the Great Pine Woods in the parish of Avoyelles in the heart of Louisiana. He is a minister, and Solomon asserts that \"there never was a more kind, noble, candid, Christian man than William Ford\". All the same, Ford is a product of his time and thus sees things in the same light as those who brought him up. He treats his slaves well, though, and is a model master. PARAGRAPH>The river passage takes a couple of days; Solomon almost tells Ford the truth about himself, but he decides not to. In retrospect, he thinks it may have helped, but it was not worth the risk. His identity would have consigned him to the remote depths of slavery, and he could have been taken into Texas or over the border. PARAGRAPH>When their time on the steamship is over, the only way to reach the plantation is to walk. Ford, Solomon, Eliza, and Harry begin their trek on an extremely hot day. Ford, who rides his horse, is solicitous of their condition, but it is still very arduous. PARAGRAPH>The land is low and marshy. There are numerous trees and wild cattle all around. The four stop at the summer residence of Mr. Martin, a rich planter who stays here during the summer season due to the shade and cooler temperatures. Ford dines with Martin and the slaves eat in the kitchen. PARAGRAPH>They traverse five more miles; as the sun begins to sink, they arrive at Ford's plantation. The house is large and surrounded by woods, and Solomon finds it lonely but pleasant. He meets a slave named Rose, another one named Sally, and a teenager named John. Harry and Solomon sleep, and in the morning they meet Rose's husband, Walton. PARAGRAPH>At this time, Ford is a wealthy man. He has a lumbering establishment on Indian Creek, this seat in Pine Woods, and, in his wife's name, a plantation on Bayou Boeuf. PARAGRAPH>Harry and Solomon work throughout the summer at Indian Creek, piling lumber and chopping logs. Every Sunday they have Sabbath and Master Ford reads to them from the Bible. Another of Ford's slaves, Sam, becomes very spiritual that summer. Some white men see that Ford has given Sam a Bible and criticize him for that, but Solomon writes that those who treat their slaves leniently get more labor out of them. PARAGRAPH>Solomon suggests to Ford that he may be able to reduce the shipping costs of lumber if they use the river and rafts. His own experience is critical to this, and he works hard to build a raft and navigate it to Lamourie. This creates a sensation, and people throughout the Pine Woods laud his intelligence. He is in charge of the project until its culmination. PARAGRAPH>Indian Creek flows through an incredible forest, and a tribe of Native Americans still resides on its shores. They host tribes from elsewhere and once Solomon was present at a great dance where the music was melancholy and mesmerizing. PARAGRAPH>One day, Mistress Ford asks Ford to buy a loom so Sally can weave cloth for the winter garments of slaves; Ford offers that he can build a loom. It is finished and works perfectly, and he continues to make more. PARAGRAPH>A carpenter named John M. Tibeats arrives to do work for Ford, and Solomon is instructed to leave off his looms and assist Tibeats for two weeks. To his dismay, Tibeats is the complete opposite of Ford. He is ignorant, vengeful, quick-tempered, and disliked by slaves and white men. He reveals to Solomon the real, dark side of slavery, as opposed to the benignity of Ford. PARAGRAPH>Clouds are gathering on the horizon for Solomon, and he is \"doomed to endure such bitter trials as only the poor slave knows\"", "analysis": "Northup spends a good deal of time painting the terrible picture of Eliza and her children, demonstrating beyond a shadow of a doubt that the separation of a mother from her children was one of slavery's grossest inhumanities. The mournful, hysterical, and disconsolate Eliza would have garnered sympathy from Northern white women who would not have been able to fathom such a monstrous thing happening to them. Critic Vanessa Vaughn writes of this scene that \"the description is... aimed at the white reader and seeks to reinforce the overall argument that slavery was an inhumane and unjust institution that inflicted legal, physical, and emotional damage upon those who suffered under it.\"<PARAGRAPH>Indeed, the slave auction was one of the most potent images of abolitionists seeking to reveal to their audiences just how unjust and immoral nearly every single aspect of the system of slavery was. It humiliated and stripped slaves of their humanity, reduced them to the property and chattel they were perceived to be, and reminded them that they had no control over their own body and fate of their family members. Nothing Eliza did could preclude her children from being taken from her, and, as Northup recounts, nothing could ever fill that hole in her heart.<PARAGRAPH>Northup's first master, the minister William Ford, is a good, kind, Christian man whom Northup is careful to present as evidence that not every Southerner was a monster. For Northup, Ford is simply a reminder of how slavery wasn't just an economic system but rather an entire way of life that permeated the South's consciousness. He writes that Ford was blinded to the wrongs of slavery, that \"he never doubted the moral right of one man holding another in subjection. Looking through the same medium with his fathers before him, he saw things in the same light. Brought up under other circumstances and other influences, he is notions would undoubtedly be different\" . It might seem unbelievable to modern readers that a man as Christian and benevolent as Ford would think slavery was okay, but Northup's words remind us of slavery's power and prominence in the South. It is no wonder that slavery was only exterminated with a brutal war, given its entrenchment.<PARAGRAPH>Unfortunately for Northup, his time with Ford is relatively short-lived and he is forced to work for the coarse, ruthless, and vengeful Tibeats. For Northup and the reader, Tibeats is a prominent example of how a man's whiteness allows him a more elevated social position despite his shortcomings in intellect, morality, and work ethic. Northup is Tibeats's superior in every possible respect, but the color of his skin means that he has to submit to the man. For a man like Northup who was -- and still is, at least legally -- free, offering obeisance to a man like Tibeats is nearly impossible. Thankfully, Tibeats's reputation is well-known in the area, and Ford and Chapin's intervention is seen as right; all the same, Northup has the chilling reminder that his blackness means he is considered the lowliest of all men.<PARAGRAPH>Working under Tibeats also reveals to Northup what most slave labor is actually like. He did work hard for Ford, yes, but he was not privy to the capricious punishments, unrealistic expectations, or backbreaking tasks that Tibeats and especially Epps require of their slaves. Now under, Tibeats, he is \"forced to labor very hard. From earliest dawn until late at night, I was not allowed to be a moment idle. Notwithstanding which, Tibeats was beer satisfied... I was his faithful slave, and earned him large wages every day, and yet I went to my cabin nightly, loaded with abuse and stinging epithets\" . Life was labor for most slaves, which is something that will only become more apparent to Northup when he is sold to Edwin Epps.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-v-ix"}