{"name": "Chapter IX", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter IX<PARAGRAPH>Solomon remains completely bound in the hot sun. He feels near collapse and his limbs ache, but he cannot move. Chapin never relieves him, but he paces the porch. Perhaps he wanted Ford to see how badly Tibeats had treated Solomon, or perhaps he did not want to interfere more. PARAGRAPH>Rachel comes out once to give Solomon water and tells him she pities him. PARAGRAPH>Finally, Ford comes riding up, and all he says is that Solomon is in a bad state. He cuts his bonds and rushes into the house. Solomon topples over, unable to walk. He sees Tibeats and his two friends approach the house and talk to Ford, only to depart again. PARAGRAPH>Solomon crawls to his cabin at dusk because he cannot work. He is in great misery. The other slaves return from their labors. They listen to Solomon's story and give him food and water. Rachel adds what she saw. Lawson also tells his version of the story. PARAGRAPH>Suddenly, Chapin appears at the door and tells Solomon he will sleep in the floor on the great house tonight. On their walk over, he says that he believes Tibeats will be back before morning to kill Solomon, and if he kills him in front of other slaves, no one could lift a finger against him in court. PARAGRAPH>Solomon lies on the floor and tries to sleep. Around midnight, the dog begins to bark; Chapin looks outside but sees nothing. He tells Solomon that he thinks Tibeats is somewhere skulking around the property, but he is not sure. The dog barks again; Chapin investigates, but there is nothing. The rest of the night is uneventful. PARAGRAPH>The next morning, Solomon sets out to do his day's work. Chapin tells Solomon to be wary, as Tibeats has bad blood in him and he may do him wrong some day. Tibeats rides up at that moment, and Solomon feels a great weariness that this is his life now: he must toil and suffer the slights and dangers of monsters. Would that he had died when he was young. PARAGRAPH>It takes a week to complete the weaving-house, and Solomon learns to his delight that Tibeats has sold him to Peter Tanner to work with another carpenter named Myers. PARAGRAPH>Solomon's reputation has preceded him across the bayou, and Tanner impresses upon him that he is severe with his slaves, though Solomon gleans that he has some good humor. Solomon works for Myers for a month. PARAGRAPH>Tanner has a habit of reading the Bible to his slaves on the Sabbath, and one day he reads that servants who do not do their Lord's will should be beaten with many stripes. He calls up three of his slaves -- Warner, Will, and Major -- and tells them that they are melon-stealing, Sabbath-breaking slaves and must go into the stocks. He orders Solomon to stand watch over them. PARAGRAPH>When the Tanner family goes off to church, the three slaves beg Solomon to let them out. He gives in; they all eat melons, and then the men go back into the stocks when Tanner comes home. PARAGRAPH>This levity is short-lived, though, for Solomon's great conflict with Tibeats looms ahead", "analysis": "Northup spends a good deal of time painting the terrible picture of Eliza and her children, demonstrating beyond a shadow of a doubt that the separation of a mother from her children was one of slavery's grossest inhumanities. The mournful, hysterical, and disconsolate Eliza would have garnered sympathy from Northern white women who would not have been able to fathom such a monstrous thing happening to them. Critic Vanessa Vaughn writes of this scene that \"the description is... aimed at the white reader and seeks to reinforce the overall argument that slavery was an inhumane and unjust institution that inflicted legal, physical, and emotional damage upon those who suffered under it.\"<PARAGRAPH>Indeed, the slave auction was one of the most potent images of abolitionists seeking to reveal to their audiences just how unjust and immoral nearly every single aspect of the system of slavery was. It humiliated and stripped slaves of their humanity, reduced them to the property and chattel they were perceived to be, and reminded them that they had no control over their own body and fate of their family members. Nothing Eliza did could preclude her children from being taken from her, and, as Northup recounts, nothing could ever fill that hole in her heart.<PARAGRAPH>Northup's first master, the minister William Ford, is a good, kind, Christian man whom Northup is careful to present as evidence that not every Southerner was a monster. For Northup, Ford is simply a reminder of how slavery wasn't just an economic system but rather an entire way of life that permeated the South's consciousness. He writes that Ford was blinded to the wrongs of slavery, that \"he never doubted the moral right of one man holding another in subjection. Looking through the same medium with his fathers before him, he saw things in the same light. Brought up under other circumstances and other influences, he is notions would undoubtedly be different\" . It might seem unbelievable to modern readers that a man as Christian and benevolent as Ford would think slavery was okay, but Northup's words remind us of slavery's power and prominence in the South. It is no wonder that slavery was only exterminated with a brutal war, given its entrenchment.<PARAGRAPH>Unfortunately for Northup, his time with Ford is relatively short-lived and he is forced to work for the coarse, ruthless, and vengeful Tibeats. For Northup and the reader, Tibeats is a prominent example of how a man's whiteness allows him a more elevated social position despite his shortcomings in intellect, morality, and work ethic. Northup is Tibeats's superior in every possible respect, but the color of his skin means that he has to submit to the man. For a man like Northup who was -- and still is, at least legally -- free, offering obeisance to a man like Tibeats is nearly impossible. Thankfully, Tibeats's reputation is well-known in the area, and Ford and Chapin's intervention is seen as right; all the same, Northup has the chilling reminder that his blackness means he is considered the lowliest of all men.<PARAGRAPH>Working under Tibeats also reveals to Northup what most slave labor is actually like. He did work hard for Ford, yes, but he was not privy to the capricious punishments, unrealistic expectations, or backbreaking tasks that Tibeats and especially Epps require of their slaves. Now under, Tibeats, he is \"forced to labor very hard. From earliest dawn until late at night, I was not allowed to be a moment idle. Notwithstanding which, Tibeats was beer satisfied... I was his faithful slave, and earned him large wages every day, and yet I went to my cabin nightly, loaded with abuse and stinging epithets\" . Life was labor for most slaves, which is something that will only become more apparent to Northup when he is sold to Edwin Epps.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-v-ix"}