{"name": "Chapter XIV", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XIV<PARAGRAPH>In 1845, the caterpillars destroy the cotton crop throughout the region. There is a rumor that wages are high and laborers are in demand on the sugar plantations in St. Mary's parish, so a drove of slaves is sent down there. It is a long trek full of inclement weather, but they make it to the region. PARAGRAPH>Solomon works for Judge Turner, a distinguished man with an estate in Bayou Salle. He finds it much easier to cut cane than to pick cotton. Eventually, he is transferred to the sugar house to act as driver. PARAGRAPH>During sugar-harvesting time, labor does not cease at all; Solomon's job is to whip anyone not performing efficiently enough. PARAGRAPH>It is a custom in Louisiana to allow slaves to retain whatever compensation they receive on Sundays. Solomon is furnished with a blanket and is allowed to have a gourd, but he is not furnished with a knife, nor a cup, nor a plate. PARAGRAPH>During the sugar time, there is no distinction between the days of the week, and everyone knows slaves must labor on the Sabbath. However, they do receive remuneration, and most are able to purchase small luxuries with this money. PARAGRAPH>Solomon plays his violin constantly and makes money that way, becoming the wealthiest slave in the region and finding succor from his despair. PARAGRAPH>The slaves return to Bayou Boeuf. Solomon learns from Phebe that Patsey is getting deeper and deeper into trouble. Epps covets her more and then whips her to gratify the mistress. The mistress wants her out of her sight--or, at least, she wants her to suffer. Solomon writes that Mistress Epps is an educated, beautiful, and accomplished woman; she is good to all the slaves except Patsey. Epps would gratify any whim his wife had, as he loves her in his own coarse way, but his selfishness prevents him from getting rid of Patsey. On Patsey's head, \"the force of all these domestic tempests spent itself\". PARAGRAPH>During the summer after Solomon returns from the sugar plantation, he learns how to provide himself with food. The bacon rations are disgusting and filled with worms, and it is hard to hunt for coons or opossum without firearms. Solomon decides to construct a fish trap; the area of Bayou Boeuf is rich in number and variety of fish, and this trap works well enough to keep Solomon and his companions relatively full. PARAGRAPH>On the opposite side of the bayou is Mr. Marshall's plantation. He comes from an aristocratic family and is accustomed to getting what he wants. One day, Solomon writes, a man from Natchez is negotiating with Marshall to purchase the estate. A messenger arrives at Epps's saying there is a bloody battle going on. Marshall kills Natchez due to a difficulty in their negotiations. Solomon remarks that this would have resulted in punishment in the North, but here in the South, violence is common and almost passes without notice. PARAGRAPH>Slavery exacerbates man's propensity to sin and violence. Solomon does not blame the slaveholder for being cruel: he blames the system and the fact that man cannot withstand the influence of it. There are humane masters and inhumane ones, happier slaves and more depressed ones, but overall, every slave--either somewhere deep down or on the surface--hopes for \"life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness", "analysis": "Northup's time with Epps is the fodder for his narrative that best reveals the horrors of slavery. Critic Ira Berlin writes, \"On page after page, Northup tells of the brutality of chattel bondage the endless and often senseless beatings, the frequent, soul-crushing humiliations, the casual and callous destruction of family life -themes sure to raise the ire of white Northerners...He is especially attentive to the dangers salve women faced...he demonstrates how slavery subverted the work ethic and undermine the values of self-improvement that white Northerners believed central to the creation of the good society.\" Northup's years with Epps are very different from those with Ford. Epps is a different character altogether, and Northup spares nothing in the description of him: \"His manners are repulsive and coarse, and his language gives speedy and unequivocal evidence that he has never enjoyed the advantages of an education\" . He is a drunk fool and a sly, cunning sober figure. He whips his slaves for any and all reasons, provides them with only the barest necessities to get by, and pushes them to the brink of their physical and mental abilities. Northup writes, \"Ten years I toiled for that man without reward. Ten years of incessant labor has contributed to increase the bulk of his possessions. Ten years I was compelled to address him with downcast eyes and uncovered head - in the attitude and language of a slave. I am indebted to him for nothing, save undeserved abuse and stripes\" .<PARAGRAPH>As for Mistress Epps, Northup considers her a lovely and educated woman but notes the glaring discrepancy in her personality: she absolutely despises one of Epps's slaves, Patsey, because her husband cannot control his lust for her. The slave mistress is a tragic figure in this respect, for she has to watch her husband prey on the women who work for them and, due to the prevailing patriarchal system, has no recourse of her own. Women like Mistress Epps can only do so much to oppose their husbands; it was commonplace to pretend they didn't see anything or, as in Mistress Epps's case, to abuse the poor slave whom their husbands pursued.<PARAGRAPH>Like Sophia Auld in Frederick Douglass's Autobiography, Mistress Epps may have redeeming qualities, but Northup suggests that the system of slavery utterly corrupts her all the same. In perhaps one of the most significant passages of the work, Northup writes: \"The existence of Slavery in its most cruel form among them, has a tendency to brutalize the humane and finer feelings of their nature. Daily witnesses of human suffering--listening to the agonizing screeches of the slave--beholding him writhing beneath the merciless lash--bitten and torn by dogs--dying without attention, and buried without shroud or coffin--it cannot otherwise be expected, than that they should become brutified and reckless of human life. It is true there are many kind-hearted and good men in the parish of Avoyelles...It is not the fault of the slaveholder that he is cruel, so much as it is the fault of the system under which he lives. He cannot withstand the influence of habit and associations that surround him. Taught from earliest childhood, by all that he sees and hears, that the rod is for the slave's back, he will not be apt to change his opinions in maturer years.\"<PARAGRAPH>Northup adds to this when he explains his perceptions of young Master Epps: \" possessed some noble qualities, yet no process of reasoning could lead him to comprehend, that in the eye of the Almighty there is no distinction of color. He looked upon the black man simply as an animal, differing in no respect from any other animal, save in the gift of speech and the possession of somewhat higher instincts, and, therefore, the more valuable. To work like his father's mules--to be whipped and kicked and scourged through life--to address the white man with hat in hand, and eyes bent servilely on the earth, in his mind, was the natural and proper destiny of the slave. Brought up with such ideas--in the notion that we stand without the pale of humanity--no wonder the oppressors of my people are a pitiless and unrelenting race.\" Slavery corrupts everyone in its path, Northup suggests, which is one of the most morally compelling reasons to abolish it.<PARAGRAPH>Returning to Patsey, who was \"the enslaved victim of love and hate\" , readers can discern more about the particular difficulties slave women faced. They were subject to their master's, and perhaps other white men's, abuse frequently; this ranged from lewd words to outright rape. Oftentimes, slave women became pregnant and had to carry the child. Such children were despised by the mistress of the plantation for being visual and unforgettable reminders of their husband's fornications. Slave women often had to labor during their pregnancies up until the very day they gave birth. They faced potential separation from their children, like Eliza, and they suffered greatly because they were not able to protect their children in any real way. Ultimately, Epps destroys Patsey through his attention to her, which also leads him to brutally beat her in order to appease his wife. Northup notes that all vitality, hope, and joy leave Patsey; she is one of the most tragic figures in his work.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-x-xiv"}