{"name": "Chapter XI", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XI<PARAGRAPH>The next day, Solomon works in Mistress Ford's garden to show his appreciation to her and Ford. Ford takes him to the bayou the next morning. Solomon's heart is heavy as he looks on the beauty of the Pine Woods, knowing he will probably be sold elsewhere. Ford speaks to him of God, His power, and His goodness. They encounter Tibeats along the way, who sneers at how fast a runner Solomon is. Ford tells him that it is shameful to attack a slave with a broad-axe and hatchet and that he must sell him because they can no longer work together. PARAGRAPH>A white man named Mr. Eldret, who lives below Ford, hires Solomon to work in the Big Cane Brake for a time. They travel down to Sutton's Field, a place once lived in by a solitary white man who was killed by Native Americans; the place is now said to be haunted. They reach Eldret's wild lands; the very next morning, Solomon starts cutting cane away to build two cabins: one for the slaves, and one for Myers and Eldret. PARAGRAPH>The major annoyances are the insects, but Solomon is mightily relieved to be away from Tibeats. Eldret promises he can visit his friends at Ford's in four weeks, which he looks forward to. PARAGRAPH>Tibeats appears on the day when Solomon is supposed to go to Ford's; Eldret assures him that Solomon worked hard and he told him he could go. Tibeats writes him a pass reluctantly. PARAGRAPH>Solomon explains to the reader that a pass allows a slave to travel unmolested. Most of the time, rich men leave the slaves alone, but unscrupulous men ask to see the pass, perhaps hoping to luck into capturing a slave and making money. With a pass, a slave can seek victuals at any plantation in Louisiana. PARAGRAPH>Solomon arrives. He sees Eliza, who is a mere shell of her former self. He relates to the reader how he later learns about her death. She became helpless, would do nothing, and collapsed in her cabin. Her master at that time did nothing to help her or eliminate her, and she died. PARAGRAPH>After his visit, Solomon makes his way back to Eldret's, but Tibeats meets him and tells him he has been sold to Edwin Epps. Solomon is pleased to be away from Tibeats. He tells the reader that he only would only see Tibeats one more time: when he passed with other slaves through Bayou Boeuf and caught sight of Tibeats in a slovenly groggery", "analysis": "Northup's time with Epps is the fodder for his narrative that best reveals the horrors of slavery. Critic Ira Berlin writes, \"On page after page, Northup tells of the brutality of chattel bondage the endless and often senseless beatings, the frequent, soul-crushing humiliations, the casual and callous destruction of family life -themes sure to raise the ire of white Northerners...He is especially attentive to the dangers salve women faced...he demonstrates how slavery subverted the work ethic and undermine the values of self-improvement that white Northerners believed central to the creation of the good society.\" Northup's years with Epps are very different from those with Ford. Epps is a different character altogether, and Northup spares nothing in the description of him: \"His manners are repulsive and coarse, and his language gives speedy and unequivocal evidence that he has never enjoyed the advantages of an education\" . He is a drunk fool and a sly, cunning sober figure. He whips his slaves for any and all reasons, provides them with only the barest necessities to get by, and pushes them to the brink of their physical and mental abilities. Northup writes, \"Ten years I toiled for that man without reward. Ten years of incessant labor has contributed to increase the bulk of his possessions. Ten years I was compelled to address him with downcast eyes and uncovered head - in the attitude and language of a slave. I am indebted to him for nothing, save undeserved abuse and stripes\" .<PARAGRAPH>As for Mistress Epps, Northup considers her a lovely and educated woman but notes the glaring discrepancy in her personality: she absolutely despises one of Epps's slaves, Patsey, because her husband cannot control his lust for her. The slave mistress is a tragic figure in this respect, for she has to watch her husband prey on the women who work for them and, due to the prevailing patriarchal system, has no recourse of her own. Women like Mistress Epps can only do so much to oppose their husbands; it was commonplace to pretend they didn't see anything or, as in Mistress Epps's case, to abuse the poor slave whom their husbands pursued.<PARAGRAPH>Like Sophia Auld in Frederick Douglass's Autobiography, Mistress Epps may have redeeming qualities, but Northup suggests that the system of slavery utterly corrupts her all the same. In perhaps one of the most significant passages of the work, Northup writes: \"The existence of Slavery in its most cruel form among them, has a tendency to brutalize the humane and finer feelings of their nature. Daily witnesses of human suffering--listening to the agonizing screeches of the slave--beholding him writhing beneath the merciless lash--bitten and torn by dogs--dying without attention, and buried without shroud or coffin--it cannot otherwise be expected, than that they should become brutified and reckless of human life. It is true there are many kind-hearted and good men in the parish of Avoyelles...It is not the fault of the slaveholder that he is cruel, so much as it is the fault of the system under which he lives. He cannot withstand the influence of habit and associations that surround him. Taught from earliest childhood, by all that he sees and hears, that the rod is for the slave's back, he will not be apt to change his opinions in maturer years.\"<PARAGRAPH>Northup adds to this when he explains his perceptions of young Master Epps: \" possessed some noble qualities, yet no process of reasoning could lead him to comprehend, that in the eye of the Almighty there is no distinction of color. He looked upon the black man simply as an animal, differing in no respect from any other animal, save in the gift of speech and the possession of somewhat higher instincts, and, therefore, the more valuable. To work like his father's mules--to be whipped and kicked and scourged through life--to address the white man with hat in hand, and eyes bent servilely on the earth, in his mind, was the natural and proper destiny of the slave. Brought up with such ideas--in the notion that we stand without the pale of humanity--no wonder the oppressors of my people are a pitiless and unrelenting race.\" Slavery corrupts everyone in its path, Northup suggests, which is one of the most morally compelling reasons to abolish it.<PARAGRAPH>Returning to Patsey, who was \"the enslaved victim of love and hate\" , readers can discern more about the particular difficulties slave women faced. They were subject to their master's, and perhaps other white men's, abuse frequently; this ranged from lewd words to outright rape. Oftentimes, slave women became pregnant and had to carry the child. Such children were despised by the mistress of the plantation for being visual and unforgettable reminders of their husband's fornications. Slave women often had to labor during their pregnancies up until the very day they gave birth. They faced potential separation from their children, like Eliza, and they suffered greatly because they were not able to protect their children in any real way. Ultimately, Epps destroys Patsey through his attention to her, which also leads him to brutally beat her in order to appease his wife. Northup notes that all vitality, hope, and joy leave Patsey; she is one of the most tragic figures in his work.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-x-xiv"}