{"name": "Chapter XVI", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XVI<PARAGRAPH>Solomon explains that Epps is considered a smaller planter and that he must hire during some seasons. Plantations with fifty or one-hundred slaves need an overseer, whose qualifications are \"heartlessness, brutality, and cruelty\". Overseers also keep dogs and pistols with them. Under the overseer are drivers, who are slaves themselves and must whip their brethren if they are not working hard enough. PARAGRAPH>Solomon is appointed driver. When Epps is around, Solomon knows he cannot show any leniency, and it seems like Epps is always lurking. However, Solomon learns to use the whip so precisely that it looks as if it were touching the slaves without actually hurting them. PARAGRAPH>One day, Epps comes near Patsey and Solomon. Solomon whispers to her not to look up; when Epps nears, he drunkenly sneers that \"Platt\" whispered something. He grabs his knife and begins to totter about, chasing Solomon. Solomon keeps a respectful distance as he eludes him; he knows that when Epps is sober he will laugh at himself. PARAGRAPH>Solomon recounts a time when Epps asked Solomon if he could read or write, and Solomon admitted he'd had some training. Epps warned him threateningly to never be caught with any paper or pen. PARAGRAPH>Solomon's main goal during this time is to get a letter out, but the obstacles in the way are massive. First, it is hard to procure the materials. Second, a slave cannot leave without a pass and a postmaster will not take it. Solomon is a slave for nine years before he finds an opportunity. A stranger named Armsby comes into the region. He applies for an overseer position at Epps' and then works at the neighboring Shaw's for a bit. Armsby has to work in the fields along slaves because he is so poor, and Solomon does his best to cultivate his friendship. Finally, he asks about Armsby taking a letter, and Armsby promises to do so. Solomon has a letter on him, having made ink with bark, but he does not trust Armsby yet, so he returns to his cabin to see what happens. PARAGRAPH>That night, Epps enters with a rawhide in his hand and announces to Solomon that he hears that he has a slave who can write and asks white men to deliver letters for him. Solomon knows that his only recourse is to lie, so he says that he has no paper or pencil, has no friends to write to, and Armsby is a drunken, lying man who clearly wants to make Epps think that one of his slaves is going to run away so he will have to hire an overseer. Epps is compelled by this and becomes angry with Armsby. PARAGRAPH>After Epps leaves, Solomon burns his letter--and, with it, all of his hopes. He does not know where to look for deliverance. The hope of rescue is a flame that is quickly being distinguished", "analysis": "Throughout his narrative, Northup takes pains to correct assumptions people have about slaves. He writes, \"they are deceived who flatter themselves that the ignorant and debased slave has no conception of the magnitude of his wrongs. They are deceived who imagine that he arises from his knees, with back lacerated and bleeding, cherishing only a spirit of meekness and forgiveness\"  and \"It is a mistaken opinion that prevails in some quarters, that the slave does not understand the term--does not comprehend the idea of freedom. Even on Bayou Boeuf, where I conceive slavery exists in its most abject and cruel form--where it exhibits features altogether unknown in more northern States--the most ignorant of them generally know full well its meaning. They understand the privileges and exemptions that belong to it--that it would bestow upon them the fruits of their own labors, and that it would secure to them the enjoyment of domestic happiness. They do not fail to observe the difference between their own condition and the meanest white man's...\" . One of the other things that Northup does frequently is depict a culture among the slaves, even those who labor for such controlling and soul-sucking monsters as Epps. He seeks to show how slaves create meaning in their lives, how they maintain their dignity, and how they strive to improve their conditions even infinitesimally.<PARAGRAPH>Critic William Nichols identifies Northup's evocation of slave culture as early as the slave pens, where Northup finds \"communities of shared emotion\" and \"the frequent exchange of autobiographies and reflections on injustice.\" It is notable that despite the slaves' isolation from family and friends, these separations \" not seem to have destroyed their willingness to risk ne human relationships.\" Northup befriends Clem, Arthur, and Robert, and he also works with the latter and other slaves to foment mutiny . Once on the plantations, Northup recounts slaves telling stories, giving advice, delighting in a white person getting their comeuppance, helping each other, and rehashing interesting events. Nichols sees these as \"reminiscent of folk tales in their tough humor and masked resentment.\"<PARAGRAPH>Northup reveals how slaves also supplemented their meager rations in a variety of ways. He builds himself a fish trap while some try to catch possums and coons. Slaves are allowed to keep money that they make on Sundays and buy small luxuries. Ira Berlin explains that \"plantation hands have been depicted as cogs In a great machine, marching mindlessly up and down the rows of cotton or through fields of cane, driven by an overseer's lash. Northup reveals that even on the great plantations, slaves were often jacks-of-all-trades, laboring on a multitude of tasks...In the interstices of these many tasks, slaves created their own economy and their own life.\" Northup is keen to note the small bits of rebelliousness that slaves evince, and \"emphasizes how slaves found satisfaction and pride in their daily accomplishments, even knowing they gained few benefits from the labor that made their masters rich.\" He explains that many masters think beating their slaves and instilling fear in them makes them more productive, but that the truth is it makes them less productive. The plantation system is inefficient and wasteful; free labor is far more productive and profitable.<PARAGRAPH>During the holidays, Northup writes, slaves forge romantic relationships, dance, dress up, celebrate, and travel from plantation to plantation. Northup is aware of the problematic nature of the holidays: slaveowners consider themselves benevolent in \"giving\" these days to slaves, while the rest of the year, their slaves toil and suffer; yet he does acknowledge how much slaves delight in these days. Ultimately, as Berlin states, Northup \"understands the essential truth that while slavery may define black people, it is not who they are.\"", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191206144937/https://www.gradesaver.com/twelve-years-a-slave/study-guide/summary-chapters-xv-xviii"}