{"name": "act 3, Scene 2", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Scene 2<PARAGRAPH>Hieronimo enters the scene, still bemoaning his son's death in a series of apostrophes. He cries to the heavens for justice in form of revenge and continues his monologue until a letter suddenly falls from the sky. The letter is from Bellimperia - written in blood for want of ink - and informs Hieronimo that Balthazar and Lorenzo conspired together the kill his son. Hieronimo suspects a trap, and thus warily sets out to confirm Bellimperia's accusations. PARAGRAPH>Pedringano enters, followed by Lorenzo. The prince explains that Bellimperia has been confined by the Duke for \"some disgrace. He offers to hear Hieronimo's request in place of Bellimperia, but Hieronimo declines and leaves the scene. Suspecting Serberine of revealing the truth about Horatio's murder, Lorenzo gives Pedringano gold and sends him to kill Serberine the very same night. Lorenzo then reveals his dual manipulation: he will send guards on patrol to capture Pedringano in the act of murdering Serberine, thus ridding himself of future risks. As he puts it: \"better it's that base companions die, / Than by their life to hazard our good haps", "analysis": "The third act opens with the resolution of the sub-plot that takes place in Portugal.  The scene may seem superfluous to the larger picture of The Spanish Tragedy.  Unlike the death of Horatio, the tensions between the Viceroy, Alexandro, and Villuppo bear no direct influence on the outcome of the play.  It is precisely because of this ambiguous relation to the rest of the play, however, that the scene raises several important questions.<PARAGRAPH>Like Hieronimo, the Viceroy believes that his son has been unjustly murdered and finds himself in the depths of despair.  He would like to lie at the \"lowest\" point possible so as to avoid falling further .  But even at such a lifetime low, the Viceroy still sits too high in his throne to commiserate with the equally tormented Alexandro, whose words of protest are suppressed.  Luckily, the ambassador soon brings good news from Spain.  At this point, the Viceroy is overjoyed and hastily makes amends with Alexandro. Villuppo, in turn, is condemned to the \"bitterest torments\" - even worse than those prepared for Alexandro.  Has justice been served?<PARAGRAPH>This question takes on interesting dimensions when considered in relation to Hieronimo.  The Marshall, too, finds himself with a murdered son, and also desires justice.  But just as Lorenzo's motive for killing Horatio remains unresolved, so too are their respective claims to having captured Balthazar shrouded in mystery.  It is not out of the question that Horatio took undue credit in the battlefield.  Men are easily corrupt: the mere desire for gold and glory made Villuppo betray his fellow noblemen.  The same can be said for Pedringano, who had presumably been well treated by fair Bellimperia for many years.  Thus seen, the Viceroy's initial mistake destabilizes Hieronimo's righteous claim to justice and revenge.  Hieronimo may be mistaken to believe Horatio's total innocence in the affair - or, for that matter, Pedringano's damning letter to Lorenzo.  Does Hieronimo have a redeeming quality lacking in the Viceroy?  All of this will eventually call into question the fine distinction between justice and revenge.<PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, Lorenzo continues to manipulate friends and foes alike.  As a distrustful Machiavellian schemer he anticipates, in many ways, Shakespeare's Iago ). Unlike Iago, however, the Castilian prince is primarily concerned with covering up his tracks.  Once the murder is committed, he falls into an almost paranoiac state of mind, whereby both Serberine and Pedringano must be immediately killed off.  There is no reason to believe that either of the two would have revealed the truth behind Horatio's murder - especially since they were both present at the crime scene.  <PARAGRAPH>Justice or revenge for Hieronimo, then, only emerges out of fear and uncertainty.  If Lorenzo had kept Pedringano close to him, Bellimperia's accusations may never have been confirmed.  Be betraying Pedringano to the law, Lorenzo involuntarily undoes the order that he has attempted to impose on the stage - a mistake aptly symbolized by the empty box into which the page peeks.  The box, in Pedringano trusting eyes, contains the law.  It is at once the \"righteous\" law  and the law of criminals .  By sending a box with nothing but empty promises inside, Lorenzo symbolically obliterates the natural order of things.  In other words, he advances the total upheaval that Revenge prophesized at the end of the first act:  \"I'll turn their friendship into fell despite, / Their love to mortal hate, their day to night,\" etc.<PARAGRAPH>Also noteworthy in the third act is the introduction of madness into the play.  To a certain extent, Revenge's prophesy in the first act already adumbrates madness - if only in a figurative, chaotic sense.  In Isabella, however, the word takes on a concrete form. To her maid's alarm, she begins to run around, frantically searching for Horatio as well as his killers.  While Isabella's scene is short, it suggests an interesting reason, or etiology, behind her madness.  Her last words in the scene read: \"But say, where shall I find the men, the murderers, / That slew Horatio? Whither shall I run / To find them out that murdered my son?\"  The impelling force behind her frenzy, it seems, is the frustration of not even knowing the identity of her son's murderers.  Her disease is thus the absence of history .  And yet she calls for herbs to \"purge the heart\" - as if the disease were an internal matter, and moreover one of waste.  It is this paradoxical intentional/external tension that Hieronimo carries on in the second half of the third act.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180414055342/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-spanish-tragedy/study-guide/summary-act-3-scenes-1-10"}