The sea--Longings for shore--A land-sick ship--Destination of the
voyagers.


Six months at sea! Yes, reader, as I live, six months out of sight of
land; cruising after the sperm whale beneath the scorching sun of the
Line, and tossed on the billows of the wide-rolling Pacific--the sky above,
  the sea around, and nothing else! Weeks and weeks ago our fresh provisions
  were all exhausted. There is not a sweet potato left; not a single yam.
  Those glorious bunches of bananas which once decorated our stern and
  quarter-deck, have, alas, disappeared! and the delicious oranges which
  hung suspended from our tops and stays--they, too, are gone! Yes, they are
  all departed, and there is nothing left us but salt-horse and sea-biscuit.

  Oh! for a refreshing glimpse of one blade of grass--for a snuff at the
  fragrance of a handful of the loamy earth! Is there nothing fresh around
  us? Is there no green thing to be seen? Yes, the inside of our bulwarks is
  painted green; but what a vile and sickly hue it is, as if nothing bearing
  even the semblance of verdure could flourish this weary way from land.
  Even the bark that once clung to the wood we use for fuel has been gnawed
  off and devoured by the captain's pig; and so long ago, too, that the pig
  himself has in turn been devoured.

  There is but one solitary tenant in the chicken-coop, once a gay and
  dapper young cock, bearing him so bravely among the coy hens. But look at
  him now; there he stands, moping all the day long on that everlasting one
  leg of his. He turns with disgust from the mouldy corn before him, and the
  brackish water in his little trough. He mourns no doubt his lost
  companions, literally snatched from him one by one, and never seen again.
  But his days of mourning will be few; for Mungo, our black cook, told me
  yesterday that the word had at last gone forth, and poor Pedro's fate was
  sealed. His attenuated body will be laid out upon the captain's table next
  Sunday, and long before night will be buried, with all the usual
  ceremonies, beneath that worthy individual's vest. Who would believe that
  there could be any one so cruel as to long for the decapitation of the
  luckless Pedro; yet the sailors pray every minute, selfish fellows, that
  the miserable fowl may be brought to his end. They say the captain will
  never point the ship for the land so long as he has in anticipation a mess
  of fresh meat. This unhappy bird can alone furnish it; and when he is once
  devoured, the captain will come to his senses. I wish thee no harm, Peter;
  but as thou art doomed, sooner or later, to meet the fate of all thy race;
  and if putting a period to thy existence is to be the signal for our
  deliverance, why--truth to speak--I wish thy throat cut this very moment;
  for, oh! how I wish to see the living earth again! The old ship herself
  longs to look out upon the land from her hawseholes once more, as Jack
  Lewis said right the other day when the captain found fault with his
  steering.

  "Why, d'ye see, Captain Vangs," says bold Jack, "I'm as good a helmsman as
  ever put hand to spoke; but none of us can steer the old lady now. We
  can't keep her full and bye, sir: watch her ever so close, she will fall
  off; and then, sir, when I put the helm down so gently and try like to
  coax her to the work, she won't take it kindly, but will fall round off
  again; and it's all because she knows the land is under the lee, sir, and
  she won't go any more to windward." Ay, and why should she, Jack? didn't
  every one of her stout timbers grow on shore, and hasn't she sensibilities
  as well as we?

  Poor old ship! Her very looks denote her desires: how deplorable she
  appears! The paint on her sides, burnt up by the scorching sun, is puffed
  out and cracked. See the weeds she trails along with her, and what an
  unsightly bunch of these horrid barnacles has formed about her
  stern-piece; and every time she rises on a sea, she shows her copper torn
  away or hanging in jagged strips.

  Poor old ship! I say again: for six months she has been rolling and
  pitching about, never for one moment at rest. But courage, old lass, I
  hope to see thee soon within a biscuit's toss of the merry land, riding
  snugly at anchor in some green cove, and sheltered from the boisterous
  winds.

  * * * * * * * * * *

  "Hurrah, my lads! It's a settled thing; next week we shape our course to
  the Marquesas!" The Marquesas! What strange visions of outlandish things
  does the very name spirit up! Lovely houris--cannibal banquets--groves of
  cocoa-nuts--coral reefs--tattooed chiefs--and bamboo temples; sunny valleys
  planted with bread-fruit trees--carved canoes dancing on the flashing blue
  waters--savage woodlands guarded by horrible idols--_heathenish rites and
  human sacrifices_.

  Such were the strangely jumbled anticipations that haunted me during our
  passage from the cruising ground. I felt an irresistible curiosity to see
  those islands which the olden voyagers had so glowingly described.

  The group for which we were now steering (although among the earliest of
      European discoveries in the South Seas, having been first visited in the
      year 1595) still continues to be tenanted by beings as strange and
  barbarous as ever. The missionaries, sent on a heavenly errand, had sailed
  by their lovely shores, and had abandoned them to their idols of wood and
  stone. How interesting the circumstances under which they were discovered!
  In the watery path of Mendanna, cruising in quest of some region of gold,
  these isles had sprung up like a scene of enchantment, and for a moment
  the Spaniard believed his bright dream was realized. In honour of the
  Marquess de Mendoza, then viceroy of Peru--under whose auspices the
  navigator sailed--he bestowed upon them the name which denoted the rank of
  his patron, and gave to the world, on his return, a vague and magnificent
  account of their beauty. But these islands, undisturbed for years,
  relapsed into their previous obscurity; and it is only recently that
  anything has been known concerning them. Once in the course of a half
  century, to be sure, some adventurous rover would break in upon their
  peaceful repose, and, astonished at the unusual scene, would be almost
  tempted to claim the merit of a new discovery.

  Of this interesting group, but little account has ever been given, if we
  except the slight mention made of them in the sketches of South Sea
  voyages. Cook, in his repeated circumnavigations of the globe, barely
  touched at their shores; and all that we know about them is from a few
  general narratives.

  Within the last few years, American and English vessels engaged in the
  extensive whale fisheries of the Pacific have occasionally, when short of
  provisions, put into the commodious harbour which there is in one of the
  islands; but a fear of the natives, founded on the recollection of the
  dreadful fate which many white men have received at their hands, has
  deterred their crews from intermixing with the population sufficiently to
  gain any insight into their peculiar customs and manners. Indeed, there is
  no cluster of islands in the Pacific that has been any length of time
  discovered, of which so little has hitherto been known as the Marquesas,
  and it is a pleasing reflection that this narrative of mine will do
  something towards withdrawing the veil from regions so romantic and
  beautiful.





