State of affairs aboard the ship--Contents of her larder--Length of
South Seamen's voyages--Account of a flying whale-man--Determination
to leave the vessel--The bay of Nukuheva--The Typees.


It was in the summer of 1842, that we arrived at the islands. Our ship had
not been many days in the harbour of Nukuheva, before I came to the
determination of leaving her. That my reasons for resolving to take this
step were numerous and weighty, may be inferred from the fact that I chose
rather to risk my fortunes among the savages of the island than to endure
another voyage on board the _Dolly_. To use the concise, point-blank
phrase of the sailors, I had made up my mind to "run away." Now, as a
meaning is generally attached to these two words no way flattering to the
individual to whom they are applied, it behoves me, for the sake of my own
character, to offer some explanation of my conduct.

When I entered on board the _Dolly_, I signed, as a matter of course, the
ship's articles, thereby voluntarily engaging and legally binding myself
to serve in a certain capacity for the period of the voyage; and, special
considerations apart, I was of course bound to fulfil the agreement. But
in all contracts, if one party fail to perform his share of the compact,
   is not the other virtually absolved from his liability? Who is there who
   will not answer in the affirmative?

   Having settled the principle, then, let me apply it to the particular case
   in question. In numberless instances had not only the implied but the
   specified conditions of the articles been violated on the part of the ship
   in which I served. The usage on board of her was tyrannical; the sick had
   been inhumanly neglected; the provisions had been doled out in scanty
   allowance; and her cruises were unreasonably protracted. The captain was
   the author of these abuses; it was in vain to think that he would either
   remedy them, or alter his conduct, which was arbitrary and violent in the
   extreme. His prompt reply to all complaints and remonstrances was--the
   butt-end of a hand-spike, so convincingly administered as effectually to
   silence the aggrieved party.

   To whom could we apply for redress? We had left both law and equity on the
   other side of the Cape; and unfortunately, with a very few exceptions, our
   crew was composed of a parcel of dastardly and mean-spirited wretches,
   divided among themselves, and only united in enduring without resistance
   the unmitigated tyranny of the captain. It would have been mere madness
   for any two or three of the number, unassisted by the rest, to attempt
   making a stand against his ill usage. They would only have called down
   upon themselves the particular vengeance of this "Lord of the Plank," and
   subjected their shipmates to additional hardships.

   But, after all, these things could have been endured awhile, had we
   entertained the hope of being speedily delivered from them by the due
   completion of the terms of our servitude. But what a dismal prospect
   awaited us in this quarter! The longevity of Cape Horn whaling voyages is
   proverbial, frequently extending over a period of four or five years.

   Some long-haired, bare-necked youths, who, forced by the united influences
   of a roving spirit and hard times, embark at Nantucket for a pleasure
   excursion to the Pacific, and whose anxious mothers provide them with
   bottled milk for the occasion, oftentimes return very respectable
   middle-aged gentlemen.

   The very preparations made for one of these expeditions are enough to
   frighten one. As the vessel carries out no cargo, her hold is filled with
   provisions for her own consumption. The owners, who officiate as caterers
   for the voyage, supply the larder with an abundance of dainties. Delicate
   morsels of beef and pork, cut on scientific principles from every part of
   the animal, and of all conceivable shapes and sizes, are carefully packed
   in salt, and stored away in barrels; affording a never-ending variety in
   their different degrees of toughness, and in the peculiarities of their
   saline properties. Choice old water too, decanted into stout six-barrel
   casks, and two pints of which is allowed every day to each soul on board;
   together with ample store of sea-bread, previously reduced to a state of
   petrifaction, with a view to preserve it either from decay or consumption
   in the ordinary mode, are likewise provided for the nourishment and
   gastronomic enjoyment of the crew.

   But not to speak of the quality of these articles of sailors' fare, the
   abundance in which they are put on board a whaling vessel is almost
   incredible. Oftentimes, when we had occasion to break out in the hold, and
   I beheld the successive tiers of casks and barrels, whose contents were
   all destined to be consumed in due course by the ship's company, my heart
   has sunk within me.

   Although, as a general case, a ship unlucky in falling in with whales
   continues to cruise after them until she has barely sufficient provisions
   remaining to take her home, turning round then quietly and making the best
   of her way to her friends, yet there are instances when even this natural
   obstacle to the further prosecution of the voyage is overcome by
   headstrong captains, who, bartering the fruits of their hard-earned toils
   for a new supply of provisions in some of the ports of Chili or Peru,
   begin the voyage afresh with unabated zeal and perseverance. It is in vain
   that the owners write urgent letters to him to sail for home, and for
   their sake to bring back the ship, since it appears he can put nothing in
   her. Not he. He has registered a vow: he will fill his vessel with good
   sperm oil, or failing to do so, never again strike Yankee soundings.

   I heard of one whaler, which after many years' absence was given up for
   lost. The last that had been heard of her was a shadowy report of her
   having touched at some of those unstable islands in the far Pacific, whose
   eccentric wanderings are carefully noted in each new edition of the South
   Sea charts. After a long interval, however, the _Perseverance_--for that
   was her name--was spoken somewhere in the vicinity of the ends of the
   earth, cruising along as leisurely as ever, her sails all bepatched and
   bequilted with rope-yarns, her spars fished with old pipe staves, and her
   rigging knotted and spliced in every possible direction. Her crew was
   composed of some twenty venerable Greenwich-pensioner-looking old salts,
   who just managed to hobble about deck. The ends of all the running ropes,
   with the exception of the signal halyards and poop-down-haul, were rove
   through snatch-blocks, and led to the capstan or windlass, so that not a
   yard was braced or a sail set without the assistance of machinery.

   Her hull was encrusted with barnacles, which completely encased her. Three
   pet sharks followed in her wake, and every day came alongside to regale
   themselves from the contents of the cook's bucket, which were pitched over
   to them. A vast shoal of bonetas and albicores always kept her company.

   Such was the account I heard of this vessel, and the remembrance of it
   always haunted me; what eventually became of her I never learned; at any
   rate she never reached home, and I suppose she is still regularly tacking
   twice in the twenty-four hours somewhere off Buggerry Island, or the
   Devil's-Tail Peak.

   Having said thus much touching the usual length of these voyages, when I
   inform the reader that ours had as it were just commenced, we being only
   fifteen months out, and even at that time hailed as a late arrival, and
   boarded for news, he will readily perceive that there was little to
   encourage one in looking forward to the future, especially as I had always
   had a presentiment that we should make an unfortunate voyage, and our
   experience so far had justified the expectation.

   I may here state, and on my faith as an honest man, that some time after
   arriving home from my adventures, I learned that this vessel was still in
   the Pacific, and that she had met with very poor success in the fishery.
   Very many of her crew, also, left her; and her voyage lasted about five
   years.

   But to return to my narrative. Placed in these circumstances, then, with
   no prospect of matters mending if I remained aboard the _Dolly_, I at once
   made up my mind to leave her: to be sure, it was rather an inglorious
   thing to steal away privately from those at whose hands I had received
   wrongs and outrages that I could not resent; but how was such a course to
   be avoided when it was the only alternative left me? Having made up my
   mind, I proceeded to acquire all the information I could obtain relating
   to the island and its inhabitants, with a view of shaping my plans of
   escape accordingly. The result of these inquiries I will now state, in
   order that the ensuing narrative may be the better understood.

   The bay of Nukuheva, in which we were then lying, is an expanse of water
   not unlike in figure the space included within the limits of a horse-shoe.
   It is, perhaps, nine miles in circumference. You approach it from the sea
   by a narrow entrance, flanked on either side by two small twin islets
   which soar conically to the height of some five hundred feet. From these
   the shore recedes on both hands, and describes a deep semicircle.

   From the verge of the water the land rises uniformly on all sides, with
   green and sloping acclivities, until from gently rolling hillsides and
   moderate elevations it insensibly swells into lofty and majestic heights,
   whose blue outlines, ranged all around, close in the view. The beautiful
   aspect of the shore is heightened by deep and romantic glens, which come
   down to it at almost equal distances, all apparently radiating from a
   common centre, and the upper extremities of which are lost to the eye
   beneath the shadow of the mountains. Down each of these little valleys
   flows a clear stream, here and there assuming the form of a slender
   cascade, then stealing invisibly along until it bursts upon the sight
   again in larger and more noisy waterfalls, and at last demurely wanders
   along to the sea.

   The houses of the natives, constructed of the yellow bamboo, tastefully
   twisted together in a kind of wickerwork, and thatched with the long
   tapering leaves of the palmetto, are scattered irregularly along these
   valleys beneath the shady branches of the cocoa-nut trees.

   Nothing can exceed the imposing scenery of this bay. Viewed from our ship
   as she lay at anchor in the middle of the harbour, it presented the
   appearance of a vast natural amphitheatre in decay, and overgrown with
   vines, the deep glens that furrowed its sides appearing like enormous
   fissures caused by the ravages of time. Very often when lost in admiration
   at its beauty, I have experienced a pang of regret that a scene so
   enchanting should be hidden from the world in these remote seas, and
   seldom meet the eyes of devoted lovers of nature.

   Besides this bay the shores of the island are indented by several other
   extensive inlets, into which descend broad and verdant valleys. These are
   inhabited by as many distinct tribes of savages, who, although speaking
   kindred dialects of a common language, and having the same religion and
   laws, have from time immemorial waged hereditary warfare against each
   other. The intervening mountains, generally two or three thousand feet
   above the level of the sea, geographically define the territories of each
   of these hostile tribes, who never cross them, save on some expedition of
   war or plunder. Immediately adjacent to Nukuheva, and only separated from
   it by the mountains seen from the harbour, lies the lovely valley of
   Happar, whose inmates cherish the most friendly relations with the
   inhabitants of Nukuheva. On the other side of Happar, and closely
   adjoining it, is the magnificent valley of the dreaded Typees, the
   unappeasable enemies of both these tribes.

   These celebrated warriors appear to inspire the other islanders with
   unspeakable terrors. Their very name is a frightful one; for the word
   "Typee" in the Marquesan dialect signifies a lover of human flesh. It is
   rather singular that the title should have been bestowed upon them
   exclusively, inasmuch as the natives of all this group are irreclaimable
   cannibals. The name may, perhaps, have been given to denote the peculiar
   ferocity of this clan, and to convey a special stigma along with it.

   These same Typees enjoy a prodigious notoriety all over the islands. The
   natives of Nukuheva would frequently recount in pantomime to our ship's
   company their terrible feats, and would show the marks of wounds they had
   received in desperate encounters with them. When ashore they would, try to
   frighten us by pointing to one of their own number, and calling him a
   Typee, manifesting no little surprise that we did not take to our heels at
   so terrible an announcement. It was quite amusing, too, to see with what
   earnestness they disclaimed all cannibal propensities on their own part,
   while they denounced their enemies--the Typees--as inveterate gormandizers
   of human flesh; but this is a peculiarity to which I shall hereafter have
   occasion to allude.

   Although I was convinced that the inhabitants of our bay were as arrant
   cannibals as any of the other tribes on the island, still I could not but
   feel a particular and most unqualified repugnance to the aforesaid Typees.
   Even before visiting the Marquesas, I had heard from men who had touched
   at the group on former voyages some revolting stories in connection with
   these savages; and fresh in my remembrance was the adventure of the master
   of the _Katherine_, who only a few months previous, imprudently venturing
   into this bay in an armed boat for the purpose of barter, was seized by
   the natives, carried back a little distance into their valley, and was
   only saved from a cruel death by the intervention of a young girl, who
   facilitated his escape by night along the beach to Nukuheva.

   I had heard, too, of an English vessel that many years ago, after a weary
   cruise, sought to enter the bay of Nukuheva, and arriving within two or
   three miles of the land, was met by a large canoe filled with natives, who
   offered to lead the way to the place of their destination. The captain,
   unacquainted with the localities of the island, joyfully acceded to the
   proposition--the canoe paddled on and the ship followed. She was soon
   conducted to a beautiful inlet, and dropped her anchor in its waters
   beneath the shadows of the lofty shore. That same night the perfidious
   Typees, who had thus inveigled her into their fatal bay, flocked aboard
   the doomed vessel by hundreds, and at a given signal murdered every soul
   on board.





