General information gathered at the festival--Personal beauty of
the Typees--Their superiority over the inhabitants of the other
islands--Diversity of complexion--A vegetable cosmetic and
ointment--Testimony of voyagers to the uncommon beauty of the
Marquesans--Few evidences of intercourse with civilized
beings--Dilapidated musket--Primitive simplicity of government--Regal
dignity of Mehevi.


Although I had been unable during the late festival to obtain information
on many interesting subjects which had much excited my curiosity, still
that important event had not passed by without adding materially to my
general knowledge of the islanders.

I was especially struck by the physical strength and beauty which they
displayed, by their great superiority in these respects over the
inhabitants of the neighbouring bay of Nukuheva, and by the singular
contrasts they presented among themselves in their various shades of
complexion.

In beauty of form they surpassed anything I had ever seen. Not a single
instance of natural deformity was observable in all the throng attending
the revels. Occasionally I noticed among the men the scars of wounds they
had received in battle; and sometimes, though very seldom, the loss of a
finger, an eye, or an arm, attributable to the same cause. With these
exceptions, every individual appeared free from those blemishes which
sometimes mar the effect of an otherwise perfect form. But their physical
excellence did not merely consist in an exemption from these evils; nearly
every individual of their number might have been taken for a sculptor's
model.

When I remembered that these islanders derived no advantage from dress,
     but appeared in all the naked simplicity of nature, I could not avoid
     comparing them with the fine gentlemen and dandies who promenade such
     unexceptional figures in our frequented thoroughfares. Stripped of the
     cunning artifices of the tailor, and standing forth in the garb of
     Eden,--what a sorry set of round-shouldered, spindle-shanked, crane-necked
     varlets would civilized men appear! Stuffed calves, padded breasts, and
     scientifically cut pantaloons would then avail them nothing, and the
     effect would be truly deplorable.

     Nothing in the appearance of the islanders struck me more forcibly than
     the whiteness of their teeth. The novelist always compares the masticators
     of his heroine to ivory; but I boldly pronounce the teeth of the Typees to
     be far more beautiful than ivory itself. The jaws of the oldest greybeards
     among them were much better garnished than those of the youths of
     civilized countries; while the teeth of the young and middle-aged, in
     their purity and whiteness, were actually dazzling to the eye. This
     marvellous whiteness of the teeth is to be ascribed to the pure vegetable
     diet of these people, and the uninterrupted healthfulness of their natural
     mode of life.

     The men, in almost every instance, are of lofty stature, scarcely ever
     less than six feet in height, while the other sex are uncommonly
     diminutive. The early period of life at which the human form arrives at
     maturity in this generous tropical climate likewise deserves to be
     mentioned. A little creature, not more than thirteen years of age, who in
     other particulars might be regarded as a mere child, is often seen nursing
     her own baby; whilst lads who, under less ripening skies, would be still
     at school, are here responsible fathers of families.

     On first entering the Typee valley, I had been struck with the marked
     contrast presented by its inhabitants with those of the bay I had
     previously left. In the latter place, I had not been favourably impressed
     with the personal appearance of the male portion of the population;
     although with the females, excepting in some truly melancholy instances, I
     had been wonderfully pleased.

     Apart, however, from these considerations, I am inclined to believe that
     there exists a radical difference between the two tribes, if indeed they
     are not distinct races of men. To those who have merely touched at
     Nukuheva Bay, without visiting other portions of the island, would hardly
     appear credible the diversities presented between the various small clans
     inhabiting so diminutive a spot. But the hereditary hostility which has
     existed between them for ages fully accounts for this.

     Not so easy, however, is it to assign an adequate cause for the endless
     variety of complexions to be seen in the Typee valley. During the
     festival, I had noticed several young females whose skins were almost as
     white as any Saxon damsel's, a slight dash of the mantling brown being all
     that marked the difference. This comparative fairness of complexion,
     though in a great degree perfectly natural, is partly the result of an
     artificial process, and of an entire exclusion from the sun. The juice of
     the "papa" root, found in great abundance at the head of the valley, is
     held in great esteem as a cosmetic, with which many of the females daily
     anoint their whole person. The habitual use of it whitens and beautifies
     the skin. Those of the young girls who resort to this method of
     heightening their charms, never expose themselves to the rays of the sun;
     an observance, however, that produces little or no inconvenience, since
     there are but few of the inhabited portions of the vale which are not
     shaded over with a spreading canopy of boughs, so that one may journey
     from house to house, scarcely deviating from the direct course, and yet
     never once see his shadow cast upon the ground.

     The "papa," when used, is suffered to remain upon the skin for several
     hours; being of a light green colour, it consequently imparts for the time
     a similar hue to the complexion. Nothing, therefore, can be imagined more
     singular than the appearance of these nearly naked damsels immediately
     after the application of the cosmetic. To look at one of them you would
     almost suppose she was some vegetable in an unripe state; and that,
     instead of living in the shade for ever, she ought to be placed out in the
     sun to ripen.

     All the islanders are more or less in the habit of anointing themselves;
     the women preferring the "aker" or "papa," and the men using the oil of
     the cocoa-nut. Mehevi was remarkably fond of mollifying his entire cuticle
     with this ointment. Sometimes he might be seen with his whole body fairly
     reeking with the perfumed oil of the nut, looking as if he had just
     emerged from a soap-boiler's vat, or had undergone the process of dipping
     in a tallow-chandlery. To this cause, perhaps, united to their frequent
     bathing, and extreme cleanliness, is ascribable, in a great measure, the
     marvellous purity and smoothness of skin exhibited by the natives in
     general.

     The prevailing tint among the women of the valley was a light olive, and
     of this style of complexion Fayaway afforded the most beautiful example.
     Others were still darker, while not a few were of a genuine golden colour,
     and some of a swarthy hue.

     As agreeing with much previously mentioned in this narrative, I may here
     observe, that Mendanna, their discoverer, in his account of the Marquesas,
     described the natives as wondrously beautiful to behold, and as nearly
     resembling the people of Southern Europe. The first of these islands seen
     by Mendanna was La Madelena, which is not far distant from Nukuheva; and
     its inhabitants in every respect resemble those dwelling on that and the
     other islands of the group. Figueroa, the chronicler of Mendanna's voyage,
     says, that on the morning the land was descried, when the Spaniards drew
  near the shore, there sallied forth, in rude procession, about seventy
canoes, and at the same time many of the inhabitants (females, I presume)
  made towards the ships by swimming. He adds, that "in complexion they were
  nearly white, of good stature, and finely formed; and on their faces and
  bodies were delineated representations of fishes and other devices." The
  old Don then goes on to say, "There came, among others, two lads paddling
  their canoe, whose eyes were fixed on the ship; they had beautiful faces,
  and the most promising animation of countenance, and were in all things so
  becoming, that the pilot-mayor, Quiros, affirmed, nothing in his life ever
  caused him so much regret as the leaving such fine creatures to be lost in
  that country."

  Some of the natives present at the Feast of Calabashes had displayed a few
  articles of European dress, disposed, however, about their persons after
  their own peculiar fashion. Among these I perceived the two pieces of
  cotton cloth which poor Toby and myself had bestowed upon our youthful
  guides the afternoon we entered the valley. They were evidently reserved
  for gala days; and during those of the festival they rendered the young
  islanders who wore them very distinguished characters. The small number
  who were similarly adorned, and the great value they appeared to place
  upon the most common and most trivial articles, furnished ample evidence
  of the very restricted intercourse they held with vessels touching at the
  island. A few cotton handkerchiefs of a gay pattern, tied about the neck,
  and suffered to fall over the shoulders, strips of fanciful calico,
  swathed about the loins, were nearly all I saw.

  Indeed, throughout the valley, there were few things of any kind to be
  seen of European origin. All I ever saw, besides the articles just alluded
  to, were the six muskets preserved in the Ti, and three or four similar
  implements of warfare hung up in other houses, some small canvas bags,
  partly filled with bullets and powder, and half a dozen old hatchet-heads,
  with the edges blunted and battered to such a degree as to render them
  utterly worthless. These last seemed to be regarded as nearly worthless by
  the natives; and several times they held up one of them before me, and
  throwing it aside with a gesture of disgust, manifested their contempt for
  anything that could so soon become unserviceable.

  But the muskets, the powder, and the bullets, were held in most
  extravagant esteem. The former, from their great age and the peculiarities
  they exhibited, were well worthy a place in any antiquarian's armoury. I
  remember, in particular, one that hung in the Ti, and which
  Mehevi--supposing as a matter of course that I was able to repair it--had
  put into my hands for that purpose. It was one of those clumsy,
  old-fashioned English pieces known generally as Tower Hill muskets, and,
  for aught I know, might have been left on the island by Wallace, Carteret,
  Cook, or Vancouver. The stock was half-rotten and worm-eaten; the lock was
  as rusty and about as well adapted to its ostensible purpose as an old
  door-hinge; the threading of the screws about the trigger was completely
  worn away; while the barrel shook in the wood. Such was the weapon the
  chief desired me to restore to its original condition. As I did not
  possess the accomplishments of a gunsmith, and was likewise destitute of
  the necessary tools, I was reluctantly obliged to signify my inability to
  perform the task. At this unexpected communication Mehevi regarded me, for
  a moment, as if he half suspected I was some inferior sort of white man,
  who after all did not know much more than a Typee. However, after a most
  laboured explanation of the matter, I succeeded in making him understand
  the extreme difficulty of the task. Scarcely satisfied with my apologies,
  however, he marched off with the superannuated musket in something of a
  huff, as if he would no longer expose it to the indignity of being
  manipulated by such unskilful fingers.

  [Illustration: MEHEVI]

  During the festival, I had not failed to remark the simplicity of manner,
  the freedom from all restraint, and, to a certain degree, the equality of
  condition manifested by the natives in general. No one appeared to assume
  any arrogant pretensions. There was little more than a slight difference
  in costume to distinguish the chiefs from the other natives. All appeared
  to mix together freely, and without any reserve; although I noticed that
  the wishes of a chief, even when delivered in the mildest tone, received
  the same immediate obedience which elsewhere would have been only accorded
  to a peremptory command. What may be the extent of the authority of the
  chiefs over the rest of the tribe, I will not venture to assert; but from
  all I saw during my stay in the valley, I was induced to believe that in
  matters concerning the general welfare it was very limited. The required
  degree of deference towards them, however, was willingly and cheerfully
  yielded; and as all authority is transmitted from father to son, I have no
  doubt that one of the effects here, as elsewhere, of high birth, is to
  induce respect and obedience.

  The particular grades of rank existing among the chiefs of Typee, I could
  not in all cases determine. Previous to the Feast of Calabashes, I had
  been puzzled what particular station to assign to Mehevi. But the
  important part he took upon that occasion convinced me that he had no
  superior among the inhabitants of the valley. I had invariably noticed a
  certain degree of deference paid to him by all with whom I had ever seen
  him brought in contact; but when I remembered that my wanderings had been
  confined to a limited portion of the valley, and that towards the sea a
  number of distinguished chiefs resided, some of whom had separately
  visited me at Marheyo's house, and whom, until the festival, I had never
  seen in the company of Mehevi, I felt disposed to believe that his rank,
  after all, might not be particularly elevated.

  The revels, however, had brought together all the warriors whom I had seen
  individually and in groups at different times and places. Among them
  Mehevi moved with an easy air of superiority which was not to be mistaken;
  and he whom I had only looked at as the hospitable host of the Ti, and one
  of the military leaders of the tribe, now assumed in my eyes the dignity
  of royal station. His striking costume, no less than his naturally
  commanding figure, seemed indeed to give him pre-eminence over the rest.
  The towering helmet of feathers that he wore raised him in height above
  all who surrounded him; and though some others were similarly adorned, the
  length and luxuriance of their plumes were far inferior to his.

  Mehevi was in fact the greatest of the chiefs--the head of his clan--the
  sovereign of the valley; and the simplicity of the social institutions of
  the people could not have been more completely proved than by the fact,
  that after having been several weeks in the valley, and almost in daily
  intercourse with Mehevi, I should have remained until the time of the
  festival ignorant of his regal character. But a new light had now broken
  in upon me. The Ti was the palace--and Mehevi the king. Both the one and
  the other of a most simple and patriarchal nature it must be allowed, and
  wholly unattended by the ceremonious pomp which usually surrounds the
  purple.

  After having made this discovery I could not avoid congratulating myself
  that Mehevi had from the first taken me as it were under his royal
  protection, and that he still continued to entertain for me the warmest
  regard, as far at least as I was enabled to judge from appearances. For
  the future I determined to pay most assiduous court to him, hoping that
  eventually through his kindness I might obtain my liberty.





