King Mehevi--Conduct of Marheyo and Mehevi in certain delicate
matters--Peculiar system of marriage--Number of
population--Uniformity--Embalming--Places of sepulture--Funeral
obsequies at Nukuheva--Number of inhabitants in Typee--Location of
the dwellings--Happiness enjoyed in the valley.


King Mehevi!--A goodly sounding title!--and why should I not bestow it upon
the foremost man in the valley? All hail, therefore, Mehevi, king over all
the Typees! and long life and prosperity to his tropical majesty! But to
be sober again after this loyal burst.

Previously to seeing the Dancing Widows I had little idea that there were
any matrimonial relations subsisting in Typee, and I should as soon have
thought of a Platonic affection being cultivated between the sexes, as of
the solemn connexion of man and wife. To be sure, there were old Marheyo
and Tinor, who seemed to live together quite sociably; but for all that, I
had sometimes observed a comical-looking old gentleman, dressed in a suit
of shabby tattooing, who appeared to be equally at home. This behaviour,
   until subsequent discoveries enlightened me, puzzled me more than anything
   else I witnessed in Typee.

   As for Mehevi, I had supposed him a confirmed bachelor, as well as most of
   the principal chiefs. At any rate, if they had wives and families, they
   ought to have been ashamed of themselves; for sure I am, they never
   troubled themselves about any domestic affairs. In truth, Mehevi seemed to
   be the president of a club of hearty fellows who kept "Bachelor's Hall" in
   fine style at the Ti. I had no doubt but that they regarded children as
   odious incumbrances; and their ideas of domestic felicity were
   sufficiently shown in the fact, that they allowed no meddlesome
   housekeepers to turn topsy-turvy those snug little arrangements they had
   made in their comfortable dwelling. I strongly suspected, however, that
   some of those jolly bachelors were carrying on love intrigues with the
   maidens of the tribe, although they did not appear publicly to acknowledge
   them. I happened to pop upon Mehevi three or four times when he was
   romping--in a most undignified manner for a warrior king--with one of the
   prettiest little witches in the valley. She lived with an old woman and a
   young man, in a house near Marheyo's; and although in appearance a mere
   child herself, had a noble boy about a year old, who bore a marvellous
   resemblance to Mehevi, whom I should certainly have believed to have been
   the father, were it not that the little fellow had no triangle on his
   face. Mehevi, however, was not the only person upon whom the damsel
   Moonoony smiled--the young fellow of fifteen, who permanently resided in
   the house with her, was decidedly in her good graces. This too was a
   mystery which, with others of the same kind, was afterwards satisfactorily
   explained.

   During the second day of the Feast of Calabashes, Kory-Kory--being
   determined that I should have some understanding on these matters--had, in
   the course of his explanations, directed my attention to a peculiarity I
   had frequently marked among many of the females,--principally those of a
   mature age and rather matronly appearance. This consisted in having the
   right hand and the left foot most elaborately tattooed; while the rest of
   the body was wholly free from the operation of the art, with the exception
   of the minutely dotted lips and slight marks on the shoulders, to which I
   have previously referred as comprising the sole tattooing exhibited by
   Fayaway, in common with other young girls of her age. The hand and foot
   thus embellished, were, according to Kory-Kory, the distinguishing badge
   of wedlock, so far as that social and highly commendable institution is
   known among these people. It answers, indeed, the same purpose as the
   plain gold ring worn by our fairer spouses.

   After Kory-Kory's explanation of the subject, I was for some time
   studiously respectful in the presence of all females thus distinguished,
   and never ventured to indulge in the slightest approach to flirtation with
   any of their number.

   A further insight, however, into the peculiar domestic customs of the
   inmates of the valley did away in a measure with the severity of my
   scruples, and convinced me that I was deceived in some at least of my
   conclusions. A regular system of polygamy exists among the islanders, but
   of a most extraordinary nature,--a plurality of husbands, instead of wives;
   and this solitary fact speaks volumes for the gentle disposition of the
   male population.

   I was not able to learn what particular ceremony was observed in forming
   the marriage contract, but am inclined to think that it must have been of
   a very simple nature. Perhaps the mere "popping the question," as it is
   termed with us, might have been followed by an immediate nuptial alliance.
   At any rate, tedious courtships are unknown in the valley of Typee.

   The males considerably outnumber the females. This holds true of many of
   the islands of Polynesia, although the reverse of what is the case in most
   civilized countries. The girls are first wooed and won, at a very tender
   age, by some stripling in the household in which they reside. This,
   however, is a mere frolic of the affections, and no formal engagement is
   contracted. By the time this first love has a little subsided, a second
   suitor presents himself, of graver years, and carries both boy and girl
   away to his own habitation. This disinterested and generous-hearted fellow
   now weds the young couple--marrying damsel and lover at the same time--and
   all three thenceforth live together as harmoniously as so many turtles. I
   have heard of some men who in civilized countries rashly marry large
   families with their wives, but had no idea that there was any place where
   people married supplementary husbands with them. Infidelity on either side
   is very rare. No man has more than one wife, and no wife of mature years
   has less than two husbands,--sometimes she has three, but such instances
   are not frequent. The marriage tie, whatever it may be, does not appear to
   be indissoluble; for separations occasionally happen. These, however, when
   they do take place, produce no unhappiness, and are preceded by no
   bickerings: for the simple reason, that an ill-used wife or a hen-pecked
   husband is not obliged to file a bill in chancery to obtain a divorce. As
   nothing stands in the way of a separation, the matrimonial yoke sits
   easily and lightly, and a Typee wife lives on very pleasant and sociable
   terms with her husbands. On the whole, wedlock, as known among these
   Typees, seems to be of a more distinct and enduring nature than is usually
   the case with barbarous people.

   But, notwithstanding its existence among them, the scriptural injunction
   to increase and multiply seems to be but indifferently attended to. I
   never saw any of those large families, in arithmetical or step-ladder
   progression, which one often meets with at home. I never knew of more than
   two youngsters living together in the same home, and but seldom even that
   number. As for the women, it was very plain that the anxieties of the
   nursery but seldom disturbed the serenity of their souls; and they were
   never seen going about the valley with half a score of little ones tagging
   at their apron-strings, or rather at the bread-fruit leaf they usually
   wore in the rear.

   I have before had occasion to remark that I never saw any of the ordinary
   signs of a place of sepulture in the valley, a circumstance which I
   attributed, at the time, to my living in a particular part of it, and
   being forbidden to extend my ramble to any considerable distance towards
   the sea. I have since thought it probable, however, that the Typees,
   either desirous of removing from their sight the evidences of mortality,
   or prompted by a taste for rural beauty, may have some charming cemetery
   situated in the shadowy recesses along the base of the mountains. At
   Nukuheva, two or three large quadrangular "pi-pis," heavily flagged,
   enclosed with regular stone walls, and shaded over and almost hidden from
   view by the interlacing branches of enormous trees, were pointed out to me
   as burial-places. The bodies, I understood, were deposited in rude vaults
   beneath the flagging, and were suffered to remain there without being
   disinterred. Although nothing could be more strange and gloomy than the
   aspect of these places, where the lofty trees threw their dark shadows
   over rude blocks of stone, a stranger looking at them would have discerned
   none of the ordinary evidences of a place of sepulture.

   During my stay in the valley, as none of its inmates were so accommodating
   as to die and be buried in order to gratify my curiosity with regard to
   their funeral rites, I was reluctantly obliged to remain in ignorance of
   them. As I have reason to believe, however, that the observances of the
   Typees in these matters are the same with those of all other tribes on the
   island, I will here relate a scene I chanced to witness at Nukuheva.

   A young man had died, about daybreak, in a house near the beach. I had
   been sent ashore that morning, and saw a good deal of the preparations
   they were making for his obsequies. The body, neatly wrapped in new white
   tappa, was laid out in an open shed of cocoa-nut boughs, upon a bier
   constructed of elastic bamboos ingeniously twisted together. This was
   supported, about two feet from the ground, by large canes planted
   uprightly in the earth. Two females, of a dejected appearance, watched by
   its side, plaintively chanting, and beating the air with large grass fans
   whitened with pipe-clay. In the dwelling-house adjoining a numerous
   company were assembled, and various articles of food were being prepared
   for consumption. Two or three individuals, distinguished by head-dresses
   of beautiful tappa, and wearing a great number of ornaments, appeared to
   officiate as masters of the ceremonies. By noon the entertainment had
   fairly begun, and we were told that it would last during the whole of the
   two following days. With the exception of those who mourned by the corpse,
   every one seemed disposed to drown the sense of the late bereavement in
   convivial indulgence. The girls, decked out in their savage finery,
   danced; the old men chanted; the warriors smoked and chatted; and the
   young and lusty, of both sexes, feasted plentifully, and seemed to enjoy
   themselves as pleasantly as they could have done had it been a wedding.

   The islanders understand the art of embalming, and practice it with such
   success, that the bodies of their great chiefs are frequently preserved
   for many years in the very houses where they died. I saw three of these in
   my visit to the bay of Tior. One was enveloped in immense folds of tappa,
   with only the face exposed, and hung erect against the side of the
   dwelling. The others were stretched out upon biers of bamboo, in open,
   elevated temples, which seemed consecrated to their memory. The heads of
   enemies killed in battle are invariably preserved, and hung up as trophies
   in the house of the conqueror. I am not acquainted with the process which
   is in use, but believe that fumigation is the principal agency employed.
   All the remains which I saw presented the appearance of a ham after being
   suspended for some time in a smoky chimney.

   But to return from the dead to the living. The late festival had drawn
   together, as I had every reason to believe, the whole population of the
   vale, and consequently I was enabled to make some estimate with regard to
   its numbers. I should imagine that there were about two thousand
   inhabitants in Typee; and no number could have been better adapted to the
   extent of the valley. The valley is some nine miles in length, and may
   average one in breadth, the houses being distributed at wide intervals
   throughout its whole extent, principally, however, towards the head of the
   vale. There are no villages. The houses stand here and there in the shadow
   of the groves, or are scattered along the banks of the winding stream;
   their golden-hued bamboo sides and gleaming white thatch, forming a
   beautiful contrast to the perpetual verdure in which they are embowered.
   There are no roads of any kind in the valley. Nothing but a labyrinth of
   footpaths, twisting and turning among the thickets without end.





