The social condition and general character of the Typees.


There seemed to be no rogues of any kind in Typee. In the darkest nights
the natives slept securely, with all their worldly wealth around them, in
houses the doors of which were never fastened. The disquieting ideas of
theft or assassination never disturbed them. Each islander reposed beneath
his own palmetto-thatching, or sat under his own bread-fruit, with none to
molest or alarm him. There was not a padlock in the valley, nor anything
that answered the purpose of one: still there was no community of goods.
This long spear, so elegantly carved and highly polished, belongs to
Warmoonoo--it is far handsomer than the one which old Marheyo so greatly
prizes--it is the most valuable article belonging to its owner. And yet I
have seen it leaning against a cocoa-nut tree in the grove, and there it
was found when sought for. Here is a sperm-whale tooth, graven all over
with cunning devices--it is the property of Kurluna. It is the most
precious of the damsel's ornaments. In her estimation, its price is far
above rubies; and yet there hangs the dental jewel, by its cord of braided
  bark, in the girl's house, which is far back in the valley; the door is
left open, and all the inmates have gone off to bathe in the stream.(5)

  So much for the respect in which such matters are held in Typee. As to the
  land of the valley, whether it was the joint property of its inhabitants,
  or whether it was parcelled out among a certain number of landed
  proprietors, who allowed everybody to roam over it as much as they
  pleased, I never could ascertain. At any rate, musty parchments and
  title-deeds there were none in the island; and I am half inclined to
  believe that its inhabitants hold their broad valleys in fee simple from
  nature herself.

  Yesterday I saw Kory-Kory hie him away, armed with a long pole, with
  which, standing on the ground, he knocked down the fruit from the topmost
  boughs of the trees, and brought them home in his basket of cocoa-nut
  leaves. To-day I see an islander, whom I know to reside in a distant part
  of the valley, doing the self-same thing. On the sloping bank of the
  stream were a number of banana trees. I have often seen a score or two of
  young people making a merry foray on the great golden clusters, and
  bearing them off, one after another, to different parts of the vale,
  shouting and tramping as they went. No churlish old curmudgeon could have
  been the owner of that grove of bread-fruit trees, or of these gloriously
  yellow bunches of bananas.

  From what I have said, it will be perceived that there is a vast
  difference between "personal property" and "real estate" in the valley of
  Typee. Some individuals, of course, are more wealthy than others. For
  example: the ridge-pole of Marheyo's house bends under the weight of many
  a huge packet of tappa; his long couch is laid with mats placed one upon
  the other seven deep. Outside, Tinor has ranged along in her bamboo
  cupboard--or whatever the place may be called--a goodly array of calabashes
  and wooden trenchers. Now, the house just beyond the grove, and next to
  Marheyo's, occupied by Ruaruga, is not quite so well furnished. There are
  only three moderate-sized packages swinging overhead; there are only two
  layers of mats beneath; and the calabashes and trenchers are not so
  numerous, nor so tastefully stained and carved. But then, Ruaruga has a
  house--not so pretty a one, to be sure--but just as commodious as Marheyo's;
  and, I suppose, if he wished to vie with his neighbour's establishment, he
  could do so with very little trouble. These, in short, constitute the
  chief differences perceivable in the relative wealth of the people in
  Typee.

  They lived in great harmony with each other. I will give an instance of
  their fraternal feeling.

  One day, in returning with Kory-Kory from my accustomed visit to the Ti,
  we passed by a little opening in the grove; on one side of which, my
  attendant informed me, was that afternoon to be built a dwelling of
  bamboo. At least a hundred of the natives were bringing materials to the
  ground, some carrying in their hands one or two of the canes which were to
  form the sides, others slender rods of the Habiscus, strung with palmetto
  leaves, for the roof. Every one contributed something to the work; and by
  the united, but easy, and even indolent, labours of all, the entire work
  was completed before sunset. The islanders, while employed in erecting
  this tenement, reminded me of a colony of beavers at work. To be sure,
  they were hardly as silent and demure as those wonderful creatures, nor
  were they by any means as diligent. To tell the truth, they were somewhat
  inclined to be lazy, but a perfect tumult of hilarity prevailed; and they
  worked together so unitedly, and seemed actuated by such an instinct of
  friendliness, that it was truly beautiful to behold.

  Not a single female took part in this employment: and if the degree of
  consideration in which the ever-adorable sex is held by the men be--as the
  philosophers affirm--a just criterion of the degree of refinement among a
  people, then I may truly pronounce the Typees to be as polished a
  community as ever the sun shone upon. The religious restrictions of the
  taboo alone excepted, the women of the valley were allowed every possible
  indulgence. Nowhere are the ladies more assiduously courted; nowhere are
  they better appreciated as the contributors to our highest enjoyments; and
  nowhere are they more sensible of their power. Far different from their
  condition among many rude nations, where the women are made to perform all
  the work, while their ungallant lords and masters lie buried in sloth, the
  gentle sex in the valley of Typee were exempt from toil--if toil it might
  be called--that, even in that tropical climate, never distilled one drop of
  perspiration. Their light household occupations, together with the
  manufacture of tappa, the platting of mats, and the polishing of
  drinking-vessels, were the only employments pertaining to the women. And
  even these resembled those pleasant avocations which fill up the elegant
  morning leisure of our fashionable ladies at home. But in these
  occupations, slight and agreeable though they were, the giddy young girls
  very seldom engaged. Indeed, these wilful, care-killing damsels were
  averse to all useful employment. Like so many spoiled beauties, they
  ranged through the groves--bathed in the stream--danced--flirted--played all
  manner of mischievous pranks, and passed their days in one merry round of
  thoughtless happiness.

  During my whole stay on the island I never witnessed a single quarrel, nor
  anything that in the slightest degree approached even to a dispute. The
  natives appeared to form one household, whose members were bound together
  by the ties of strong affection. The love of kindred I did not so much
  perceive, for it seemed blended in the general love; and where all were
  treated as brothers and sisters, it was hard to tell who were actually
  related to each other by blood.

  Let it not be supposed that I have overdrawn this picture. I have not done
  so. Nor let it be urged, that the hostility of this tribe to foreigners,
  and the hereditary feuds they carry on against their fellow-islanders
  beyond the mountains, are facts which contradict me. Not so; these
  apparent discrepancies are easily reconciled. By many a legendary tale of
  violence and wrong, as well as by events which have passed before their
  eyes, these people have been taught to look upon white men with
  abhorrence. The cruel invasion of their country by Porter has alone
  furnished them with ample provocation; and I can sympathize in the spirit
  which prompts the Typee warrior to guard all the passes to his valley with
  the point of his levelled spear, and, standing upon the beach, with his
  back turned upon his green home, to hold at bay the intruding European.

  As to the origin of the enmity of this particular clan towards the
  neighbouring tribes, I cannot so confidently speak. I will not say that
  their foes are the aggressors, nor will I endeavour to palliate their
  conduct. But surely, if our evil passions must find vent, it is far better
  to expend them on strangers and aliens, than in the bosom of the community
  in which we dwell. In many polished countries civil contentions, as well
  as domestic enmities, are prevalent, at the same time that the most
  atrocious foreign wars are waged. How much less guilty, then, are our
  islanders, who of these three sins are only chargeable with one, and that
  the least criminal!

  The reader will, ere long, have reason to suspect that the Typees are not
  free from the guilt of cannibalism; and he will then, perhaps, charge me
  with admiring a people against whom so odious a crime is chargeable. But
  this only enormity in their character is not half so horrible as it is
  usually described. According to the popular fictions, the crews of
  vessels, shipwrecked on some barbarous coast, are eaten alive like so many
  dainty joints by the uncivil inhabitants; and unfortunate voyagers are
  lured into smiling and treacherous bays; knocked on the head with
  outlandish war-clubs; and served up without any preliminary dressing. In
  truth, so horrific and improbable are these accounts, that many sensible
  and well-informed people will not believe that any cannibals exist; and
  place every book of voyages which purports to give any account of them, on
  the same shelf with Blue Beard and Jack the Giant-killer. While others,
  implicitly crediting the most extravagant fictions, firmly believe that
  there are people in the world with tastes so depraved, that they would
  infinitely prefer a single mouthful of material humanity to a good dinner
  of roast beef and plum pudding. But here, Truth, who loves to be centrally
  located, is again found between the two extremes; for cannibalism to a
  certain moderate extent is practised among several of the primitive tribes
  in the Pacific, but it is upon the bodies of slain enemies alone; and
  horrible and fearful as the custom is, immeasurably as it is to be
  abhorred and condemned, still I assert that those who indulge in it are in
  other respects humane and virtuous.





