{"name": "Chapter 28", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-25-31", "summary": "At lunch, Mrs. Beale's beauty attracts attention from others at the hotel. Mrs. Beale continues to be overly sweet to Mrs. Wix. During lunch, she suggests that she is the most suited of Maisie's four potential guardians to raise the girl. The narrator implies that Maisie could do without a father figure, since she isn't a boy. After the meal they go out touring with Mrs. Beale; Maisie and Mrs. Wix are uncomfortable that they aren't able to communicate privately with the other woman constantly present. Since Mrs. Beale is more cultured, she is able to explain a lot of what they are seeing. All the while, Maisie worries about Sir Claude being alone in England. Mrs. Beale takes Maisie into Sir Claude's hotel room before dinner. Mrs. Beale announces that she is going to divorce Beale and marry Sir Claude. When Maisie asks about his marriage to her mother, Mrs. Beale says that she isn't her mother anymore: Sir Claude has made an agreement with Ida that he will stop supporting Ida financially and take full responsibility of Maisie. Maisie tells Mrs. Beale that she doesn't think Mrs. Beale or Sir Claude will get their divorces. When Mrs. Beale presses her, Maisie says that Mrs. Wix told her this. Mrs. Beale says that he will certainly get the divorce, and that she left him in England precisely because he hadn't gotten it yet. Maisie asks if Mrs. Beale actually likes Mrs. Wix, and Mrs. Beale asks that Maisie find out whether Mrs. Wix likes her. At bedtime, Maisie asks Mrs. Wix whether she likes Mrs. Beale. Maisie suggests that Mrs. Beale has been trying to win Mrs. Wix over to the idea of her taking care of Maisie, rather than Sir Claude. Mrs. Wix says that it wouldn't be as immoral as the two of them taking care of Maisie, but that she would still rather Sir Claude have sole guardianship. Mrs. Wix remarks that Maisie is talking in a very bold and mature way. Maisie seems pleased by this and continues to push the matter of whether Mrs. Wix would accept Mrs. Beale as Maisie's sole guardian. When Mrs. Wix asks Maisie if she would like that arrangement, Maisie says that she would not: she wants \" alone or nobody\". Mrs. Wix asks, \"Not even me. and Maisie replies, \"Oh, you're nobody", "analysis": "Contemporary readers might be confused by James's use of the phrase \"making love\" in this section of the book, as when James writes, \"There was a phrase familiar to Maisie, so often was it used by this lady to express the idea of one's getting what one wanted: one got it--Mrs. Beale always said she at all events always got it or proposed to get it--by 'making love'. She was at present making love, singular as it appeared, to Mrs. Wix\" . To understand what is going on in the plot at this point, a reader must look to the transformation of this phrase over time. Up until the late 19th century, the phrase was defined as wooing someone or making them fall in love with you. This was Mrs. Beale's goal in this chapter; while Mrs. Beale does not want Mrs. Wix to be romantically in love with her, she wants the woman to like and accept her. It was in the early 20th century that the phrase came to take on the connotation of sexual intercourse, meaning it is possible for James, who published the novel in 1897, to have intended for the phrase to be a double entendre. James escalates the suspense over who Maisie will choose as her guardian at the end of Chapter 28. Maisie and Mrs. Wix argue about whether Maisie should be raised by Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale, and Maisie professes that she wants to be raised by \" alone or nobody\" . When Mrs. Wix inquires, \"Not even me?\" , Maisie replies, \"Oh, you're nobody!\" . While Maisie's eventual choice of Mrs. Wix has been foreshadowed by the girl's trust of the governess ever since their first meeting, this moment subverts the reader's expectation, building tension and intrigue. Maisie's statement might even be read as attempting to push Mrs. Wix away to test her love. As Maisie and her guardians spend the final chapters of the book in Boulogne, France, James includes certain phrases in French without translation . As the novel was written in the late 19th century in England, James likely assumed that educated readers would be able to translate the French phrases. While many of the uses of French serve merely to create a rich setting and show Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale's comfort in France due to their levels of education, a particular situation at the end of Chapter 29 warrants further analysis. As Sir Claude and Maisie leave to get breakfast together, Sir Claude stops an employee of the hotel where they are staying to ask for food to be sent to Mrs. Wix. The employee responds, \"Soyez tranquille...Et pour Madame?\"  This translates to \"Rest assured...and for your wife?\" . This shows that the hotel is treating Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale as husband and wife, likely because they requested for her bags to be taken to his room. Sir Claude feigns confusion, responding, \"Madame?\" , perhaps because he fears Maisie would understand the underlying significance of what the employee has said. Morality is one of the major themes of What Maisie Knew, and it is particularly strong in the last chapters of the novel. Mrs. Wix begins to passionately question Maisie's morality in Chapter 26, asking her repeatedly if she has a \"moral sense\" . Mrs. Wix seems to be questioning Maisie's morality because Maisie does not denounce Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale's relationship. Maisie likely does not react strongly to Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale's affair because of how many examples of adultery she has seen in her childhood. This underscores the moral of the novel, which is that mistreating children or exposing them to trauma has long-lasting negative effects. James makes heavy use of tactile imagery in the final scene of the novel in which Mrs. Wix, Sir Claude, and Mrs. Beale battle to be Maisie's guardian. James writes, \" threw herself upon the child and, before Maisie could resist, had sunk with her upon the sofa, possessed of her, encircling her\" . The negative language used to describe the way Mrs. Beale is touching Maisie shows that young girl does not have a positive association with the woman and sees through her ploy of possessing her to ensnare Sir Claude. Later, when Mrs. Beale realizes that Maisie is not going to choose her, James writes, \"Maisie's back became aware of a push that vented resentment\" . Specifying that Maisie's back felt the push from Mrs. Beale gives the reader a vivid understanding of Maisie's sensations, keeping the reader focused on her perception of the event occurring."}