{"name": "Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24", "summary": "As Maisie and her father wait for the Countess to arrive, he tells her that he and the Countess are planning on going to America. He invites Maisie to go with him, which surprises her greatly, and she replies, \"Dear papa, I'll go with you anywhere\". He does not seem to accept this answer, and moves on to talking about Maisie's mother. He threatens, as Maisie's mother has done, that her other parent does not care for her at all and will throw her out of the house. As he talks, Maisie realizes that her father is trying to get her to not come with him to America while still looking like a caring father--meaning this would be the last time she ever sees him. Beale moves on to criticizing Mrs. Beale and Sir Claude, saying that they're using Maisie as a \"pretext\" and turning the girl into \"a monster\". He threatens that they too will throw her out when she is no longer useful. Maisie brings the topic back to America, saying again that she wants to go if not going would mean never seeing her father again. Beale gives her a disgusted grimace, but suddenly leaps into action when he hears the Countess arrive at home. By the time the Countess comes in the front door, Beale and Maisie are a picture of familial bliss snuggled together on the couch. From the moment Maisie sees the Countess face to face, she begins referring to her almost exclusively as \"the brown lady\". It seems that Maisie is very disturbed by the Countess's race, and she is suddenly repulsed by her relationship to Beale and everything in the house that had once seemed lavish and lovely. The Countess attempts to be friendly to Maisie, complimenting her and offering her food. Maisie mentions going to America, and the Countess and Beale begin to argue; the Countess clearly did not think Beale would offer for his daughter to accompany them. Beale tells the Countess that Maisie has said she doesn't want to go, and throughout the argument Maisie has a growing desire to leave. She finally asks to be sent home, and a cab is called for her. As she gets in the cab, Maisie says that she doesn't have any money to pay. Beale tells her to get her stepmother to pay, but the Countess gives Maisie a handful of coins--more than she could possibly need for the cab ride home", "analysis": "As a modern reader, it is difficult to read Maisie's racist impressions of the Countess in Chapter 19. She repeatedly calls the Countess \"the brown lady\"  and states that \"She literally struck the child more as an animal than as a 'real' lady; she might have been a clever frizzled poodle in a frill or a dreadful human monkey in a spangled petticoat. She had a nose that was far too big and eyes that were far too small and a moustache that was, well, not so happy a feature as Sir Claude's\" . This antiquated, discriminatory language toward people of African descent is all the more shocking and disturbing coming from a child. It must be imagined that Maisie's racist thoughts are the product of her upbringing, another negative effect of her parents' and guardians' speech and behavior being passed down to her. It is also important to note that James created the Countess as a confident, financially self-sufficient character, showing that any negative characterization comes from Maisie rather than the author or narrator. Ida's presence in Folkestone in Chapters 20 and 21 mark a turning point in the story: the last time either of Maisie's biological parents is involved in the story. This makes it an apt time to examine Jame's moral message regarding family. The story raises questions about three kinds of relations: biological, legal, and emotional. By the removal of Ida and Beale from Maisie's life, James shows that biological relation is not the last word in creating a stable family. The major question for the remainder of the book is whether legal relatedness will take any precedence over emotional relatedness in Maisie's choice of a guardian, as well as to whom, out of Sir Claude, Mrs. Wix, and Mrs. Beale, she has the strongest legal and emotional relationships. Letters are a motif in What Maisie Knew, particularly in this section of the novel. Throughout the book, letters are used to represent relationships. Communication by letter makes it easy to keep relationships secret, though it also makes relationships subject to obstruction by others. This can be seen earlier in the novel when Mrs. Wix tries to stay in communication with Maisie but is thwarted by Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale as well as when Sir Claude keeps his relationship with Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale a secret from Maisie by communicating with her mostly through letters. In this section of the book, Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale again communicate through letters, showing their continued romantic relationship. Of particular importance is the letter--or rather, letters--in Chapter 24. Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale sends a letter to Sir Claude which includes a letter from Beale to her effectively breaking off their marriage. The symbol of a letter within a letter shows how adultery and lies have muddled relationships between multiple characters. Another motif that recurs at multiple points in this section is the blushing and paling of characters. This communicates information about characters' emotional states. Characters are shown to pale in moments of shock or horror and blush in moments of embarrassment or passion. For example, when Beale asks Maisie if she'll join him in moving to America at the beginning of this section, James writes, \"Planted once more before him in the middle of the room she felt herself turning white\" . This shows her displeasure at the idea, even though she answers affirmatively. An example of a character blushing comes later in the section when Sir Claude asks Mrs. Wix whether Ida was alone when she came to call. The text reads, \"Mrs Wix was red now: his good humour wouldn't keep down her colour, which for a minute glowed there like her ugly honesty\" . In this case, Mrs. Wix's blush reveals her embarrassment for Sir Claude and her strong feelings about Ida's immorality. Violent imagery is used frequently in this section of the novel to depict Ida and Beale's behavior toward Maisie. In Chapter 21, Ida brutally tells Maisie that \"Your father wishes you were dead\" , and two chapters later Sir Claude remarks that \" has chucked our friend here overboard not a bit less than if she had shoved her, shrieking and pleading, out of that window and down two floors to the paving-stones\" . By describing both Beale and Ida wishing or causing the death of Maisie, James communicates that Maisie's relationship with her biological parents is completely finished. The vivid, violent language also communicates how severely James treats Ida and Beale's choice to abandon their child."}