{"name": "Chapter 10", "summary": "Chapter 10: Catherine and Edgar are happy at Thrushcross Grange, and Edgar humors Catherine exceedingly, giving her everything she wants. One day in September as Ellen is gathering apples, she hears someone call her, and finds Heathcliff in the garden. He tells her to go in and tell Catherine that there is someone to see her, but not to say who. She does, and when Catherine comes back after meeting the stranger she is breathless, she is so happy. Edgar does not seem to want to invite him in, and thinks Catherine is being silly. Ellen notices how much Heathcliff has changed. He is an older, well-formed man who is intelligent and dignified. Heathcliff and Catherine become absorbed in each other, and Edgar gets irritated. As he is leaving after tea, Heathcliff tells Ellen that he is going to Wuthering Heights, as Hindley invited him to stay there. Ellen is quite surprised, and has the feeling that it would have been better if Heathcliff had stayed away. The next day Catherine and Isabella visit Wuthering Heights, and soon Heathcliff is a regular visitor to Thrushcross Grange. New trouble arises when it becomes clear that Isabella is attracted to Heathcliff. When Catherine confronts her with it, Isabella admits that she loves him. Catherine seriously advises her against it, saying that she does not know Heathcliff at all, and that he could not love her but might marry her for her fortune. Ellen tells Isabella to listen to Catherine. She goes on to say that Heathcliff is not a good man for her, and that she heard from Joseph that he and Hindley do nothing at the Heights but drink and gamble. Edgar is away from home, so Heathcliff calls earlier than normal. Isabella is horrified when Catherine tells him that she is in love with him. He stares at her darkly but does not say anything, and Catherine holds on to her so that she cannot leave. Finally Isabella digs her nails into Catherine so that she will let her go, and she leaves the room. When Catherine tells Heathcliff that he should beware of her talons, he replies that he would wrench them off her fingers if they ever menaced. Catherine tells Heathcliff that she likes Isabella too much to let him have her, and he says he is not interested, but Ellen can tell that he is still thinking about it", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210213004212/https://www.novelguide.com/wuthering-heights/summaries/chapter9-10"}