{"name": "part 2, Chapter 43", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210609010508/https://www.gradesaver.com/little-women/study-guide/summary-chapter-42-through-chapter-47", "summary": "Surprises The day before her twenty-fifth birthday, Jo laments that she will be a literary spinster. The narrator here urges readers to be kind and respectful to spinsters, as there is tragedy and sacrifice often in their histories, and remember the kindnesses that countless Aunts have shown them. Jo is surprised out of her reverie by Laurie, who has returned from abroad with Amy. They are awkward for a moment, but they are delighted to see each other and rekindle their exuberant friendship, and Laurie lets slip that he and Amy had gotten married, so that she could accompany him and Grandfather back home while the Carrols stayed another year abroad. Laurie explains to Jo that he does still love her, as a brother, and that it would have all come about naturally if he had been sensible and not proposed, as Jo urged. He asks if they can go back to being best friends as they were, and Jo assures him that they can be friends, but now as man and woman, and not as children as they were before. Having Laurie nearby is a great cheer to Jo, and when the entire family troops in, joy is plentiful all around, with gentle sad reminders of dear Beth, as when Mr. Laurence asks Jo to be his girl now. After tea, the party goes upstairs, leaving Jo to feel lonely again just for a moment, when there is a knock at the door, and she finds Mr. Bhaer has come to visit. She invites him in and proudly introduces him to the family, where is he is a quick favorite. Mr. Bhaer and Father are kindred spirits, the babies enjoy his pockets of treats, and even Laurie overcomes his brotherly suspicion of the man's intentions. Mr. Bhaer looks wistfully and Laurie and occasionally at Jo, until he learns that Laurie has married Amy, to his delight. The evening ends with Amy leading them through Beth's old songs, and Mr. Bhaer and Jo singing a duet. Mr. Bhaer promises to come again, for he has business in town, and all pronounce their approval of him", "analysis": "Despite her promise to Beth, it is difficult for Jo to do her duty to her parents.  Jo feels that her sacrifice goes unrewarded, while Amy enjoys her trip abroad.  Jo takes comfort in work and in her parents, and Hannah foreshadows that Jo, too, will be rewarded.  Indeed Jo is, as marked by the final stage of her growth in womanhood and through Mr. Bhaer's love for her. This section celebrates the generosity of the Laurences, recalling Marmee saying that money could be used nobly, and Jo telling Laurie in college that if he only spent money helping friends, no one would think the less of him.  Now he and his father are exceptionally generous and derive great joy from sharing their wealth.  Laurie and Amy's dedication to help \"poor gentlefolk\" reflect on the situation of the March family - and the Alcott family, who often benefited from the generosity of others. Part II, in addition to Part I, closes as the beginning of Part I opens, with the March sisters discussing their wishes.  Now they are reflecting back on their lives, rather than looking forward.  The family is still their core orientation, but the family has grown even more to include children.  Even Aunt March has found a place of welcome in the family, through remembrance of her generosity, albeit used differently than she imagined. The granddaughters Daisy and Beth are both reminiscent of the sister Beth, as is Jo's more tempered spirit. At the close of the book, all feel happy regardless of wealth. Jo is determined to contribute to her household and works in partnership with her husband.  She has grown into a \"little woman,\" but enjoys her boys immensely as a mother.  The harvest metaphor the girls use to discuss their families in the final paragraphs of the book signifies the hard work and patient cultivation that has one into creating the family's blessings."}