{"name": "part 1, Chapter 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210609010508/https://www.gradesaver.com/little-women/study-guide/summary-chapter-1-through-chapter-5", "summary": "Playing Pilgrims The story begins on Christmas Eve, where the four daughters are gathered in their simple living room lamenting that, this year, they are too poor to have presents on Christmas. Meg is sixteen and quite pretty. She can be vain, especially about her soft, white hands. Jo is fifteen years old, a tomboy with a fierce temper. Jo loves to write stories and plays, which the girls act out. Beth is thirteen and exceptionally quiet, but she loves music and her family. Beth loves music and her family. Amy is the youngest at twelve. She is vain about her appearance and tries to act like a lady, using long words incorrectly. She enjoys drawing and longs to be a famous artist. Each of the girls only has one dollar, and their mother feels that spending money on presents is wasteful during wartime. To cheer themselves up, the girls decide they will each buy themselves a present. Meg wants nice things, Jo wants a book, Beth new music, and Amy drawing pencils. But as they prepare for their mother's arrival, they decide that instead of buying presents for themselves, they will all buy presents for their Mother, \"Marmee. When Marmee comes in, they enjoy a simple supper, and sit together by the fire to read a cherished letter from their Father. Mr. March, a philosopher, teacher, and pastor, was too old to be a soldier in the Union Army, so he joined as a chaplain. The whole family misses him dearly and worries about his safety. Father's letter reminds them to be dutiful, loving and kind, so when he returns he \"may be fonder and prouder than ever of my little women. Inspired by the letter, the girls decide to play a game based on Pilgrim's Progress and each work toward improving a personal character flaw. Meg's goal is to be less vain and do her work dutifully without complaint. Jo hopes to be womanlier and less wild. Beth aims to be less bashful and happy with her work, not envying girls with nice pianos. Amy vows to be less selfish. Marmee promises to give them guidebooks and loving support for their journeys. Everyone sings together and then goes to bed", "analysis": "These chapters lay the foundation for the rest of Part I. Chapter 1 introduces the main storyline of Part I, the girls' effort to improve their characters. The Christmas gifts that they wish for not only provide insight into the girls' personalities, but also become rewards for their individual quests: at the end of Part I, each girl will receive a Christmas present very similar to the one she wished for in Chapter 1. Many of the major themes are introduced in these chapters, as well as the primary conflicts the characters will undergo. The story opens on the family unit, just as it will close in Part I and Part II, emphasizing the fundamental nature of family. The girls are complaining about their poverty, but find comfort in generously sacrificing their Christmas breakfast for the Hummels. This sacrifice not only feels personally rewarding, but is also in accordance with their Christian morality. They girls dedicate themselves to further self-improvement, with assistance and support from Mother, Father, and their guidebooks. Alcott uses various techniques to foreshadow the conflicts her characters will undergo.  Meg twists her ankle because of her vanity, wearing high-heeled shoes that are too small. Jo is ignorant of Laurie's compliment of her and hopes they should all be friends.  Beth is introduced by the narrator with a lament that so many girls like her are underappreciated until they are gone.  Amy shares the misfortunes of her friend getting in trouble at school, not foreseeing her own downfall. We even see Laurie's conflict with his grandfather around music. Alcott's writing engages her readers in dialogue. Her narration is conversational, and she speaks to her readers directly. For example, she acknowledges, \"Young readers like to know 'how people look.'\" She will continue this style throughout the book, closing Part I by inviting feedback on its reception.  Indeed, Alcott's decisions for Part II were partly influenced by the letters she received from readers asking her for specific endings. Alcott is not only in dialogue with her readers, but also with other literature. Alcott weaves her own writings through the story. The play the girls perform is modeled on \"Norna; or, The Witch's Curse,\" published posthumously in 1893 in Comic Tragedies.  Her characters are often reading or referring to contemporary and classic books, such as the Undine and Sintram and the Heir of Radclyffe and Arabian Nights. These books suggest character traits, such as the family's experience with poverty in The Vicar of Wakefield, opposition to slavery in Uncle Tom's Cabin, Jo's sense of adventure in Arabian Nights, Meg's sense of romance in Ivanhoe, and Aunt March's worldview in William Belsham's Essays, Philosophical, Historical, and Literary. The most explicit allusion in Alcott's text is her use of John Bunyan's The Pilgrim's Progress. The only Preface is an excerpt from the book, intended to \"give some clue to the plan of the story.\" By applying this allegory of salvation to her girls, Alcott imbues their domestic struggles with a sense of heroic importance. Scholars debate whether the guidebook Marmee gives her girls is Pilgrim's Progress or The New Testament. Either way, the girls' journeys are clearly placed in a Christian context."}