{"name": "Part 3, Chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210619223131/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/gullivers-travels/summary/part-3-chapter-7", "summary": "Gulliver claims that Balnibarbi is situated in the Pacific, west of California, which has not yet been charted . To the north of Lagado is the island of Luggnagg, which is not far southeast of Japan. These two countries have trade relations, so Gulliver plans to go to Luggnagg, sail for Japan, and then head for Europe. Gulliver has to wait for a month before a boat will arrive at the port city of Maldonada to take him to Luggnagg. Since he has nothing to do for a month, a local guy suggests that he try visiting the small island of Glubbdubdrib, an island of sorcerers. These sorcerers are very private and only marry among each other. The Governor of Glubbdubdrib can raise the dead, but only for one day, and he can't call them back again until three months have gone by. Gulliver goes to meet this Governor, who asks Gulliver about his adventures. All of the servants in the Governor's household are ghosts. After 10 days on Glubbdubdrib, Gulliver stops worrying about the ghosts so much, which leads the Governor to make him an offer: Gulliver can speak to any ghosts he chooses and as many as he wants. The one thing he has to promise is that he will only ask them questions about their own time. Gulliver agrees, and gets to speak to: Alexander the Great ;Hannibal .);Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great in the midst of their greatest battles;Brutus, Julius Caesar's assassin, whom Gulliver admires for his bravery and commitment to the end of dictatorship. Alexander the Great ; Hannibal .); Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great in the midst of their greatest battles; Brutus, Julius Caesar's assassin, whom Gulliver admires for his bravery and commitment to the end of dictatorship. Gulliver doesn't want to bore the reader with a complete list of who he spoke to, but most of his conversations were with great men of history who killed tyrants and fought for liberty.", "analysis": ""}