{"name": "Chapter 15", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210506134332/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/sons-and-lovers/summary/chapter-15", "summary": "Paul hardly sees Clara again after she goes with Dawes to Sheffield. Neither Paul nor Walter can stand the empty Morel house, so both go to live in different places. Paul can't paint after his mother's death. He can't do much of anything, really. To numb the pain, he starts drinking and knocking around the town. This isn't going to end well, is it? Let's find out. Maybe there's a chance for our man Paul yet. One night, Paul stumbles drunk into his apartment and stares into the fire. He wonders about his mother's struggle and what it was all for. He realizes he's destroying himself, and starts to resist it. He tells himself that his mother is in him, and that he has to stay alive for her sake. He also tells himself he can either paint or beget children, which would carry on his mother's legacy. One day, he runs into Miriam at church and they go for a walk together. Then he leads her back to his apartment building for supper. That sly dog. She says she knows about him breaking things off with Clara, then drops a bomb and says she thinks that they should be married. Paul asks why, and she says it's because he's falling apart. He says he's not sure that marriage would do him much good. He knows that Miriam wants to own him completely, and thinks that this will suffocate him. They banter back and forth being all emo for a while. Miriam keeps hoping Paul will really express a profound interest in marrying her, but he won't take charge like that. Paul similarly keeps hoping Miriam will take charge of the sitch. In the end, neither one will compromise, so they part. If they had Facebook in those days, they might be \"In a relationship,\" but clearly, \"It's complicated.\" Once Paul's alone again, he gets all dark and twisty. He whispers \"mother\" out loud a few times. He almost wants to kill himself to be near her again... Oh boy. At long last, he decides that he won't give in to death. So he turns with clenched fists and walks quickly back toward the town. We wish you the best, good sir. We don't believe you'll achieve it, with what we've seen of Paul so far. But hey, people can change. Right?", "analysis": ""}