{"name": "Scene 3", "summary": "In the English camp, Gloucester, Bedford, Exeter, Westmoreland, and Salisbury discuss the battle. There are five times as many French soldiers as there are Englishmen, and the French are fresh and rested. The Earl of Salisbury bids his friends goodbye, saying they may not meet again until they meet in heaven; he then exits to do battle.\nThe king enters and hears Westmoreland wish for ten thousand more English troops. In answer to Westmoreland, Henry says that if God plans for them to win, there will be greater glory with no more troops than these to share the honors with. He urges anyone who does not wish to fight to leave. Today is a day set aside for the celebration of the \"Feast of Saint Crispian,\" and all of those English soldiers who survive the battle will be honored and remembered every Saint Crispian's Day. Henry promises that all of their names shall become household words and their deeds remembered \"to the ending of the world.\" Every Englishman who fights with him shall be his brother, and all Englishmen who do not take part in the battle will hold their manhoods cheap on Saint Crispian's Day.\nThe Earl of Salisbury enters and warns the king that the French are ready to charge. Henry asks Westmoreland if he still wishes for more help. Westmoreland, inspired by the king's speech, is now willing to fight the French with only the king at his side.\nThe French herald, Montjoy, sent from the Constable, asks King Henry to surrender now, before the slaughter begins. The king is impatient and his speech is meant more for his troops than for the French herald: Henry and his troops will either defeat the French or die. Montjoy exits, taking the king's message back to the Constable. King Henry grants his cousin, the Duke of York, the privilege of leading the troops into battle.", "analysis": "The opening of this scene reestablishes for the audience the great odds against which the English are confronted. There are about sixty thousand French soldiers matched against somewhat less than twelve thousand Englishmen -- five-to-one odds -- and Westmoreland's wish for another ten thousand \"of those men in England! That do no work to-day\"  allows Henry to enter and make his famous Saint Crispian's Day speech.  Henry's speech contrasts strongly in its dignity and manliness with the boastful frivolity of the French nobility.\nIn his speech, which is a superb rhetorical vehicle for theatrical declamation, Henry is able to rouse his soldiers to a high pitch of patriotism. He would not want to share the honor of this day with other men. The fewer men there are, the greater the honor will be to those who do fight. Furthermore, if any man does not want to fight, then:\nLet him depart . . .We would not die in that man's company . . .We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;For he to-day that sheds his blood with meShall be my brother. . . . \nWestmoreland then expresses this response to Henry's rousing speech: \"Would you and I alone, / Without more help, could fight this royal battle.\"\nHenry is again given the opportunity to give a rousing speech when the French herald demands that Henry surrender himself for ransom. Henry reminds the envoy of the man who sold a lion's skin in advance but was subsequently killed while hunting the lion. Likewise, this very day might provide his English soldiers with new coats of lion skins.\nAnd my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere nightThey'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluckThe gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' headsAnd turn them out of service. \nHe assures the herald that the only ransom that the French will receive will be his bones . On this note, the famous Battle of Agincourt begins.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219133100/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/h/henry-v/summary-and-analysis/act-iv-scene-3"}