{"name": "Scene 2", "summary": "Scene Two takes place in the \"presence chamber\" of the palace. The king wants to hear from the bishops concerning the rightness of his claims in France before he sees the ambassadors from France. The Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of Ely enter to explain to the king his rightful claim to the French throne. But before they begin, the king warns them to tell the truth. Henry understands that a legitimate claim would mean a war with France and would cost thousands of lives. He wants more information about the \"Salic law\" that France is using to disprove Henry's claim. Therefore, he urges Canterbury to begin and to speak with \"your conscience wash'd / As pure as sin with baptism.\"\nIn a very long and involved speech, Canterbury explains that the king has a legitimate claim to the French crown. The Salique  laws were once applied to a small area in Germany  called Salique Land. There was, long ago, a decision made by the settlers of the area that decreed that the family's inheritance would not pass on to the women. This law \"was not devised for the realm of France,\" for several of the kings of France obtained their right to the throne through their mothers' line. What is more, Canterbury explains, the French are simply using this law to keep Henry from the French throne.\nKing Henry asks if he can in good conscience make the claim. The Archbishop of Canterbury responds with a biblical quote from the Book of Numbers: \"When a man dies, let the inheritance / Descend unto the daughter.\" He then urges the king to fight for his claim by remembering the great exploits of his great-grandfather, Edward III, whose mother was Isabella, the daughter of Phillip IV of France.\nHere, the Bishop of Ely, Exeter, and Westmoreland all implore the king to remember his noble ancestry and his regal blood. They remind the king of his courageous heritage and the unswerving loyalty of his subjects. The Archbishop of Canterbury promises him that not only his subjects, but the clergy as well, will financially support him in his fight for the French throne:\nIn aid whereof we of the spiritualtyWill raise your Highness such a mighty sumAs never did the clergy at one timeBring in to any of your ancestors. \nHenry expresses his fears for the Scottish defenses if he were to leave, recalling that every time that English kings have gone off to war, the Scots \"come pouring like the tide into a breach.\" While Canterbury believes there is nothing to worry about, Ely and Exeter seem to agree with the king. Canterbury responds, then, using the metaphor of a bee colony in which he compares the working of a kingdom to that of a beehive: every bee has an assigned task to perform, and they all work to accomplish a common goal for the total good. Therefore, he urges Henry to divide up his forces into quarters and, with one quarter, he can conquer France and leave the other three-fourths to defend the homeland:\nIf we, with thrice such powers left at homeCannot defend our own doors from the dog,Let us be worried, and our nation loseThe name of hardiness and policy. \nThe king seems satisfied with this suggestion and pronounces that he and his forces are going to France. He then summons the ambassadors from France. They are sent by the Dauphin  and not by the King of France. Henry assures the ambassadors that they can speak freely and safely because \"We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,\" and he urges them to speak frankly about what is on the Dauphin's mind.\nThey say that the Dauphin is aware of Henry's claim upon the French throne, but that the Dauphin believes Henry to be young and immature and worthy only of the gift which he sent with his ambassadors: tennis balls. King Henry, with dignity and clarity, responds that he will go to France to play a match that will \"dazzle all the eyes of France.\" The tennis balls, he says, will be transformed into cannonballs, and many will \"curse the Dauphin's scorn.\" Granting the ambassadors safe conduct, Henry bids them farewell. After their exit, he says that he hopes that he will make the \"sender  blush at it,\" and then he begins to prepare for war with France.", "analysis": "In Scene One, we only heard about King Henry V; now, in Scene Two, the praise we heard is justified with Henry's appearance. Here is the ideal Christian king who has rejected the depraved companions of his youth. King Henry is seen as a prudent and conscientious ruler; that is, he has apparently already decided to wage war against France, and now he seeks from the Archbishop a public statement justifying his actions. And furthermore, he is fully and conscientiously aware of the loss of lives that this struggle will entail. To the Archbishop, he admonishes:\nTherefore take heed how you impawn our person,How you awake our sleeping sword of war:We charge you, in the name of God, take heed;For never two such kingdoms did contendWithout much fall of blood. . . . \nWith this speech emerges the theme which will be carried forth to the battlefield later in the play -- the theme of the horrors of war and the loss of many lives which this encounter will entail and, thereby, the heavy responsibility which it places upon the conscience of the king who decides to wage such a war.\nConsequently, the king commands the Archbishop to consult his own conscience before speaking and justifying such an undertaking. Here is the mature Christian king, concerned not with just matters of state, but with the conscience of the entire state  as well. The Archbishop explains the justification for Henry's actions in a speech that has to be one of the most garbled, confused, and tedious speeches in all of Shakespeare's works . When the Archbishop, the head of the church of England, pleads with Henry to let \"the sin  upon my head\" if there be any wrongdoing, Henry resolves to proceed; he has full assurance that he can go to war with a clear conscience.\nWhen Henry expresses concern about an invasion from Scotland , the Archbishop answers with the now-famous beehive comparison. This elaborate comparison of the state or human society to a beehive is a familiar Renaissance idea which supports the idea that all classes  are necessary for the welfare of the perfect state.\nAnother facet of Henry's character is revealed during his handling of the ambassadors from France. The Dauphin has apparently heard a great deal about the wildness and immaturity of the young Prince Hal and is openly insulting to the newly reformed king.  But Henry is not rankled by the Dauphin's insults; instead, he responds with an evenness of temper, amazing self-control, and complete courtesy:\nWe understand him well, How he comes o'er us with our wilder days, Not measuring what use we made of them. \nHenry means, as was indicated in Scene One by the Archbishop, that the \"wilder days\" were a part of the king's training and have been put to good use in his present knowledge of human nature.\nIn this scene, the Archbishop is presented as a person of great learning and one who is a master at garbling the English language in a serious manner. He is completely dedicated to England, to the king, and, last but not least, to the church. He is an admirable diplomat in the manner in which he is able to inspire and convince the king of the rightness of the engagement against France. We, however, must always keep in mind that the Archbishop's insistence upon the rightness of the claims against France are due, in part, to his desire to retain the church's revenues -- with this in mind, he even promises more revenues for the war than any clergy has ever before provided.\nWith all the noblemen, kinsmen, and churchmen united behind the king, the first act ends with a perfect sense of unity of state and church and citizenry.\nThere is total and utter confusion concerning how anyone could make a strong, legitimate case for Henry's claim to the French throne. Henry's claim is based on a flimsy assertion that his great-great-grandinother, who was in line for the French throne, married his great-great-grandfather, Edward II of England. Yet there were many in the male line of descendants who are much more entitled to claiming a legitimacy to the French throne. And aside from all other matters, King Edward III renounced forever any claim by any of the sovereigns of England to the throne of France. In conclusion, King Henry V has absolutely no claim whatsoever, and the Archbishop's speech simply obscures all these issues.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219133100/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/h/henry-v/summary-and-analysis/act-i-scene-2"}