{"name": "Scene 1", "summary": "In the English camp on the night before the battle, the king tells his brother Gloucester that he is worried about the outcome of the battle. When Sir Thomas Erpingham enters, the king, on an impulse, borrows Erpingham's cloak and is thus no longer identifiable as the king. He sends the others out to \"commend  to the princes in our camp\" and, since he wishes \"no other company,\" he asks to be left alone to \"debate\" with himself.\nPistol enters and does not recognize Henry; he extols the king and asks the \"young man\" his name, and Henry tells him that his name is \"Harry, le Roy.\" When Pistol discovers that he is a Welshman and knows Fluellen, he tells him that he plans to fight Fluellen. \"Harry\" warns him he might be defeated, and Pistol becomes so incensed that he insults \"Harry\" with a vulgar gesture and leaves. As Henry steps aside, Fluellen and Gower enter, unaware of the king's presence. Fluellen is angry with Gower for speaking his name too loudly, afraid that the French might have overheard it. Gower maintains that \"the enemy is loud\" and cannot hear him; in order to end the argument, Gower promises to speak lower and they exit. The king remarks that Fluellen is odd, but that he is a good soldier.\nNext, three common soldiers, John Bates, Alexander Court, and Michael Williams, enter. Henry, unrecognized, tells them he serves under Sir Thomas Erpingham. Bates asks him if he thinks that the king should be told how bleak the situation really is. Henry says no, that the king is \"but a man,\" as they are, and if he exhibited fear, he would discourage the army. Bates personally thinks that the king would prefer to be back in London, but Henry disagrees; he believes that the king is content to be where he is. Then Bates says that the king should be ransomed to save the lives of the men in the army. Henry responds by saying that he himself would not want to leave his king alone to fight the battle because of the king's \"cause being just and his quarrel honorable.\"\nWilliams is unsure of the justness of the king's claim. Bates does not think it matters; if it is unjust, the guilt is upon the king's head and they will not have to share in the blame. When Williams suggests that those who die \"unprovided\"  will be a burden upon the king's conscience, Henry responds by saying that all who go to battle should be spiritually prepared, but that the king is not responsible to God for their deaths.\nWhen the discussion returns to the king's ransom, Henry says he overheard the king say it would never happen; Williams jokes that it could happen after they are all killed and they would not know the difference. After another exchange of quips, in which Henry intimates that if times were different, he might be angry at Williams, Williams takes up the idea and challenges \"Harry\" to a fight if they should both survive the battle. They agree to exchange gloves and wear them in their caps so they can find each other the next day. Bates calls them both fools and urges them to be friends, for there are plenty of Frenchmen for them to fight.\nAfter the three soldiers leave, Henry is left alone with his thoughts. He talks about the custom of blaming everything upon the king and concludes that a slave has a better life than a king, for he can sleep soundly at night and not worry about affairs of state.\nSir Erpingham enters, finds the king, and tells him that his associates are waiting for him. He leaves, and alone once more, Henry prays to God, asking Him to fill his soldiers with courage. He also asks God not to recall the guilt of Henry's father concerning the death of Richard II because he has already made reparations and plans to do more.\nHenry's brother Gloucester enters, and the king leaves with him.", "analysis": "As noted above in the commentary to the Prologue, this scene serves, first, to emphasize the contrasting attitudes between the French camp -- their joviality and overconfidence and superficiality -- with the prevailing seriousness of the English camp. In contrast to the frivolity of the French, the entire scene in the English camp is essentially serious. Yet, there is an anticipation of great humor when the disguised king exchanges gloves with Williams and promises to meet him in a duel if they both survive today's battle; we anticipate Williams finding out that he was arguing with the very monarch for whom he is fighting.\nThe main purpose of this scene is to further illuminate the character of King Henry on the night before the significant and decisive Battle of Agincourt. Any time that a king wraps himself in a cloak and goes among his men incognito, talking with the common soldiers, we have a very dramatic situation. Continuing a dramatic device of the earlier Henry plays, the rowdy and rebellious Prince Hal had to, at first, disguise himself to become a king; now as king, he disguises himself to become a common man. Now wrapped in the obscurity of a commoner's cloak and further obscured by the darkness of night, the king is able to learn the feelings of his common soldiers, represented not by the comic Pistol  and not by the dedicated, if peculiar, Fluellen , but as seen in the personages of John Bates, Alexander Court , and Michael Williams. Even the names \"John Bates\" and \"Williams\" suggest something of the basic nature of these good English soldiers -- that is, this is the stuff of which an ideal Englishman is made of and which will help Henry win military glory for England.\nMost critics value this scene as proof of the greatness of Henry as a king -- that is, it exhibits the simplicity and modesty, the democracy and the deep religious nature of the king. But Shakespeare no doubt hoped that his audience would be aware of some ambiguity in a situation in which the king is in darkness and is in disguise, suggesting that a man's actions by day are different from his words concealed by night. In the first act, the king was ready to place the responsibility for the war on the shoulders of the Archbishop; here, when a common soldier suggests that the responsibility for the deaths of many Englishmen must rest on the conscience of the king, Henry vehemently denies this possibility. Williams maintains:\nIf the cause be not good, the king himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day and cry all \"We died at such a place . . .\" it will be a black matter for the king that led them to it. \n To answer Williams, Henry eludes taking blame by this analogy: \"So, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule, should be imposed upon his father that sent him. . . .\" He further adds that \"every subject's duty is the king's; but every subject's soul is his own.\" We see also that Henry believes that \"the king is but a man, as I am; the violet smells to him as it doth to me . . . his ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man, and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet, when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing.\" In other words, the king is like the common man except that he has more concerns, and when disaster or grief strikes, one man is the same as another.\nIn his soliloquy, Henry expresses the suffering he endures, and he pours forth his anguish and his sense of guilt for the crown that his father usurped; particularly, we sense his sorrow when he utters a final prayer, beginning \"God of battles. . . .\" The sense of guilt which he feels for his father's crime against the preceding king  is carefully scrutinized:\nNot to-day, O Lord,O, not to-day, think not upon the faultMy father made in compassing the crown! \nThis passage alone, given in a soliloquy, ultimately attests to the deep religious nature of Henry V.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219133100/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/h/henry-v/summary-and-analysis/act-iv-scene-1"}