{"name": "Chapter XI", "summary": "Chapter XI Dickon tells Mary that he had heard of the secret garden from Martha, but never imagined that he would step inside it. He begins to investigate which of the plants are alive, and remarks that the secret garden would make a marvelous nesting place for birds, as there are no people there to harm them. The two busily set to work, clearing away the dead wood and more of the weeds. Dickon is impressed at how much Mary, who knew nothing of gardening, has been able to accomplish on her own. Mary replies, simply, that she likes the smell of the earth. Mary asks Dickon if he will help her with the garden, and Dickon happily agrees. Noting how many of the plants are still alive, Dickon wonders aloud if perhaps someone else hasn't been in the garden in the ten years since Master Craven locked its door. Mary tells Dickon that she wishes to grow flowers that look like bells, in defiance of the nursery taunt that the clergyman's children shouted at her, \"Mistress Mary, quite contrary, How does your garden grow. With silver bells, and cockle shells, And marigolds all in a row. Mary tells Dickon that she likes him, and asks, in Yorkshire dialect, if he likes her as well. He asserts that both he and the robin like her a great deal. Their work is interrupted when Mary is called back to the house for her supper. She frets that she will never see Dickon again. Mary worries that, like a sprite or a wood- fairy, he will simply vanish as suddenly as he appeared. She does, however, completely trust that he will keep the secret of the garden. Analysis The idea of the garden as a fairy-tale setting is refined in these chapters: if the garden is a \"kind of fairy place,\" it is not one that causes magical sleep, but rather magical wakefulness. Mary thinks to herself, \"The few books she had read and liked had been fairy-story books, and she had read of secret gardens in some of the stories. Sometimes people went to sleep in them for a hundred years, which she thought must be rather stupid. She had no intention of going to sleep, and, in fact, she was becoming wider awake with every day which passed at Misselthwaite. While Mary is becoming rejuvenated by the garden, the garden is being rejuvenated by her presence. This process occurs because Mary and the garden are so closely aligned with one another. As Mary herself says, \"Nobody wants , nobody cares for it, nobody ever goes into it. They're letting it die, all shut in by itself. Mary, too, has been utterly neglected, shut in by herself, for the past ten years. Both she and the secret garden are being awoken at the same time, and by many of the same agents. The natural landscape, through personification , is here described as responding directly to Mary's work in the garden: \"the bulbs. begin to cheer up under the dark earth. they begin to feel very much alive. If the natural world is subject to personification, persons are subject to what might be called \"thingification\": the characters most in harmony with Missel Moor often seem on the verge of becoming part of the landscape themselves. Ben Weatherstaff remarks that Mary seems \"to spring out of the earth,\" and compares her silent approach to that of the robin. Mary, too, compares herself to the robin by noting that both he and she stumbled upon the garden by a sort of accident, and have made themselves at home there. Dickon strengthens this association in referring to the secret garden as Mary's \"strange bird's nest\" several times. By the same work of \"thingification,\" Dickon's own eyes are described as looking like \"pieces of moorland sky,\" and he smells of \"heather and grass and leaves. as if he were made of them. Dickon's relationship to the moor is a uniquely close one, however: when the reader first encounters him, he is sitting beneath a tree charming animals with the music of his wooden pipe. This immediately conjures the image of panpipes, and serves to associate Dickon with the god Pan. He therefore is presented as having an uncannily close relationship with the wilderness and with wild things. Carrying his \"thingification\" still further, he tells Mary, \"Sometimes I think perhaps I'm a bird, or a fox, or a squirrel. and I don't know it. Mary compares Dickon's pipe playing with the way \"natives charm snakes in India. Throughout the novel, Mary perceives Dickon as thrillingly strange and exotic: like the Indian natives, he speaks a different language. Also like the Indians, he is visually marked as different from Mary - his difference is one of class, however, rather than of race. Mary comments several times upon Dickon's patched clothes and rough hair, as well as on the coarse simplicity of his food. This class difference is extremely provocative for Mary: she is instantly drawn to Dickon, and her revelation of the garden to him is full of implicit eroticism. It's as though she were displaying herself to him, on the one hand; on the other, it is underwritten by the extremely charged notion of \"letting him inside. Throughout this scene, Mary is \"panting with excitement,\" and she constantly touches Dickon, without knowing that she is doing so. An interesting footnote: Nancy Friday, the popular feminist psychologist, named her book of women's sexual fantasies My Secret Garden in homage to this scene", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210124225111/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/secretgarden/section7/"}