{"name": "act 4, Scene 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210722203413/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-rivals/study-guide/summary-part-5", "summary": "At Malaprop's lodgings, Malaprop and Lydia discuss Jack Absolute and Beverley. Malaprop thinks Jack is very handsome indeed, but Lydia stubbornly insists that she still loves Beverley. A servant announces the arrival of Anthony and Jack Absolute, and Malaprop tells him to bring them up, before telling Lydia to \"show good breeding. Lydia is determined to be impolite to Jack, so much so that she decides to not even look at him when he comes in, looking away from the door. Anthony and Jack enter and Jack notices that Lydia is refusing to look at him. He asks his father to leave them alone, but he will not, entreating his son to speak to Lydia. Finally, Jack resolves to alter his voice and speaks to Lydia in a \"low hoarse tone. With no other hope, Jack speaks to Lydia in an aside in his own voice, telling her to \"suppress all surprise at present. When Lydia turns around and sees him, she recognizes him as Beverley, which confuses Malaprop and Anthony. Jack admits that, indeed, he has disguised himself as Beverley to win Lydia's affection, and Lydia disappointedly says, \"So. there will be no elopement after all. Anthony is mad that Jack would mount such an elaborate charade and compromise his reputation. Malaprop is also offended by Jack's ruse, realizing that it was he who wrote such unflattering descriptions of her in his letters. Anthony encourages Malaprop to forgive them and delight in the fact that they are in love, and the two elders leave the room, singing. Jack goes to Lydia and notices that she is disappointed that he is actually a wealthy young captain. She says to him, \"Then, sir, let me tell you, the interest you had there was acquired by a mean, unmanly imposition, and deserves the punishment of fraud. What, you have been treating me like a child. humouring my romance. and laughing, I suppose, at your success. She bemoans the fact that she thought she was rebelling against her family, but was actually falling in love with precisely the person her aunt and father want her to marry. As Jack flatters Lydia and looks at a picture of her, she bursts into tears, and storms out of the room, vowing not to marry him", "analysis": "At every moment in which Jack's plot could potentially be revealed, something gets in the way to prevent the truth from coming to the surface. These convenient elisions always have a comical effect, for indeed they occur right in the nick of time, saving Jack from getting discovered. For instance, in Act 4, Scene 2, Anthony Absolute and Jack come to visit Lydia and Malaprop, but Lydia feels so averse to meeting him that she hides her face and refuses to look at him. If she looked at him, she would realize that he and Ensign Beverley are one and the same, but instead she prevents herself from learning her beloved's true identity for a time. This does not last long, however, as Anthony and Malaprop force a meeting between Jack and Lydia. As soon as Lydia turns around, she recognizes her beloved as Ensign Beverley, and Jack must come out with his plot to everyone. Malaprop and Anthony are both enraged by the deception for a moment, but soon enough, they decide to look past it and take heart in the fact that the two young lovers have found one another. With their approval, it is only Lydia who needs convincing from Jack that his love is worth the deception. A great deal of comic mileage comes from the fact that Lydia's preferences in a man are the complete opposite of what one would expect of a noblewoman. Instead of wanting a monied captain, she wants a lowly ensign with whom to live in poverty. When Jack's identity comes out, however, it becomes clear that her desires for a poor mate were less about poverty itself than about rebelling against her station. Incensed, she tells Jack, \"So, while I fondly imagined we were deceiving my relations, and flattered myself that I should outwit and incense them all--behold my hopes are to be crushed at once, by my aunt's consent and approbation--and I am myself the only dupe at last!\" Her desire to marry an ensign and to forfeit her inheritance was wrapped up in her desire to disobey her protective guardians, to make a decision for herself for once. While both Jack and Faulkland's deceptions are meant to ensure the love of their respective mistresses, their backhandedness proves to have the opposite effect, at least at first. Offended to have been duped by Jack, Lydia refuses his hand at first. Similarly, Julia is heartbroken when she realizes that Faulkland has only pretended to need to leave the country in a bid to test her affections. In the final act of the play, the unions between the two couples are broken, and it seems as though everyone will end up uncoupled, and perhaps, killed in a duel. In the end, the play is a romantic comedy, a lighthearted confection about the foolishnesses and beauty of romantic love. So it's no surprise that the two central couples, Jack and Lydia and Julia and Faulkland, are finally reunited and hope to live happy lives with one another. The epilogue only further amplifies the theme of romantic love, a series of rhyming couplets about the fact that while it may seem as though men have the upper hand in society, it is women who hold the keys to his social happiness and control the tides of romance."}