{"name": "chapter 29", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island33.html", "summary": "One of the buccaneers shows up later to borrow the light. Silver, by this time, has started talking to Jim in a friendly tone. Jim sees the group of buccaneers proceeding towards the stockade. Unlike Jim, Silver is hardly concerned. When the door opens, one of the men is pushed ahead to hand over a piece of paper to Silver. Its the Black Spot again. Silver condemns their act, as he recognizes the paper as having been cut out of a bible. He taunts Dick for doing this. At this, George is furious and asks Silver to do his part of his duty by reading it. He asks Silver to step down from his position for a common note. In the heated conversation that followed, Silver is accused of releasing the prisoners and saving the life of Jim. Now it is Silvers turn to lash out at their arguments and prove his superiority. He answers their arguments one by one. Firstly, he accuses Anderson, Hands, George and Davy Jones for crossing him. He goes on to tell them that they will be better off as tailors than sailors. As for Jim, he says he is a hostage and killing him would be a waste. He reminds them about the consort. He also reminds them that he was the one who bargained for food without which they would have been, by now, crawling on the floor. Much to their surprise, he then throws the original treasure map in front of them. The men are dumb founded. Silver gives a final warning to George and asks him to shut his mouth if he wants to live. To prove his supremacy once again, Silver asks who the Captain is. Silver throws the piece of paper to Jim. The paper contains two verses of the Bible. This is blackened with wood ash which soiled out as Jim took it in his hand. `Deposed was written on the blank side. Jim is unable to comprehend any thing. That ends the nights activity. Jim lies down admiring the remarkable tactics Silver used to control the mutineers and save his life.", "analysis": ""}