{"name": "chapter 25", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island29.html", "summary": "Jim climbs up along the side of the ship with great difficulty. He crawls along the bow spirit and makes his way to the deck. He doesnt see anybody on the deck except a bottle tumbling by. The Hispaniola gets a whiff of another wind and it shudders. Jim gets a glimpse of red cap and Israel Hands lying down in their drunken stupor. The ship rocks recklessly on the sea due to the rough weather. The coracle on which Jim floated moments ago sinks. The rash movements of the ship, do not disturb the unconscious Red Cap and Hands except that they sink a little with every tumble. Jims curiosity is aroused when his eyes fall on splashes of blood around both of them. Jim wonders if they were both dead. Suddenly he sees Israel Hands move. He moans and positions himself back on the bulwark. Jim walks boldly to the main mast and welcomes Hands on board. Hands is too weak to say anything and he asks for brandy. Jim takes this opportunity to rush down to the cellar. He finds some brandy for Hands and picks biscuits, picked fruits, raisins and cheese for himself. He quenches his thirst with fresh water. Hands is struck by thunder when he takes the first swig of brandy. When he asks Jim where he comes from, Jim confidently replies that he has come to take possession of the ship and asks Hands to call him Captain. He then pulls down the pirate flag. Seeing Jim in a better state of health than he is, Hands accepts Jims proposal. Knowing that Jim would like to sail ashore, he offers to show Jim how to sail in return of some food, water and a bandage for his wound. Jim accepts the deal on the condition that theyd steer the ship to the North Inlet before high tide. Jim fulfills Hands request Hands tells him what to do. Soon they sail. Jim feels elated when Hands addresses him as Captain. Proceeding towards the destination, Jim finds something strange in Hands demeanor. The way Hands observes Jim, makes him feel suspicious.", "analysis": ""}