{"name": "chapter 8", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island12.html", "summary": "Jim was put to work night away when he is asked to deliver a note addressed to Long John Silver. Jim is overjoyed as he gets an opportunity to go outdoors. He finds his way to the Spy-glass and finds a tall, strong, smiling hunk with one good leg and the other cut off close to his hip, cheering the people at the inn. Jim is relieved to find that Long John is not the same person whom the Captain had feared as he had none of the characteristics of a buccaneer. He appeared to be a very respectable man and did not fit any of the images of a buccaneer that Jim had imagined in his dreams. Jim approaches Long John Silver and hands him the note. Just then he sees a familiar face rushing out of the Spy-glass. Jim is sure he recognizes the person as Black Dog and he informs Long John Silver about him. Long John doesnt recognize him. He cross checks with Tom Morgan, who was drinking with him. But he states that doesnt know him either. Even through Long John doesnt recognize Black Dog by name, he admits that he had see him with a blind man named Pew. He asks Ben to locate Black Dog and tells Jim that they will keel-haul him. Long John then diverts Jims attention and involves him in a conversation. Suddenly he bursts into laughter. Though Jim joins him, he doesnt get the joke. Later he figures out that Long John is laughing at himself and blaming himself for the loss of money-as Black Dog hadnt paid for his drink-and that he should takes up Jims position as a cabin boy in the ship. Silver gets friendly with Jim and him that theyll make a good company and they do. Jim finds him very informative as he talks about various ships and the work taking place on them as they walk down to the hotel where the Squire is staying. Long John Silver tells the Squire about the incident at Spy-glass and departs. He nods an O.K. in a seamans style when he is asked to be on board with the crew by four. Dr. Livesey and the Squire appreciate Long Johns personality and proceed towards the ship to make an inspection, along with Jim.", "analysis": ""}