{"name": "chapter 26", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island30.html", "summary": "Jim learns the basics of sailing from Israel Hands. They settle down to have their meal when Hands tell Jim about jettisoning OBriens dead body. Jim tells him that he is not strong enough. Hands tries to justify OBriens death as a good thing but Jim refuses to accept his argument. Hands asks him to fetch him a bottle of wine from the cabin. Jim smells something fishy in his request but conceals his apprehension. Jim goes down below the deck to get the wine. His suspicion is proved right when Jim, peeping through the fore companion, finds Hands moving towards the bulwark. Jim realizes that Hands could move and that now he cannot be trusted. Except for one thing -- as they had a common interest to have the ship land safely. Jim appears on the deck with a bottle of port wine. After taking a swig, Hands asks Jim to cut him some tobacco. Jim does so but tells Hands that cutting peoples throat was a sin and he should atone for his sins like a true Christian. Hands rejects Jims suggestion and tells him that he didnt fear dead men. Jim, on the other hand, appreciated Hands ability to control the ship. He is also excited as he handles the helm. All of a sudden when Jim turns his head, he sees Hands rushing towards him with a dagger. Hands makes his move and injures himself. Jim takes this opportunity to wriggle out of Hands trap and notes that his pistols needs to be primed, so they cannot be fired yet. Both of them indulge in a dodging game when the Hispaniola staggers like never before, taking them by surprise. This gives Jim an upper hand. He quickly changes the priming of his pistol. Hands is dumbstruck when Jim points the pistol at him. Jim observes Hands moving his right hand over his shoulder, while telling Jim that they were fouled by the ship, when something as sharp as an arrow strikes Jim in a lightning speed and hits him on his shoulder. It is Hand's dagger. This startles Jim and he triggers-off his pistols. They drop from his hands. So does Hands who plunges into the sea, head first.", "analysis": ""}