{"name": "chapter 34", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island38.html", "summary": "They start their work early next morning, for it is quite an effort to carry masses of gold bars first to the boat and then to the ship. Work is allocated for all. Gray and Ben go with the boat. Jim is busy packing the coins. Jim find them similar to the ones found in Billy Bones bag. They belong to all countries. This activity goes on for days. They havent heard from the mutineers for almost 3 days. On the third night, they hear some voices singing. It was the mutineers. Silver notes that they were drunk. He advises the Doctor not to approach them, for they arent trustworthy like him. On a meeting held on the Island before boarding the Hispaniola, they decide to leave the three mutineers on the island with some leftovers of food, clothing, medicine and tobacco. They begin their journey. Back from the Treasure Island with the Union Jack fluttering on top of the deck. Soon after they at sea. They see the three men marooned in the island begging and pleading to take them back. The Doctor informs them about the supplies they had left for them at the cave. When they see that their requests are rejected, one of them fires at Silver. He misses him but nevertheless puts everyone else on guard. They sail far from island. They anchor the ship in a port in Spanish America. The sight of Negroes and the Mexican Indians delights them. They go ashore for a while and when they return, Ben Gunn who was alone in the ship informed them that Silver has escaped. He tells them that he helps him do so only to save the lives of the men on board. The crew is pleased to hear that Silvers account is settled for three to four hundred guineas in loot. They reach port in Bristol just as Mr. Blandly was beginning to plan the consort. Only five men have returned from the voyage. They share the treasure among themselves. Captain Smollet retires. Gray settles down in life and becomes a mate on a ship he partly owns. Ben Gunn, after spending his money in nineteen days, lived on in the port. They never ever hear of Long John Silver. The bars of Silver and the arms -- the remaining treasure still lies on Treasure Island. Jim says that the voice of the surf hitting the rocks and the parrot, Captain Flints sharp voice `Pieces of eight, pieces of eight still rings in his ears.", "analysis": ""}