{"name": "chapter 13", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island17.html", "summary": "In the morning, Jim sees the island has changed in appearance. He sees most of the island is covered with grey colored woods and tall pine trees. There were hills rising up above the vegetation and the rock named Spy-glass is the tallest by several hundred feet. It is a steep spire with it's top bluntly cut off The Hispaniola is swaying and creaking in the strong ocean swells. The look of the island and the general atmosphere that enveloped the whole morning make Jim hate the island from the very first sight. Lots of work awaits the men on board. The ship is anchored 3 to 4 miles away from the island. They have to launch their small boats to guide the ship through the narrow channel to the safety inside the reef and it will take several hours. The heat is unbearable and so is the attitude of the men when they reach the island. The Hispaniola is anchored with able help from Long John Silver, who is familiar with the island. Dr. Livesey senses a strange stagnant smell hanging over the place. Jim says that the crew was turning exceptionally rude and disobedient except Long John Silver who is in high spirits. The Captain called his trusted group to the cabin to discuss the events. Plans are made to give charge to Silver as a precautionary measure, the reason being to avoid a mutiny, as Silver has a good command over his men and is as anxious for the treasure as the Captain and his men. Loaded pistols are distributed to Hunter, Joyce and Redruth, whom the Captain feels can be trusted above all. The Captain addresses the crew and gives them permission to take the boats to the island. The men soon come out of their sulky temperament and cheer up. This Captain decides to retain his six honest men on the ship and gives Silver the control of the others. Jim decides to go the shore alone. He quickly slips off and races ahead of other men. Long John Silver notices this and calls out to Jim. But as Jims boat is better manned, he leaves them behind and reaches the island first, quickly disappearing into the thick vegetation.", "analysis": ""}