{"name": "chapter 28", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island32.html", "summary": "Jim finds the stockade with all its provisions under the control of Silver and his men. Jim assumes that Captain Smollet and his men are dead and wishes he could have joined them. There were six buccaneers in the camp and one of them is severely injured. As the torch lights up the interior of the stockade, Silver recognizes Jim. He welcomes Jim, sarcastically to his camp. Taking a swig of alcohol, he tells Jim that he had always liked Jim for his youthful spirit. He informs Jim that Captain Smollet and the doctor had written him off as an ungrateful lad who caused trouble. Silver asks Jim to join him. Jim is relieved to hear that his friends are still alive. When Jim is allowed to speak, he asks Silver about his friends. Silver recounts the past evenings happenings when Dr. Livesey had approached them with a flag of truce asking for food, brandy and firewood, after which they disappeared Silver reiterates the fact that they didn't care about Jim. When Jim is asked to choose between Silver and the Squire, Jim tells him about everything. From overhearing the conversation at the apple barrel to cutting the ship loose. He says that the laugh is on his side and that Silver is free to kill him. Silver and his men are startled to hear Jim. They realize that he is the lad who grabbed the chart from Billy Bones and also the one who knew Black Dog. When Morgan charges at Jim with a knife, Silver stops him. When two other pirates support Tom Morgans move to kill Jim, Silver is quick to cut them in the middle like an experienced Captain. Silver tells them that Jim was more a man than any of them. After a long pause, when Silver asks them if they had to say anything to say, they express their dissatisfaction. One by one they walk out of the house leaving Silver and Jim alone. Silver makes Jim aware of the situation. He tells him that the men were against him and that they have to stick together thereafter. Silver asks Jim to save him from the gallows in exchange of Jims safety. Jim is perplexed, and Silver goes on to tell him that he was now on the Squires side and had never trusted his men. Jim is again confused when he asks him the reason for the Doctor giving him the original treasure map. Jim does not understand and stares at him in confusion.", "analysis": ""}