{"name": "chapter 15", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island19.html", "summary": "Jim is suddenly aware that he is being trailed by a creature. He cannot tell if it is a man, a monkey, or a bear, but he is terrified. He thinks that he would prefer to die at the hands of Long John Silver, than some strange creature and retraces his steps to the boat. The figure reappears and Jim finds the creature running like a man. Jim suddenly realizes that he had forgotten he has a loaded pistol for his defense. Jim confidently approaches the man hiding behind the tree trunks. The man comes out into the open and kneels in front of Jim. The man tells Jim that his name is Ben Gunn and that he is a Christian. Jim observes that he is white man. Tanned, ragged and uncouth, he is covered in pieces of an old ships canvas held together with brass buttons and bits of stick. He tells Jim that he was marooned here three years ago and has not spoken to a man since. He has lived on berries, oysters and goats and that he was yearning for a piece of cheese. He asks Jim if he has any with him at the moment. Jim promises him to get it if he gets on board again. Then, Jim hears the strangest thing from him. Ben Gunn proclaims that he is rich and he will make Jim rich too. Ben Gunn inquires if the ship anchored here belonged to Captain Flint. Jim tells him that Flint is dead but there are Flints men on board. When Jim mentions Silvers name Ben Gunn recognizes him. Jim tells Ben Gunn about his voyage. He tells Jim that he is a good lad and asks if the Squire was liberal minded, and would he agree to give him a thousand pounds and a ride back home if he helps them. Jim said that they were all going to share, so yes. Ben Tells Jim about his voyage with Flint while he buried his treasure. At that time he had served as a mate with Bill Bones and Silver. He also tells Jim that he was marooned on the island by a group of other sailors, when he had returned to find the treasure, and failed to find it. To get to the ship, Ben Gunn says that he has made a boat which will help them. Just then they hear the thunder of a cannon and small arms fire. They run for their lives. As they run Ben Gunn keeps on talking about things Jim couldnt comprehend. Not far away from them they see a Union Jack flutter.", "analysis": ""}