{"name": "chapter 33", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island37.html", "summary": "The world had come to an end for the pirates. The treasure for which they had sailed all the way has gone. Silver is quick to recall to this. He passes a double barrel pistol to Jim. He asks Jim to get into cover and cautions Jim. Jim hears the buccaneers saying that Silver had changed sides again. The pirates dig the pit to see if they can find the already unearthed treasure. Morgan finds two gold guineas. Merry holds it aloft pointing it at Silver asking him if it is the seven hundred thousand pounds he had promised. Silver, unperturbed by his taunt, asks them to dig hard to find some pig-nuts. He asks if George is again attempting to Captain the crew. But by now the crew is against Silver. George Merry gets ready to make a speech. He slowly raises his arm to signal an attack on Silver when three bullet shots from the thicket hit him. His men flee for life. Silver gives the final touches to the body as he empties two barrels of pistol into the fallen man. The Doctor, Gray and Ben Gunn appears from the thicket. They think that the other pirates had fled towards the boat. Dr. Livesey and the gang follow. Silver keeps pace with them. They slow down when they find out that the men are not running towards the boat. The Doctor narrates the story of Ben Gunn finding the treasure long ago and that it was safe. He tells them that he had traded the map only after he met Ben Gunn. Silver thanks his stars to have Jim by his side. Failing which, the Doctor accepts, he would have been dead. When they reach the sea, they get in a gig boat and make their way to the North Dulet. They see the Squire standing by Ben Gunn. When they reach the north inlet, they see the Hispaniola cruising by herself. Gray handles the ship alone and after pulling it over to Ben Gunns cave, guarded it the whole night. They enter the cave. Captain Smollet is lying beside the fire and the light from the blaze flickers the pile of Flints treasure. Jim is dumbstruck to see the amount of wealth accumulated in the form of gold bars and coins. The Captain welcomes Jim. Silver is asked what he was up to this time, to which he promptly replies that he is back to his old duty. They sit down and have supper. Jim recalls this moment as the happiest one he has had in the whole journey.", "analysis": ""}