{"name": "chapter 21", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island25.html", "summary": "Long John Silver disappears. When the Captain turns to his crew, he becomes furious on seeing the men have not stayed in the position he put them in, except Gray. Regaining his composure, the Captain addresses his men. He tells them that the mutineers could be back in an hour and that they have to fight them. He offers Jim his breakfast and asks Hunter to serve brandy to everyone. While he did so, he was planning defense strategies in his mind. Everyone was given positions to handle and monitor the movements of the enemy. An hour passed without any movement. Joyce reconfirms the Captains command to shoot anyone at sight. Shortly later, Joyce fires his gun, and the fighting begins. His shot is answered by many rounds of returned gunfire. After the initial rounds the Captain takes a stock of the situation. Suddenly a group of pirates appear from the woods and charge toward the stockade. Casualties on the enemys side increase as fighting starts again. As the mutineers outnumber them, they still have an advantage over the Captains men and they can attack the stockade from all sides. The situation in the stockade is reversed. The stockade has now filled with smoke from the fire used to cook their meals and the men have trouble seeing. The Captain orders his men to fight in the open with their cutlasses. They rush out. Jim makes his first attack with the Cutlass and kills one. The Captain keeps giving orders. The fighting picks up tempo. Jim counts the number of mutineers who have died. He could see three of the four who attacked lying dead. The doctors command to get back into cover is ignored. The mutineers are, by now, decreasing in number. They are defeated. When they run back for inside the stockade shelter, Jim learns the price they have to pay for their victory. Hunter is wounded and lies beside a hole, and Joyce has been shot dead. The Squire informs them that the Captain is wounded. Despite his wounds, the Captain is overjoyed to hear that they had killed five pirates and says that the new ratio of the pirates with them is survivable.", "analysis": ""}