{"name": "chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island13.html", "summary": "They board the Hispaniola. Jim observes that Mr. Arrow and Squire Trelawney have a good rapport. But it isnt the same with the Squire and the Captain-Captain Smollet. Smollet asks to speak with the Squire prior to the voyage. Smollet expresses his dissatisfaction without mincing words. He clearly tells the Squire that he doesnt like the planned voyage, the crew and his officer. Trelawney is offended at this. Dr. Livesey, understanding the gravity of the situation butts in and inquires the reasons for the Captains dissatisfaction. The Captain tells the doctor that he is not fully informed about the objective of such a voyage and finds his crew members more knowledgeable in this matter. He goes on to say that he should have been the one to choose his sailors and makes a comment on how a senior officer should conduct himself in front of his juniors. He points out that the powder and arms should be secured in the fore hold where there is enough space under the cabin and that they should provide baths to their people inside the cabin, rather than outside. His last point leaves everybody speechless as he states that he has heard that they have a map of an island with the exact latitude and longitude and an X marking the location of treasure on the island exactly. Although the Squire protests that he hasnt let out the secret, nobody plays any attention to him. The Squire questions the Captain as to whether he fears a mutiny, but the Captain insists he does not. He just warns about taking precautions to secure the weapons in an area under the control of people that can be trusted. He asks the Squire and the doctor to keep the secret of the map from him as well as Mrs. Arrow as he feels that the things are not right on board. Much to the surprise of Captain Smollet, Dr. Livesey and the Squire accepts his suggestions. Even though the Squire finds him unmanly and un-English. Based on the Captains suggestion changes are made much to his liking and he agrees to serve as Captain. When Long John Silver inquires about the new arrangements, Captain Smollet orders him to get down to doing his work in the kitchen. The Captain also asks Dr. Livesey to remain easy with the men. Jim takes a dislike to him when he announces that he has no favorites in his ship.", "analysis": ""}