{"name": "Chapter 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210211164251/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/sevengables/section3/", "summary": "The First Customer The shop's first visitor is actually the Pyncheon house's only lodger, Holgrave, a young man of twenty-two who makes daguerreotypes, an early kind of photograph. Holgrave gently chides Hepzibah for being so worried about losing her dignity, saying that now she will become a \"woman\" rather a \"lady. Hepzibah's decision to begin working, Holgrave continues, means she is \"lending strength. to the united struggle of mankind. This is success. Hepzibah resists this interpretation, but Holgrave claims that in their modern world the title of \"lady\" is more of a restriction than a privilege. Holgrave asks for some biscuits, which makes him Hepzibah's first customer, but as he is her lodger she gives them to him freely. Hepzibah then overhears a conversation between two workers. They are surprised to see her shop open and discuss her business prospects quite openly in front of her. One points out that better shops can be found on every street corner, while the other adds that his own wife actually lost money by trying to start a shop. As they walk off, Hepzibah frets over their assertions that she will probably fail. Hepzibah is even more concerned, however, with the casual way that the workmen discuss her painful fall from dignity. She finds their frank conversation about the mechanics of her fall mortifying, and she is especially offended by the way that what is so important to her is of only passing interest to the two workmen. The shop bell rings again, and in walks a small boy, who asks for a gingerbread man. Hepzibah, who appears to have a low opinion of her own goods, thinks its wrong to take a child's pocket money for a piece of stale baking, so she gives him the cookie for free. Five minutes later, however, the small boy returns for another cookie. This time Hepzibah, having overcome her disdain for pocket change, takes his money. Now that her day has begun to pick up, Hepzibah begins to feel better about opening up her shop. Throughout the day, she experience brief uplifting moments, and things begin to look better. Several more customers come through, and most of them are quite grouchy. Unable to keep up her good spirits, Hepzibah begins to worry again that the shop will ruin her. When a wealthy woman walks by, Hepzibah wonders bitterly what use such people serve, then instantly feels guilty about her bitter sentiments", "analysis": ""}