{"name": "Chapter 18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210211164251/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/sevengables/section10/", "summary": "Governor Pyncheon  Judge Pyncheon is both spoken of and directly addressed in this chapter, as if the man were not dead but merely asleep or meditating in his chair. The narrator exhorts the Judge to awaken while simultaneously listing all of the scheduled plans that the Judge is now missing. The most significant is a dinner meeting at which the Judge had planned to get himself nominated as a candidate for governor of Massachusetts. Even for this, however, the bloated body will not wake up. A solemn march of ghosts begins. Deceased Pyncheon after deceased Pyncheon parades by, from Colonel Pyncheon on. Each of them stops at the portrait of Colonel Pyncheon and shakes it, looking in vain for something hidden inside the painting. Among them is the Judge's own son, whom he has long ago disowned. The novel wonders what the son is doing here--if he is dead, then the Judge's property will go to Clifford and Hepzibah. The next day comes, and Judge Pyncheon still resists the narrator's jeers and calls to wake up. A fly crawls across his face and creeps toward his open eyes. The narrator gives up in disgust. The Judge continues to sit slumped in his chair, and the novel's reverie is interrupted by the tinkling of the shop bell.", "analysis": "In Clifford's animated discussion with the old gentleman on the train, we see both a continuation of and a variation on Holgrave's arguments in Chapter 12. Like Holgrave, Clifford ridicules the idea of relying too heavily on the institutions of the past; he sees society as rolling toward nomadic greatness on an unstoppable tidal wave of progress. He is especially offended by the habit of \"planting\" a family in a single spot, which he says traps people in old misery and taunts them with the memories of their past glory. Unlike Holgrave, however, Clifford does not dismiss all of the past and even holds up humankind's primitive era as an example of the ideal society. His contempt seems to be more for the more recent past. Clifford's tirade constitutes an escape, a mental abandonment of the house that parallels his physical flight on the train, and his elation is due to the fact that he feels real liberty awaits him ahead. The house does not give up easily, though, and even at a distance it pushes Clifford toward insanity, prompting him to reveal the presence of his cousin's body in the house and to commit other indiscretions, even as he cheers on the house's destruction"}