{"name": "Chapter 16", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210211164251/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/sevengables/section9/", "summary": "Clifford's Chamber  Hepzibah very slowly mounts the stairs that lead to Clifford's room, pausing on the way to look through the window at the busy street outside. She wonders if Clifford actually knows of any hidden gold, and she wonders what it would mean for them if he did. Hepzibah soon sees, however, that no one as feeble as Clifford could know such a secret, and she wonders at the horrible things the Judge will do to her frail brother in order to obtain this information that Clifford does not know. Hepzibah contemplates calling for help, but she knows the village would invariably take the Judge's side. Hepzibah knocks on Clifford's door, and there is no answer. When Hepzibah enters, the room is empty, and she has panicked visions of Clifford drowning himself to avoid persecution. She runs downstairs to ask the Judge for his help, but the Judge remains motionless in his chair in the parlor regardless of how loudly Hepzibah yells. Suddenly, Clifford springs out of the parlor, gleefully proclaiming they are \"free\" as he points grotesquely inside the room. Puzzled, Hepzibah rushes inside to see what the matter is, then recoils in horror. Clifford tells her they must flee, and after Hepzibah grabs her cloak and purse, they escape into the night, leaving the Judge's body slumped in his chair like \"a defunct nightmare.", "analysis": "In Chapter 15, the Judge is further fleshed out as the novel's villain, and though it is never questioned that his motives are cruel and self-serving, Hawthorne does add some depth to this discussion by suggesting that the Judge may not be aware of his own faults. The Judge sees himself as a man of many accomplishments and just a few misdeeds. He is a pious and active member of the community--a judge, a preacher, and a leader of the temperance movement. The Judge's smile, since it reflects his sense of self-satisfaction, while misguided, can no longer honestly be called fake or a deception. The fact that the Judge remains the obvious antagonist of The House of the Seven Gables makes the novel both an indictment of the society which allows gestures to override true integrity and an even sterner view of human conduct than we might expect from the Judge himself. The Judge's conscience is clear, but Hawthorne has little use for what some might call mitigating circumstances and condemns the Judge nonetheless. These chapters both masterfully employ suspense to build up what will prove to be the climax of the book. Although Hepzibah greets the Judge apprehensively, he is kind at first and slow to anger. Given the urgency of his task and the fact that he has so often been rejected by Hepzibah, we might expect the Judge to immediately and explosively butt heads with his cousin, but he continues to bide his time. Even once his anger is aroused, the Judge speaks through clenched teeth instead of raising his voice, and we are left hungering for some kind of resolution. The suspense is carried over into the next chapter, and the tension rises with every step up the stairs the Hepzibah takes. When Hepzibah finally gets to Clifford's room, the scene seems like an inspiration for countless horror movies--she knocks on the door and there is no answer, then she swings the door open slowly and steps into the empty room. As Hepzibah is suddenly struck by the thought of Clifford trying to end his own misery, the prose springs to life, as Hepzibah races down the halls, calls loudly to the Judge at the top of her lungs, and Clifford suddenly pops up in the parlor. Yet the novel continues to deny us any resolution. Even though the Judge is left slumped in his chair, exactly what has happened is left unclear and an aura of mystery hangs over the next few chapters"}