{"name": "Chapter 15", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-22", "summary": "Weeks have passed and school has begun. Anne and Diana walk to school together every day down beautiful roads with trees and flowers all around. At the school in Avonlea, there are students in many grades, from children Anne's age through teenagers studying for entrance exams to Queen's teacher's college. Anne has a good time at school; she makes friends easily and does fairly well academically. On the way to school about three weeks into the school year, Diana tells Anne that Gilbert Blythe will be coming back to school. Gilbert is a handsome 13-year-old boy who likes to tease the girls at school. Talking about Gilbert gets Diana and Anne onto the topic of boys and crushes. When boys have crushes on girls at the school in Avonlea, they write their names together on the wall of the school's porch. Diana tells Anne that a boy named Charlie Sloane may write Anne's name on the wall, but Anne says she doesn't want her name written up. Diana says that Gilbert will be studying the same material as Anne since he had to miss school for almost three years when his father was sick. In school, Anne sees Gilbert for the first time. When he catches her looking at him, he winks. Anne thinks that he is handsome but has bad manners. That afternoon, Gilbert tries to get Anne to look at him while she is lost in daydreams. To get her attention, he says \"Carrots. Carrots. Anne immediately springs up, yells at him, and smashes her slate on his head. When the teacher comes over, Gilbert says that it was his fault, but Anne is still punished by being made to stand in front of a message reading \"Anne Shirley must learn to control her temper\" for the rest of the school day. After school, Gilbert tries to apologize to Anne, but she ignores him. The next day, the teacher institutes a new rule at the school that students must be back in their seats after lunch break by the time the teacher enters the classroom. The teacher sets this rule because the students like to wander and climb trees during the lunch break and often return late. On the day the new rule begins, the students all have to run back to the school after lunch to try to get there on time. Anne is one of the last to arrive back in the school, along with many boys who were climbing trees. The teacher makes an example of Anne, punishing her by making her sit next to Gilbert. Anne sits down next to Gilbert, puts her head in her arms on the desk, and stays that way for the rest of the school day. Gilbert tries to slip her a candy heart, but Anne drops it on the ground and crushes it with her foot. At the end of the school day, Anne takes all of her belongings from the school with her, telling Diana that she will not be coming back. Diana tries to convince her to come back to school, but Anne is stubborn. When Anne gets home, she tells Marilla that she will be learning her lessons at home from now on. Marilla objects at first, but then she decides not to press the matter. She decides to talk to Mrs. Rachel Lynde about it. Marilla goes to Mrs. Rachel's house; surprisingly, Mrs. Rachel says that she should let Anne not go to school for a little while. Mrs. Rachel says that this will give Anne time to cool down rather than get in more trouble, and she won't be missing much anyway because the teacher isn't very good. Marilla lets Anne stay home, and Anne behaves very well, learning her lessons, doing her chores, and playing with Diana after school. Diana tries to get Anne to forgive Gilbert, but she will not budge. Nevertheless, Diana and Anne grow even closer; one night, Anne even cries to Marilla about the fact that someday, Diana will get married and leave her", "analysis": "For readers of the entire Anne of Green Gables series, there is a humorous irony in Anne's antagonistic relationship with Gilbert and declaration that she \"made up her mind to hate Gilbert Blythe to the end of life\" . In fact, in sequels to Anne of Green Gables, Anne and Gilbert marry and have seven children together. Nevertheless, this statement does foreshadow that Anne will stubbornly continue her antagonistic relationship with Gilbert until the end of the novel. Montgomery's chapter titles often create suspense regarding what will happen next in the story. For example, the title of Chapter 16 is \"Diana Is Invited to Tea with Tragic Results\" . The title gives just enough information to create tension throughout the beginning of the chapter, but it does not spoil exactly what the tragic result will be. Similarly, Chapter 18, \"Anne to the Rescue\" , informs the reader that this chapter will have a positive and triumphant tone. Anne's imagination is a theme throughout Anne of Green Gables. Anne has developed a strong imagination as a coping technique due to the neglect and isolation she experienced in her childhood. Montgomery shows how Anne is able to start lowering her defenses once she feels loved and accepted. Earlier in the book, Anne tells Marilla that when she was living with various guardians who treated her like a servant, she would play with imaginary friends. She speaks quite fondly about these imaginary friends at that point in the novel. However, just after Diana has told Anne that she loves her in Chapter 17, Anne tells Marilla, \"Somehow, little dream girls are not satisfying after a real friend\" . Now that Anne's reality is mostly positive and affirming, she is able to live more in reality, rather than escaping into her mind. Though Anne's past was traumatic and negatively impacted her self-esteem and education, Montgomery also shows that difficult experiences can forge important skills and character traits. Montgomery demonstrates this in Chapter 18 when Anne is able to save Diana's younger sister's life due to having cared for her guardians' children from a young age. Anne herself says, \"I'm so glad Mrs. Hammond had three pairs of twins after all. If she hadn't I mightn't have known what to do for Minnie May\" . This shows Anne beginning to integrate her negative experiences into a positive image of herself as a capable and caring young woman."}