{"name": "Chapter 29", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-30", "summary": "It is fall again in Avonlea, and Anne is bringing cows back to Green Gables when she sees Diana walking toward her. Diana has good news: Aunt Josephine has invited both Diana and Anne to visit her in Charlottetown and see the Exhibition. Anne thinks that Marilla will say she can't go, but Diana says she will have her mother ask Marilla. Anne still withholds her excitement, but she reflects that she is glad Marilla now makes her fashionable clothes, ever since Matthew had Mrs. Rachel Lynde make her a dress for Christmas. Marilla agrees that Anne can go on the trip to Charlottetown. Anne gets up early on Tuesday and goes to Diana's house, where they set off with Mr. Barry. The girls enjoy the drive and they are soon in Charlottetown. Aunt Josephine greets them and tells Anne how much better-looking she is now. Anne and Diana, being \"little country girls\" , are dazzled by her beautiful house. Anne and Diana sleep over that night and spend all of Wednesday at the Exhibition. There are competitions for food and crafts, and Anne is proud of how many people from Avonlea win their categories. Aunt Josephine takes girls to watch horse races, where Anne refuses to bet. After that, the girls have their fortunes told, and Anne's fortune says that she will marry a rich, dark-complected man. To end the day, the girls sleep in Aunt Josephine's spare room as Anne was promised, though she finds it is not as exciting as she imagined it would be when she was young. On Thursday, Aunt Josephine takes the girls to the park and then to see a concert. After the concert, they get ice cream, and Diana says that she was born for city life. Upon reflection, Anne says she was not born for city life, and she is glad for that. On Friday, Mr. Barry comes back and the girls return to Avonlea. When Anne arrives back at Green Gables, Marilla has prepared a nice dinner to welcome Anne home. Anne tells Marilla and Matthew after dinner that she had a great trip, but the best part was coming home", "analysis": "Miss Stacy is an important character in Anne of Green Gables because she is a double for Anne in many ways. Like Anne, Miss Stacy is a new and different kind of person in Avonlea. Unlike previous teachers at the Avonlea school, Miss Stacy's curriculum includes outdoor exploration, physical education, and writing stories. This is encouraging to Anne who already loves nature and stories, leading her to excel at school. Furthermore, Anne becomes a teacher at the Avonlea school herself at the end of the novel, and she is likely influenced and inspired by Miss Stacy's teaching style. Matthew's relationship with Anne is central in this section of the book. His positive and relaxed attitude with Anne contrasts with his awkward, flustered manner toward Anne's friends and with the shopkeeper in Carmody. This contrast demonstrates to the reader that there is something special about Anne: she can charm and befriend anyone. Matthew also understands Anne better than Marilla does in some ways, as shown in this section. He realizes how much having a pretty dress with puffed sleeves would mean to Anne because it would allow her to fit in with her friends--something Marilla has been too stubborn and moralistic to truly consider. Though Mrs. Rachel Lynde is originally presented as a nosy and judgmental character, in this section of the book it becomes clear that she is also wise and empathetic when it comes to raising children. Earlier in the book, she surprises Marilla--and perhaps the reader--by telling Marilla to let Anne stop going to school for a while. She reasons that Anne will only get in more trouble if she is forced to go to school. In this section, Mrs. Rachel Lynde agrees with Matthew that Anne should be allowed to wear pretty clothes that fit in with other young women in Avonlea, and she states that \"There's no hard and fast method in the world that'll suit every child\" . Anne and Diana's conversation on Anne's birthday shows how girls were constricted by norms of femininity and modesty in the early 20th century. For example, Diana says, \"Alice Bell is only sixteen and she is wearing her  up, but I think it's ridiculous. I shall wait until I'm seventeen\" . Anne is depicted as traditionally feminine in some ways, such as caring about her appearance and clothing, but she also does not conform to some norms of femininity at the time. For example, she is as smart or smarter than all the boys at her school, she is daring and adventurous, and she has no interest in dating boys. Anne's story about Cordelia and Geraldine is used by Montgomery to bring out the themes present in the novel as a whole. Female friendship is at the center of Anne's story, and Anne and Diana's friendship is a central component of Anne of Green Gables. Romance, marriage, and betrayal in the middle of Anne's story call attention to Anne's conflicted feelings about femininity and her relationship with Gilbert. Finally, Anne's story ends with death and insanity, which recalls Anne's traumatic childhood and foreshadows that a death will occur at the end of Anne of Green Gables."}