{"name": "Chapter 34", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-31-38", "summary": "Over the next three weeks, Anne prepares to go to Queen's. Marilla and Matthew make sure that Anne has multiple new dresses, including one of delicate green material that Marilla chooses particularly thoughtfully. When the green dress has been made, Anne puts it on and performs a recitation for Marilla and Matthew. Marilla starts to cry as she thinks about Anne arriving at Green Gables when she was so young and neglected. Marilla says she wishes that Anne had stayed a little girl, and Anne assures her that she is the same as ever. Marilla and Anne hug, and Matthew goes outside to hide his tears. The day comes for Anne to leave for Queen's. Anne says tearful goodbyes to Diana and Marilla; Diana proceeds afterward to a beach picnic, while Marilla devotes herself to working all day so that she won't feel so lonely. On her first day of school, Anne meets the other new students and her professors. Out of all the students from the Avonlea school, only Anne and Gilbert have decided to skip to the second year at Queen's, meaning they will get their teacher's license after only one year. Anne is happy that Gilbert is in her class since, without him, she wouldn't know any of the fifty students. Additionally, she feels that she wouldn't be comfortable in a school environment without their rivalry. Anne examines the other students and wonders which of them will become her friends. Anne feels lonesome on her first night in the bedroom she has rented in a boarding-house. She has just started to cry when Josie Pye, a student Anne did not like at the Avonlea school, shows up at her door. Josie Pye speaks somewhat rudely to Anne, and Anne is just thinking that she may have actually preferred solitude when their friends Jane and Ruby show up. Ruby asks Anne whether she is going to try for the gold medal, which is awarded at the end of the year, and Anne says she has been thinking of doing so. Josie announces that there will also be a scholarship to college awarded at the end of the year to whoever gets the highest grades in English. Anne feels a burst of ambition as she imagines herself going to college and making Matthew proud", "analysis": "This section of the book shows just how special Anne is. Not only is she one of the brightest students at the Avonlea school, but she also ties for first place on the entrance exam into Queen's College, which is taken by students from many different towns; on top of that, she goes on to win a scholarship to university, which at least fifty students were competing for. This is especially impressive since Anne had very little formal education before she was eleven. Anne's educational achievements demonstrate a moral of the story: that hard work and healthy rivalry can lead to success, even for people who have faced trauma or other hindrances. Time passes quickly in this final section of Anne of Green Gables. While the previous thirty chapters have described three years of Anne's life, her entire school year at Queen's passes in just three chapters. These chapters show how adaptable Anne is. She makes new friends, maintains her relationships with Marilla, Matthew, and Diana, and excels at her schoolwork. This is likely another positive coping skill that Anne gained due to her traumatic childhood. Because she moved to multiple houses and towns before age eleven, she had to learn how to make new relationships and find things in life to keep her happy and motivated. This is further evidence of the moral that people who have experienced trauma or difficulties can succeed in life. Montgomery uses small symbols to show how Anne has changed Marilla and Matthew over the years she has been in their lives. In particular, Marilla's opinions on beauty and vanity have shifted. For example, Montgomery writes, \"In her own white room, where Marilla had set a flowering house rose on the window sill, Anne looked about her and drew a long breath of happiness\" . This contrasts with Marilla's earlier statements that flowers don't belong indoors and Anne's feelings that the bedroom at Green Gables was too plain and bare. Because beauty and nature have always been important to Anne, they have become important to Marilla, too. Montgomery foreshadows Matthew's death at multiple points in Anne of Green Gables. First, the narrator says that the reason Marilla and Matthew are taking in an orphan boy is to help Matthew with farm work due to his declining health. Then, Marilla discusses Matthew's heart with both Anne and Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Finally, Montgomery heavily foreshadows Matthew's death at the end of Chapter 26 and the beginning of Chapter 27. Chapter 26 ends, \"Anne always remembered the silvery, peaceful beauty and fragrant calm of that night. It was the last night before sorrow touched her life; and no life is ever quite the same again when once that cold, sanctifying touch has been laid upon it\" . This is followed by the chapter title, \"The Reaper Whose Name Is Death\" . This foreshadowing prepares readers--particularly young readers--to cope with the difficult emotions around a central character dying. The end of Anne of Green Gables shows that stubbornness can be a negative and positive quality. Anne's stubbornness prevents her from having a positive relationship with Gilbert throughout their time at the Avonlea school and Queen's College. Anne only makes up with Gilbert after hearing a story from Marilla about how stubbornness led her to break up with Gilbert's father as a young girl. However, stubbornness is also shown to be a good quality through Anne's stubbornness about staying home at Green Gables and caring for Marilla. When Marilla is trying to convince Anne to go to university, Anne responds, \"You can't prevent me. I'm...'obstinate as a mule' as Mrs. Lynde once told me\" . In this case, stubbornness is not a matter of hubris, but rather devotion to a moral obligation."}