{"name": "Chapter 23", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-30", "summary": "A week later, Diana throws a party at her house and invites some of the girls from the Avonlea school, including Anne. After having tea, the girls begin daring one another, which is a very popular activity with the children their age in Avonlea. The dares start off relatively easy, with one girl climbing a caterpillar-infested tree and another hopping around the garden on one foot. The daring gets more intense when Anne dares Josie to walk along the top of a fence. Josie walks the fence easily. Anne, wanting to save face, says that walking a board fence isn't impressive and that she once knew a girl who walked the ridgepole of a roof. Josie immediately dares Anne to walk the ridgepole of the roof on Diana's house, and Anne stubbornly agrees. The girls try to convince her not to do this, but she climbs a ladder to the roof and steps onto the ridgepole. She takes a few steps and then falls off. The girls scream and run to her, thinking she might be dead. Anne lies on the ground, hurt but conscious. Mrs. Barry comes outside, and when Anne tries to get to her feet, she finds that her ankle is badly injured. Mr. Barry is enlisted to carry Anne home, and everyone goes with them to Green Gables. When Marilla sees Mr. Barry carrying Anne, she has a sudden realization that \"Anne was dearer to her than anything else on earth\". As Anne is carried into her home, she faints in Mr. Barry's arms. Matthew brings the doctor later in the day, and it is discovered that Anne has broken her ankle. The doctor says that Anne will not be able to go anywhere for seven weeks, so Anne won't be able to start the school year with the other students. Throughout the seven weeks, Anne's imagination is her only company during most of the days. However, after school, there are always students and townspeople to keep her company, bring her presents, and tell her gossip. Anne is happy to see how many friends she has, and she is particularly thankful for Diana and Mrs. Allan, who visit her frequently. As August and September pass, Anne becomes all the more eager to return to school and meet the new teacher", "analysis": "Miss Stacy is an important character in Anne of Green Gables because she is a double for Anne in many ways. Like Anne, Miss Stacy is a new and different kind of person in Avonlea. Unlike previous teachers at the Avonlea school, Miss Stacy's curriculum includes outdoor exploration, physical education, and writing stories. This is encouraging to Anne who already loves nature and stories, leading her to excel at school. Furthermore, Anne becomes a teacher at the Avonlea school herself at the end of the novel, and she is likely influenced and inspired by Miss Stacy's teaching style. Matthew's relationship with Anne is central in this section of the book. His positive and relaxed attitude with Anne contrasts with his awkward, flustered manner toward Anne's friends and with the shopkeeper in Carmody. This contrast demonstrates to the reader that there is something special about Anne: she can charm and befriend anyone. Matthew also understands Anne better than Marilla does in some ways, as shown in this section. He realizes how much having a pretty dress with puffed sleeves would mean to Anne because it would allow her to fit in with her friends--something Marilla has been too stubborn and moralistic to truly consider. Though Mrs. Rachel Lynde is originally presented as a nosy and judgmental character, in this section of the book it becomes clear that she is also wise and empathetic when it comes to raising children. Earlier in the book, she surprises Marilla--and perhaps the reader--by telling Marilla to let Anne stop going to school for a while. She reasons that Anne will only get in more trouble if she is forced to go to school. In this section, Mrs. Rachel Lynde agrees with Matthew that Anne should be allowed to wear pretty clothes that fit in with other young women in Avonlea, and she states that \"There's no hard and fast method in the world that'll suit every child\" . Anne and Diana's conversation on Anne's birthday shows how girls were constricted by norms of femininity and modesty in the early 20th century. For example, Diana says, \"Alice Bell is only sixteen and she is wearing her  up, but I think it's ridiculous. I shall wait until I'm seventeen\" . Anne is depicted as traditionally feminine in some ways, such as caring about her appearance and clothing, but she also does not conform to some norms of femininity at the time. For example, she is as smart or smarter than all the boys at her school, she is daring and adventurous, and she has no interest in dating boys. Anne's story about Cordelia and Geraldine is used by Montgomery to bring out the themes present in the novel as a whole. Female friendship is at the center of Anne's story, and Anne and Diana's friendship is a central component of Anne of Green Gables. Romance, marriage, and betrayal in the middle of Anne's story call attention to Anne's conflicted feelings about femininity and her relationship with Gilbert. Finally, Anne's story ends with death and insanity, which recalls Anne's traumatic childhood and foreshadows that a death will occur at the end of Anne of Green Gables."}