{"name": "Chapter 28", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-30", "summary": "Anne, Diana, and a few friends from school are playing by a pond a few months later. Anne's hair has grown out into beautiful auburn curls all over her head. The girls are assigning roles to act out a poem they read recently in class. Anne is assigned to be the main character, Elaine. In the poem, Elaine dies and is sent out to sea in a little boat, so Anne gets into Diana's father's little boat used for shooting ducks. The girls cover the interior of the boat with Diana's mother's shawl, to represent a pall, and give Anne a scarf to represent a coverlet. As the other girls push the boat out to float downstream, it scrapes against a stake sticking up underwater. The other girls run downstream to meet Anne as she floats by, but Anne realizes after a few minutes that the boat is filling up with water. Anne prays that the boat will pass close to one of the poles holding up a bridge, and indeed it does. She jumps out of the boat onto the pole, but now, she cannot get up onto the bridge. The boat drifts a little further downstream and then sinks, which leads Anne's friends to think she has drowned. They run to get adults to help, while Anne still clings to the bridge pole. Anne sees a small boat coming toward her; to her surprise, it is Gilbert. He offers for her to get into his boat and she accepts, though she remains cold and disdainful of him. Anne gets out of the boat and thanks Gilbert formally; he apologizes for making fun of her years before and asks if they can be friends. Anne looks at Gilbert's shy and eager expression and hesitates, but then tells him coldly that she will never be his friend. Gilbert's expression turns to anger; he gets in his boat and rows away. As Anne sees Gilbert row away, she feels regret at how she acted and almost starts to cry. As she walks up the path back to town, she runs into two of her friends who couldn't find the Barrys or the Cuthberts to help them. They are greatly relieved that Anne is alive, and they find her story about Gilbert very romantic. When Anne tells Marilla about what happened, Marilla is frustrated, but Anne says that each mistake she makes teaches her something. Anne says that this mistake has cured her of being too romantic, but when Marilla leaves the room, Matthew tells Anne not to give up all her romance", "analysis": "Miss Stacy is an important character in Anne of Green Gables because she is a double for Anne in many ways. Like Anne, Miss Stacy is a new and different kind of person in Avonlea. Unlike previous teachers at the Avonlea school, Miss Stacy's curriculum includes outdoor exploration, physical education, and writing stories. This is encouraging to Anne who already loves nature and stories, leading her to excel at school. Furthermore, Anne becomes a teacher at the Avonlea school herself at the end of the novel, and she is likely influenced and inspired by Miss Stacy's teaching style. Matthew's relationship with Anne is central in this section of the book. His positive and relaxed attitude with Anne contrasts with his awkward, flustered manner toward Anne's friends and with the shopkeeper in Carmody. This contrast demonstrates to the reader that there is something special about Anne: she can charm and befriend anyone. Matthew also understands Anne better than Marilla does in some ways, as shown in this section. He realizes how much having a pretty dress with puffed sleeves would mean to Anne because it would allow her to fit in with her friends--something Marilla has been too stubborn and moralistic to truly consider. Though Mrs. Rachel Lynde is originally presented as a nosy and judgmental character, in this section of the book it becomes clear that she is also wise and empathetic when it comes to raising children. Earlier in the book, she surprises Marilla--and perhaps the reader--by telling Marilla to let Anne stop going to school for a while. She reasons that Anne will only get in more trouble if she is forced to go to school. In this section, Mrs. Rachel Lynde agrees with Matthew that Anne should be allowed to wear pretty clothes that fit in with other young women in Avonlea, and she states that \"There's no hard and fast method in the world that'll suit every child\" . Anne and Diana's conversation on Anne's birthday shows how girls were constricted by norms of femininity and modesty in the early 20th century. For example, Diana says, \"Alice Bell is only sixteen and she is wearing her  up, but I think it's ridiculous. I shall wait until I'm seventeen\" . Anne is depicted as traditionally feminine in some ways, such as caring about her appearance and clothing, but she also does not conform to some norms of femininity at the time. For example, she is as smart or smarter than all the boys at her school, she is daring and adventurous, and she has no interest in dating boys. Anne's story about Cordelia and Geraldine is used by Montgomery to bring out the themes present in the novel as a whole. Female friendship is at the center of Anne's story, and Anne and Diana's friendship is a central component of Anne of Green Gables. Romance, marriage, and betrayal in the middle of Anne's story call attention to Anne's conflicted feelings about femininity and her relationship with Gilbert. Finally, Anne's story ends with death and insanity, which recalls Anne's traumatic childhood and foreshadows that a death will occur at the end of Anne of Green Gables."}