{"name": "Chapter 42", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210126043207/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/oliver/section10/", "summary": "Noah Claypole and Charlotte flee to London after robbing Mr. Sowerberry. They stop at the Three Cripples inn, where they meet Fagin and Barney. Fagin invites Noah to join his gang, assigning him to rob children", "analysis": "Although Fagin claims to be in partnership with his associates, protecting them in exchange for their loyalty, in the end, he manipulates them so that his own self-interest is better served. He watches the people around him with special care and translates his knowledge about them into power. A prime example of this strategy is his hope to use Nancy's possible lover to control her through blackmail. Even worse, he reveals Nancy's betrayal of the band's code of silence to Sikes in the worst, most treacherous light possible. He describes her actions in such a way as to inspire Sikes's murderous rage. Having Nancy killed is at least as beneficial to Fagin as to Sikes, but Fagin is unwilling to risk doing the deed himself. Instead, he uses his knowledge about Nancy and about Sikes's character to manipulate Sikes into committing the horrible crime.   Oliver Twist explores different varieties of justice--that served by the English court system; spiritual or godly justice; and, with Sikes's crime, personal justice, or the torments of conscience. Justice for Sikes's \"foulest and most cruel\" of crimes is served almost instantly, as Sikes's guilt immediately subjects him to horrific mental torture. The passages exploring his mental state are among the most psychologically intricate in the novel. Sikes cannot cleanse himself of Nancy's blood, either figuratively or literally. Visions of Nancy's dead eyes disturb him greatly, and he fears being seen. During his desperate flight from London, he feels as though everyone is watching suspiciously. Sikes's remorse and paranoia shape and twist the world around him. The traveling salesman who claims to offer \"the infallible and invaluable composition for removing all sorts of stain,\" including bloodstains, is so canny in his offer to help Sikes remove his stains that the salesman could almost be a figment of Sikes's haunted imagination. Likewise, the burning barn, which essentially serves no purpose in the plot, seems to be a herald of the fires of hell Sikes sees in his future.  Unlike Oliver, who spends much of the novel trying to discover his identity, Sikes desperately wishes to hide his identity. However, his dog, Bull's-eye, acts as a kind of walking name tag. The animal follows him everywhere. Indeed, Sikes's animal even leaves his mark at the scene of the crime--his bloodstained footprints cover the room where Nancy is killed. Bull's-eye often functions as an alter ego for Sikes: the animal is vicious and brutal, just like its owner. Sikes's desire to kill the dog symbolically and psychologically represents a desire to kill himself, the murderer he has become."}