{"name": "Chapter 41", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-40-42", "summary": "Isabel is not excited by the idea of Pansy and Lord Warburton marrying initially, but she allows the idea to settle in her mind. She realizes that she would be acting her part as a good wife if she were to assist the match in being made. Yet, she is also surprised that Lord Warburton would be attracted to Pansy -- for Pansy is very different from Isabel herself. She thinks of Pansy as small, an innocent but limited creature. Nevertheless, Isabel contents herself with the idea of providing a service for her husband. Of course, Isabel thinks to herself, Edward Rosier presents a problem. Isabel had tried not to inform herself of Pansy's feelings for Mr. Rosier, but she finds that she knows that Pansy thinks the world of him. She wonders how tenacious Pansy will be in clinging to her idea of Edward Rosier - Isabel then begins to believe that Pansy could cling to just anything. Isabel after all thinks more highly of Lord Warburton than Edward Rosier. This scene within Isabel's mind takes place as Isabel is having another of her Thursday gatherings. Lord Warburton is there, speaking with Pansy. Isabel knows that if she leaves the two alone in a room together, Lord Warburton may declare his feelings for Pansy and set in motion a proposal. But she hesitates to do this act that would please her husband. Lord Warburton ends up leaving for the night without a moment alone with Pansy. Isabel then sits alone in a room staring at the fire. Her husband enters the room, and asks about Lord Warburton's interest in Pansy. Isabel says she has been waiting for Osmond to give it a name. The narrator tells us that Isabel has decided not to take it for granted that her husband would like Lord Warburton -- and further, she is motivated by the thought that Osmond's declaring a desire to see Lord Warburton propose would show that Osmond did in fact want something from the world. She thinks it is his constant intimation that he wants nothing of the world - that nothing could be good enough for him. Thus his declaration of a desire for a proposal from Lord Warburton would be a lapse in consistency. Isabel then also thinks to herself that her husband may very well decide to take this opportunity to humiliate Isabel. Osmond behaves well on this occasion though. He simply asks Isabel to help along the match. He then suggests to Isabel that she can make Lord Warburton do whatever she would like him to do - and that she should use this influence to make him marry Pansy", "analysis": "The situation between Lord Warburton and Pansy presents us with an interesting situation that allows Isabel to think about the right motivations behind an action.  If Lord Warburton is marrying Pansy in order to please Isabel, she sees that it would be wrong of her to take advantage of this.  Yet Isabel realizes that this is exactly what Madame Merle and Osmond expect of her: they expect her to have no qualms about using another person for one's own ends.  This makes her reflect on the moral character of the people around her. As Robert Pippin has pointed out , the modern situation that Henry James was facing during his time introduced the possibility that psychological motivations made an action moral or immoral.  For example, if Osmond had married Isabel just for his own self-interest and to increase his fortune, it would be immoral.  But Isabel had married Osmond because she had wanted to give him the means to further express himself, and this is considered moral.  However, the problem being presented in the novel is that psychological motivations only crystallize as such later on in life. It is important to note the technique that James employs to enter into Isabel's mind.  He first of all has set up the scene so that we have only gradually approached Isabel's true state of mind through the speculations of others.  We first get Edward Rosier's speculations of Isabel, then Lord Warburton's, then Ralph's, until we finally approach Isabel's own.  It is like peeling the layers off of an onion until we reach the core of Isabel's thought.  Furthermore, there is an indication that Isabel's own thoughts are very much infected and inflected through her understanding of the thoughts of others.  Sharon Cameron  has called this the 'intersubjectivity' of the novel: the belief that one's mind is not entirely one's own, but rather a consciousness crystallizes as such only once one knows what others are thinking. Finally, Chapter 42 provides us with insight into James' views on the conventional Old World.  Osmond is representative of empty traditions without any intrinsic meaning.  He follows them simply to show his own aristocratic value.  At best, this Old World is capable of showing itself off through aesthetics -- knowledge about classical art, for example, would let one show off how cultured one is.  However, James is questioning whether or not this aristocratic, European view of the world would not benefit from the freshness of an American, moral perspective. Isabel is representative of the New World, and the insights that an open mind can provide to a European outlook.  She wants to always look at things for herself, bring her own original perspective, and question the meaning of traditions.  Yet it is problematic that she has only two means of expressing herself: money and marriage.  There seems also to be a feminist point being made here, especially in Isabel's envy of Lord Warburton.  Women did not have enough avenues open to them during this time period for expression of their character, and James seems to be suggesting that they would have something very valuable to add to society if more pathways were open to them to do so."}