{"name": "Chapter 35", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-31-35", "summary": "Isabel feels isolated now that she knows how her friends disapprove of her marriage. The narrator tells us: \"the chief impression produced on Isabel's spirit by this criticism was that the passion of love separated its victim terribly from everyone but the loved object\". She knew Henrietta would come out to disapprove of her, and she thinks also of the disapproval that Caspar Goodwood had and that Lord Warburton would undoubtedly have. Her sisters have written to her out of duty, but they also wonder why she did not make a better match. Osmond is satisfied - the narrator describes him as full of self-control, and capable thus of acting tender and kind. He does think that Madame Merle has made him a wonderful \"present\". He is glad that Isabel is not dull; he thinks of her as a \"silver plate\" that reflects back to him his own thoughts in an original form, making them seem all the more splendid. He knows though that their relations do not approve, and he tells Isabel that he thinks they disapprove because of their difference in fortune. He defends himself by saying that he has shown himself to never care for money, insofar as he has never tried to earn it. He tells her they will get on very well. Isabel meanwhile feels that she is surrendering to Osmond in an act of humility - rather than simply taking in the act of marriage, she has something to give. She is tired of observing - after a year of traveling abroad - and now wants to engage in the \"act of living\" even more. No longer did she feel she could never marry - she has a more primitive need to be beneficent. She is glad to have a private duty \"that might gather one's energies to a point\". Pansy is glad the two will marry. She thinks that Isabel and her father suit each other well. When they are discussing the matter though, Isabel has a strange fear that she will one day have to protect Pansy from harm. Countess Gemini tells Isabel that she is glad for herself that Isabel and Osmond will marry, but she cannot be glad for Isabel. She declares that she only tells fibs if she has something to gain from it, and therefore she is being honest with Isabel when she tells her that she and Osmond have fallen quite low in status. She predicts that Isabel and herself will never be quite intimate with each other. She makes some declarations as to marriage in general, how she sees them as a \"steel trap\" for women", "analysis": ".  It is notable too, that this reminiscence of Isabel's travels is contextualized in her mind's eye -- she is awaiting Caspar Goodwood, and thinking about how much she herself has changed since she last saw him.  This is a common technique that Henry James employs: the narrator lends some more concrete words for the very vague reminiscences of a character, allowing that character to reflect upon their own experiences, but also allowing the reader to reap the benefit of a more objective, summary view of certain events.  \"If her thoughts just now had inclined themselves to retrospect, instead of fluttering their wings nervously about the present, they would have evoked a multitude of interesting pictures,\"  the narrator tells us.  This again is called \"hypothetical discourse\" as coined by scholar Arlene Young . Isabel's reaction in Chapter 32 to Caspar Goodwood is curiously physical and emotional.  Is she really as disinterested in him as she claims to be? The novel itself deals very little with strong, physical outbursts of emotions: Isabel's scenes with Caspar Goodwood are an exception to the rule.  One theory is that Isabel is sexually attracted to Goodwood, but her Victorian prudery makes her repress this idea; she wants to escape her own sexuality in his presence. It is important to notice the reactions of others to Isabel's engagement, and how Isabel's resolution becomes more concrete in the face of their opposition.  In her conversation with Mrs. Touchett, she does not quite know why she wants to marry Osmond, and she can barely articulate it.  When she discusses her motivations with Ralph, her own conviction becomes more concrete.  \"His opposition had made her own conception of her conduct clearer to her,\"  the narrator tells us.  Ralph says that he had thought of the great \"idea\" she would actualize in the world only in the \"negative\" -- but we should notice that her marrying Osmond is actually an articulation of a negative idea -- of an idea that exists only as one in opposition to others' opinions.  In other words, she feels like she freely chooses her marriage to Osmond mostly because no one in her circle seems to approve of the engagement.  So the narrator tells us, the disapproval of others for Isabel \"served mainly to throw into higher relief, in every way so honourable, that she married to please herself.\" Osmond's narcissism becomes apparent in Chapter 35.  It is notable how he thinks of Isabel as a fine object, a present made to him by Madame Merle, rather than seeming to really be in love with her.  Again, there is a comparison between a person and a commodity: he thinks of Isabel as a \"silver plate.\" Consider the coldness of this extended metaphor - he continues to think of how he will heap fruits onto this plate. His conception of a good relationship is that the other person reflects one's own thoughts back to oneself -- it seems that he will give very little room for Isabel to have ideas of her own.   He has the attitude of a connoisseur or collector to a commodity of value.  It does not quite fit a more romantic conception of love - of loving Isabel for herself."}