{"name": "Chapter 23", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-22-23", "summary": "At Mrs. Touchett's place, the Palazzo Crescenti in Florence, Merle comes to visit. She arranges for Isabel and Gilbert Osmond to meet. When Osmond visits the house, Isabel is uncharacteristically silent, finding it more important to get an accurate impression of him than she finds it important to produce her own impression of him. Osmond, in spite of Isabel's silence is interested in her. He invites her to visit his house with Madame Merle sometime. Isabel expects that Madame Merle will scold her for her silence and stupidity when Osmond leaves, but instead Merle tells her that she behaved just as she wished. Isabel feels displeasure at this comment, claiming that she is under no obligation to charm Mr. Osmond. Merle flushes at this. When Isabel asks Ralph about Osmond, Ralph only knows that he is a vague, unexplained American who has lived for thirty years in Italy. He knows that Osmond dreads the vulgar, but other than that he has no special talents. Isabel says that she wants to have more information about him because it is better to know about one's dangers. Ralph responds that knowing that much may actually make people more dangerous. He cautions her to judge for herself. Isabel has noticed that Ralph has something against Madame Merle. When she asks him what he thinks of her, he responds that he feels sorry for Madame Merle, that she was ambitious but unaccomplished. He finds her, in her overall aspect, to be an exaggerated person, never allowing others to have the chance to call her a fool. Ralph thinks to himself that Isabel's friendship with Madame Merle will not last forever, noting that neither person knew the other as well as she supposed. He believes that each will discover the true nature of the other", "analysis": "Gilbert Osmond is described as an aesthete.  He has impeccable taste, but there seems to be something substantially lacking in him.  His house is described in very sinister terms: it is a surface, just a \"face\" that bars communication with the outside.  The architecture and style of his house is a symbol of Osmond's own personality.  He is superficial and heartless, but appears to be very cultured.  His relationship to his daughter is somewhat odd, because the daughter seems to admire him very much, even though he is not a very warm person.  James' description of Osmond as a \"coin\" that is not in the general circulation is a hint at Osmond's own relation to commodities: he is a selfish hoarder, and has no interest in the communicative aspects of style. The conversation between Merle and Osmond suggests a very intimate nature of their relationship, although why exactly this is the case is left obscure.  They seem to be antagonistic in some respects, exchanging insults, but they are also very forthright with each other.  They seem to both know each other too intimately, and the suggestion is that they typically do not allow others to have true knowledge of their character.  It is unclear why Merle would want Isabel to marry Osmond, since she thinks highly of Isabel and she thinks Osmond is heartless.  There is something sinister about Merle's dealings, especially because she declares that she does not know what Isabel is good for, but she only knows what she can \"do with them.\" She makes it sound as if she will use Isabel for some purpose of her own, but we do not know how her plan of getting Isabel and Osmond to marry will benefit her. Isabel is uncharacteristically silent and un-opinionated when she meets Osmond.  She is more interested in gaining an accurate impression of him than of forming her own opinion of him -- this seems to be the exact opposite of her usual approach to people.  This foreshadows to us that Osmond will be perceived differently than all her other suitors.  Why though, is Isabel so reticent when she meets him?  Ralph insinuates that Isabel's abundance of second-hand knowledge on his character is the reason she is so interested in him.  It seems that Madame Merle has exploited Isabel's imaginative possibilities: the more Isabel thinks she \"knows\" the less she is able to experience for herself.  This brings up an interesting theme that Henry James treats in other of his novels: What is the relationship between knowledge and experience?  Does having knowledge of something prejudice us towards the way we experience it?  Can one have an experience without having knowledge or prejudice about that thing?  His short novel, What Maisie Knew, is one of his more extended explorations of this theme."}