{"name": "Book 6, Chapter 58", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210307064824/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/middlemarch/summary/book-6-chapter-58", "summary": "Rosamond has had a miscarriage, and Lydgate's medical opinion is that it's because she went horseback riding while he was out, when he told her she shouldn't. She went because Lydgate's cousin, Captain Lydgate , was visiting them, Lydgate didn't much like his cousin, because the cousin is a dumb lug. But Rosamond is proud of the fact that her husband's relatives are aristocratic, and wanted to show him off by going horseback riding with him while Lydgate was at work. So she went in spite of her husband's warnings, but the horse got startled when a tree fell down, she fell, and eventually had her miscarriage. Lydgate could hardly be angry with her in that condition, so nothing is said on the subject between them. Lydgate has other things to concern him - they owe money all over town for the fancy furniture in their new house and the expensive food for the dinner parties they've given. He'd always thought that worrying about money was a vulgar thing to do, but now that he doesn't have enough to pay the bills he can understand it. He's decided to tell Rosamond all about it, and he's afraid of how she'll react. When he gets home and finds Will Ladislaw there, singing with Rosamond, he's not so happy. Will has already said goodbye to Dorothea, but hasn't left town yet. He's not remotely jealous of Will, but he had business to talk over with Rosamond. Will's no dummy, and can tell that Lydgate wants to be alone with Rosamond, so he takes off. Rosamond thinks Lydgate's being terribly unpleasant and rude. He tells her that they have to have all of their furniture and things inventoried for security against the debt they owe. She wants him to ask her father for money, but he refuses, and tells her not to go, either. She thinks he's behaving very badly, and wishes she had never married him. She's unswervingly polite about it, though, and aside from a few tears, hardly complains. But she's so cold and distant with him that it breaks his heart. She says that when the inventory people come the next day, she'll go to her parents' house. He urges her to stay at home to deal with it so that they won't have to tell the servants. She agrees, but acts like a martyr about it.", "analysis": ""}