{"name": "Book 6, Chapter 54", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210307064824/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/middlemarch/summary/book-6-chapter-54", "summary": "Dorothea has decided to move back to Lowick, despite Celia's pleadings. Dorothea isn't interested in staring at Celia's baby all day. She'd be happy to help take care of it, but there's a nurse to do all the dirty work, and watching the every move of an infant isn't her idea of a good time. Mrs. Cadwallader thinks that Dorothea will go crazy in that big house all by herself, but Dorothea has made up her mind. She's twenty-one . Mrs. Cadwallader thinks Dorothea should get remarried, and tells her husband so, but he tells her to lay off the matchmaking. So Dorothea goes home to Lowick, resolved to do some good with her money if she can. She has also resolved not to do anything with Mr. Casaubon's research. Her biggest desire is to see Will Ladislaw, but she doesn't know how to arrange it. She wants to make up for her husband's injustice to him . But Will makes it easy - he comes to see her, but just to say goodbye. Their meeting is awkward. He knows about the will, and Mr. Casaubon's suspicions, and he's just plain embarrassed. He says that he's going away to London to work as a lawyer for all the political goings-on. Dorothea is happy that he's going to be working for the betterment of mankind and all that, but is sorry that he'll be gone for so long. Just then, Sir James Chettam comes in. Sir James still thinks of Dorothea as some kind of saint , and he doesn't like the idea of Will Ladislaw poking around her shrine. In fact, he suspects Will of trying to marry her because she's rich. So he's a little stiff and rude when he sees that Will is there. Will and Dorothea say goodbye, and Will leaves. Dorothea is annoyed with Sir James - she knows what he's thinking, because she knows about Casaubon's will. But she acts as though nothing is wrong so that Sir James won't say anything about Will.", "analysis": ""}