{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420003408/https://www.gradesaver.com/frankenstein/study-guide/summary-chapters-17-20", "summary": "In London, Clerval occupies himself with visits to learned and illustrious men; Victor cannot join him, however, as he is too absorbed in the completion of his odious task. He reflects that the trip would have given him indescribable pleasure while he was still a student; now, however, he wants only to be alone, as \"an insurmountable barrier has been placed between and fellow men. To Victor, Clerval is the image of his younger self: he is full of excitement and curiosity, and is at present making plans to travel to India. The two men receive a letter from a mutual friend inviting them to visit him in Scotland; though Victor detests all human society, he agrees to go, so as not to disappoint Clerval. He also looks forward to seeing the mountains once more. The pair sets out for Scotland at the end of March. Victor reflects that he was \"formed for peaceful happiness,\" having spent his youth in the enjoyment of nature and the contemplation of human accomplishment. Now, he feels himself to be a \"blasted tree,\" an example of wrecked and forsaken humanity. Clerval and Frankenstein spend time at Oxford, where they wonder over English history; for a brief moment, Victor \"dares to shake off his chains\" and is nearly happy. Almost immediately, however, he recalls his task, and is cast back into his former despair. The pair finally arrives in Scotland. Victor is overcome by fear that he has neglected his work too long, and that the creature will visit his wrath upon his family or his friend. He awaits his letters from Geneva with tormenting anxiety, and follows Henry about as though he were his shadow. After visiting Edinburgh and a number of other cities, Victor leaves Henry, having resolved to finish his work in a remote part of the Scotch countryside. His friend urges him to hurry back, as he will grow lonely without Victor's company. Frankenstein devotes most of his mornings to labor, and walks the bleak and stony beach at night. His horror at his task increases daily, in stark contrast to the enthusiasm with which he undertook his first experiment. He grows progressively more anxious and terrified that he will meet his monster. He looks upon the new creation with a mixture of hope and \"obscure forebodings of evil.", "analysis": "The symbol of the blasted tree is crucial to understanding what Frankenstein has become. A tree is a living organism that branches and spreads itself widely. One that is \"blasted\" is split down the middle, severed from its roots, unable to register sensations. The happiness that Victor once so casually enjoyed is now tainted by memories of the past and visions of the future. He can no longer find solace, since his soul cannot take pleasure in the manner it once did. Frankenstein says that a \"bolt\" has entered his soul. The reader cannot help but recall that the creature was brought to life by means of lightning: once again, Victor and his creature have become inextricably entangled. Both are separated from humanity by, in Victor's words, \"an insurmountable barrier\": for the creature, that barrier is his ugliness; for Frankenstein, it is his guilt. Victor's journey through Northern Europe seems to be a condensed version of the creature's own journey: both reflect on how they were once able to find consolation in nature and stories of human accomplishment ; now, nothing can ease their suffering. The Scotland in which Frankenstein undertakes his second experiment is \"a desolate and appalling landscape\"; it thus mirrors the desolation and horror in Victor's heart. At chapter's end, the reader shares in the narrator's \"forebodings of evil"}