{"name": "Volume 2, Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210630082640/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mysteries-of-udolpho/summary/volume-2-chapter-10", "summary": "The next morning, Madame Montoni is as determined as ever not to give up her property to her husband. While Madame Montoni recovers, Em has to go to dinner with a bunch of Montoni's new guests. She tries to dress simply, but Montoni makes her wear a flashy outfit. Dinner is a bust. All of Montoni's guests are wild-looking and scary, and all they want to talk about is war and politics. Montoni proposes a toast to the group and is about to drink when his wine hisses and the glass breaks into thousands of pieces. Someone's trying to poison him! Montoni declares a traitor in the midst, and everyone draws their swords. We're about to have another Inigo Montoya moment. Montoni orders anyone suspicious-looking to be chained in the dungeon. Nice guy. He's already pretty mad, so it's no surprise when he locks Em and Madame Montoni in a room by themselves. He still plans to send his wife to the east turret, BTW. Annette tries to get Em to open the door, not realizing that Montoni locked them in. She tells Em and Madame Montoni that it's total sword-fighting chaos in the castle. Montoni sends his thugs to take Madame Montoni to the east turret, leaving Em to faint out of fear on a couch. Good going, Em. When she wakes up, she tests the door to see if it's open. It is, so she wanders around the castle to see what's going on. Someone's bawling inside a locked room in the castle. It's the hysterical Annette. Looks like her sweetheart Ludovico locked her in to protect her from all the fighting and never came back. Em bails when she can't open the door. Sorry, Netters! Em is having some problems keeping it together, too. She's pretty sure Madame Montoni has been murdered. Scratch that, she's sure Madame Montoni has been murdered. Em hides in a corner as Montoni passes by. He might be a murderer, after all! She goes back to her room to freak out.", "analysis": ""}