{"name": "Volume 1, Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210630082640/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mysteries-of-udolpho/summary/volume-1-chapter-10", "summary": "Emily lights up a fire in her dad's old bedchamber and gets ready to burn. Following St. Aubert's last instructions, she digs up all of his old papers under the floorboards. Whoa, she thinks she sees her father's ghost sitting in his chair. Calm down! As she's in the process of fainting Emily catches a glimpse of writing on the loose sheets of paper. Remember, she's not supposed to see anything. Bad girl, Emily. Hmm, maybe she shouldn't have made that promise to burn the papers without looking at them. Major conscience struggle going on here. Okay. Okay. She's not going to look at the papers. Emily throws them into the fire really quickly so she won't be tempted. Phew. There's also a purse in the cabinet with some money and something else, wrapped in layers of paper. She didn't promise to burn everything, right? Emily unwraps the papers and finds a miniature of a beautiful woman. Uh, what's going on? Why would St. Aubert have a picture of a random not-Emily's-mom woman? Before she can figure out what do, she sees Valancourt heading her way. Quick, hide the contraband! Even though Emily's upset over the picture, Valancourt makes her feel better by bringing up her favorite subject: nature. He's a smart one, that Valancourt. Oh yeah, and he also confesses his love. He is totally, utterly, head-over-heels in love with Emily. Emily's not really sure what's proper under these circumstances, but she definitely likes him too. Valancourt admits that he's been wandering around Emily's house for a while, especially at night. Okay, dude, that's a little weird. When Valancourt and Emily are in the middle of all their love-talk, Madame Cheron stumbles across them. Guess she arrived at a pretty inconvenient moment. Madame Cheron gets a little snippy with Emily and says she's recovered pretty quickly from her dad's death. Who's this new friend of hers, anyway? She sends him away lickety-split. Actually, Madame Cheron first wants to know how much Valancourt is worth. Emily admits that he's from an unexceptional family. Ouch. Madame Cheron plans to shut this thing down, stat. Oh, and she plans to take Emily to Tholouse the next day. On her last night at La Vallee, Emily wanders around being all melancholy. She dwells on childhood memories and remembers the first time she met Valancourt. Wait, doesn't Valancourt like to lurk in the bushes at night? Emily's a little nervous she'll run into him, but she has no such luck. She thinks someone is following her and hurries back to bed. Is that a figure gliding through the garden outside? Spooky.", "analysis": ""}