{"name": "Volume 1, Chapter 8", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210630082640/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mysteries-of-udolpho/summary/volume-1-chapter-8", "summary": "The monk who attended St. Aubert invites Emily to come visit the nearby convent, but she needs to get it together first. There's a lot of crying going on here, naturally. Emily can't help but hear the same mysterious music she heard on the first night. St. Aubert, is that you? Emily chills at La Voisin's place for a little bit before heading over to the convent to check it out. The lady abbess is a pretty cool gal who gets what Emily is going through. She invites Emily to evening prayers and cheers her up a bit, which is pretty difficult at this point. La Voisin walks Emily back to his house to stay the night before her father's funeral, but she can't get the banditti out of her head . La Voisin isn't too worried about banditti popping out of the woods, but he reiterates that the chateau is not a good place to visit at night. No way, no how. Before the big funeral, Emily asks to spend some time gazing at her father's body. La Voisin peeps in the room and sees Emily lying senseless on the floor. Apparently, the shock was too much. After La Voisin revives her, Emily barely makes it through the funeral. There's lots of shuddering, crying, and moaning going on. Once again, abbess to the rescue! She comforts Emily and asks her to stay a few days at the convent. So Emily hangs out at the convent for a bit, writing a letter to her new guardian to let her know what went down with St. Aubert. Madame Cheron sends a servant to help bring her back to La Vallee, but Emily wants to take a few more days to rest up. Before Emily leaves for good, she wants to visit her father's grave entirely alone. This means waiting until midnight, when no one sane wants to go to a cemetery alone. Emily's a special flower. A nun warns Emily that she must pass a newly opened grave to get over to her dad's grave. Okay, getting a little creepy. Yep, it's definitely creepy. Emily thinks she sees a shadow following her, but it's probably her imagination. But she makes it out alive and starts on the long journey back home. Back at La Vallee, she catches up with her favorite maid, Theresa, and recites a sonnet to commemorate her beloved dad. Theresa tells Emily that their old friend and neighbor Barreaux was particularly devastated by St. Aubert's death. He sent over a pheasant for Emily to eat for dinner, because he's thoughtful like that.", "analysis": ""}