{"name": "Volume 4, Chapter 12", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210630082640/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/mysteries-of-udolpho/summary/volume-4-chapter-12", "summary": "Coming back to Count de Villeforte and his family, we get a taste of all the scenery they've encountered on their little trip. They've had a nice visit with the Baron St. Foix and now they're heading back home. Young St. Foix is tagging along for the ride, too, since he's smitten with Blanche. But it's getting dark, and the group seems to have lost their way. The group stumbles across a fortress in the middle of the woods and decides to rest up for the night. Blanche is worried that some bad guys live there, and the Count admits it's a definite possibility. He says these types of fortresses are often inhabited by French and Spanish smugglers. Then he goes and knocks on the door. A man armed with a hunting spear answers, and the Count convinces him to grudgingly let them all in for the night. This plan is looking better and better. Some other guys who look like they could be hunters are hanging around the fortress, too. Hunter-Guy #1 offers to show the de Villefortes to their rooms, but Blanche takes a wrong turn and gets lost. Good thing she does, 'cause she overhears the \"hunters\" talking about overthrowing their guests. They're discussing how many of the group they'll need to kill. The Hunter-Guys shall henceforth be known as the Smugglers, since it seems to be their noble occupation. They also dabble in murder and robbery. Blanche tries to sneak away all casual-like, but the Smugglers catch up with her. She conveniently faints. When she wakes up, the whole battle between the de Villefortes and the Smugglers is totally over . It looks like they would have been outnumbered had Ludovico not shown up at the last second to help them out. That's right, you read correctly. Ludovico, the one who disappeared in the haunted chamber a while back. We're definitely going to get an explanation from him, but the group needs to skedaddle before more Smugglers arrive.", "analysis": ""}