
TOWARDS THE PUSH


The rank and file of the 5/6 Service Battalion of the Stonewalls
knew that "there was another push on," and that they were moving up
somewhere into the push; but beyond that and the usual crop of wild and
loose-running rumors they knew nothing. Some of the men had it on the
most exact and positive authority that they were for the front line
and "first over the parapet"; others on equally positive grounds knew
that they were to be in reserve and not in the attack at all; that they
were to be in support and follow the first line; that there was to be
nothing more than an artillery demonstration and no infantry attack at
all; that the French were taking over our line for the attack; that
we were taking over the French line. The worst of it was that there
were so many tales nobody could believe any of them, but, strangely
enough, that did not lessen the eager interest with which each in turn
was heard and discussed, or prevent each in turn securing a number of
supporters and believers.

But all the rumors appeared to be agreed that up to now the push had
not begun, so far as the infantry were concerned, and also that, as
Larry Arundel put it, "judging by the row the guns are making it's
going to be some push when it does come."

The Stonewalls had been marching up towards the front by easy stages
for three days past, and each day as they marched, and, in fact,
each hour of this last day, the uproar of artillery fire had grown
steadily greater and greater, until now the air trembled to the violent
concussions of the guns, the shriek and rumble of the shells, and
occasionally to the more thrilling and heart-shaking shriek of an enemy
shell, and the crash of its burst in our lines.

It was almost sunset when the Stonewalls swung off the road and halted
in and about a little orchard. The lines of an encampment--which
was intended for no more than a night's bivouac--were laid out,
and the men unbuckled their straps, laid off their packs, and sank
thankfully to easeful positions of rest on the long grass, waiting
until the traveling cookers, which on their journey along the road had
been preparing the evening meal, were brought up and discharged of
their savory contents. But before the meal was served there came an
unpleasant interruption, which boded ill for the safety of the night's
camp. A heavy shell rushed overhead, dropped in the field about four
hundred yards beyond the camp, burst with a crash and a gush of evil
black smoke, a flying torrent of splinters and up-flung earth.

While the men were still watching the slow dispersal of the shell
smoke, and passing comments upon how near to them was the line it had
taken, another and another shell whooped over them in a prolonged line
on the fields beyond. "We seem," said Larry Arundel, "to have chosen a
mighty unhealthy position for to-night's rest."

"If the C.O. has any sense," retorted his mate, Billy Simson, "he'll
up and off it somewheres out to the flank. We're in the direct line of
those crumps, and if one drops short, it is going to knock the stuffin'
out of a whole heap of us."

While they were talking an artillery subaltern was seen crossing the
road and hurrying towards them. "Where is your C.O.?" he asked, when
he came to the nearest group.

"Over in the orchard, sir," said Billy Simson. "I'll show you if you
like."

The officer accepted his pilotage, urging him to hurry, and the two
hastened to the orchard, and to a broken-down building in the corner of
it, where the officers of the battalion were installing a more or less
open-air mess.

Billy Simson lingered long enough to hear the Subaltern introduce
himself as from a battery in a position across the road amongst some
farm buildings, and to say that his Major had sent him over to warn
the infantry that the field they were occupying was in a direct line
"regularly strafed" by a heavy German battery every few hours.

"My Major said I was to tell you," went on the Subaltern, "that there
are one or two old barns and outbuildings on the farm where we have the
battery, and that you might find some sort of shelter for a good few of
your men in them; and that we can find room to give you and some of the
officers a place to shake down for the night."

Simson heard no more than this, but he soon had evidence that the
invitation had been accepted. The battalion was warned to "stand
by" for a move across the road, and the Colonel and Adjutant, with
the Sergeant-Major and a couple of Sergeants, left the orchard and
disappeared among the farm buildings, in the company of the gunner
Subaltern.

Billy Simson repeated to his particular chums the conversation he
had overheard; and the resulting high expectations of a move from
the unhealthy locality under the German guns' line of fire, and of
a roof over their heads for the night, were presently fulfilled by
an order for the battalion to move company by company. "C" Company
presently found itself installed in a commodious barn, with ventilation
plentifully provided by a huge hole, obviously broken out by a shell
burst, in the one corner, and a roof with tiles liberally smashed and
perforated by shrapnel fire. But on the whole the men were well content
with the change, partly perhaps because being come of a long generation
of house-dwellers they had never become accustomed to the real pleasure
of sleeping in the open air, and partly because of that curious and
instinctive and wholly misplaced confidence inspired by four walls and
a roof as a protection against shell fire.

Somewhere outside and very close to them a field battery was in
action, and for a whole hour before darkness fell the air pulsed and
the crazy buildings about them shook to an unceasing thump and bang
from the firing guns, while the intervals were filled with the slightly
more distant but equally constant thud and boom of other batteries'
fire.

While they were waiting for the evening meal to be served some of the
men wandered out and took up a position where they could view closely
the guns and gunners at their work. The guns were planted at intervals
along a high hedge; the muzzles poked through the leafy screen, and a
shelter of leaves and boughs was rigged over each, so as to screen the
battery from air observation.

Billy Simson and his three particular chums were amongst the interested
spectators. The four men, who were drawn from classes that in pre-war
days would have made any idea of friendship or even intercourse most
unlikely, if not impossible, had, after a fashion so common in our
democratic New Armies, become fast friends and intimates.

Larry Arundel, aged twenty, was a man of good family, who in civilian
days had occupied a seat in his father's office in London, with the
certain prospect before him of a partnership in the firm. Billy Simson
was a year or two older, had been educated in a provincial board
school, and from the age of fourteen had served successively as errand
boy and counter hand in a little suburban "emporium." The third man,
Ben Sneath, age unknown, but probably somewhere about twenty-one to
twenty-five, was frankly of the "lower orders"; had picked up a living
from the time he was able to walk, in the thousand and one ways that a
London street boy finds to his hand. On the roll of "C" Company he was
Private Sneath, B, but to the whole of the company--and, in fact, to
the whole of the battalion--he was known briefly, but descriptively,
as "Pug." Jefferson Lee, the fourth of the quartette, was an unusual
and somewhat singular figure in a British battalion, because, always
openly proud of his birthplace, he was seldom called by anything but
it--"Kentucky," or "Kentuck." His speech, even in the wild jumble of
accents and dialects common throughout a mixed battalion, was striking
and noticeable for its peculiar softness and slurring intonations,
its smooth gentleness, its quiet, drawling level. Being an American,
born of many generations of Americans, with no single tie or known
relation outside America, he was, in his stained khaki and his place
in the fighting ranks of a British regiment, a personal violation of
the neutrality of the United States. But the reasons that had brought
him from Kentucky to England, with the clear and expressed purpose of
enlisting for the war, were very simply explained by him.

"Some of us," he said gently, "never really agreed with the sinking of
liners and the murder of women and children. Some of us were a trifle
ashamed to be standing out of this squabble, and when the President
told the world that we were 'too proud to fight,' I just simply had to
prove that it was a statement which did not agree with the traditions
of an old Kentucky family. So I came over and enlisted in your army."

The attitude of the four men now as they watched the gunners at
work was almost characteristic of each. Larry, who had relatives or
friends in most branches of the Service, was able to tell the others
something of the methods of modern artillery, and delivered almost a
lecturette upon the subject. Billy Simson was frankly bored by this
side of the subject, but intensely interested in the noise and the
spectacular blinding flash that appeared to leap forth in a twenty-foot
wall of flame on the discharge of each gun. Pug found a subject for
mirth and quick, bantering jests in the attitudes of the gunners and
their movements about the gun, and the stentorian shoutings through a
megaphone of the Sergeant-Major from the entrance to a dug-out in the
rear of the guns. Lee sat down, leisurely rolled and lit a cigarette,
watched the proceedings with interest, and made only a very occasional
soft drawled reply to the remarks of the others.

"Do you mean to tell me," said Pug incredulously, breaking in on
Arundel's lecture, "that them fellows is shootin' off all them shells
without ever seein' what they're firin' at? If that is true, I calls it
bloomin' waste."

"They do not see their target," said Arundel, "but they are hitting it
every time. You see they aim at something else, and they're told how
much to the right or left of it to shoot, and the range they are to
shoot at--it is a bit too complicated to explain properly, but it gets
the target all right."

"Wot's the bloke with the tin trumpet whisperin' about?" asked
Pug. "Looks to me as if he was goin' to be a casualty with a broke
blood-vessel."

"Passing orders and corrections of fire to the guns," explained
Arundel. "There's a telephone wire from that dug-out up to somewhere
in front, where somebody can see the shells falling, and 'phone back to
tell them whether they are over or short, right or left."

"It's pretty near as good as a Brock's benefit night," said Billy
Simson; "but I'd want cotton wool plugs in my ears, if I was takin' up
lodgin's in this street."

The light was beginning to fade by now, but the guns continued to fire
in swift rotation, from one end of the battery to the other. They could
hear the sharp orders, "One, fire; Two, fire; Three, fire," could see
the gunner on his seat beside each piece jerk back the lever. Instantly
the gun flamed a sheet of vivid fire, the piece recoiled violently to
the rear between the gunners seated to each side of it, and as the
breech moved smoothly back to its position, the hand of one gunner
swooped rapidly in after it, grabbed the handle and wrenched open the
breech, flinging out the shining brass cartridge case, to fall with a
clash and jangle on to the trail of the gun and the other empty cases
lying round it. The instant the breech was back in place, another man
shot in a fresh shell, the breech swung shut with a sharp, metallic
clang, the layer, with his eye pressed close to his sight, juggled for
a moment with his hands on shiny brass wheels, lifted one hand to drop
it again on the lever, shouted "Ready," and sat waiting the order to
fire. The motions and the action at one gun were exactly and in detail
the motions of all. From end to end of the line the flaming wall leaped
in turn from each muzzle, the piece jarred backwards, the empty brass
case jerked out and fell tinkling; and before it ceased to roll another
shell was in place, the breech clanged home, and the gun was ready
again.

Billy Simson spoke to a gunner who was moving past them towards the
billets.

"What are you fellows shooting at?" he asked.

"Wire cutting," said the gunner briefly. "We've been at it now without
stopping this past four days," and he moved on and left them.

"Wire cutting," said Arundel, "sweeping away the barbed wire
entanglements in front of the Boche trench. That's clearing the track
we're going to take to-morrow or the next day."

"I hopes they makes a clean job of it," said Pug; "and I hopes they
sweep away some of them blasted machine guns at the same time."

"Amen, to that," said Kentucky.



