{"name": "act i, Scene ii", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212214204/https://www.novelguide.com/coriolanus/summaries/act-1-scenes-2-10", "summary": "Scene ii shifts the action from Rome to the Volscian city of Corioli. Shakespeare foreshadows the Romans. coming defeat of the Volscians by showing at the beginning of the scene that the Romans already know, through intelligence, the Volscians. plan of attack. The Roman army has already set off to engage the Volscians, robbing the Volscians of the initiative. The scene also highlights the sworn enmity between Aufidius and Caius Martius. Aufidius's words at I. ii. 34. 6 set up an expectation in the audience's mind that the two men will fight and that eventually, one will die. The contrast in mood and tone, from the public tumult of scenes i and ii to the private and domestic focus of scene iii, is typical of Shakespeare. He often uses such contrasts to provide different perspectives on the same subject. The contrast also serves to stimulate the minds of the audience, whose focus is switched rapidly between broad and narrow, noisy and quiet, public and personal. The exchange between Volumnia and Virgilia emphasizes the contrast between the two women. Volumnia has many traditionally masculine qualities: she is bold, ambitious for fame, and exults in the honor that can be won in battle. Because she is a woman in a society in which women were expected to occupy a subservient, passive and domestic role , she channels all her desires and enthusiasms into her son, Caius Martius. She is never happier than when Caius Martius is away fighting, risking his life and thereby increasing his warlike fame. His wife Virgilia, on the other hand, is timid and terrified at his martial exploits. The two women's contrasting attitude to the possibility that Caius Martius will be killed in battle sums up their different natures: Virgilia fears it, but Volumnia would take comfort in his heroic reputation, which would become a replacement child for her. Scenes iv-ix establish Caius Martius as a war hero by showing his bravery and effectiveness in battle. He is largely responsible for both Roman victories. in the battlefield and at Corioli. A contrast is drawn between his heroism and the cowardice and unreliability of the Roman soldiers. When Caius Martius orders the soldiers to enter Corioli with him , they refuse, in the belief that he is going to a certain death. This is clearly unacceptable since it is the role of a soldier to risk his life for his country. Their conduct is shown as justly drawing Caius Martius's contempt", "analysis": ""}