{"name": "act i, scene v", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212214204/https://www.novelguide.com/coriolanus/summaries/act-1-scenes-2-10", "summary": "In scene v, they are shown looting cheap trash from Corioli before the battle is won. The soldiers. petty greed and covetousness is set against the high-minded modesty of Caius Martius, who wants no reward for his services and determinedly refuses all praise for his achievements. In addition, Caius Martius shows affection and respect for his superior, Cominius. These two qualities give the lie to the cynical tribunes of the people, Sicinius and Brutus, who claimed that Caius Martius was greedy of fame and so proud that he would find it hard to serve under Cominius. Caius Martius emerges from the battle scenes as a brave, honorable, and truthful man who knows his role and shoulders his responsibilities without hesitation. Though at the beginning of the play, his contempt for the plebeians seemed extreme, the base and unheroic behavior of the common soldiers suggests that he is, in fact, justified in his attitude. Thus, in the argument that raged between ruling aristocrats and common people both in ancient Rome and seventeenth-century England, Shakespeare subtly takes the side of the rulers. However, Caius Martius's lack of public relations skills fatally undermines him in his career. His failure to remember the names of the tribunes of the people reveals this lack. A similar slip of memory comes in scene ix. When Cominius asks Caius Martius to name his reward for his excellent service, Caius Martius asks nothing for himself, but requests that a Volscian prisoner who was kind to him be set free. Cominius readily agrees, but Caius Martius has forgotten his name, meaning that his generous impulse comes to nothing. Caius Martius's obliviousness to the detail of his relations with ordinary people here has a serious outcome, making the difference between imprisonment and freedom for the Volscian man. The incident, while showing that Caius Martius is instinctively kind to the deserving among the common folk, is symptomatic of his unhealthy detachment from them", "analysis": ""}