{"name": "Chapter 6", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200923164503/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/house-seven-gables/summary/chapter-6", "summary": "Phoebe goes out into the garden. She sees signs that the garden has been well-cared for. She can't figure out who's doing the upkeep, but she's sure it's not Hepzibah. She finds a corner of the garden with a lovely old mossy fountain. There is also a chicken coop. Phoebe runs inside to get breadcrumbs for the chickens. As she feeds them, one of the baby chickens flies up to land on her shoulder. A voice says, \"That little fowl pays you a high compliment!\" . Phoebe turns around and sees the lodger, Mr. Holgrave. Phoebe introduces herself. Mr. Holgrave tells her that he is the one who hoes and weeds the garden. He asks if Phoebe wants to see a portrait he has taken. He points out that this particular portrait is unusual. Generally, photographs show the faces of their subjects as they always appear. But this portrait is of a man who shows \"a very different expression\" during his ordinary life. Phoebe identifies the face as that of her \"Puritan ancestor\" , Colonel Pyncheon. It's not Colonel Pyncheon, though, since it's a modern face. Usually this stern, hard man looks \"exceedingly pleasant, indicative of benevolence, openness of heart, sunny good humor\" . But the photograph makes him look \"sly, subtle and cold as ice\" . Phoebe points out the contrast between the man in this photograph and her cousin Hepzibah's miniature portrait. Mr. Holgrave has never seen the portrait but he has heard of it. He asks if Phoebe can imagine that figure being guilty of a crime. Phoebe thinks he's talking a lot of nonsense: of course not. Mr. Holgrave changes the subject. He suggests that Phoebe help out with the garden, since she will need something to do with her energy while she's staying with Hepzibah. Phoebe agrees, and they start working silently side by side. Phoebe doesn't really like Mr. Holgrave. He seems serious, almost stern, and she doesn't understand him. As the sun sets, Mr. Holgrave tells her good night. He suggests that Phoebe come and see him sometime. He also warns Phoebe not to drink or wash at Maule's Well . He says the fountain is bewitched. Then he goes inside. Phoebe returns to Hepzibah's part of the house. Hepzibah seems in a strange mood, as though she is listening for something. The room is very dark. Phoebe asks if Hepzibah has just said something. Hepzibah says no. Phoebe asks if there is someone in the room with them. Hepzibah suggests that Phoebe go and rest; she's had a busy day. Hepzibah hugs Phoebe before Phoebe goes to bed. As Phoebe lies down, she hears what sounds like the murmur of human voices.", "analysis": ""}