ACT IV  SCENE I.

--A Picture Room in CHARLES SURFACE'S House

     Enter CHARLES, SIR OLIVER, MOSES, and CARELESS

CHARLES. Walk in, gentlemen, pray walk in;--here they are, the family of
the Surfaces, up to the Conquest.

SIR OLIVER. And, in my opinion, a goodly collection.

CHARLES. Ay, ay, these are done in the true spirit of portrait-painting;
no volontiere grace or expression. Not like the works of your modern
Raphaels, who give you the strongest resemblance, yet contrive to make
your portrait independent of you; so that you may sink the original
and not hurt the picture. No, no; the merit of these is the inveterate
likeness--all stiff and awkward as the originals, and like nothing in
human nature besides.

SIR OLIVER. Ah! we shall never see such figures of men again.

CHARLES. I hope not. Well, you see, Master Premium, what a domestic
character I am; here I sit of an evening surrounded by my family. But
come, get to your pulpit, Mr. Auctioneer; here's an old gouty chair of
my grandfather's will answer the purpose.

CARELESS. Ay, ay, this will do. But, Charles, I haven't a hammer; and
what's an auctioneer without his hammer?

CHARLES. Egad, that's true. What parchment have we here? Oh, our
genealogy in full. [Taking pedigree down.] Here, Careless, you shall
have no common bit of mahogany, here's the family tree for you,
you rogue! This shall be your hammer, and now you may knock down my
ancestors with their own pedigree.

SIR OLIVER. What an unnatural rogue!--an ex post facto parricide!
[Aside.]

CARELESS. Yes, yes, here's a list of your generation indeed;--faith,
Charles, this is the most convenient thing you could have found for the
business, for 'twill not only serve as a hammer, but a catalogue into
the bargain. Come, begin--A-going, a-going, a-going!

CHARLES. Bravo, Careless! Well, here's my great uncle, Sir Richard
Ravelin, a marvellous good general in his day, I assure you. He served
in all the Duke of Marlborough's wars, and got that cut over his eye
at the battle of Malplaquet. What say you, Mr. Premium? look at
him--there's a hero! not cut out of his feathers, as your modern clipped
captains are, but enveloped in wig and regimentals, as a general should
be. What do you bid?

SIR OLIVER. [Aside to Moses.] Bid him speak.

MOSES. Mr. Premium would have you speak.

CHARLES. Why, then, he shall have him for ten pounds, and I'm sure
that's not dear for a staff-officer.

SIR OLIVER. [Aside.] Heaven deliver me! his famous uncle Richard for ten
pounds!--[Aloud.] Very well, sir, I take him at that.

CHARLES. Careless, knock down my uncle Richard.--Here, now, is a maiden
sister of his, my great-aunt Deborah, done by Kneller, in his best
manner, and esteemed a very formidable likeness. There she is, you see,
a shepherdess feeding her flock. You shall have her for five pounds
ten--the sheep are worth the money.

SIR OLIVER. [Aside.] Ah! poor Deborah! a woman who set such a value on
herself!--[Aloud.] Five pounds ten--she's mine.

CHARLES. Knock down my aunt Deborah! Here, now, are two that were a sort
of cousins of theirs.--You see, Moses, these pictures were done some
time ago, when beaux wore wigs, and the ladies their own hair.

SIR OLIVER. Yes, truly, head-dresses appear to have been a little lower
in those days.

CHARLES. Well, take that couple for the same.

MOSES. 'Tis a good bargain.

CHARLES. Careless!--This, now, is a grandfather of my mother's, a
learned judge, well known on the western circuit,--What do you rate him
at, Moses?

MOSES. Four guineas.

CHARLES. Four guineas! Gad's life, you don't bid me the price of his
wig.--Mr. Premium, you have more respect for the woolsack; do let us
knock his lordship down at fifteen.

SIR OLIVER. By all means.

CARELESS. Gone!

CHARLES. And there are two brothers of his, William and Walter Blunt,
Esquires, both members of Parliament, and noted speakers; and, what's
very extraordinary, I believe, this is the first time they were ever
bought or sold.

SIR OLIVER. That is very extraordinary, indeed! I'll take them at your
own price, for the honour of Parliament.

CARELESS. Well said, little Premium! I'll knock them down at forty.

CHARLES. Here's a jolly fellow--I don't know what relation, but he was
mayor of Norwich: take him at eight pounds.

SIR OLIVER. No, no; six will do for the mayor.

CHARLES. Come, make it guineas, and I'll throw you the two aldermen here
into the bargain.

SIR OLIVER. They're mine.

CHARLES. Careless, knock down the mayor and aldermen. But, plague on't!
we shall be all day retailing in this manner; do let us deal wholesale:
what say you, little Premium? Give me three hundred pounds for the rest
of the family in the lump.

CARELESS. Ay, ay, that will be the best way.

SIR OLIVER. Well, well, anything to accommodate you; they are mine. But
there is one portrait which you have always passed over.

CARELESS. What, that ill-looking little fellow over the settee?

SIR OLIVER. Yes, sir, I mean that; though I don't think him so
ill-looking a little fellow, by any means.

CHARLES. What, that? Oh; that's my uncle Oliver! 'Twas done before he
went to India.

CARELESS. Your uncle Oliver! Gad, then you'll never be friends,
Charles. That, now, to me, is as stern a looking rogue as ever I saw; an
unforgiving eye, and a damned disinheriting countenance! an inveterate
knave, depend on't. Don't you think so, little Premium?

SIR OLIVER. Upon my soul, Sir, I do not; I think it is as honest a
looking face as any in the room, dead or alive. But I suppose uncle
Oliver goes with the rest of the lumber?

CHARLES. No, hang it! I'll not part with poor Noll. The old fellow has
been very good to me, and, egad, I'll keep his picture while I've a room
to put it in.

SIR OLIVER. [Aside.] The rogue's my nephew after all!--[Aloud.] But,
sir, I have somehow taken a fancy to that picture.

CHARLES. I'm sorry for't, for you certainly will not have it. Oons,
haven't you got enough of them?

SIR OLIVER. [Aside.] I forgive him everything!--[Aloud.] But, Sir, when
I take a whim in my head, I don't value money. I'll give you as much for
that as for all the rest.

CHARLES. Don't tease me, master broker; I tell you I'll not part with
it, and there's an end of it.

SIR OLIVER. [Aside.] How like his father the dog is.--[Aloud.] Well,
well, I have done.--[Aside.] I did not perceive it before, but I think
I never saw such a striking resemblance.--[Aloud.] Here is a draught for
your sum.

CHARLES. Why, 'tis for eight hundred pounds!

SIR OLIVER. You will not let Sir Oliver go?

CHARLES. Zounds! no! I tell you, once more.

SIR OLIVER. Then never mind the difference, we'll balance that another
time. But give me your hand on the bargain; you are an honest fellow,
Charles--I beg pardon, sir, for being so free.--Come, Moses.

CHARLES. Egad, this is a whimsical old fellow!--But hark'ee, Premium,
you'll prepare lodgings for these gentlemen.

SIR OLIVER. Yes, yes, I'll send for them in a day or two.

CHARLES. But, hold; do now send a genteel conveyance for them, for, I
assure you, they were most of them used to ride in their own carriages.

SIR OLIVER. I will, I will--for all but Oliver.

CHARLES. Ay, all but the little nabob.

SIR OLIVER. You're fixed on that?

CHARLES. Peremptorily.

SIR OLIVER. [Aside.] A dear extravagant rogue!--[Aloud.] Good day! Come,
Moses.--[Aside.] Let me hear now who dares call him profligate!

     [Exit with MOSES.]

CARELESS. Why, this is the oddest genius of the sort I ever met with!

CHARLES. Egad, he's the prince of brokers, I think. I wonder how
the devil Moses got acquainted with so honest a fellow.--Ha! here's
Rowley.--Do, Careless, say I'll join the company in a few moments.

CARELESS. I will--but don't let that old blockhead persuade you to
squander any of that money on old musty debts, or any such nonsense; for
tradesmen, Charles, are the most exorbitant fellows.

CHARLES. Very true, and paying them is only encouraging them.

CARELESS. Nothing else.

CHARLES. Ay, ay, never fear.--

     [Exit CARELESS.]
So! this was an odd old fellow, indeed. Let me see, two-thirds of these
five hundred and thirty odd pounds are mine by right. Fore Heaven!
I find one's ancestors are more valuable relations than I took them
for!--Ladies and gentlemen, your most obedient and very grateful
servant.     [Bows ceremoniously to the pictures.]

     Enter ROWLEY

Ha! old Rowley! egad, you are just come in time to take leave of your
old acquaintance.

ROWLEY. Yes, I heard they were a-going. But I wonder you can have such
spirits under so many distresses.

CHARLES. Why, there's the point! my distresses are so many, that I can't
affort to part with my spirits; but I shall be rich and splenetic, all
in good time. However, I suppose you are surprised that I am not more
sorrowful at parting with so many near relations; to be sure, 'tis very
affecting; but you see they never move a muscle, so why should I?

ROWLEY. There's no making you serious a moment.

CHARLES. Yes, faith, I am so now. Here, my honest Rowley, here, get me
this changed directly, and take a hundred pounds of it immediately to
old Stanley.

ROWLEY. A hundred pounds! Consider only----

CHARLES. Gad's life, don't talk about it! poor Stanley's wants are
pressing, and, if you don't make haste, we shall have some one call that
has a better right to the money.

ROWLEY. Ah! there's the point! I never will cease dunning you with the
old proverb----

CHARLES. BE JUST BEFORE YOU'RE GENEROUS.--Why, so I would if I could;
but Justice is an old hobbling beldame, and I can't get her to keep pace
with Generosity, for the soul of me.

ROWLEY. Yet, Charles, believe me, one hour's reflection----

CHARLES. Ay, ay, it's very true; but, hark'ee, Rowley, while I have, by
Heaven I'll give; so, damn your economy! and now for hazard.

     [Exeunt.]





