ACT V    SCENE I.

--The Library

     Enter SURFACE and SERVANT

SURFACE. Mr. Stanley! and why should you think I would see him?--you
must know he came to ask something!

SERVANT. Sir--I shouldn't have let him in but that Mr. Rowley came to
the Door with him.

SURFACE. Pshaw!--Blockhead to suppose that I should now be in a Temper
to receive visits from poor Relations!--well why don't you show the
Fellow up?

SERVANT. I will--Sir--Why, Sir--it was not my Fault that Sir Peter
discover'd my Lady----

SURFACE. Go, fool!--

    [Exit SERVANT.]

Sure Fortune never play'd a man of my policy such a Trick before--my
character with Sir Peter!--my Hopes with Maria!--destroy'd in a
moment!--I'm in a rare Humour to listen to other People's Distresses!--I
shan't be able to bestow even a benevolent sentiment on Stanley--So!
here--He comes and Rowley with him--I MUST try to recover myself, and
put a little Charity into my Face however.----

     [Exit.]

     Enter SIR OLIVER and ROWLEY

SIR OLIVER. What! does He avoid us? that was He--was it not?

ROWLEY. It was Sir--but I doubt you are come a little too abruptly--his
Nerves are so weak that the sight of a poor Relation may be too much for
him--I should have gone first to break you to him.

SIR OLIVER. A Plague of his Nerves--yet this is He whom Sir Peter
extolls as a Man of the most Benevolent way of thinking!--

ROWLEY. As to his way of thinking--I can't pretend to decide[,] for, to
do him justice He appears to have as much speculative Benevolence as any
private Gentleman in the Kingdom--though he is seldom so sensual as to
indulge himself in the exercise of it----

SIR OLIVER. Yet [he] has a string of charitable Sentiments I suppose at
his Fingers' ends!--

ROWLEY. Or, rather at his Tongue's end Sir Oliver; for I believe there
is no sentiment he has more faith in than that 'Charity begins at Home.'

SIR OLIVER. And his I presume is of that domestic sort which never stirs
abroad at all.

ROWLEY. I doubt you'll find it so--but He's coming--I mustn't seem to
interrupt you--and you know immediately--as you leave him--I come in to
announce--your arrival in your real Character.

SIR OLIVER. True--and afterwards you'll meet me at Sir Peter's----

ROWLEY. Without losing a moment.

     [Exit.]

SIR OLIVER. So--I see he has premeditated a Denial by the Complaisance
of his Features.

     Enter SURFACE

SURFACE. Sir--I beg you ten thousand Pardons for keeping--you a moment
waiting--Mr. Stanley--I presume----

SIR OLIVER. At your Service.

SURFACE. Sir--I beg you will do me the honour to sit down--I entreat you
Sir.

SIR OLIVER. Dear Sir there's no occasion--too civil by half!

SURFACE. I have not the Pleasure of knowing you, Mr. Stanley--but I am
extremely happy to see you look so well--you were nearly related to my
mother--I think Mr. Stanley----

SIR OLIVER. I was Sir--so nearly that my present Poverty I fear may do
discredit to her Wealthy Children--else I should not have presumed to
trouble you.--

SURFACE. Dear Sir--there needs no apology--He that is in Distress tho' a
stranger has a right to claim kindred with the wealthy--I am sure I wish
I was of that class, and had it in my power to offer you even a small
relief.

SIR OLIVER. If your Unkle, Sir Oliver were here--I should have a
Friend----

SURFACE. I wish He was Sir, with all my Heart--you should not want an
advocate with him--believe me Sir.

SIR OLIVER. I should not need one--my Distresses would recommend
me.--but I imagined--his Bounty had enabled you to become the agent of
his Charity.

SURFACE. My dear Sir--you are strangely misinformed--Sir Oliver is a
worthy Man, a worthy man--a very worthy sort of Man--but avarice
Mr. Stanley is the vice of age--I will tell you my good Sir in
confidence:--what he has done for me has been a mere--nothing[;] tho'
People I know have thought otherwise and for my Part I never chose to
contradict the Report.

SIR OLIVER. What!--has he never
transmitted--you--Bullion--Rupees--Pagodas!

SURFACE. O Dear Sir--Nothing of the kind--no--no--a few Presents now and
then--china, shawls, congo Tea, Avadavats--and indian Crackers--little
more, believe me.

SIR OLIVER. Here's Gratitude for twelve thousand pounds!--Avadavats and
indian Crackers.

SURFACE. Then my dear--Sir--you have heard, I doubt not, of the
extravagance of my Brother--Sir--there are very few would credit what I
have done for that unfortunate young man.

SIR OLIVER. Not I for one!

SURFACE. The sums I have lent him! indeed--I have been exceedingly to
blame--it was an amiable weakness! however I don't pretend to defend
it--and now I feel it doubly culpable--since it has deprived me of the
power of serving YOU Mr. Stanley as my Heart directs----

SIR OLIVER. Dissembler! Then Sir--you cannot assist me?

SURFACE. At Present it grieves me to say I cannot--but whenever I have
the ability, you may depend upon hearing from me.

SIR OLIVER. I am extremely sorry----

SURFACE. Not more than I am believe me--to pity without the Power to
relieve is still more painful than to ask and be denied----

SIR OLIVER. Kind Sir--your most obedient humble servant.

SURFACE. You leave me deeply affected Mr. Stanley--William--be ready to
open the door----

SIR OLIVER. O, Dear Sir, no ceremony----

SURFACE. Your very obedient----

SIR OLIVER. Your most obsequious----

SURFACE. You may depend on hearing from me whenever I can be of
service----

SIR OLIVER. Sweet Sir--you are too good----

SURFACE. In the mean time I wish you Health and Spirits----

SIR OLIVER. Your ever grateful and perpetual humble Servant----

SURFACE. Sir--yours as sincerely----

SIR OLIVER. Charles!--you are my Heir.

     [Exit.]

SURFACE, solus Soh!--This is one bad effect of a good Character--it
invites applications from the unfortunate and there needs no small
degree of address to gain the reputation of Benevolence without
incurring the expence.--The silver ore of pure Charity is an expensive
article in the catalogue of a man's good Qualities--whereas the
sentimental French Plate I use instead of it makes just as good a
shew--and pays no tax.

     Enter ROWLEY

ROWLEY. Mr. Surface--your Servant: I was apprehensive of interrupting
you, tho' my Business demands immediate attention--as this Note will
inform you----

SURFACE. Always Happy to see Mr. Rowley--how--Oliver--Surface!--My Unkle
arrived!

ROWLEY. He is indeed--we have just parted--quite well--after a speedy
voyage--and impatient to embrace his worthy Nephew.

SURFACE. I am astonished!--William[!] stop Mr. Stanley, if He's not
gone----

ROWLEY. O--He's out of reach--I believe.

SURFACE. Why didn't you let me know this when you came in together.--

ROWLEY. I thought you had particular--Business--but must be gone to
inform your Brother, and appoint him here to meet his Uncle. He will be
with you in a quarter of an hour----

SURFACE. So he says. Well--I am strangely overjoy'd at his coming--never
to be sure was anything so damn'd unlucky!

ROWLEY. You will be delighted to see how well He looks.

SURFACE. O--I'm rejoiced to hear it--just at this time----

ROWLEY. I'll tell him how impatiently you expect him----

SURFACE. Do--do--pray--give my best duty and affection--indeed, I cannot
express the sensations I feel at the thought of seeing him!--certainly
his coming just at this Time is the cruellest piece of ill Fortune----

     [Exeunt.]





