EPILOGUE

     BY MR. COLMAN

     SPOKEN BY LADY TEAZLE

     I, who was late so volatile and gay,
     Like a trade-wind must now blow all one way,
     Bend all my cares, my studies, and my vows,
     To one dull rusty weathercock--my spouse!
     So wills our virtuous bard--the motley Bayes
     Of crying epilogues and laughing plays!
     Old bachelors, who marry smart young wives,
     Learn from our play to regulate your lives:
     Each bring his dear to town, all faults upon her--
     London will prove the very source of honour.
     Plunged fairly in, like a cold bath it serves,
     When principles relax, to brace the nerves:
     Such is my case; and yet I must deplore
     That the gay dream of dissipation's o'er.
     And say, ye fair! was ever lively wife,
     Born with a genius for the highest life,
     Like me untimely blasted in her bloom,
     Like me condemn'd to such a dismal doom?
     Save money--when I just knew how to waste it!
     Leave London--just as I began to taste it!
       Must I then watch the early crowing cock,
     The melancholy ticking of a clock;
     In a lone rustic hall for ever pounded,
     With dogs, cats, rats, and squalling brats surrounded?
     With humble curate can I now retire,
     (While good Sir Peter boozes with the squire,)
     And at backgammon mortify my soul,
     That pants for loo, or flutters at a vole?
     Seven's the main!  Dear sound that must expire,
     Lost at hot cockles round a Christmas fire;
     The transient hour of fashion too soon spent,
     Farewell the tranquil mind, farewell content!
     Farewell the plumed head, the cushion'd tete,
     That takes the cushion from its proper seat!
     That spirit-stirring drum!--card drums I mean,
     Spadille--odd trick--pam--basto--king and queen!
     And you, ye knockers, that, with brazen throat,
     The welcome visitors' approach denote;
     Farewell all quality of high renown,
     Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious town!
     Farewell! your revels I partake no more,
     And Lady Teazle's occupation's o'er!
     All this I told our bard; he smiled, and said 'twas clear,
     I ought to play deep tragedy next year.
     Meanwhile he drew wise morals from his play,
     And in these solemn periods stalk'd away:--
     "Bless'd were the fair like you; her faults who stopp'd,
     And closed her follies when the curtain dropp'd!
     No more in vice or error to engage,
     Or play the fool at large on life's great stage."


END OF PLAY





<1> This PORTRAIT and Garrick's PROLOGUE are not included in Fraser
Rae's text.

<2> From Sheridan's manuscript.

<3> The story in Act I. Scene I., told by Crabtree about Miss Letitia
Piper, is repeated here, the speaker being Sir Peter:

   SIR PETER.  O nine out of ten malicious inventions are founded
   on some ridiculous misrepresentation--Mrs. Candour you remember
   how poor Miss Shepherd lost her Lover and her Character one
   Summer at Tunbridge.

   MRS. C.  To be sure that was a very ridiculous affair.

   CRABTREE.  Pray tell us Sir Peter how it was.

   SIR P.  Why madam--[The story follows.]

   MRS. C.  Ha ha strange indeed--

   SIR P.  Matter of Fact I assure you....

   LADY T.  As sure as can be--Sir Peter will grow scandalous
   himself--if you encourage him to tell stories.
   [Fraser Rae's footnote--Ed.]

<4> The words which follow this title are not inserted in the manuscript
of the play. [Fraser Rae's footnote.--Ed.]

<5> From this place to Scene ii. Act IV. several sheets are missing.
[Fraser Rae's footnote.--Ed.]





