{"name": "Chapter 30", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 30<PARAGRAPH>Olivia Carteret remains disturbed by what her Aunt Polly had told her before her death. The shock of Aunt Polly's murder has kept her from opening the papers that she found in the pine box, but her nervousness over the situation finally allowed her to open them. The first document is a will. It leaves ten thousand dollars and a tract of land to the daughter of Julia Brown. The rest is left to Olivia. This gives Olivia a sense of relief. She takes the will, walks into the next room, and throws it into the fire. Just as it is burning, Olivia sees a line that she had missed -- \"All the rest and residue of my estate I devise and bequeath to my daughter Olivia Merkell, the child of my beloved first wife. This word \"first\" means that her father had taken a second wife. PARAGRAPH>Olivia grabs the envelope again and finds a certificate of marriage, executed in a county in South Carolina, between Julia Brown and her father. This paper shocks Olivia, but she cannot see how such a certificate could be honored since it is illegal for persons of mixed race to marry. She goes to the fireplace and throws the certificate in to burn. There is another letter in the envelope and Olivia takes it out and reads it. It is a long letter, written to Mr. Delamere asking him to be the executor of his estate upon his death. Olivia's father gives his reasons for marrying Julia and asks that if Julia's child should become an educated, virtuous woman in her adulthood, that Mr. Delamere should tell her that she is his lawful child and ask her to forgive his weakness. PARAGRAPH>Several days later, Olivia hypothetically asks her husband what would happen if it was discovered that her father had married his servant. Though Major Carteret thinks that his wife is over thinking the matter, he tells her that it could only be a valid marriage if it was conducted during the military occupation or in the state of South Carolina. Olivia is troubled by this. She feels that marriage is a right given from God. She cannot announce the marriage or make amends from the past, however, without shaming her father in the process. This causes her health to begin to deteriorate", "analysis": "The character of Mr. Ellis represents the northern white audience that Chesnutt addresses his novel to. Chesnutt would not have addressed his book to a Southern audience, as speaking out against lynching and racial violence in such a way would have been condemned and met with violent resistance. Instead, like writers such as Harriet Beecher Stowe, Chesnutt addressed his book to a sympathetic Northern audience that, through public opinion, might be able to improve the condition of the black community in the South.<PARAGRAPH>Mr. Ellis is representative of those white Northerners who were still undetermined about what action to take regarding the lynchings and racial violence in the South. Ellis is educated and has a sense of moral outrage over the practice, but he is not sure of the path to take. He compares himself to Brutus, a reference to Lucius Junius Brutus who was a founder of the Roman republic. When Brutus's sons rebelled against the republic, Brutus turned them both in and ordered their executions. Brutus's actions carry with them a perception of both nobility and disgust.<PARAGRAPH>Ellis is concerned that his actions to correct the accusations against Sandy will be considered too disgusting and will result in his own lack of standing in the community. However, he also understands that his failure to do anything will result in a murder. This, Chesnutt suggests, is the plight of the white Northern observer. They do not want to over-object to the violent situation in the South, since the nation was just beginning to recover from a bloody civil war, yet their inaction was tantamount to murder. Though Sandy was acquitted of the false accusations, Ellis cannot escape blood on his own hands. By declining to intervene, Ellis cost Mr. Delamere his life. Chesnutt means to alert his northern readers that silence on the subject of lynching and violence will always result in death.<PARAGRAPH>Chapter Twenty-Eight is the beginning of the novel's final act. There is a sense of uneasy normalcy returning to Wellington, though it is questionable how normal any community can seem with an everpresent air of violence. The narrator's comment that \"a new Pharaoh\" has come to the North is a reference to the Bible story of the Hebrew enslavement. In this story, a new Pharaoh comes to rule over an Egypt that does not remember the contribution of Joseph and of the Hebrews to Egyptian society. The new Pharaoh then enslaves the Hebrew people. This refers to the conclusion of Reconstruction and the new policies of the United States government to encourage national unity. This national unity came at the sacrifice of black civil rights. The United States government, Chesnutt suggests, turned over the issue of civil rights to the Southern states.<PARAGRAPH>This quote also references the analogy of Hebrew exodus to the ending of slavery. Throughout the period of slavery in the United States, slaves often compared their plight to this Biblical story, believing that God would bring them out of captivity just as he did for the Hebrew people. African American spirituals such as \"Go Down Moses\" and \"Pharaoh's Army Got Drowned\" also make reference to this story. By creating an analogy between the Hebrew exodus and slavery, African American slaves were able to create a method of non-violent resistance to their white slave owners and slave drivers.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-26-30"}