{"name": "Chapter 1", "summary": "Chapter 1<PARAGRAPH>The novel opens on a \"hot and sultry\" night in the sickroom of Mrs. Olivia Carteret. Dr. Price, who is looking over Mrs. Carteret, gives her hand to Major Carteret, her husband, and tells him to look after her while he goes down to the library for a rest. Major Carteret is as much oppressed by his memories as by the heat. He remembers how, after returning from Appomattox as a boy, he found his family destitute and in ruin. Only after he married Mrs. Carteret and used some of her family fortune to buy the Morning Chronicle, the \"most influential paper in the State,\" did he find success in life. The only cloud that had marred his life with Olivia had been her inability to have children. Now, she lays in her room, ready to give birth to her first child but in danger for her life because of a \"nervous shock\" that is causing her to give birth to the child prematurely. PARAGRAPH>In the library, the doctor sits and talks to Mammy Jane. Jane begins to tell him the story of Olivia's family. Jane had been the mistress to Olivia's mother and Olivia's nurse as a child. When her mother passed away when Olivia was only six, her aunt, Mrs. Polly Ochiltree, came to look after Olivia. Mrs. Ochiltree went to Olivia's father and demanded that she be made the maid of the household and that they fire the current maid, Julia. Sensing her power play, Olivia's father told her this would not happen. Mrs. Ochiltree left and an arrangement was made for her to raise Olivia. Julia, the maid, stayed and two years later gave birth to a child by Olivia's father. While this was a scandalous relationship, the doctor thinks of how such things \"had been all too common in the old slavery days, and not a few of them had been projected into the new era. Olivia's father soon died as well, but did not leave a will. This meant that Mrs. Polly kicked Julia and her child out of the house. Julia's daughter , Janet, grew up and married an African-American doctor. They opened a school together in the town and now live in the old Carteret house, the same house that the Major's family had lived in before they became poor. It was seeing Janet and her young child that had sent Olivia into hysterics. Major Carteret calls for Dr. Price and Jane from the stairs and they go up. After two hours of hard labor, a baby boy is born. Jane's only concern over the child is that he has a small mole under its left ear, which she believes to be a sign of bad luck", "analysis": "The Marrow of Tradition is a novel that deals with the complex issues of racial tension between white and black in the late nineteenth century U.S. South. The tensions of the novel are not just between races, however, but also internal to the African American community as well. It is a novel filled with characters of complex identity; race is an internal matter as much as an external social and political matter.<PARAGRAPH>The book's title comes from a line in a poem by Charles Lamb, a nineteenth century English writer. The book's epigraph contains a few lines from the poem; \"I like you and your book, ingenious Hone! / In whose capacious all-embracing leaves / The very marrow of tradition's shown.\" This poem refers to an 1824 book written by a British bookseller entitled The Every-Day Book. This volume was a chronicle of everyday British life with commentary upon both important days and events, such as Saints' Day and the major religious happenings of the year, as well as the banal everyday street life of London. Lamb praises the book in his poem because, as he says, it embraces all of life and an essence of an antiquarian tradition. Chesnutt uses this quote ironically because this \"marrow of tradition\" is a white tradition. It does not include an African American point of view. This quote illustrates the book's overarching theme: the tyranny of the white ruling class in their efforts to recover a slaveholding tradition, and the struggles of African Americans to overcome this tyranny.<PARAGRAPH>The book's setting is Wilmington, North Carolina. It is based upon the Wilmington Massacres of 1898. The book falls into the genre of \"historical fiction,\" a work in which the setting, events, and characters are often drawn from real life, but fictionalized into a coherent and gripping narrative. The author's intention is to capture the spirit, meaning, and conditions of the historical event instead of the actual details. The book is thus a novel instead of a work of non-fiction. The novel is also a didactic work of fiction. It is an argument against racial prejudice and the violent act of lynching.<PARAGRAPH>Marrow focuses on families and relationships more than events. This allows Chesnutt to explore the complex set of emotions that fostered the violence of the Massacre. Since the novel was written in 1901, the novel's setting exudes a mood of an antebellum South; there is an anxiety felt by all the characters for a time that is passing and a future that is uncertain. The novel shifts points of view between many characters, though the main points of view are from the novel's three interconnected families: the Carterets, the Millers, and the Delameres.<PARAGRAPH>The first chapter introduces the white family upon which much of the novel's action revolves around, the Carterets. There are brief passages of back-story that illuminate the character's feelings and philosophy towards race in the novel's present. Major Carteret is a Civil War veteran from a proud family who lost everything in the war. Chesnutt's use of the place name \"Appomattox\" is an example of metonymy; in this case, it represents all of the fighting that Carteret participated in during the Civil War. The reader learns that, after the war, Carteret is able to advance in life only because of his wife's family and their money. Slave nursemaids raised Olivia Carteret, but she has a half-sister that is African American, a child borne from an affair her father had with his African American maid. Mrs. Carteret's own anxiety over her ability to bear children causes her to go into a state of shock when she meets this bastard child and her early labor is the novel's first action.<PARAGRAPH>Chesnutt's writing is highly stylized. He focuses less on describing specifics of place and more on the interior and exterior characteristics of his characters. His language can be described as often flowery or ornate, and he goes into detail in describing a character's physical appearance. Their exterior appearance mirrors their interior thoughts and motivations; for instance, in chapter three Major Carteret and General Belmont are described as neat and formal in appearance, while Captain McBane is described as disheveled and sloppy. Though all three men harbor sinister motivations against African Americans, Captain McBane's appearance alerts the reader to his greater propensity for cruelty and violence. The physical characteristics often have double meanings in Chesnutt's writing. Tom Delamere is often contrasted with the term \"manly\" or \"manliness.\"<PARAGRAPH>This reference is also a pun suggesting the loss of white Southern masculine identity in the post-Reconstruction South. The pun is in the reference to Alexander Manly, an African American newspaper editor whose editorial criticizing lynching was a catalyst for the Wilmington race riot on which Chesnutt's novel is based. Manly was threatened and expelled from the community, an act that Chesnutt suggests is representative of cowardice and of the lack of \"manliness\" on the part of white supremacists.<PARAGRAPH>Chapter Five first introduces the reader to the injustice of Southern Jim Crow laws. Jim Crow laws, named after a play performed in the early nineteenth century demonstrating white superiority to the African American race, mandated \"Separate but Equal\" status for all African American citizens of U.S. Southern states. This meant that African Americans were forced to use separate and inferior public and private services. In the case of Dr. Miller, this means using an inferior train coach. The reader is given glimpses of the anger brewing in the African American population of Wilmington and the events that cause such anger.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-5"}