{"name": "Chapter 13", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 13<PARAGRAPH>A group of Northern men and women come to Wellington and stay at the St. James Hotel. The men are there in order to look into investing in a cotton mill; the women came to study the social condition of the South, especially \"the negro problem. They are escorted throughout the town by the gentlemen and ladies of Wellington, and the racial problem is explained in such a way that the Northerners cannot help but sympathize with the plight of the Southern whites in dealing with this \"dying race, unable to withstand the competition of a superior type. The Northerners become assured that \"no negro was ever lynched without incontestable proof of his guilt. Since the servants at the hotel seemed pleasant enough and the teachers at the mission school had been \"well-dressed, well-mannered, and apparently content with their position in life,\" the visitors are assured that \"surely a people who made no complaints could not be very much oppressed. PARAGRAPH>In order to show them a true Southern negro custom, the people of Wellington organize a \"cakewalk\" for the Northern guests to observe. The cakewalk goes wonderfully, with a large group of black contestants all dancing and entertaining the guests. Ellis happens to be at the hotel and wanders up to the banquet hall where the cakewalk is being held. He is aghast and offended by one man's \"grotesque contortions\" which he thought were \"overdone, even for the comical type of negro. Ellis recognizes the man as Sandy, old Mr. Delamere's servant. Ellis is shocked because he had witnessed Sandy as a gracious servant at the Carteret's christening party and he simply could not \"predict in advance what any one of the darker race would do under a given set of circumstances. PARAGRAPH>The week after the cakewalk, Sandy is summoned before the disciplinary committee of his church and charged with \"unchristian conduct\" in \"dancing, and participating in a sinful diversion. calculated to bring the church into disrepute and make it the mockery of sinners. Sandy denies the charges, but several witnesses swear he was there. Sandy is banished from the church until he repents, which he simply cannot bring himself to do. In order to cheer Sandy up, Tom Delamere often tells him to go take a drink of liquor and take heart that \"the devil's church has a bigger congregation than theirs, and we have the consolation of knowing that when we die, we'll meet all our friends on the other side", "analysis": "Chapters Eleven and Thirteen allow the reader to observe and compare the religious beliefs and rituals of both white and black culture. The reader receives a brief look into the rituals of white culture during the book's first chapters and the christening of the baby. Chesnutt depicts white religion as an institution of history and lineage. White families participate in religious ceremonies in order to establish their place in society. Rituals such as christenings are ceremonies of passage that all established white children must go through. In this way, white religion serves the purpose of reinforcing the social structures of separation and white supremacy.<PARAGRAPH>Chesnutt depicts African American religion in a much different way, however. The first example of this is Mammy Jane's superstitious belief in Dodie Carteret's mole. She sees the mole behind the child's ear as a portent of bad luck and evil. This mole is the mark of lynching. Mammy Jane notes in the first chapter that a black person with such a mole was bound to meet a bad end. In an attempt to negate this evil, she buries a vial of the baby's bathwater, blessed by a religious shaman in the community, in the Carteret's yard. Mammy Jane's beliefs are a fusion of Christianity, a religion inherited from white culture, and an amalgamation of folk religions brought to America by African and Caribbean slaves. Sandy, old Mr. Delamere's servant, is an example of moralistic Christianity in the black community. Sandy is Methodist, a denomination with evangelical roots that places a high priority on moral behavior. Thus, when Sandy is caught dancing in the cakewalk, he is cast out of the Methodist society and loses his moral standing in society. In this side of religion, the reader can see how religious values inherited from white culture served to create a set of moral structures that contained and restricted African American social life.<PARAGRAPH>In chapter Twelve, the reader sees the frailty of the structure that religion provides for the African American community. Josh, the man who broke his arm in a fight with a South American sailor, represents the harshest side of black life during this time. Josh's father was killed by the Ku Klux Klan. The Klan was a secret white organization begun in Tennessee shortly after the Civil War. It used tactics of terrorism and violence to intimidate both African Americans and whites who supported the Reconstruction government of the post-War South. The death of Josh's father, therefore, is an act of terrorism for which Josh remains violently bitter. Josh and his mother lived in poverty throughout their lives, a state that he has not been able to overcome. Josh's anger is born out of his social condition. He has no money and no rights. He sees his one purpose in life is to avenge the death of his father. Dr. Miller invokes the New Testament's teaching of forgiving others as opposed to the \"Mosaic law's\" prescription of an \"eye for an eye.\" This does not seem to matter to Josh, however, because his anger is too great. Chesnutt means to show the severity of the social conditions for the African American community is eroding the moral and social structures of the community.<PARAGRAPH>The cakewalk scene is an important part of the novel for understanding how African American culture played the role of both amusement for white culture and satirizing of white culture. Chesnutt clearly seeks to show that the cakewalk, a dance competition whose tradition dates back to slave plantations, is a form of black spectacle meant to entertain and demean African Americans. In the novel, it is performed in order for white Northern guests to see how happy and content the African American race is in the South. Chesnutt misses what later sociologists and historians have suggested is a satirizing of white culture in the cakewalk. The cakewalk, in its original form on the plantation, emulates and makse ridiculous the manners of white people in the plantation homes. In this way, black slaves were able to gain a sense of autonomy and self-identification in the culture of chattel slavery.<PARAGRAPH>In the cakewalk scene, Tom Delamere participates in the cakewalk, rather than Sandy, though it will be Sandy that is blamed by his religious community for his participation. Tom is able to imitate a black person through paint, clothing, and mannerism. Tom and Sandy, thus, are doubles in the novel in both a physical and a symbolic sense. Physically, Tom is able to impersonate Sandy and will, in fact, use his persona to commit murder. Symbolically, both Tom and Sandy were raised by the same family and are expected to uphold the same values and traditions. Ironically, it is Sandy who upholds the values of truth, honesty, and virtue and not Tom. Tom's decline and Sandy's moral uprightness is Chesnutt's attempt to chart the white aristocracy's decline into injustice and the African American community's moral uprightness.<PARAGRAPH>The story that Aunt Polly tells Olivia Carteret in chapter fifteen is a flashback moment that provides back-story for the novel's narrative. This story of Aunt Polly's deceit aligns her with the novel's other antagonists. Her growing dementia allows Chesnutt to further her characterization as a woman with evil and greedy motives interested only in securing the supremacy of her white family.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-11-15"}