{"name": "Chapter 19", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 19<PARAGRAPH>Ellis leaves the Morning Chronicle offices at about eleven and walks towards his boarding house down the same street as the Carteret and Delamere residences. Earlier in the day, Ellis went to the club to verify the rumor that Tom Delamere had been kicked out of the Clarendon Club. He is hopeful that Clara Pemberton will not be allowed to marry a man \"who had been proved dishonorable\" though he knows that many important people will be involved in the Delamere case and that nothing will probably come of it. PARAGRAPH>As he walks down the street, Ellis observes two men, one walking in front of the other. The second man seems to be sneaking behind the first as if he does not want to be seen. Ellis sees the first man stop under a lamppost carrying some sort of small sack and Ellis immediately recognizes the man as Sandy because of his old-fashioned coat. This first man goes into the Delamere house quietly. The second man follows him, stopping briefly under a tree and Ellis is surprised to see that this man looks just like Sandy as well. Ellis is confused over the whole matter but even that mystery cannot distract his thoughts of Clara for long. He is sure that with Tom's demise, he might have a \"fair play", "analysis": "Chesnutt continues this theme of economic justice in the next chapter focusing on Captain McBane. In Southern hierarchy, the slave drivers and poor whites of the antebellum South have retained few rights and those that they did have come only because of race. McBane represents this crude class of poor white Southerners who, by the fortune of capitalism, was able to pull himself into respectable society. Chesnutt uses an aside by his narrator in Chapter Seventeen to reveal to the reader McBane's true feelings and aspirations -- just as McBane seeks to attack the black community, he also plans to \"assault society in its citadel\" by seeking to become a member at the Clarendon Club. That Tom Delamere speaks on his behalf is only a demonstration of the decline of white aristocracy from its principles and its past.<PARAGRAPH>The narrative of Sandy's false imprisonment and near lynching in the book's middle chapters is a sub-plot of the novel's larger narrative. Chesnutt has been slowly building up this sub-plot, with Sandy's dismissal from the Methodist Church and Delamere's gambling problems as the crises leading to the murder of Mrs. Ochiltree. This sub-plot foreshadows the riot that will take place in the novel's closing chapters. It also involves several characters that will prove pivotal during the riot, most importantly Josh Green.<PARAGRAPH>Chesnutt uses this sub-plot to illustrate the common practice of false accusations that often led to the lynchings of black men. Though Polly Ochiltree is a despised woman, Chesnutt demonstrates how the town's white males will use her murder and alleged rape to persecute a black man -- any black man -- as a defense of feminine honor. Chesnutt suggests that Southern white culture used female sexuality as a veil to disguise their racial hatred and contempt. This also ties into laws of mixed marriage and mixed race children, which were considered impure. Chesnutt argues that racial purity is a delusion of hatred, not of honor.<PARAGRAPH>This \"shocking crime\" is the basis for a proposed lynching. Lynching was a crime committed by white mobs throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries against black men and, sometimes, women. The black person would be accused of a crime, often rape, and the mob would carry out a violent act of justice, usually hanging or burning at the stake, as a way to punish the criminal. The act, however, was actually meant as a mode of violent oppression and warning to the black community. The Marrow of Tradition can be seen as an argument through storytelling against the practice of lynching. According to Chesnutt, lynching is a misuse of justice because it undermines the democratic legal proceedings upheld by the public. It is a perversion of justice meant not to keep order but to subject a people to an unjust order of racial domination.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20"}