{"name": "Chapter XXI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227012805/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/screw/section7/", "summary": "Mrs. Grose wakes the governess with news that Flora is sick and terrified of the governess. According to Mrs. Grose, Flora has said nothing about Miss Jessel. The governess, surmising that Flora wants to get rid of her, constructs a plan calling for Mrs. Grose to take Flora straight to her uncle and for the governess to stay at Bly with Miles. She demands that Flora and Miles have no contact prior to Flora's departure. Mrs. Grose expresses skepticism but decides Flora must leave the place immediately. She states that Flora has been saying \"really shocking\" things about the governess, who laughs, saying she knows where Flora picked up such language. Mrs. Grose tells the governess she believes what the governess has been saying. Remembering her letter, the governess says it will arrive before Mrs. Grose does, but Mrs. Grose informs her that the letter was not sent--Miles took it. Mrs. Grose then declares that Miles must have been expelled for stealing letters. The governess reveals that the letter contained only a demand for an interview.", "analysis": "The scene in which the governess confronts Flora at the lake is a climactic moment, because it brings the conflict between Flora and the governess out into the open, with the governess's explicit accusation. Up to this time, the governess has skirted the issue, with neither the children nor the governess mentioning the names Quint or Jessel to each other. Once the governess makes her suspicions explicit, she passes the point of no return. The governess fails to elicit the confession she is hoping for, instead incurring Flora's permanent enmity and rejection. Remarkably, despite this confrontation, we still don't really know whether Flora and Miles are in league with the ghosts. Flora's reaction could be seen as a vivid and terrifying manifestation of Miss Jessel's control over her, but it could also plausibly be read as Flora's final rejection of an insane governess who has tyrannized and terrorized her with vague hints and questions. If the governess's credibility was at a high point after describing Quint in Chapter V, this episode is the high point for doubting the governess, since neither Mrs. Grose nor Flora corroborate the governess's vision of Miss Jessel"}