{"name": "Chapter 16", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210508161644/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/portrait-of-a-lady/summary/chapter-16", "summary": "Isabel is in desperate need of some alone time - a lot has happened in her world recently. Unexpectedly, Caspar Goodwood arrives. Henrietta apparently wrote to him and let him know that Isabel would be alone that evening. Kind of sneaky, sure; but, hey - that's Henrietta. Caspar Goodwood asks Isabel why she never wrote him back. She says that her silence was intentional. Oh, snap. Isabel demands that Caspar stay away from her -- for at least two years. Caspar worries that she will marry someone else. Isabel insists that she doesn't want to get married at all. Isabel tells Caspar that she has turned down an English nobleman, and admits that she sort of thought of Caspar when she did it, which gives Caspar some consolation. Caspar admits that he was invited to Gardencourt by way of Henrietta, which adds yet another tick on the old \"Why, Henrietta, Why?\" list. Caspar said that he declined because it didn't seem like the invitation was coming from Isabel. Isabel thanks him for this propriety. Isabel shudders at the thought of Caspar and Lord Warburton possibly meeting - she would have felt bad for Lord Warburton. Isabel says that she plans to stay in Europe for a while. She says that the world is small, but Caspar claims that it is too big. He feels the distance between the two of them. Isabel declares, once again, that her personal freedom is very important to her. Caspar insists that he wants to marry her in order to liberate her and, supposedly, give her more opportunities. Isabel insists that Caspar keeps his distance from her. Caspar jokes that she's going to do something criminal. Isabel doesn't deny it; she says she would like the freedom to do anything, even something atrocious. Caspar promises to reenter her life after two years. Caspar does not leave until Isabel leaves the room. Isabel retreats and collapses at the foot of her bed.", "analysis": ""}