{"name": "Chapter 26", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180407095842/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-jungle/study-guide/summary-chapters-24-27", "summary": "Jurgis keeps his job after the elections and begins a new life as a \"sporty\" young man. He wears nicer clothes now, and stays out until all hours of the night, gambling and drinking and going to parties. Soon, however, there is talk of a strike, and negotiations between the Meat Workers' Union and the packinghouse owners begin to break down. The price of meat has gone up in past years, so the unions demanded more pay. The bosses denied the pay, so word went out to all the packing plants on the East Coast and in the Mid-West, and soon the great \"Beef Strike\" begins. Jurgis walks over to see Mike Scully and asks for a job. Scully says that he cannot do it and tells Jurgis to go and break the strike and take back a job in the packinghouses. Jurgis asks if he could be in politics again, but Scully tells him no because he is now a Republican and Scully did not plan to elect a Republican again. Jurgis had not thought of this development. Jurgis then goes back to the packinghouse and tells them that he wants a job. They eagerly put him to work for three dollars a day and Jurgis becomes one of the new \"American heroes\" who shows the virtues \"of the martyrs of Lexington and Valley Forge\" since he broke the strike lines. One night, he goes out for a beer with some of his fellow strikebreakers, and a gang of union men confronts them. A fight breaks out and the next day, millions of people read of the violence in Chicago over the strikes. One day, Jurgis is asked to become a boss on the killing floors. Jurgis jumps at the opportunity and soon he is directing and giving orders to a group of unskilled laborers. The packinghouses had brought in the lowest classes of workers. They began to ship in \"Negroes\" from the South to take the place of the union men. Many of the men do not work, but the plants can do nothing because they need to break the union strike. Jurgis makes even more money by \"firing\" a man who then pays him ten dollars to keep his job. The Packers then devise a plan to cause the unions even more hardships. They negotiate a deal with the union leaders, but when the men come back to work, they intentionally deny jobs to union leaders. The leaders are so angry over this that they go back on strike, and Packingtown is \"beside itself with fury. With the return of the strike, the Packers make a new effort to bring in cheap labor from the South. Most of the new laborers are \"'green' negroes from the cotton districts of the far South\" who were the ancestors of \"savages in Africa\" and had been chattel slaves. For the first time they were free, -- free to gratify every passion, free to wreck themselves. There is great debauchery and vice in the stockyards then. These new workers care even less for the cleanliness of their work or their life. Jurgis, now a foreman, begins to dislike himself for being a scab and a traitor. He drinks even more and develops a \"villainous temper\" which he uses on his underlings. One evening, a few of the workers illegally kill a cow for meat. The police descend on the yards and begin to beat any black man they can find. Jurgis joins in the fray and begins to beat people in a saloon. Jurgis sees a police officer come in and beat up the woman barkeeper. The policeman then fills his pockets with bottles of liquor and raids the cash register. One evening, after knocking off from work early, Jurgis goes downtown where he has dinner and gets involved in gambling. He loses his money and then makes his way back home. On the way, he meets a prostitute who begins to take him into her house when a man with a lantern comes out and demands to know why there is such noise on the street. When the light reaches his face, Jurgis sees that it is Connor, the man who raped his wife. Jurgis becomes furious and begins to beat Connor again, smashing his head against a stone. A policeman comes over and beats Jurgis. The next day, in jail, Jurgis gets a five hundred dollar bail. Because he has some money now, he calls Harper to help get him out of jail. When Jurgis tells Harper what he has done, Harper tells him that he cannot help him. Connor was a close friend of Scully's and by beating him, Jurgis's \"pull had run up against a bigger pull, and he was down and out. Harper negotiates the bail down to three hundred, which Jurgis pays, and he tells Jurgis that the only way to keep his freedom is to skip town. Jurgis boards a streetcar and makes his way to the other side of Chicago with only a few dollars left to his name", "analysis": "In Chapter Twenty-Four, Sinclair notes that Jurgis's journey to the home of the rich meat packer is the greatest adventure of his life. This is an ironic statement since Jurgis finds no real adventure there and, in fact, is once again subject to a string of events that is out of his control yet is deterministic for his fate. On the surface, the descriptions of the lavish settings, the carefully prepared food, and the way in which Freddie Jones unthinkingly spends money, provides as stark a contrast as possible between the lives of the rich and the lives of the poor. It shows the disconnect between those that own the packing plants and those that work there. Freddie Jones finds it humorous that Jurgis had once worked in the plants owned by his father. Jurgis finds it just as incomprehensible, however, that his labor is used to provide such a lavish estate. Notably, neither Freddie Jones, nor Jurgis, makes broad generalized judgments of the other during the scene. The servants, who have presumably moved up in social standing because of the jobs they have been able to attain, do judge Jurgis a tramp and throw him out of the house. On another level, Sinclair recreates the setting of eighteenth-century France. In several of the passages, Sinclair has Jones allude to fine French things and to practices of the French aristocracy. For Sinclair, the French Revolution of 1789 best epitomized the collective power of the people used to overthrow the extravagances of aristocracy and to claim power. By using this scene of Chicago aristocracy, Sinclair is suggesting that a similar time will come in which the people will be made aware of the lifestyle their labor and toil produces for those that own the means of production. This, Sinclair hopes, will result in revolution. The novel continues in its narratives of descent. It should be noted the order of events into which Jurgis descends. Some critics have noted that the novel can be read as a kind of modern re-telling of Dante's Inferno, in which Dante descends through the levels of hell, witnessing the horrors of each and reasons for such punishment. Significantly, Jurgis ventures into the world of criminals, then politicians, before being turned out of each, which might mean that Sinclair sees politicians as even worse criminals than those that actively participate in criminal activities. Jurgis's time with Mike Scully's political machine is an opportunity for Sinclair to describe in detail the corrupt ways that politicians and business people controlled the political and economic systems of Chicago. Sinclair notes how neither of the major political parties, Democrats or Republicans, stand up for any kind of political value. Instead, they are each engaged in a race to hold onto the power they already have. Scully, who is head of the Democratic Party, works to elect a Republican candidate so that he himself will be able to hold onto his seat in the next election. The Republican policies will be no different from the Democratic ones and that neither party will actually work towards improving the lives of those that vote for them. This cynicism will be contrasted in future chapters with the convictions of the Socialist Party and their insistence that there be no political leadership. Jurgis soon becomes a participant of the Beef Strikes. The Beef Strikes were a series of historical strikes that occurred in the first decade of the twentieth century. On July 12, 1904, almost 30,000 packing plant workers left their jobs to strike for better wages and conditions. The packers had not willingness to concede to these demands, and so they instituted a program of bringing poor labor, many of them poverty stricken African Americans from the US South, to the plants. They had higher wages than normal workers did, even though they were unskilled. These tactics proved successful and packing plant workers such as Jurgis returned to their jobs without gaining concessions from the packers. These scenes in the novel have been criticized as being racist and inaccurate in depicting immigrant and racial strife in the stockyards. Sinclair's purpose is to show the way in which workers devolve into animals and how the conditions of Packingtown come to mirror the stockyards full of animals. These poor workers, Sinclair suggests, became sacrifices so that the packers might break the strike and, one day, produce larger profits."}