{"name": "part 3, CHAPTER 2", "summary": "CHAPTER 2 Summary Some weeks later Jude and Sue go by train from Melchester for an afternoon's outing to Wardour Castle. While wandering through the picture galleries, Jude is fascinated by the religious paintings of del Sarto, Guido Reni, Dolci and others. Sue is more interested in Lely and Reynolds. They decide to walk over the hills to another station to catch the train back, but they walk further than planned and stop at a shepherd's cottage to rest. They are told they have missed the train and they are offered accommodation for the night. When told they are not married, the shepherd arranges separate bedrooms for them. The next morning they return to Melchester. Sue is worried at having stayed away overnight without permission. She gives Jude a very recent photograph of herself. The college porter receives her with a questioning look. Notes Jude does not realize the inconsistency of his position as his friendship with Sue deepens. He is still tied to Arabella, and Sue is engaged to Phillotson. He spends a day out with her and though it is an innocent escapade, he becomes emotionally involved. The reader is shown further glimpses of Sue's nature; she does not share Jude's preference for devotional paintings or even religion. When Sue claims to be enjoying the outing and the rustic setting, Jude does not believe her. He feels she is a conventional city-bred type: \"You are quite a product of civilization. you seem to me to have nothing unconventional at all about you. But Sue violently disputes this, saying, \"you don't know what's inside me. the Ishmaelite. Indeed, these lines are significant, for although Sue is quite serious, Jude has not yet understood her or how independent and unorthodox she is. Her words are prophetic and ominous: they , like Ishmael , will be outcasts. As the angel said to Hagar: \"And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren\"", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude28.asp"}