{"name": "part 5, CHAPTER 1", "summary": "CHAPTER 1 Summary The next year in February, Jude and Sue are still at Aldbrickham, but they have not yet become lovers. Jude was divorced from Arabella two months earlier, and now news arrives that Sue's divorce from Phillotson has come through. They are now both free to marry and they both go out for a walk to celebrate their freedom. Jude raises the question of their marriage, but Sue is extremely reluctant to enter into matrimony. She prefers the present arrangement of living together as friends without any physical relations. She denounces the institution of marriage as a sordid contract and fears that such a binding agreement will extinguish all love between them. Jude laments her lack of passion and wonders about her ability to love, but he finally gives in to her and allows her to have her way. Jude continues with his job of cutting and lettering headstones, and Sue helps him with this. His new work is not as prestigious as cathedral masonry, yet he manages to support them both with his earnings. Notes Though Jude and Sue are now free to marry, Sue evades the issue. It seems that she is looking for excuses not to treat her freedom as real. She claims her freedom has been obtained under \"false pretences,\" as she and Jude were not really having an adulterous relationship. She also feels that an \"iron contract should extinguish all tenderness\" between them. Actually, she dreads the physical aspect of marriage. She wishes to continue this curious relationship with Jude; she wants them to be more than friends, but less than lovers. Jude's impatience with Sue grows. He feels that her unwillingness to make a commitment reflects an inability to love. You are as slippery as an eel,\" he says in relation to the question of marriage. Sue does not realize that a man of Jude's passionate nature can feel tormented by such an incomplete relationship. But when she becomes tearful in self-defense, Jude lets her have her way", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude43.asp"}