{"name": "part 5, CHAPTER 3", "summary": "CHAPTER 3 Summary Jude and Sue leave for the parish clerk's office to put up the banns for their marriage, but again, Sue gets cold feet about the wedding, and they decide to think it over. Hence it is delayed once more. In the meantime news comes from Arabella that she has now married Cartlett. There also comes the stunning revelation that she had a son by Jude eight months after their separation. The child will soon be arriving from Australia, and Arabella wants Jude to take charge of him. Jude and Sue, although initially dismayed, feel sorry for the unwanted child. Although he may not be Jude's, both Jude and Sue agree to keep him. Sue even considers marriage for the boy's sake, as it will make for a more natural home. The boy arrives the next night all alone from London; he is a solemn, anxious child, with an unnaturally old appearance. Sue and Jude welcome the boy and pity him. Notes Both Jude and Sue are now legally free to marry, but again they procrastinate. Sue talks about how \"hopelessly vulgar an institution legal marriage is--a sort of trap to catch a man. She feels the compulsion inherent to the bond will ruin their relationship: \"The men and women of our family are very generous when everything depends upon their goodwill, but they always kick against compulsion. Her feelings are of course partly influenced by Arabella's comments about marriage. Now the two consider themselves \"married\" in a way, although they will never celebrate their status with a formal ceremony. They have finally begun to live as \"man and wife. However, the irony lies in the fact that Arabella has brought about this \"union. Sue, unfortunately, has to assume Arabella's tactics to maintain her hold over Jude. The child that Arabella sends to them is an unusual character. He appears incredibly old, pale and wizened, quite unlike a normal child, with his unsmiling face and \"saucer eyes. Hardy most likely meant him to be a symbol  rather than a real child. Sue is seen at her best in her generous sympathy and acceptance of the boy, and she even allows him to call her mother. Jude's allusion to Job is significant. Hardy uses the symbol of Job very appropriately to describe Jude's life; like Job, his life too is filled with unexplained and undeserved suffering", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude43.asp"}