{"name": "part 3, CHAPTER 10", "summary": "CHAPTER 10 Summary Determined to overcome his passion for Sue, Jude returns to Melchester and plunges seriously into his studies for the ministry. He begins to realize that his passions conflict with his aim of being a clergyman, and he decides to take up sacred music as a hobby. He joins a church choir and is deeply moved by a new hymn the choir is learning for Easter. On learning the composer is a professional musician living at Kennetbridge, Jude decides to meet him, hoping that the man will understand his spiritual conflict. But Jude is bitterly disappointed with the meeting. The man is interested only in making money and is planning to go into the wine trade, which will be far more lucrative as a business than music. Jude returns to Melchester where he finds a letter from Sue, inviting him to lunch with her that very Sunday. He immediately forgets all his resolutions and arranges to meet her later that week. Notes The reader sees in this chapter Jude's growing self-knowledge. He realizes that his attachment to Sue is incompatible with his priestly ministry: \"his passion for Sue troubled his soul. He is tormented by doubts about his vocation: \"he was a man of too many passions to make a good clergyman. One can sense his moral indecision getting the better of him. His tendency toward childish idealism is seen in his impulsive visit to the unknown composer at Kennetbridge. In his misery and loneliness he hopes for guidance and comfort; he is \"a hungry soul in pursuit of a full soul. But the composer turns out to be a shrewd businessman, and Jude returns depressed and let down by reality. He cannot find a single person who can understand him. He has been disappointed even by Sue, who is now preoccupied with her own problems. The letter from Sue shows Jude thoroughly at her beck and call. All his good resolutions and self-discipline conveniently vanish. His response to her request is immediate. His moral indecision indicates that his calling is now in doubt. He is seen drifting away from his long-held aspirations, torn as he is between two conflicting forces", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude34.asp"}