{"name": "part 3, CHAPTER 4", "summary": "CHAPTER 4 Summary When Sue gets up, Jude gives her some supper and they begin talking. Sue does not know Latin or Greek but has read most of the classics in translation along with much other serious literature. She confides in Jude that she developed her literary preferences from a Christminster undergraduate with whom she became very friendly at the age of eighteen. She had even lived with him in London for fifteen months, although not as a lover. They would read and go on trips together, and he later became a reporter for a London newspaper. He eventually died of tuberculosis and left Sue some of his money. Jude is astonished at Sue's story and is puzzled at the strange combination of innocence and unconventionality in her. When Jude asks her to join him in his nightly prayers, she refuses vehemently, criticizing religion and the intellectual life of Christminster. She offers to make a new copy of the New Testament for Jude, arranging the books chronologically, and is particularly critical of the conventional Christian interpretation of the Song of Solomon. They are on the verge of quarreling when Sue confesses she had expected Jude to be a kind of comrade and intellectual companion. Now she finds him too conservative. Jude, in turn, wishes that like her, he could accept her as a friend and forget her sex. They both eventually drop off to sleep in their chairs, as they are overcome with fatigue. Notes This is one of the most important chapters in the novel. The dialogue between Sue and Jude reveals the great difference in their views. Jude is conventionally Christian in his beliefs, while Sue is unabashedly agnostic, attacking Jude's most cherished views. Sue refuses to pray with him, saying she does not want to seem like a hypocrite. She has rearranged the New Testament for herself  and has had the whole volume rebound. She criticizes the Song of Solomon and condemns the ecclesiastical interpretation of it as misinterpreting the Bible. She believes it should be taken literally, as a celebration of human love, not divine love. Jude is shocked and pained at her criticism and describes her as \"quite Voltairean. The extent of her reading--the Greek classics, Catullus Martial, Juvenal, Boccacio, Defoe, Smolett, Fielding, Shakespeare and the Bible--amazes him. An \"educated\" girl in Victorian times would have learned sewing, music and painting, but not philosophy. Jude finds Sue's religious views shocking. Her condemnation of Christminster's intellectual life as \"new wine in old bottles\" dismays him. Jude still feels Christminster has in it \"much that is glorious\" and still decides to take Christianity on trust: \"I suppose one must take some things on trust. Life isn't long enough to work out everything on Euclid problems before you believe it. I take Christianity. Sue's attitude to the opposite sex is one of honesty and independence. She is extremely unconventional in her emphasis on the possibility of friendship without sex. I have no fear of men. I have mixed with them almost as one of their own sex. Jude is amazed at her story of living with the London writer and yet refusing to be his mistress. She seems to be a strange mixture of boldness and innocent idealism. Sue wishes she could have Jude as a comrade. I did want to ennoble some man to high aims,\" she confesses to him. Jude also wishes they would be just friends and realizes that she is \"nearer to him than any other women he had ever met", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude28.asp"}