{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 2", "summary": "CHAPTER 2 Summary Jude starts looking for a job in Christminster, and as soon as he is offered one , he accepts it. By night he studies sincerely. He spends his money on books, pens and paper even though he cannot afford a fire. When it is too cold, he sits up reading wrapped in a greatcoat, hat and woolen gloves. He persuades his aunt to send him the portrait of Sue and she does so, but reluctantly, and with a warning not to contact Sue. But Jude learns that Sue is working in an ecclesiastical goods shop and eventually discovers her there one day at work. He does not introduce himself to her. Later, she passes him by on the street. He notices her elegance and sophistication in contrast to his own rustic ways. He still does not speak to her and resolves not to think of her except as a relative. Notes Hardy hints that Jude's dream of learning is going to be challenged by his interest in Sue. He shows Jude falling in love with his cousin before he even meets her. He puts the photograph of Sue, which Aunt Drusilla has sent him, on the mantelpiece and kisses it and immediately \"felt more at home. She seemed to look down and preside over his tea. The first time he sees her at work in the ecclesiastical shop, she is designing on zinc the word \"Alleluia. Jude is impressed with her beauty and the work she is. He has begun to idealize her. Hardy demonstrates Jude's inaccurate perception of Sue's character. He is seeing her for what he wants to her to be, and not for what she really is. When she passes him on the street, he is again enchanted by her grace and delicate charm. She is a strong contrast to Arabella. The reader is gradually shown how Jude builds a new illusion, this time about his cousin. Nevertheless, he says he will think of her only in \"quite a family way,\" because he is still married to Arabella and fears the Fawley family curse in matters of love and marriage. He tells himself that Sue will be a \"kindly star, an elevating power. a tender friend\" to him. Thus he idealizes her and does not himself realize the real extent of his fascination", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude18.asp"}