{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 11", "summary": "CHAPTER 11 Summary Jude's life has dragged on, and once again it is summer and Remembrance Day in Christminster. The weather is calm and the college festivities have begun. Arabella leaves Jude alone and goes out to see the celebration. The organ notes of the concert outside disturb Jude and he wakes up coughing. He realizes it is Remembrance Day and asks for water, but there is no one to attend to him. He quotes in great bitterness some verses from the Book of Job. Amidst the noise of celebrations outside, Jude dies alone and unattended. Meanwhile, Arabella is enjoying herself at the festival. She looks in to see how Jude is doing and when she realizes he is dead, she goes back to rejoin the celebrations, as she does not want to miss the fun of the boat races. She meets Vilbert, allows him to flirt with her and finally returns to make the arrangements for the funeral. Two days later, only Arabella and Mrs. Edlin are there to pay their last respects to Jude. Mrs. Edlin wonders if Sue will attend the funeral, since she had promised Phillotson never to see Jude again. Mrs. Edlin tells Arabella that Sue has aged a great deal since living with Phillotson as his wife, although she claims to have \"found peace. Arabella declares that Jude never forgave Sue and that Sue will never have any peace until death. Notes Hardy writes this last chapter with great care and sensitivity to establish the atmosphere. It is ironically fitting that Jude dies on Remembrance Day, the anniversary of the founding of Christminster  and also the anniversary of the death of his children. The sounds of revelry and bells and cheering outside heighten the contrast to Jude's lonely, pathetic death. The contrast is continued up to the day of the funeral. Jude lies pale and statuesque in his coffin with his old books, Virgil and Horace and the \"dog-eared Greek Testament\" on the shelves. The reverberations of the bells outside travel around the bedroom. While the university is conferring honorary degrees to noblemen outside, Jude passes away unmourned and unhonored. For all those who are victims of a cruel social order, life is a bitter descent into despair", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude58.asp"}