{"name": "part 2, CHAPTER 5", "summary": "CHAPTER 5 Summary Sue proves to be quite a success as a teacher, and Phillotson is happy with her work. But he soon begins to be interested in her as a woman. He starts giving her lessons in the evening with her landlady as chaperone. One day Sue and Phillotson take the school children to Christminster to see an exhibition of a model of the city of Jerusalem. Sue is skeptical about its accuracy and critiques Jerusalem as an ancient city. Phillotson mildly reprimands her. Then they see Jude at the exhibition. He is greatly fascinated by the model. Phillotson repeats Sue's criticism to Jude, and Sue turns to Jude for comfort. The next day, in school, Sue draws on the blackboard an accurate model, which demonstrates her remarkable powers of observation. That same day the school inspector pays a surprise visit to the school. Sue is very upset, due to her inexperience. Phillotson's protective instincts are aroused, and he revives Sue's spirits with brandy and encouraging words. A few days later Jude comes to visit her in the rain. He catches sight of Sue and Phillotson leaving the vicarage under one umbrella; Phillotson's arm is around Sue. He is overcome with jealousy and returns without calling on them. He knows Phillotson is about twenty years older than Sue and rues the fact that it was he who brought them together. Notes Events move quickly in this chapter. Phillotson is seen becoming a rival to Jude, a rival whom Jude cannot fight since he knows he is still bound to Arabella. The irony is that it was Jude who has brought this union about by getting Sue a teaching post with Phillotson. His idea was to keep Sue near him, but it seems he did not foresee the growing intimacy between Phillotson and Sue. Phillotson, of course, is entirely unaware that Jude has anything more than a cousin's regard for Sue. Sue herself is quite unconscious of the tug-of-war between the two men. She had not the least conception. of what a complication she was building up thereby in the futures of both. She is not wholly aware of the effect she has on Phillotson and Jude, although otherwise she is extremely talented and discerning, as seen in the model of Jerusalem that she draws from memory and in her overall teaching ability", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude22.asp"}