{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 9", "summary": "CHAPTER 9 Summary Arabella waits for Jude at the Christminster railway platform. She helps him home and chides him for the risk he took in going out in the rain. But Jude tells her that he did it deliberately, in the hope that the exposure would kill him. He claims that he had only two wishes: to see Sue and to die. He declares that he has accomplished both at once with his journey to Marygreen. As they walk home, he imagines that he can see the spirits of the great scholars of Christminster: Addison and Gibbon, Johnson, Walter Raleigh and Wycliffe. This vision is similar to the one he had when he first arrived in Christminster, however, this time the scholars seem to mock him. Arabella is impatient with his fantasies. At Marygreen, Mrs. Edlin has come to help Sue with the housework and finds that Sue has been scrubbing the stairs to punish herself for her sin that afternoon. She tells Mrs. Edlin of Jude's visit and that she still loves him. She declares, however, that she will make amends for what has happened by sleeping with Phillotson. Mrs. Edlin tries to dissuade her, since it is obvious that Sue is forcing herself to do this, but Sue is determined to inflict this penance on herself. She goes to Phillotson's room, wakes him up and confesses to meeting with Jude that afternoon and to the kiss they shared. But she promises she will never see Jude again. Phillotson asks her to swear on the New Testament and she does. Phillotson asks her twice if she is sure she wants to give herself to him. Although at first she recoils, Sue controls her aversion, and Phillotson lifts her up and carries her into his room. Notes Sue's giving of herself to Phillotson marks the warfare between flesh and spirit. Hardy's description of Sue's horror and revulsion and her determination to discipline herself is remarkably realistic. When Mrs. Edlin tries to reason with her, she replies, \"It is my duty. I will drink my cup to the dregs. Marriage to Sue, then, is a self-inflicted punishment; she finally submits to Phillotson not out of love, but as a penance. It does not occur to Sue to ask herself if it was morally right to have married Phillotson at all, since they share no affection, a necessary component of any relationship. Phillotson should be given credit for the many chances he gives Sue to back out. At this point the reader will notice the complete reversal of the beliefs that Sue and Jude began with. While Jude offers to run away with Sue, she is determined to carry out her penance. This is also an important indication of the nearing end of the novel", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude58.asp"}