{"name": "part 5, CHAPTER 5", "summary": "CHAPTER 5 Summary One summer day, Jude, Sue and Little Father Time go to visit The Great Wessex Agricultural Show at Stoke-Barehills. There are many visitors and sightseers, among them Arabella and her husband, Cartlett. On seeing Jude and his family, Arabella follows them without their knowledge. Arabella observes Jude and Sue together, and their obvious devotion to each other arouses her jealousy. Arabella also meets her old friend, Anny, and Physician Vilbert, from whom she buys a love potion. Jude and Sue meanwhile, unaware that they are being watched, take delight in the show, admiring a model of Cardinal College, which they themselves made. They move on to a pavilion of flowers, where Sue is enchanted by the roses. But Little Father Time does not share their enthusiasm although they try to get him interested in the exhibits. Notes The town that Hardy calls Stoke-Barehills is probably the town of Basingstoke. The chapter depicts Jude and Sue enjoying ordinary life together in harmony: \"hat complete mutual understanding in which every glance and movement was as effectual as speech. made them almost the two parts of a single whole. Arabella too notices the close bond and Jude's obvious devotion to Sue: \"He's charmed by her as if she were some fairy. It becomes clear that she is bitterly jealous. Her own marriage has grown stale, and she now seems to long for Jude again. Her friend, Anny, notices this and comments that she  always wants another man more than her own. Arabella is shrewd enough to notice that Sue lacks the capacity to love Jude as he loves her: \"I am inclined to think that she don't care for him quite so much as he does for her. She's not a particular warm-hearted creature. The fact that perhaps even Jude and Sue themselves are ignorant of this inbalance emphasizes Arabella's shrewdness. It is hinted that Arabella will attempt to get Jude back, as she suspects that he has not yet married Sue. Jude and Sue's joy is clouded only by Little Father Time's lack of enthusiasm about the exhibition. He makes an important remark on the roses at the end of the chapter: \"I should like the flowers very, very much if I didn't keep on thinking they'd be all withered in a few days. Strange as this comment may seem from a young child, it does function to foreshadow the unhappy events to come", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude46.asp"}