{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 6", "summary": "CHAPTER 6 Summary The next day in Christminster, Arabella arrives at Jude's doorstep saying she is destitute and homeless after quarrelling with her father. She begs Jude to take her in. Jude is initially reluctant, but ultimately he feels sorry for her, and he arranges with the landlord to have a bed provided for her. When she raises the issue of Sue's wedding, Jude becomes touchy. But Arabella persists and offers to get news of the wedding from Anny in Alfredston. Arabella leaves and returns with the news that Phillotson and Sue were married; she has even heard about the incident of Sue's burning a particular nightgown in an attempt to forget Jude. She also tells Jude that Sue has now resolved to accept Phillotson as her husband. Arabella declares the same feelings for Jude. Jude is miserable and depressed, and after visiting his old haunts, he goes into a tavern to drink. In the meantime Arabella patches up her quarrel with her father and arranges with him to leave the house open for herself and Jude. She goes to the tavern to find Jude, gets him to drink more, and then persuades him to come to her father's house. Jude is too drunk to know what he is doing. Notes Arabella is up to her old cunning tricks, and she schemes to get Jude back. By playing on his soft heartedness, she gets a place in his house. Then, finding that her physical charms are no longer seductive, she encourages his despair and gloom and encourages him to drink. He is soon completely in her power again. The reader is reminded of the earlier scene at the cottage in Cresscombe  when she first schemed to get him. She manages to trap Jude again, as he is totally in despair at being deserted by Sue. He is too dejected to find the strength to fight against Arabella. Although he knows he will be ruined by getting involved with her again, he probably no longer cares. He seems to have been totally broken by life", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude55.asp"}