{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 4", "summary": "CHAPTER 4 Summary Phillotson and his friend, Gillingham, had noticed Sue, Jude and the children in Christminster on Remembrance Day. One day at Alfredston, Phillotson reads about the death of the three children, and he is moved with compassion for Sue's woes. He meets Arabella again, and she tells him that the oldest child  was hers and Jude's. She also informs him that Jude and Sue had never married and that they are now separated. Arabella tells Phillotson that Sue still considers herself to be his wife. Assuming that the tragedy would have united Jude and Sue in their grief, Phillotson is astonished to hear Arabella's account. He now begins to hope for reconciliation with Sue on the grounds of her innocence at the time of the divorce. Although Gillingham advises against it, Phillotson writes to Sue and asks her to remarry him. Sue accepts this offer and one evening she goes to see Jude. They walk to the cemetery together. She tells him that she is returning to Marygreen to remarry Phillotson, as she still considers him her husband. She considers the death of the three children as a kind of warning to mend her ways. Jude is horrified at her decision, but Sue is adamant and will not listen to his protests. She even says he should return to Arabella. Notes The reader finds Arabella scheming to get Jude for herself: she is devious enough to contact Phillotson and give him Jude's address. Phillotson has been reduced to financial and social ruin, and one cannot really blame him for seeking to remarry Sue in order to regain some respectability and acceptance. Gillingham, of course, is always sensible and practical. His is the voice of reason, telling Phillotson to leave Sue alone. Sue, meanwhile, is in the grip of self-torture and blame. Her sudden obsession with religion springs from a feeling of guilt over the children's deaths, and she seeks to punish herself by \"renouncing\" Jude at the children's graves. Jude is anguished at her decision to marry Phillotson and points out that since she does not love Phillotson, it will be \"fanatic prostitution. He is amazed at her perverse reasoning: \"I never knew such a woman for doing impulsive penances, as you, Sue. As the chapter ends Jude and Sue part at the cemetery. Let our farewell be there-- beside the graves of those who died to bring home to me the error of my views,\" says Sue", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude52.asp"}