{"name": "part 4, CHAPTER 2", "summary": "CHAPTER 2 Summary The next day, Sue, having changed her mind as usual, writes Jude a note saying he must not come to Shaston. Jude writes back agreeing not to meet her. But on Easter Monday he gets a message from Mrs. Edlin saying that his aunt's health is sinking. Jude rushes to Marygreen to find Aunt Drusilla already dead. He informs Sue, who arrives for the funeral. After the funeral, Sue and Jude have a discussion about Aunt Drusilla's disapproval of marriage for the Fawleys. Sue confesses to an intense physical aversion to Phillotson, although she respects and likes him as a friend. Jude senses her unhappiness and laments the fact that he did not try to prevent her hasty marriage. Sue will not let Jude comfort her and goes off to Widow Edlin's cottage for the night. Later that night, Jude hears the cry of trapped rabbit, and, unable to bear it, he goes out and relieves it of further pain by putting it to death. He finds Sue awake at her window, and she breaks down and pours out all her suffering to him. She finally admits her mistake in not considering the full implications of marriage. Notes Sue's predicament inspires pity and sympathy, especially now that she realizes her rashness in having entered into such a marriage. Interestingly, she is quite fair to Phillotson. He is considerate to me in everything,\" she admits. But she is finally quite honest with Jude, \"though I like Mr. Phillotson as a friend--I don't like him--it is a torture to me to live with him as a husband. Jude is appalled and can hardly bear to see her suffering like this. Hardy uses the incidence of the trapped rabbit to emphasize the growing bond between Jude and Sue; both are extremely sensitive and cannot bear to hear the rabbit's cry of pain. The reader recalls Jude as a little boy, walking on tiptoe to avoid crushing the earthworms. But Hardy also employs this event as symbolic of Sue's situation. Sue's agony appears to be as great as that of the rabbit struggling to break free: \"I daresay it happens to a lot of women--only they submit and I kick. Earlier in the book , Hardy describes Jude too as trapped in a marriage; he is described as being \"caught in a gin which would cripple him", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude37.asp"}