{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 5", "summary": "CHAPTER 5 Summary During the next few years Jude diligently studies Latin and Greek on his own. He also drives a wagon delivering bread and baked goods for his aunt. Despite the poor texts and the lack of a tutor, he makes remarkable progress due to sheer perseverance and becomes familiar with Caesar, Virgil and Horace. One evening he is so overcome with the beauty of the full moon rising that he kneels on the roadside to recite a poem to Diana, the goddess of the moon and hunting. Later on he realizes that his aim is not only to be a classical scholar, but a clergyman, and he therefore turns to a study of the New Testament in Greek and the Gospels. In other words he shifts his study from secular to religious works. He begins to wonder how he could earn a living while studying in Christminster, and he decides to work as a stone mason. He gets a job as an apprentice in the town of Alfredston, and returns to Marygreen each weekend. When the chapter ends, Jude is nineteen years of age. Notes This chapter brings Jude to the end of his boyhood and shows him still persevering in his studies. The account of how Jude reads while going on his rounds is described with realism and humor. His determination to proceed with Greek and Latin is commendable since he has no teacher and must supply the translations and understand the points of grammar by himself. His decision to take up the trade of stone-cutter and mason indicates that Jude's planning is practical. He is sure that in the University town there are great buildings of stone, which will be in need of repair. As the chapter ends, Jude is a nineteen-year-old stonemason with some knowledge of Greek and Latin, a rather remarkable achievement considering his environment. But he still does not know the world and the possibilities of wickedness; his efforts have made him learned but, he is not shrewd or calculating. This is a virtue, but one that will make it difficult for him to make his way in the world", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude12.asp"}