{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 5", "summary": "CHAPTER 5 Summary Sue arrives at Phillotson's house in Marygreen. When Phillotson welcomes her with a kiss, she shrinks in revulsion. And when she sees the marriage license, she recoils in fear, yet she is determined to go through with the marriage. Gillingham joins them for supper and Sue goes to Mrs. Edlin's place for the night. When a pretty, embroidered night gown is laid out for her, Sue tears it to pieces, saying it is an adulterous thing, since she had bought it to please Jude. Mrs. Edlin, who perceives that Sue is still in love with the other man , tells her that she should not marry Phillotson. Phillotson in the meantime is uncertain whether to go ahead with the wedding, which is to be the next day. He discusses the matter with Gillingham, who advises him to stick to his plan. Mrs. Edlin comes to tell Phillotson that Sue is forcing herself to marry him and that he should call off the wedding. But Phillotson claims that Sue is marrying him of her own will. However, he has doubts about whether he should give Sue more time, but Gillingham urges him on. The next morning Sue and Phillotson are remarried in the church; Gillingham gives Sue away, as Mr. Edlin has refused to assist. When they return home, Phillotson promises Sue that he will not intrude on her privacy. Their marriage will be in name only, for the purpose of gaining social acceptance. Sue is relieved by this offer. Notes The chapter gives the reader every indication that Sue is making herself remarry Phillotson against her better instincts. She cannot kiss him, she is upset when she sees the marriage license, and she even tears her pretty nightgown to shreds. Hardy reveals her unconscious motivation: she is marrying Phillotson, whom she does not love, simply to punish herself. By marrying Phillotson, she is trying to exorcise the guilt she feels over the children's deaths. But neither religion nor law decrees that marriage is a punishment: such a marriage cannot work and is basically wrong, as Mrs. Edlin points out. Mrs. Edlin represents the voice of common sense. She bluntly tells Sue that her actual responsibility is towards Jude, to whom she is being unjust. Phillotson also has several moments of hesitation, but the temptation to straighten out his career and improve his social standing is too much, and he goes ahead with this mockery of a marriage. He has suffered much by granting Sue her freedom. The fog which shrouds Marygreen on the wedding day of Sue and Phillotson is symbolic of the blindness of the actors in this tragedy and of the misery which is bound to cloud this marriage", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude55.asp"}