{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 11", "summary": "CHAPTER 11 Summary The next day Jude and Arabella have an argument. She deliberately dirties and throws his books until Jude physically restrains her. She goes outside and exaggerates Jude's ill treatment of her. She accuses Jude of being just like his father and his aunt with regard to marriage. Later, Jude asks his Aunt Drusilla about his parents, and she confirms the story of his parents' unhappy marriage and separation and his mother's subsequent suicide. His father's sister, too, separated from her husband. Aunt Drusilla repeats that the Fawleys were not made for marriage. Jude returns home and on the way attempts to drown himself in a pond, but the ice is too thick. He then tries to forget his sorrows by drinking. Returning home, he finds that Arabella has left him. She writes a few days later to say that she is immigrating with her parents to Australia. Jude agrees to her plan. Jude goes to the hills again and stands on the old ridge track from where he had often gazed at Christminster. His childhood memories and his old ambitions are rekindled, and he decides to go to Christminster after completing his apprenticeship. Notes Arabella's behavior is typical of her selfishness; she has no more use for Jude. So she very conveniently cuts her losses and leaves. At the second-hand store, Jude finds that Arabella has even sold the photograph of himself that he gave her. He buys it back and burns it in anger. This convinces him to let go of any feelings he has for her. In a fit of depression, Jude tries to drown himself. And for the first time, the reader witnesses him trying to drown his sorrows in drink. Later he goes back to the old ridge-track. Hardy makes use of this setting in a symbolic way. This was the spot where he had looked, entranced, at Christminster. It is further reported that his parents separated near the same spot. His aunt relates that there was a gallows in the vicinity, and this detail is in some way connected with Jude's family history. He learns the connection later in his life from Mrs. Edlin. It is now revealed that this is also the place where he as a young boy he had inscribed his initials on a milestone, indicating his aspirations of going to Christminster. At the end of the chapter Jude's hopes are renewed. He has been through a disastrous marriage, but that obstacle has now been removed. Young and resilient as he is, he seems determined to proceed to his old ideal of Christminster. PART II CHAPTER 1 Summary Jude is seen three years later on his way to Christminster after completing his apprenticeship as a stone mason. Before leaving Marygreen, he saw a portrait of his pretty cousin, Sue Bridehead, who his aunt tells him is now in Christminster. Jude is at least partly inspired to pursue his goal in the city by Sue. He enters Christminster on foot in the evening and gets lodgings in a cheap suburb, Beersheba. He begins to explore the city at night. He has read and thought so much about Christminster that he imagines the ghosts of all the great scholars who have studied there are talking to him. When he falls asleep that night, he dreams of them. And when he awakens, he remembers he has yet to meet his old teacher. Notes Jude finally enters the city of his dreams. He goes to the city on foot by choice; probably he romantically thinks of himself as a pilgrim, humbly entering Christminster, the Temple of Learning. He is enraptured with the city and feels the presence of all the great men who have studied there. None of them are mentioned by name, but readers in Hardy's time would have recognized Hardy's contemporaries: Mathew Arnold, Edward Gibbon and Cardinal Newman. In his nighttime walk he sees a procession of such intellectuals, and even when he goes to bed he muses about them. But it is significant that Hardy says that the \"ultimate impulse\" to come to Christminster was emotional, not intellectual. Jude had seen a portrait of Sue Bridehead, his cousin, but his Aunt Drusilla refused to give it to him, telling him only that Sue lived in Christminster. Hardy notes that the portrait \"haunted him and ultimately formed a quickening ingredient\" in his intention of following his schoolmaster to Christminster. The reader is given a hint that his interest in his cousin Sue may be the cause of future trouble to Jude", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude18.asp"}