{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 3", "summary": "CHAPTER 3 Summary The death of the three children has left Sue emotionally scarred. She begins to develop an obsession about religion and her own sinfulness. She regards the tragedy as a judgment of God and begins to talk of \"self-renunciation\" and starts attending the church of St. Silas. Jude is amazed and disturbed at Sue's strange behavior and proposes that they marry. But Sue refuses, saying she is still morally bound to Phillotson, and that she and Jude ought not to behave as man and wife. One day while Jude and Sue are debating such matters, Arabella turns up. She has read of the tragedy in the papers, and after going to visit Little Father Time's grave, she has come to pay them a visit. While they are talking, Sue suddenly denies that she is Jude's wife and leaves the room. Arabella tells Jude that she is now living at Alfredston with her father, who has returned from Australia. Later, after Arabella leaves, Jude goes to look for Sue, and he finally finds her in St. Silas' church where she lies prostrate before a cross. She tells Jude that the death of the children is a divine punishment for her sins and that she is still Phillotson's wife. They discuss their relationship, and Sue admits that she gave herself to him  because she was jealous of Arabella. Jude cries out that Sue does not and never has loved him as he loves her. He begs her not to abandon him lest he fall into the temptation to drink. But Sue is adamant and insists that they live separately because her conscience demands it, although they can still be friends and meet occasionally. Notes Sue and Jude have traveled in opposite directions and have now adopted each other's original stance: Sue is turning to religion, and Jude is more than ever a part of the secular world. The tragedy of the children's deaths affects each of them differently: Jude is now hardened and skeptical about religion and tradition, while Sue is exhibiting self-torment and guilt. Sue's new feeling regarding the indissolubility of their former marriages and divine retribution reveal her mental state: \"We should mortify the flesh--the terrible flesh--the curse of Adam. Jude wonders what has come over her: \"She was no longer the same as in the independent days when her intellect played like lambent lightning over conventions and formalities, which he at the time respected, though he did not now. He is angry and bitter at her, and says, \"After converting me to your views on so many things, to find you suddenly turn to the right-about like this. But nothing can move Sue now. Finally, Jude makes an impassioned plea: \"Do not do an immoral thing for moral reasons. Jude displays honesty and goodness of heart, but his fate is the same as that of the Christminster undergraduate in his relationship with Sue. In this chapter Hardy presents lengthy discussions on marriage, sexual relations and religion in the conversations between Sue and Jude", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude52.asp"}