{"name": "part 2, CHAPTER 1", "summary": "CHAPTER 1 Summary Jude is seen three years later on his way to Christminster after completing his apprenticeship as a stone mason. Before leaving Marygreen, he saw a portrait of his pretty cousin, Sue Bridehead, who his aunt tells him is now in Christminster. Jude is at least partly inspired to pursue his goal in the city by Sue. He enters Christminster on foot in the evening and gets lodgings in a cheap suburb, Beersheba. He begins to explore the city at night. He has read and thought so much about Christminster that he imagines the ghosts of all the great scholars who have studied there are talking to him. When he falls asleep that night, he dreams of them. And when he awakens, he remembers he has yet to meet his old teacher. Notes Jude finally enters the city of his dreams. He goes to the city on foot by choice; probably he romantically thinks of himself as a pilgrim, humbly entering Christminster, the Temple of Learning. He is enraptured with the city and feels the presence of all the great men who have studied there. None of them are mentioned by name, but readers in Hardy's time would have recognized Hardy's contemporaries: Mathew Arnold, Edward Gibbon and Cardinal Newman. In his nighttime walk he sees a procession of such intellectuals, and even when he goes to bed he muses about them. But it is significant that Hardy says that the \"ultimate impulse\" to come to Christminster was emotional, not intellectual. Jude had seen a portrait of Sue Bridehead, his cousin, but his Aunt Drusilla refused to give it to him, telling him only that Sue lived in Christminster. Hardy notes that the portrait \"haunted him and ultimately formed a quickening ingredient\" in his intention of following his schoolmaster to Christminster. The reader is given a hint that his interest in his cousin Sue may be the cause of future trouble to Jude", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude18.asp"}