{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 6", "summary": "CHAPTER 6 Summary One Saturday afternoon Jude is returning from Alfredston to Marygreen. He mentally takes stock of and is rather pleased at his progress: his fluency in Latin and Greek, his familiarity with Euclid and his knowledge of Roman and English history. He indulges in a pleasant daydream of becoming a D. D. and eventually rising to the rank of bishop or archdeacon. He suddenly feels something cold hit him on the ear, and then he notices a nearby pig farm. One of the girls working there has thrown a pig part at him to get his attention, and he enters into conversation with her. She is Arabella Donn and her father raises pigs for a living. Jude is attracted to her, and she manages to extract a promise from him to meet with her the next day. Jude is half-surprised at himself, but the impulse of sexual attraction is something new to Jude and it overwhelms him. Christminster no longer occupies the center of his thoughts. Notes In this chapter Hardy introduces the first of many conflicts that will radically challenge Jude as he proceeds along his career path. The instincts of the flesh come into brutal collision with Judy's goals of education and self-improvement. Hardy here prepares the reader for the confrontation of a would-be scholar and clergyman with the demands of the weak flesh. Jude encounters the awakening of sexual emotions with Arabella. She is the first woman in his life and unfortunately the wrong type for him. A part of him recognizes that intellectually, that there is something in her \"quite antipathetic to that side of him which had been occupied with literary study and the magnificent Christminster dream. But Jude is too weak to resist although he knows better. Hardy stresses the naivete and inexperience of Jude. In the words of Arabella's friend, Anny \"he's as simple as a child. he looked at  as if he had never seen a woman before in his born days. Arabella's earthy coarseness and vulgarity is emphasized through her occupation of tending pigs. It is quite clear that she deliberately sets out to trap Jude. The reader is informed of how without Jude noticing it she gives an \"adroit little suck\" to her cheeks, resulting in a \"production of dimples at will. Anny tells Arabella that Jude is hers if she can set herself to \"catch him the right way. As a result of this newly found passion, Jude will temporarily lose sight of the important goal of pursuing a serious education at Christminster. While a consciousness of his sexuality is part of maturity, it also introduces a conflict in his life. The abrupt manner in which he is roused from his world of dreams is worth noting. Something as concrete and earthy as a pig part stands for the basic instincts against which he must now fight", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude12.asp"}