{"name": "part 4, CHAPTER 3", "summary": "CHAPTER 3 Summary The next day Sue is to return to Shaston, and they set out for the railroad station. Before they part, Jude and Sue embrace and kiss. Jude returns to Marygreen and realizes that he is facing a conflict: he cannot continue to be attached to Sue and still hope to be ordained a clergyman. He admits with painful honesty that he is not fit to hold any position in the church. That evening he burns all his books of theological works and feels relieved. Sue returns to Shaston desperately worried and miserable. That night she sleeps in a stuffy closet in order not to share the same bedroom with Phillotson. The following morning she asks Phillotson if she can live separately from him. Phillotson is astonished and does not understand her request. He wonders why she married him at all. Sue admits that it was her fault in not breaking off the engagement. Further, she confesses that she had agreed to marry him only because she was afraid of the scandal at the training college. She begs him to release her from the bond. Phillotson is horrified and accuses her of having been in love with Jude all this time. During the day Phillotson and Sue correspond by exchanging notes while teaching in their different classrooms. Phillotson finally consents to let Sue live separately in his own house, but not with Jude, as she had wanted. Notes In Hardy's words \"the kiss was the turning point in Jude's career. Jude abandons his studies because he realizes that as long as he continues his relationship with Sue, it is \"glaringly inconsistent\" to pursue his goal of a priestly career. He recalls that his first goal-- toward an academic career--was checked by a woman. Similarly, his second aspiration has also been checked by a woman. He cannot live with the thought of being an impostor. The act of burning his books symbolizes the end of his religious aspirations. It also gives him some relief: \"The sense of being no longer a hypocrite to himself. he might go on believing as before but he professed nothing. From now on his behavior to Sue will be quite consistent: \"In his passion for Sue he could now stand as an ordinary sinner and not as a whited sepulchre. Sue has her own emotional revelations. The reader is given a clear indication that she is not really cut out for marriage: \" quite unfitted by temperament and instinct to fulfill the conditions of the matrimonial relation with Phillotson, possibly with scarce any man. But for her too this is a turning point. By asking for a separation, she shows she is finally ready to give up on a marriage that should never have taken place. Her arguments are almost like a lecture, with quotations from John Stuart Mill, until Phillotson is driven to protest. Phillotson remarks, \"What must a woman's aversion be when it is stronger than her fear of spiders,\" when he sees the closet where Sue has spent the night rather than share his bedroom. His confusion and anguish at Sue's behavior will force him to see that the marriage cannot continue", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude37.asp"}