{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 10", "summary": "CHAPTER 10 Summary Jude recovers temporarily, but after Christmas, his health begins to decline again. Arabella is irritated at having to nurse him. But once she realizes he is seriously ill, she offers to send for Sue. Jude protests that Sue has chosen her own course and that he does not want to see her again. However, some days later, Mrs. Edlin comes to visit him, and Jude inquires about Sue. Mrs. Edlin reveals that Sue and Phillotson are now living as man and wife, ever since Jude's visit to Marygreen. Jude is horrified. He realizes Sue is doing this as a penance. He recalls the good times they shared and the great changes they have gone through. Then he speaks bitterly of the conventions of society, which have brought this ruin on them. As he grows more and more restless, he is overcome by a fit of coughing. Physician Vilbert calls on him, but Jude is enraged at his appearance and insults him. On his way out Vilbert meets Arabella, who offers him some wine into which she has mixed the \"love philter\" she bought from him at the agricultural show. She allows Vilbert to kiss her and flirts with him. Notes In his weak condition, Jude's thoughts take him back to the past as he tries to understand the meaning of his life. He laments his inability to follow his aim of scholarship. He thinks of Sue and how her intellect had dazzled him and how tragedy has broken her mind and will. He wonders if acute suffering affects men and women differently, making woman more submissive and conventional. As he tells Mrs. Edlin, \"the time was not ripe for us. Our ideas were fifty years too soon to be any good to us. Arabella's overtures to Vilbert are amusing and typical of her calculating nature. As she says, \"weak woman must provide for a rainy day. one must take the old if one can't get the young. She is obviously thinking of her future once Jude is gone. Time and again she has proved to be an opportunist", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude58.asp"}