{"name": "part 5, CHAPTER 4", "summary": "CHAPTER 4 Summary The next day, Jude and Sue discover that the boy is called by the nickname, Little Father Time, because he looks so old. Sue remarks that his face is like the mask of Melpomene. They decide to have him christened on their wedding day. Widow Edlin is invited for the wedding, and she brings a number of gifts with her. Unfortunately, the night before the wedding, she narrates a gloomy tale about a Fawley ancestor who was hanged at the gallows near the Brown House. The story casts an aura of sadness over the listeners. The next day Jude and Sue set off for the registry office where they are to be married. But Sue is depressed by the squalid surroundings. They retreat in horror and instead go to the parish church, where they witness another wedding. This is a normal wedding, but Sue feels she cannot go through this kind of ceremony again. They keep debating the issue and decide that the marriage contract is one that will kill all spontaneity in their relationship. They return home and inform the confused Mrs. Edlin that they have not yet tied the knot. Notes For one of Sue's temperament, her dismay at the proceedings at the registry office is understandable, because in those days a registered marriage was not the usual thing for decent couples. But her aversion even to a church wedding is more important to the novel as a whole: \"The flowers in the bride's hand are sadly like the garland which decked the heifers of sacrifice in old times,' she remarks morbidly. She tells Jude, \"let us go home without killing our dream,\" claiming, \"if we are happy as we are, what does it matter to anybody. Sue's words reveal the nature of her relationship with Jude: as a couple, they can never abide by tradition and socially accepted norms. Mrs. Edlin's robust common sense and cheerfulness provide a distinct contrast to the mood of Jude and Sue. She is amazed at their hesitation regarding marriage: \"Nobody thought o' being afeard o' matrimony in my time. Mrs. Edlin is the local \"historian\" of the village and relates important parts of their family's past. From her, the reader is reminded of the unhappiness endemic to the Fawleys, as when she recounts  how a relative of theirs was hanged", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude46.asp"}