{"name": "part 2, CHAPTER 6", "summary": "CHAPTER 6 Summary On Sunday Jude goes to Marygreen to visit Aunt Drusilla, who is now bed-ridden. He cannot help talking about Sue and Aunt Drusilla immediately warns him to stay away from his cousin. His aunt's nurse recounts tales about Sue as a child: her skill at recitation, her cleverness and her unconventional ways. Sue comes across as a fiercely independent child. Jude, on his way back to Christminster, meets some villagers who inquire as to whether he has succeeded in entering the university. They imply that such places are only for those with money. Jude is spurred to make inquiries at Christminster and writes to several masters of colleges for advice. He waits several days but on receiving no response becomes dejected. In the meantime he hears that Phillotson is moving to a bigger school in mid-Wessex, and Jude wonders what implications this transfer will have. Jude starts making indirect inquiries about entering the university and realizes that an open scholarship is the only solution. But he would need a good deal of coaching for that to be possible. He would not be able to compete with those who have had the benefit of trained teachers all their lives. Buying\" his way into the university is impossible; it would take him fifteen years. The task seems hopeless and he realizes how impractical his illusions have been. He has been stumbling in the dark with his private study. Finally, one night he gets a note from one of the heads of a college. He advises Jude to stick to his own trade. Although he knows this is sensible advice, Jude is unable to accept it. In utter despair he goes out and starts drinking. He wanders about, enters a music-hall concert and realizes that there are two Christminsters: the population of students and teachers inhabiting the prestigious colleges which forbid him entry and the other Christminster, made of ordinary, common folk and workers. In a fit of rebellion he scrawls a few lines from Job on the walls of the college to which he was denied entry. Notes Sue's character is established by the stories about her childhood. Hardy uses a minor character, Aunt Drusilla's nurse, to show the reader some revealing traits about Sue. Her artistic temperament and dramatic skills are seen in her fondness for elocution. She also mentions her ability to \"do things that only boys do as a rule,\" like going down to the pond as the only girl among twenty boys. Aunt Drusilla speaks of her as a \"pert little thing\" with \"tight-strained nerves. Jude suffers another setback in this chapter when he receives the curt note from the master of Biblioll College. It signifies the crumbling of all his dreams and hopes. He realizes that what he has worked so hard for all these years was beyond him, and not necessarily because of any lack of ability. Here, Hardy indirectly criticizes social and educational structures, which are such that a man like Jude--bright, above average, but poor--has no opportunity to prosper. Jude's scrawl on the wall of Biblioll College is a cry of despair", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude25.asp"}