{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 9", "summary": "CHAPTER 9 Summary Two months later Jude tells Arabella that he plans to go away to Christminster. He wants to break off his relationship with her. But Arabella bursts into tears and tells Jude she is pregnant with his child. Jude is stunned at this news. He becomes aware of how his cherished plans of pursuing a university education will have to be forgotten. Being an honorable man, he agrees to a quick marriage. Jude takes his bride to a small cottage on the downs. Jude gradually discovers that Arabella is not the simple country girl he had assumed her to be. Her abundant brown hair is false, as are her dimples, and she has even served as a barmaid at Aldbrickham. Arabella later tells one of her friends that she has only pretended pregnancy and jokes about it. Later, Arabella confesses to Jude that she had been mistaken about the pregnancy. Jude is dumbstruck with surprise. It is only then that he realizes how he has been tricked into an unnecessary marriage. Notes The reader witnesses how Jude's honest, unsuspecting nature leads him to tragedy. Arabella plays on his essential innocence. Jude is quite aware that the marriage is a mistake: \"he knew too well in the secret center of his brain that  was not worth a great deal as a specimen of womankind. Yet he wants to do the honorable thing. The people in the parish, too, remark \"what a simple fool young Fawley. Although he is considered to be naive, he is trying to be honest and conscientious. Jude's eyes are opened when he realizes that the pregnancy was a sham. His whole life has been ruined for nothing; his marriage is compared to being \"caught in a gin which would cripple him, if not her also, for the rest of a lifetime. Hardy here is making a satirical dig at the institution of marriage. The discovery of Arabella's former occupation as a barmaid, her wig and her faked dimples all are symbolic manifestations of Arabella's falsity. Jude's dislike of artificiality is consistent with his honest, trusting nature. At the end of the chapter, the reader sees Jude finally disillusioned, and it is a pitiful sight. His young life has been altered due to his inexperience and a temporary weakness. Arabella, of course, is triumphant at having acquired a husband. She and Anny gloat over her \"stroke of genius' in tricking Jude", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude15.asp"}