{"name": "part 4, CHAPTER 5", "summary": "CHAPTER 5 Summary Sue takes the train to Melchester where Jude is waiting. He enters the compartment and tells her that they are going on to Aldbrickham, which is a large town where they will not be recognized. He has given up his cathedral work in Melchester. Jude tells Sue that Arabella has asked him for a divorce so that she can marry her Australian husband legally. When he tells Sue that he has booked them a single room at the Temperance Hotel in Aldbrickham, she is alarmed. She explains that she is not ready for that level of intimacy. Jude gives in but wonders if she is more \"conventional\" than she seems or if she simply does not love him. They continue to argue, and Jude is puzzled by Sue's attitude. When they reach Aldbrickham, they are forced to look for another hotel, and the one they find turns out to be the inn where Jude spent the night with Arabella a month earlier. Sue learns this from the maid and becomes upset and jealous. Jude points out that it is unreasonable for her to be jealous when it was she who decided that they should remain only friends. Jude argues further that she asks for everything of him but gives nothing. Sue is reassured when he tells her that at the time, he did not know that Arabella was already married to someone else. They finally make peace after Sue quotes some lines from Shelley. Notes The coincidence of Sue and Jude staying at the same inn where Jude and Arabella had spent the night seems a bit contrived. Even the room Sue is given is the same one Jude and Arabella had occupied. The reader learns more about Sue's character here. She has caused an upheaval in the lives of two men, yet she seems unaware of the tremendous sacrifices both Jude and Phillotson have made for her. She seems rather self-centered, taking Jude's adoration for granted: \"I resolved to trust you to set my wishes above your gratification. Nevertheless, Sue's protest against intimacy is a reminder of how much a woman in Victorian society has to lose in a situation of this nature. Jude is puzzled at her strange refusal to be lovers. But while becoming a little exasperated with her, he is beginning to understand her strange aversion to sex. He thinks of the Christminster undergraduate and scholar , and wonders if his fate is to be the same. Sue, when accused of being conventional, defends herself by ascribing her reluctance to being part of a \"woman's natural timidity when the crisis comes. My nature is not so passionate as yours,\" she tells Jude. The lines she quotes from Shelley are revealing and significant: There was a Being whom my spirit oft Met on its visioned wanderings far aloft A seraph of Heaven, too gentle to be human Veiling beneath that radiant form of woman She identifies herself with the ethereal Being in the poem; she wants Jude to be an ideal soul mate, and she shrinks from a physical relationship, which she condemns as vulgar. Jude perceives this, but he loves her so much that he is ready to abide by any conditions she puts forth", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude40.asp"}