{"name": "part 5, CHAPTER 7", "summary": "CHAPTER 7 Summary Over two years have passed. Jude and Sue lead a wandering life, stopping wherever Jude can find work as a mason. However, he refuses to do any church work. At the little town of Kennetbridge, Arabella and Anny arrive one day. Arabella is now widowed and is in mourning and has come to Kennetbridge to see the laying of a foundation stone of a new chapel. She claims that she has now turned to religion for consolation. She suddenly spots Sue and Little Father Time selling cakes and gingerbread at a stall at the fair. She questions Sue and learns that Jude was very ill that winter, and they have therefore tried their hand at baking in an attempt to earn a living. Sue now has two children of her own and is expecting a third. The cakes Jude makes are shaped like Christminster colleges, with towers and pinnacles and traceried windows, indicating that Jude still has a passion for Christminster. Notes Jude and Sue's condition has deteriorated and they now live a hand-to-mouth existence. Jude's illness has forced him to give up stone work, and his early experience as a boy with Aunt Drusilla's baking now helps him to earn a living. But his old love and admiration for Christminster is still evident in the cakes that Jude bakes. They are shaped like the buildings of Christminster, and Sue remarks that Christminster is a \"fixed vision\" with him, which he will never be cured of. She says he still considers it a \"center of high and fearless thought,\" a point of view she obviously does not share; she calls it a \"nest of school masters\" with a \"timid obsequiousness to tradition. The reader can observe a trace of the old Sue in this criticism. Arabella's widowhood is structurally important, but her sudden shift to religion is not completely convincing. She is as selfish and shallow as before", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude49.asp"}