{"name": "part 5, CHAPTER 6", "summary": "CHAPTER 6 Summary Jude and Sue's postponement of their marriage is noticed by the neighbors at Aldbrickham, who begin to gossip about them. Little Father Time is teased at school. Sue and Jude decide to go off to London for a few days and then return, pretending they have been married there. But the scandal continues, and the neighbors begin to snub them. Jude and Sue are deeply hurt and think of moving away. In the meantime Jude gets a new job at the country church nearby, where he has to restore the lettering of the Ten Commandments. Sue, who is now expecting a baby, goes to help Jude with his work. Unfortunately, the churchwarden and the cleaner recognize them, and they begin to gossip. Eventually, Jude loses his job because of the rumors. Later he is forced to resign from the committee of the local Artisans Mutual Improvement Society, whose members also hear of the scandal. Sue and Jude finally decide to move away from Aldbrickham, and they arrange to auction off their furniture. Although they are not certain where they will go, they decide against going to London. Jude cannot even decide what he will do for a living, since he has already given up on his church work. During the sale Jude and Sue overhear much of the local gossip about their unmarried status and are appalled. Sue is upset at the sale of her pet pigeons to the poulterer, and passing by the shop later, she sets them free. Her remarks on nature's law of \"mutual butchery\" leave Little Father Time very disturbed. Notes The short spell of happiness in their lives, as portrayed in the previous chapter, is over. Jude and Sue now face many hardships. The neighbors snub them, Little Father Time is taunted at school, and Jude loses his commissions and his job at the church, until finally they have no choice but to leave Aldbrickham. Sue's action in freeing the trapped pigeons is typical of her emotional impulsiveness. The incident is also symbolic of Sue's constant desire for freedom from the laws of a society, which harshly punishes those who do not conform. She made a mistake in marrying Phillotson and again, she has made a mistake in not marrying Jude. It is poor Little Father Time who seems to suffer the most", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude46.asp"}