{"name": "part 2, CHAPTER 4", "summary": "CHAPTER 4 Summary Jude once again sees Sue in church with Miss Fontover but again does not present himself to her. He is uneasy about his growing attachment to her. Meanwhile, Sue has heard of Jude's presence in Christminster and visits him at work, but finding him out, she leaves a friendly note for him. Jude sends her a note in reply and they arrange to meet. Sue tells him she will be leaving Christminster. Jude talks of his old schoolmaster, Phillotson, and discovers from Sue that he is still a village teacher at Lumsdon, outside Christminster. Jude is disappointed that Phillotson has remained only a teacher and not graduated from the university. They decide to call on Phillotson together. Jude's old schoolmaster barely remembers him, but the friendship is renewed. Although Jude reminds him that his path has always inspired him, Phillotson informs Jude that he has given up all hope of ever enrolling in the university. Phillotson also mentions that he is in need of a pupil-teacher. On their way back to Christminster, Sue tells Jude that she quarreled with Miss Fontover over her pagan statues. As a result of this argument, she has to leave. Jude is anxious to keep Sue near him and suggests a career in teaching while working as Phillotson's assistant. He returns to Phillotson the next day and recommends his cousin Sue as an assistant teacher. Phillotson readily agrees to this suggestion. Notes The reader sees Jude in this chapter growing more aware of his interest in Sue and at the same time becoming uneasy about it. After seeing her in church he realizes she is a woman who is \"beginning to influence him in such an indescribable manner. To his \"moral consternation,\" he finds himself \"thinking more of her instead of less of her. He realizes that for a married man like him, the situation is an unorthodox, \"immoral\" one. In this chapter Jude and Sue meet face to face for the first time. Jude is surprised at what a contrast Sue is to Arabella. Although Sue is extremely vivacious and friendly, she does not flirt with him. Even the situations in which he meets Sue are the complete opposite of those in which he met with Arabella. Unlike Arabella, Sue does not scheme to steal away with Jude. While Arabella was quite indifferent about where they met, Sue is very sensitive to her surroundings. The most important distinction is that while Arabella wanted Jude as a lover, Sue just expects friendship from him. On the way back to Christminster, Jude realizes he is now more than ever in love. He knows that \"while her sentiments towards him were those of the frankest friendliness, he loved her more than before becoming acquainted with her. The reader can also notice Sue's practical comments regarding Christminster; she does not share Jude's romantic love for the university. Jude wonders how she can bear to leave the city of Newman, Pusey, Ward and Keble. Sue's pragmatic reply is that they are not all that important in the history of the world. Many more such differences will subsequently crop up between them. The place where Jude and Sue meet is also significant. It is close to a cross, which marks a place of martyrdom. The reference is to an area in Oxford where heretics and those holding unorthodox views were burned at the stake. The symbolism is clear and rather pointed: the relationship between Jude and Sue is overshadowed by a tragic omen", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude22.asp"}