{"name": "part 2, CHAPTER 7", "summary": "CHAPTER 7 Summary The next day, in a state of deep depression, Jude goes to a tavern and becomes very drunk. Wallowing in self-pity, he criticizes the university and its scholars and boasts of his own learning. When asked to prove his claims, he recites the Nicene Creed in Latin. He finally leaves the pub and goes out walking. Utterly dejected, he decides to visit Sue at Lumsdon, which he reaches late at night. Sue listens to him as he confesses his misdeeds. Then she encourages him to get some sleep. At dawn, Jude feels ashamed of having come to see her and decides to slip away. On returning to Christminster, he finds he has lost his job and decides to go to his aunt's house at Marygreen. Once there, he realizes his folly and has a talk with a clergyman who is visiting his aunt. The clergyman, Mr. Highridge, suggests that Jude could train to enter the church as a licentiate, rather attend the university. Notes This chapter is a kind of descent into hell for Jude, \"the hell of conscious failure, both in ambition and in love. His great dreams of Christminster have come to nothing, and his hopes for attachment to Sue are doomed as well. The scene in the tavern in all its sordidness depicts the bitterness that has crept into Jude's heart. Although he flies to Sue for comfort, she cannot really do anything for him. The interview with the curate, Mr. Highridge, leaves the reader with some hope that although the university doors are closed to Jude, he may still have a career in the church if he shows enough strength of purpose. PART III CHAPTER 1 Summary The reader sees Jude now abandoning his plans of learning and attaining scholarship. He has decided on a humbler career in the church, entering as a licentiate and probably rising no higher than an ordinary curate. He realizes that his earlier plans had originated from selfish ambition, whereas his new path will be one of humble service. He remains at Marygreen doing local jobs, putting up and lettering headstones. A letter arrives from Sue, who writes that she is going to enter a Teacher Training College at Melchester. Jude decides that he, too, will go to Melchester and enter a theological college there. Finally, after Christmas, Sue sends him another frantic letter saying she is lonely and miserable in Melchester and asking him to come. She also expresses her regret at having allowed Phillotson to influence her to move to Melchester. Jude immediately packs his things and leaves for Melchester. This time he has decided to tell her the truth about himself and Arabella and to find out about her feelings for Phillotson. Sue impulsively tells him of her engagement to Phillotson and their plan to marry when her training is over. Jude is upset, but determined to continue seeing Sue. He continues with his job as a stonecutter, first finding work at a cemetery, and later the job which he most loves, the repair and restoration of the Cathedral. He takes lodgings nearby, buys books and settles down to a study of theology. Notes The reader sees Jude settling down to a sober life of study and work. Yet his decision to go to Melchester is motivated entirely by Sue's presence there. Aware of his own impulses, he realizes that contact with her is dangerous. However, his self-deception is evident when he convinces himself that he will \"learn to love her only as a friend and kinswoman. The reader learns more about Sue in this chapter. She tends to be a person governed by impulse, writing the rash letter to Jude and then regretting it. Her engagement to Phillotson also was probably done on impulse, yet she refuses even to consider the possible consequences, saying: \"What does it matter about what one is going to do two years hence. She finds the discipline and restrictions of the training college stifling. She speaks \"with all the bitterness of a young person to whom restraint was new. When Jude suggests sitting in the Cathedral after lunch, she answers in a slightly derisive manner: \"I think I'd rather sit in the railway station. That's the center of the town now. The Cathedral has had its day. She has a tendency to scoff at the things that Jude holds dear, and Jude begins to notice this", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude25.asp"}