{"name": "part 3, CHAPTER 7", "summary": "CHAPTER 7 Summary A day or two later Jude gets a letter formally signed by Sue, informing him of her plan to marry Phillotson in a few weeks. Jude is stunned by the news and suspects that his own revelation of his marriage may have triggered this rash decision. Before he can collect his wits, she writes a second letter requesting him to give her away at the wedding. She adds a few sarcastic comments on the custom of giving away the bride. Jude agrees and offers to put her up at his lodgings for the required ten days. Sue lives in the same house with him, on a different floor, sharing an occasional meal. Her manner is strained and nervous. Jude is convinced she is marrying Phillotson on the rebound, but although he would like to warn her against the marriage, he is helpless. On the morning of the wedding day, Sue insists on entering the church of St. Thomas with Jude for a kind of rehearsal. She wants to see the aisle where she will walk down with her husband. This and the actual wedding are extremely painful for Jude. After the wedding Sue and Phillotson have a meal at Jude's lodgings and then the newly wedded couple leaves. Sue appears to want to convey something to Jude, but she does not speak and hurries away. Notes Jude is shattered by the news of Sue's impending wedding: \"It passed across Jude like a withering blast. While suspecting that she is doing this because of his revelation of his own marriage, he feels Sue does not really know what marriage means and does not see the enormity of the step she has so hastily taken. However, he himself tries to be heroic: \"He determined to play the Spartan, to make the best of it and support her. Her request that he give her away seems an unnecessary cruelty. Jude, unable to bear it, tells her not to be merciless. In fact the whole ceremony is quite an ordeal for Jude. Halfway through the service, he wishes he had not undertaken the business of giving her away. How could Sue have had the temerity to do a cruelty possibly to herself as well as to him. he wonders. Sue's actions betray her insensitivity at the suffering she is imposing on Jude. After the ceremony, when she and Phillotson are leaving Melchester, there is \"a frightened look in her eyes\" as if she is now aware of the rashness of her decision. Naive and innocent about marriage as Sue is, she is in for a rude awakening. Jude wonders again if the mistake she is making is retaliation, a way of \"asserting her independence\" from him", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude31.asp"}