{"name": "part 3, CHAPTER 6", "summary": "CHAPTER 6 Summary The chapter begins with Phillotson, who is now the master of a large boys' school in Shaston. Apart from his work at school, he is also interested in Roman-Brittanic antiquities. He is madly in love with Sue and keeps thinking of her and going over the few letters she has written. He decides to pay an unannounced visit to the training college and is shocked to hear of her expulsion two weeks earlier. He is also told the cause: her apparent licentious behavior with a young man. Sue had not said a word about this matter. He enters the nearby Cathedral in a daze. He finds Jude at work there. Jude explains to him the details behind the episode and confirms Sue's innocence. He also reveals his own feelings for Sue. Phillotson leaves to return to Shaston. Later the same day, Sue arrives in Melchester to collect her things from the training college, and Jude meets her and takes her to a deserted place. Here he finally speaks of his disastrous marriage to Arabella, and Sue is horrified. She demands to know how he can reconcile his broken marriage with the religious beliefs he upholds so dedicatedly. Reminded of the misfortune that the members of their family have faced in marriage, they finally agree to part as friends. Notes The reader is given a picture of Phillotson, the middle-aged schoolmaster, but now in love like a young man. He takes delight in re-reading Sue's letters and gazing adoringly at her photograph. Jude finally tells Sue of his marriage. The setting Hardy uses is symbolic: it is the deserted market place. They walk up and down \"over a floor littered with rotten cabbage leaves. and decayed vegetable matter and unsaleable refuse. There are overtones of squalor, filth and decomposition. Sue's reaction is one of shock and anger and then genuine jealousy. She wants to know if Arabella is a pretty woman. Finally, she asks him with heavy sarcasm how he can claim to be religious: \"your theories are not so advanced as your practice. Jude is terribly distressed at her cutting remarks, and Sue later reassures him they can still be cousins and friends", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude31.asp"}