{"name": "part 5, CHAPTER 2", "summary": "CHAPTER 2 Summary One day while Jude is out, Sue is distressed at having been visited by a fleshy, coarse woman: Arabella. Late that night Arabella returns and calls on Jude, telling him she has something important to discuss. Jude talks to her from the window, and Arabella asks him to come to the inn where she is staying. Her Australian husband has not married her after all and she is in trouble. Jude, feeling sorry for Arabella, gets ready to go, but Sue protests that Arabella is not his wife now. Jude firmly replies that neither is Sue, and he leaves the house in search of Arabella. Not finding her, he returns to change into his boots, as it has started to rain. Sue, consumed with jealousy, protests again, but Jude is firm and tells Sue bluntly that he has been patient enough with her. Sue is forced to make a decision and finally gives in and agrees to marry him. The next day Jude goes off to make arrangements, and Sue, regretting her harsh treatment of Arabella, goes to visit her at the inn. She finds her just getting up from bed. Arabella guesses that it is because of her visit that Sue and Jude have become lovers. A telegram arrives for Arabella from her Australian husband, Cartlett, who finally agrees to marry her. Arabella's problems are solved and she advises Sue to marry Jude quickly. Sue is about to leave and Arabella tells her that she will write to Jude about an important matter. Notes In this chapter, Sue finally becomes Jude's mistress and agrees even to marry him. However, her actions are propelled by jealousy and fear concerning Arabella and her influence over Jude. Sue agrees to become Jude's lover because she fears losing him, as she says: \"Very well then--if I must, I must. Since you will have it so, I agree. I give in. It seems that she is giving in against her own inclinations. Jude for once has spoken plainly: \"I've waited with the patience of Job and I don't see that I've got anything by my self-denial. I do love you Sue, though I've danced attendance on you so long for such poor returns. Jude firmly seizes a temporary advantage because of Sue's jealousy. The contrast between Sue and Arabella is clearly brought out during their conversation. Arabella is in bed; she is inelegant in appearance, crass in speech and behavior and has a cynical attitude. Sue, dainty and refined, is appalled by Arabella's crudeness. The chapter ends on a note of grim foreboding. Arabella says she will write to Jude about some mysterious business, which she has not yet discussed with him", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude43.asp"}