{"name": "part 6, CHAPTER 8", "summary": "CHAPTER 8 Summary It is three months after Jude's wedding. Jude has returned to his work, but as winter approaches, he falls ill with consumption. Arabella is angry at being saddled with a sick husband whom she will now have to support. She quickly becomes tired of him, and their quarrels resume. As Jude's health declines, he asks Arabella to write to Sue to ask her to visit them. Arabella is indignant at his request and they quarrel. Arabella calls Sue a strumpet , and Jude reacts violently. Finally, Arabella agrees to write the letter, but she never sends it. Jude, after waiting a few days, finally decides to visit Sue himself. He slips out on a cold, rainy day clothed in an overcoat and blanket and takes the train to Alfredston. From there he walks the five miles to Marygreen in the rain. He waits in the church and sends a message to Sue. Sue is not prepared for him and is horrified at his appearance. She congratulates him on having done the right thing in marrying Arabella. Jude pleads and argues with her for the last time. He even kisses her passionately. Sue admits she loves him and confesses that she and Phillotson are married in name only. Sue, however, refuses to run away with him, considering it her duty to remain with Phillotson. Jude leaves her and goes out in the rainy weather to make his journey back to Christminster. In his precarious state of health, the journey is likely to be fatal for him. Notes Jude's last meeting with Sue is a poignant one. He tells her that this is the last time they will meet and passionately exclaims, \"Sue, we are acting by the letter, and the letter killeth. He begs of her, \"Where is your reason. You dear, sad, soft, most melancholy wreck of a promising human intellect that it has ever been my lot to behold. But though Sue realizes her love for Jude, her arguments are unchanged. Jude finally makes a last appeal, saying that both their marriages are mistakes: \"I was gin-drunk, you were creed-drunk. It is ironic that they both declare their love for each other now that they have remarried others; it is too late for them now. As Jude leaves Marygreen for the last time and looks back at the familiar landscape where he grew up, it is evident that he has lost the will to live. He is almost conscious of the farewell he is bidding these surroundings. All meaning in his life has obviously vanished with the loss of Sue. His walk back in the rain is suicide for a man in his state of health, but in psychological terms he can be considered as a man who is already dead. He is beyond caring about what happens to him now. The weather, the bitter cold and the rain are symbolic of Jude's mental state of despair. Crushed and broken by life, abandoned by the only woman he ever loved, he returns to Christminster", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude58.asp"}