{"name": "part 4, CHAPTER 4", "summary": "CHAPTER 4 Summary Phillotson has resumed his interest in Roman antiquities and late one night, lost in his thoughts, he absentmindedly enters Sue's bedroom. In terror Sue goes to the window and jumps out, injuring herself. Phillotson, horrified, rushes to help, but Sue is not seriously hurt. The incident convinces Phillotson that he should grant Sue her freedom. He cannot bear to watch her suffering. The next evening, he pays a visit to his old friend and schoolmate, Gillingham. He tells him of his plans. Gillingham tries to reason with him and warns him of the scandal such a separation will result in, but Phillotson is determined. He tells Sue of his decision. Sue is grateful for his kindness, and Phillotson even sees her onto the coach that will take her to the station. After Sue has left, Gillingham calls on him and helps him to pack up the things Sue has left behind. Notes In this chapter Phillotson's charity is noteworthy. Gillingham is amazed that such a \"sedate, plodding fellow\" as he is, should think of setting Sue free. Phillotson is generally conservative on such matters, as he himself admits--he calls himself \"the most old fashioned man in the world on the question of marriage\"--yet when he realizes the misery Sue endures, his love for her will not allow him to keep her against her will: \"If a person who has blindly walked into a quagmire cries for help, I am inclined to give it. In his magnanimity, he even blames himself for hurrying her into marriage when she was too young and inexperienced to know her mind. His sensitivity and understanding allow him to see the intimate bond between Sue and Jude, and he comments to Gillingham on the \"extraordinary affinity or sympathy\" between the pair. He says they seem to be \"one person split in two. They appear to him to be a Shelleyan couple or even like Laon and Cythna. There is something noble in their relationship which \"took away all flavor of grossness. There is certainly no such affinity between Sue and Phillotson, who struggle to communicate with each other when their marriage is in crisis. Gillingham represents the conventional voice of society. He feels Phillotson ought to have agreed only to a separation. He knows society will make Sue, as well as Phillotson, suffer for this unconventional resolution of their marital problems", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude40.asp"}