{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 1", "summary": "CHAPTER 1 Summary The novel opens with the departure of Mr. Phillotson, the schoolmaster, from the village of Marygreen in Wessex. He is packing his things onto a small cart and heading for the city of Christminster, twenty miles away. He is helped by his young, earnest student, eleven-year-old Jude Fawley, who admires him tremendously. Phillotson gives Jude a book as a farewell present and explains that he is going to Christminster to enter the university and eventually to be ordained. Jude is quite grieved as he watches him leave. His great aunt Drusilla, who is bringing up the orphaned Jude, orders him to fetch two buckets of water from the well. As Jude draws the water, he thinks about his schoolmaster. Notes The opening scene itself offers a clue as to what Jude's motivation will be throughout his life. Phillotson inspires him to seek a better life at Christminster. Intelligent and perceptive beyond his years, Jude makes a significant observation about Phillotson, saying, \"He was too clever to bide here any longer-a small sleepy place like this. Jude's dissatisfaction with life at Marygreen is evident. His reaction to his schoolmaster's departure will bring about many changes in his life. Jude begins to aspire to attain similar goals. He will spend most of his life pursuing his dream of the university and the clergy. In a few skillful words, Hardy presents the young Jude as an affectionate and sensitive child. He is also very contemplative. Leaning against the well, he is portrayed as \"a thoughtful child who has felt the pricks of life somewhat before his time. The sentence gives a subtle hint of the tragic developments in store for Jude. The village well becomes a sort of symbol of permanence and stability. It is one of the few original structures left in a village that is rapidly changing. Hardy describes the well as \"the only relic of the local history that remained absolutely unchanged. The church building, in contrast, is a new one of \"modern Gothic design", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude09.asp"}