{"name": "part 3, CHAPTER 3", "summary": "CHAPTER 3 Summary There is much speculation at the training college when Sue does not return that evening at prayer time. Everyone wonders about the young man she has gone out with, and some of them are convinced that Jude is only posing as her cousin. The situation takes a serious turn because a similar incident occurred the year before: a young man had managed to seduce a student of the same college, maintaining that he was her cousin. The mistress inquires about the two photographs on Sue's dressing table. One is of Mr. Phillotson, and the other is of an unknown undergraduate. The next morning, when Sue does return, she is punished and kept in solitary confinement. The other students feel the punishment is too harsh and prepare to protest. In the evening it is discovered that Sue has escaped from a back window. She turns up at Jude's place. She is soaked and shivering with cold. Jude immediately takes her in and offers her some dry clothes and brandy. Sue is so tired that she falls asleep while relating her story. Notes Hardy presents a rather bleak picture of life at the training college, but it is probably near the truth, as Hardy's own cousin had attended such an institution. In any case the authorities are afraid of a scandal. On Sue's part, it is perhaps naive of her to expect that she can get away with spending a whole night out. It is typical of her impulsiveness that she rushes to Jude, thus making things worse for herself. The students at the college are apparently quite spirited; all seventy of them protest the harshness of the punishment, and in the geography lesson they even dare to organize a pen-down strike. However, their murmurs are ineffectual and hopeless. Hardy indicates that the laws of nature in that age were heavily weighed against women : \"every face bearing the legend 'The weaker' upon it, as the penalty of the sex wherein they were moulded", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude28.asp"}