{"name": "part 3, CHAPTER 9", "summary": "CHAPTER 9 Summary Having spent the night together as man and wife, Jude and Arabella return to Christminster the next day. Arabella tells Jude that she has remarried a Sydney hotel manager while in Australia, and that her new husband is thinking of following her to England. Jude is amazed and angry, but Arabella appears unconcerned about the fact that it is a bigamous marriage and invalid according to law. She declares that she may return to her Australian husband. They part and Jude continues walking through Christminster when he suddenly meets Sue, who has come to look for him. She is anxious at his not having kept his appointment and afraid that he might have been drinking. Jude does not tell her about Arabella's return, and they take the train back to Marygreen to see Aunt Drusilla. Jude has a feeling that Sue is not very happy with Phillotson although she speaks of him as a kind, generous husband. When they reach Aunt Drusilla's cottage, they are surprised to see that she is up and about, against doctor's orders. She tells Sue that marrying Phillotson was indeed a foolish thing to do. Sue is distressed and later admits to Jude that as Aunt Drusilla says, she should not have married. Asking Jude not to visit her, Sue leaves and goes back to Phillotson. Jude remains at Marygreen, trying to discipline himself by reading church history and sermons. A few days later a letter from Arabella announces that she has rejoined her Australian husband in London, who is now running a pub in Lambeth. She hopes Jude will keep quiet about their earlier marriage. Notes Hardy brings out the contrast between Arabella and Sue even more sharply in this chapter. As soon as Jude sees Sue, he repents the night he has spent with Arabella. Sue appears almost \"ethereal\" and \"incarnate as to seem at times impossible as a human life. Although Sue is all praise for Phillotson as a husband, Jude is sensitive enough to sense her unhappiness: \"There was something in her face which belied her late assuring words. He was convinced she was unhappy although she had not been a month married. After Aunt Drusilla's criticism, Sue almost admits the truth: \"Perhaps I ought not to have married. The reader realizes that what Jude suspected all along is true: this marriage is a disaster and his fears were not unfounded. Arabella, for her part, appears to be quite amoral. She has no qualms about her bigamous marriage to the Australian. Of course, in Victorian England, being married to two husbands simultaneously would have carried a five-year prison term, but Arabella can obviously count on Jude to remain silent about the matter. The Australian husband is unaware of Jude's existence. The chapter ends with two marital triangles and five tangled lives", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude34.asp"}