{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 7", "summary": "CHAPTER 7 Summary The next day, a Sunday, Jude plans to read his New Greek testament. But eventually, all his good intentions evaporate, and he goes off to visit Arabella, promising himself that he will return in two hours. Arabella's father accepts Jude as his daughter's suitor, but Jude is embarrassed at this interpretation. He goes out walking with Arabella, and before he knows it, they have walked a great distance. They are forced to stop at an inn for tea, but only beer is available. Later, they walk home together in the dark, often stealing kisses, and Jude returns home quite late in the evening. His Greek and Latin are forgotten and he is obsessed with Arabella. Arabella discusses her success with Jude with her friends, and they advise her to seduce him so that he will be forced to marry her if she becomes pregnant. Notes This chapter shows Jude's weakness when confronted with the demands of the flesh. Events are rapidly moving towards disaster for him. All his noble ambitions related to Christminster are forgotten in this new, all-consuming passion for Arabella. The Greek text he had planned to read is significant  which says, \"But their minds were blinded. Hardy reveals here how Jude's mind is blinded by an unworthy passion. At the inn where they stop one cannot miss the symbolism of the picture of Samson and Delilah on the wall. Jude is naive and inexperienced, while Arabella is shrewd and understands how to ensnare him. When they reach her home, Jude finds Arabella's parents and neighbors sitting around and speaking in a congratulatory manner, as if he is now Arabella's suitor. Jude for some time feels trapped, and rightly so: \"He had not meant this; a mere afternoon of pleasant walking with Arabella, that was all he had meant. However, Hardy emphasizes that Arabella's plan works because of Jude's essential decency and innocence. Arabella would not plan to trap him into marriage had she not realized Jude's integrity. Like Samson, Jude will be shorn of his freedom through his very strength: his decency and honesty", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude15.asp"}