{"name": "part 1, CHAPTER 2", "summary": "CHAPTER 2 Summary Jude returns to his aunt's house with the buckets full of water and finds his aunt talking with her friends. She is explaining his origins; that he is an orphan and has been with her for a year. She reveals that his parents' marriage was an unhappy one, and that Jude has a great love for books, like his cousin Sue. Aunt Drusilla considers him quite useless and wonders why the schoolmaster did not take Jude with him to Christminster to make a scholar of him. She also warns Jude never to marry as she believes the Fawleys have bad luck in marriage. Jude goes off to the fields, where he is working for Farmer Troutham, scaring the rooks off the corn with a clacker. Feeling sorry for the birds after some time, he allows them to feed on the corn. But soon he is caught by Troutham, who is outraged. He gives Jude a good beating and dismisses him from his job. As Jude returns home, he weeps in pain and disgrace. His aunt scolds him and again wishes he had gone with Phillotson to Christminster; that way, he would have been off her hands. In a miserable mood, Jude goes off to a high point in the village, hoping to catch a glimpse of Christminster from a distance. Notes The reader is told a little more about Jude in this chapter: that he loves books and that his cousin Sue, mentioned for the first time, also shares this passion. Aunt Drusilla's warning that the Fawleys are cursed in marriage sounds a note of foreboding. It is also clear that Aunt Drusilla considers the boy a nuisance. Feeling a sense of rejection, the little boy identifies with the rooks, unwanted as he is unwanted: \"They seemed like himself to be living in a world which did not want them. Why should he frighten them away. Because of his kindly sensitivity in allowing the birds to eat, he loses his job. This sensitivity is further underlined when he returns home through the fields and the reader is told that he walks on his tiptoes to avoid crushing the worms. Though farmer Troutham had just hurt him, he was a boy who could not himself bear to hurt anything. He \"cannot bear to see trees cut down or lopped,\" imagining that it hurts them. It is this gentleness and inability to hurt any living thing that will cause him a great deal of suffering later in life: \"he was the sort of man who was born to ache a good deal", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJude09.asp"}