{"name": "Chapter 24", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820051427/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmJaneEyre48.asp", "summary": "The tempest of the previous night is followed by a bright and brilliant morning. The experience of love has brought a glow to Jane's complexion and she seems prettier. Again, Mr. Rochester showers her with caresses. He informs her that he intends to marry her within a month. Jane is absolutely ecstatic but still considers the recent events of her life as an unreal dream. Mr. Rochester tells Jane that he has written to his banker in London to send for the family jewelry that will soon be hers. Jane, however, desires to remain his \"plain, Quakerish governess.\" After a quiet wedding in the church, Mr. Rochester plans to take Jane on a tour of Europe. Jane begs him not to indulge in romantic fantasies. She wants to know why Mr. Rochester courted Blanche and claimed he was going to marry her. He explains that he had wanted Jane to become jealous. Jane is shocked and worried upon hearing this. When Mrs. Fairfax is told that Mr. Rochester intends to marry Jane, she cannot accept it and tries to warn Jane about possible complications. She is worried about Jane's marrying a man who is so much older and wealthier than herself. However, she has no intention to hurt Jane with these remarks, so she gracefully offers an apology. The next day, Mr. Rochester takes Jane and Adele to Millcote to buy clothes and jewels for Jane. He tells Adele an amusing tale of taking Jane to the moon. Jane finds the excessive attention showered on her very embarrassing, and she stops Mr. Rochester from spending too much money on her. While returning home, Jane decides to write to her uncle in Madeira so that he may consider the option of adopting her. This would definitely bring her a sense of financial independence. She insists further that as long as she and Mr. Rochester are not married, she will continue to work as Adele's governess. During their month of courtship, Mr. Rochester sends for her every evening at seven. Whenever he becomes overly passionate and tender, Jane uses her ready wit to check him but finds this task a difficult one. Her behavior certainly hurts Mr. Rochester. However, Mrs. Fairfax commends Jane's restraint.", "analysis": "Notes Jane is thoroughly modern in her attitude to the approaching marriage. She loves Mr. Rochester but feels humiliated at the thought of being economically dependent on him. She also faces a spiritual crisis. She confesses that Mr. Rochester \"stood between her and every thought of religion. . . and that she could not see God for His creature of whom she had made an idol.\" This description is particularly significant in light of the moral conflict that lies ahead of her. In this chapter, the romantic aspect of Mr. Rochester's character is emphasized. He indulges in romantic fantasies. He calls Jane a fairy in possession of a \"talisman\" which will remove all the difficulties in his life. Jane, however, emerges in this chapter as a realist who successfully counters his romantic advances. He sings a romantic song in which he declares his love for her. The realist in Jane is not carried away by hearing these \"stanzas crooned in her praise.\" Mr. Rochester calls her \"a hard little thing\" and remarks that \"any other woman would have been melted to her marrows at hearing\" such a eulogy. Jane admits that she is firmly determined not to give way to romantic sentiments or fantasies. Mrs. Fairfax also emerges as a realistic woman endowed with common sense. She rightly reminds Jane that things are not always as they appear. She is certainly correct in warning Jane about the differences been Mr. Rochester and herself regarding their social status and age."}