{"name": "book 5, Chapter 39", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-34-44", "summary": "Sir James becomes more judicious in his appraisal of Brooke's situation, and decides that Brooke needs to invest in improvements for his tenants if he wants to evade the scathing criticisms of the other Middlemarch paper, The Trumpet. Dorothea is the key to convincing him, figures Sir James, since she is a great advocate for improvements. Dorothea goes to visit her uncle, and Will Ladislaw turns out to be there; she tells her uncle that Sir James told her that Tipton was to be managed by Caleb Garth, and improvements made. Dorothea is very passionate that this should be done; however, her uncle will not commit. She and Will find a moment alone, to explain a bit more of themselves; Will seems to be falling in love with her, as their relationship becomes stronger. Mr. Brooke goes to visit a tenant whose son has been poaching on Brooke's land, and is chastised by the tenant. Brooke, who liked to fancy himself a favorite of his tenants, is shocked; also, the house looks worse now that Dorothea has made her criticisms. It looks like Mr. Brooke will give in, and turn the management of the estate over to Mr. Garth after all.", "analysis": "When Dorothea speaks of improvements to be made on the property, to help the tenants, she is filled with passion for the first time in a while. Social reform is Dorothea's true passion; she is a woman who needs to be doing and achieving, which makes her match with Casaubon particularly ironic, and also strange. Dorothea in this scene becomes a complete dramatic foil for Casaubon; where he is cold and meticulous, she is passionate and impulsive. Casaubon's work is in his mind, and not result-oriented, whereas Dorothea wants real progress made, for the benefit of real people. As Dorothea becomes wiser about Casaubon's nature and about their marriage, the juxtaposition between the two of them becomes even more start; for Dorothea cannot stifle her true personality and self any longer to spare Casaubon's insecurities and feelings, and it just so happens that everything that Casaubon is, Dorothea is not. The change in Dorothea's tone when she speaks about something for which she has so much interest is very marked; there is a great contrast between the brief, strained tone she uses with her husband, and the emotional, image-laden, eager tone that she adopts here. Self-expression is an issue that has dogged Dorothea since her marriage, and finally she is finding ways to express her feelings and desires. The irony is, where her marriage was supposed to broaden her knowledge and fulfill her desires, all the knowledge and fulfillment she has gained are from outside her marriagelike Sir James and Will. Also, Dorothea's expression is quite apart from the appropriate modes of women's expression, which startles Will and reduces Mr. Brooke to stammering; this tendency is not looked upon kindly in society as a whole, and Dorothea continues to be very unconventional in nature compared to what women were expected to be. The lancelet that the boy kills can be taken as a symbol of how Mr. Brooke is mistaken; he believes that the boy should be punished for killing the animal, just as he believes that his tenants should, and do, bear him some amount of affection. He actually finds out that things are very much the opposite; and Mr. Brooke is not such a hard man that suggestions from his neighbors and his niece, compounded with an outburst from a tenant, does not move him. Mr. Brooke realizes the irony that has dogged his position as landlord; he thought that everything he did as a landlord, including taking over the operation of his land, was positive and good, when in fact he was messing things up beyond what he could have expected"}