{"name": "book 8, Chapter 70", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77", "summary": "Bulstrode is with Raffles, tending to him according to Lydgate's orders, though wishing at the same time that Raffles would just die and leave him in peace. Bulstrode still thinks that fate is on his side, that Raffles will die and he will be free; he is not sorry for anything he has done, but is more intent on getting away with everything. Bulstrode decides that maybe another \"good\" deed will save him; he decides to give Lydgate the money he needs, thinking that this action will clear his conscience, and in case Raffles says something unpalatable, Lydgate will be obligated not to repeat it. Raffles dies only a few days after coming to Bulstrode; Lydgate is there when he dies, and does not think to say that perhaps neglect led somehow to the man's death. Lydgate knows he is obligated to Bulstrode, and he is uneasy about this fact, because of Bulstrode's visitor and his demise. However, there is nothing else that he can do, since to renounce Bulstrode's help would mean ruin. Farebrother senses that Lydgate is still in a desperate condition, though his money woes are over. Lydgate admits as much, though he is now in a better position to continue his career and marriage.", "analysis": "The revelation that Bulstrode is not at all penitent just about says that he will not escape from punishment for what he has done. Bulstrode has tempted fate, through his pride, arrogance, and unwillingness to admit to himself or anyone else that wrong has been done. He has not learned any lessons yet, but he will have to before his story is done. Even now his conscience is getting heavy, which is a sign that perhaps redemption is possible. But, that he buys Lydgate's future silence with the thousand-pound loan means that Bulstrode still refuses to reform, even under threat of ruin. He still only acts with a show of benevolence when it is in his best interests, which shows that he has not really changed at all. Bulstrode's behavior upon Raffles' death also shows a great want for change. He never thinks to himself that his days of dishonesty are done, or that he will reform now that he has been spared. Indeed, Bulstrode will have to keep up the charade with his family, in trying to move them elsewhere, and in explaining falsely who the dead man is, and why he was there. Bulstrode seems determined as ever to profit from his good fortune, at the expense of others' misfortune; but surely, fate has surprises in store for him yet. The main question that comes out of this chapter, is whether Lydgate will manage to recover from his debt using the loan from Bulstrode, or whether Rosamond will continue to drive them into debt once more. Hopefully, Lydgate has had all the warning he needs about lacking money, and the desperation that comes with it. However, entangling himself with Bulstrode in such a compromising way can hardly come to good, and may damage Lydgate's practice and reputation even further"}