{"name": "book 5, Chapter 37", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-34-44", "summary": "Middlemarch politics assert themselves once again, in the rivalry of the two papers of the region. It is revealed that Mr. Brooke has bought one of the papers, The Pioneer, and has inserted his unorthodox political views into it. Will Ladislaw has been hired to head the paper, and Mr. Brooke is very pleased with his work, and his coverage of the Middlemarch political situation. Casaubon continues to resent Will, and Will grows more angry that Casaubon married someone as young and naive as Dorothea, dragging her down into Casaubon's dull, dry world of academia. Will's affection for Dorothea continues to grow, and Dorothea becomes more and more fond of Will in return. Will goes to Lowick to sketch; luckily for him, it begins to rain, and when he takes refuge in the house, he finds only Dorothea at home. They begin to speak as they did in Rome, very happy to be alone in each other's company; Dorothea becomes more aware of her husband's failings, but also learns of his generosity toward Will's family. Will tells Dorothea that he has a job at Mr. Brooke's paper, if he wants it; Dorothea says she would like him to stay in the neighborhood very much, but then realizes that Casaubon would disagree with her. Dorothea tells Casaubon, who of course is not in the least supportive. Casaubon writes Will a letter, telling him he should not take the position, nor should he call at the house any longer. Casaubon's letter seems to be motivated not out of embarrassment for having a relative of lower status nearby, but out of some jealousy perhaps for his friendship with Dorothea. Dorothea becomes consumed by the case of Will's grandmother, and her unfair disinheritance when she married; she believes that Will is owed a good part of what Casaubon has because his family was impoverished unfairly, and wants to bring that up to Casaubon, though it will upset him. Casaubon is not suspicious that Dorothea is being influenced by Will, but he thinks that it might happen; his insecurity and jealousy lead him to contrive secret hindrances for Will. He dislikes his cousin more than ever, because he imagines that Dorothea would like Will more than she likes him.", "analysis": "The issue of propriety would have Mr. Brooke take no part in papers, or in politics in general; also, the theme of social position plays a part in how neighbors and relatives regard Mr. Brooke's new venture. It seems that the newspaper business is regarded as too lowly and common a pursuit for a gentleman of money like Mr. Brooke; also, Mr. Brooke's airing of his political views in such a public forum is also considered distasteful. It is quite a paradox that politics in Middlemarch are decided through the influence of wealthy gentlemen like Mr. Brooke, yet to have these men publicly declare their opinion in politics is taboo. The theme of social position is also very important in Casaubon's situation; he believes in a well-defined social hierarchy, especially since it gives him a position of superiority over people like Will Ladislaw. However, once Will stops accepting money from him, and establishes his own place in Middlemarch with Mr. Brooke's newspaper, Casaubon feels that his position over Will has been diminished, which he resents. Casaubon's feelings about social organization are not unorthodox in the Middlemarch community; there are others who feel the same as Casaubon does, like the Vincys and the Bulstrodes, who like people to know their place, and act accordingly. Will's inner declaration of loyalty to Dorothea shows how his affection for her is continuing to strengthen; and the fact that she regards him highly as well foreshadows a romantic relationship between them in the book. Eliot is building up the romantic tension between them, as their feelings become stronger and more intense; they will have to come to terms with their mutual affection at some point in the book, and hopefully all turns out well. With Eliot's metaphor comparing them to \"two flowers which had opened then and there\" when they get in each other's presence, and describing Will as \"fresh water\" to Dorothea after the stagnation she bears in her marriage, it is unlikely that the two can be easily separated. The changed tones of voice which Dorothea and Will use in each other's presence testifies to their being suited for each other; Dorothea only seems to shrug off her melancholy, and the careful, depressed tone she uses around her husband when she is talking to Will, and Will sheds his usual sarcasm and becomes more gentle and thoughtful in his tone and speech. However, at the same time, \"tongues are little triggers,\" and Will cannot help but display this metaphor at work. Dorothea becomes conscious of her husband's failures when she speaks to Will; Dorothea pours forth the reasons why she married Casaubon, which Will could not have guessed. But jealousy is a theme in the novel that comes about because of this relationship; Mr. Casaubon is anything but pleased that his wife and cousin are friends, and fears that Dorothea could like Will better than he, which she does. Casaubon pretends to act out of concern for social hierarchy, another theme of importance in Middlemarch life; however, his real intent is hidden beneath, and is a function of his insecurity about himself. The end of the novel, and the brief mention of Casaubon contriving obstacles for Will, foreshadows some great plot of his, some act of spite to come"}