{"name": "book 8, Chapter 69", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77", "summary": "Mr. Garth comes to Bulstrode, to tell him that he found Raffles, very ill, near Stone Court; Raffles asks for a doctor, but also told Mr. Garth some things about Bulstrode. On account of these things, Caleb Garth says that he can no longer manage any of Bulstrode's property, and must give up the appointment to manage Stone Court as well. However, Caleb says, he will not spread around anything that he heard. Bulstrode then believes that all has happened with the aid of providence, and that Raffles might die, and leave him in peace. Lydgate sees Raffles, and determines that though the case is grave, yet Raffles will probably survive. He decides that it must be a case of an alcohol-caused disease, and that Raffles must be an odd charity case for Bulstrode. There seems to be no escape from ruin for Lydgate; the furniture is about to be taken for his debts, and his relationship with Rosamond is in shreds because of it. Lydgate cannot stand Rosamond's repeated crying, and blaming him for her unhappiness. Now, he wishes he had married a woman of a like mind and spirit, so that their union might have survived this setback; instead, he is chained to Rosamond, when the union can no longer make either of them happy.", "analysis": "It seems that Bulstrode's downfall has already begun, though Caleb Garth is certainly too honorable to act as a catalyst. The juxtaposition of Caleb Garth and Bulstrode only serves to make Bulstrode look blacker, more manipulative; Caleb Garth looks all the more honorable in comparison. That Bulstrode tries to tell Caleb Garth that what Raffles might have said is untrue, and not to believe him over a neighbor, speaks even more poorly of Bulstrode's character. But, it is lucky for Caleb Garth that he refuses to get entangled with someone whose personal effects are so much in doubt. That Raffles would dare come back to Middlemarch, and also spread the truth about Bulstrode, means that he is after more than just money. This event marks, and foreshadows, the end for Bulstrode. By this time, Raffles has become a symbol of disgrace and doom for him, rather than a person; thoughts about Raffles coming and his statements bringing Bulstrode down haunt him constantly. Raffles personifies all of Bulstrode's fears at this moment, and is sure to cause disgrace at any time. Caleb Garth becomes also a symbol, of providence; Bulstrode believes that Raffles was meant to run into Mr. Garth, and tell his story only to the one person who would not repeat it. Caleb will certainly do nothing to hasten Bulstrode's fall, but Raffles is still not neutralized as a potent threat. Bulstrode's thoughts that he still might be saved, and Raffles' illness and his meeting with Caleb Garth arranged so that he might suffer no longer. This view is sure to prove an irony, the last hopeful wish of a fallen man. Also ironic is Lydgate's view that Bulstrode's friend Raffles is someone to whom he has chosen to show charity and kindness, to the neglect of \"deserving\" people like Lydgate. Bulstrode is not generous enough to show interest where there is no benefit to him; Lydgate assumes too kindly of Bulstrode, but also tries to blame his own troubles on him. Lydgate finally repents of marrying Rosamond, as it is certain that there marriage will never be a happy one, unless he manages somehow to get rich. He finally sees that a man should marry someone whom he has things in common with, who he gets along with well and who is good company and conversation always. But, there is of course irony in this, as it is too late for Lydgate's wisdom to be of any use. His tone, when he speaks to Rosamond, becomes bitter and resentful; hers does the same. Everything around them seems unpleasant, as the thought of living without money upsets Rosamond more than anything, and Rosamond's blame and materialism in turn upsets Lydgate"}