{"name": "book 8, Chapter 86", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-78-finale", "summary": "Caleb Garth tells Mary that the Bulstrodes want Fred to manage Stone court; Mary is very happy, though Mr. Garth is still not sure if Fred will make her a good husband. He questions his daughter, about her love for Fred, and whether she truly thinks she can spend her life with him; she does not want to see his daughter make a huge mistake in marriage, if he can help prevent it. But Mary knows what is right to do, and has a good deal of sense; she will marry Fred, and they will probably be happy. She tells Fred about the management of Stone Court, and he is very happy; they will have to be engaged for a while so he can save money, but yet they are content with their engagement.", "analysis": "Love has brought Fred Vincy full circle, from an irresponsible, hopeless youth, to a hard-working, determined young man. Though he still has some tendency toward laxity in him, he is still a good man, and much improved over his more youthful self. With Mary's help, he will become better still; Mary is a good match for Fred, and will certainly make up for his shortcomings with her intelligence and economy. Mary and Fred are the picture of another kind of ideal of marriage; it is one where the husband and wife are uniquely suited in character and affection, and will be able to weather any hard times through their kinship in spirit and in life. Finale: Mary and Fred did live happily ever after, with both of them prospering and becoming very happy in their marriage. Fred buys Stone Court, and they have three boys, two of whom resemble Fred, much to his mother's relief. Lydgate and Rosamond kept on going, but were not exceptionally happy. Lydgate was able to make a successful practice, but was not happy because he never did make any of his beloved scientific advances. Dorothea and Will were very happy together; Will goes into politics, and becomes a member of Parliament. They have a boy, who becomes the heir to Mr. Brooke's estate; the disastrous effects of disinheritance are for once avoided. Sir James allows Celia to see her sister, and Will and Dorothea make visits twice a year to Mr. Brooke's house. Dorothea is not able to make the big, sweeping impact she desired; however, she was able to spread happiness and have a wonderful family, and a very contented life. There are no real surprises in this little epilogue to the novel; everyone's life continues on the whole course on which they were going at the end of the novel. Those people who are well-suited, like Dorothea and Will and Mary and Fred, are happy together and make good lives with one another. Those who are not as happy, Rosamond and Lydgate in particular, muddle through, but are never able to change the dynamic of their relationship. Characters are not set in stone, but it seems that people in Middlemarch remain pretty much as they are. Love and honor do make some favorable changes in the way people act and live; but everyone seems to find their particular destiny, and everything happens according to the indications of fate"}