{"name": "part 1, Chapter 1", "summary": "Chapter 1: Playing Pilgrims   I'll try and be what he loves to call me, \"a little woman,\" and not be rough and wild; but do my duty here instead of wanting to be somewhere else. One December evening in the mid-nineteenth century, the March girls--Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy--sit at home, bewailing their poverty. The March family used to be wealthy, but Mr. March lost his money. This year, his daughters expect no Christmas presents. Meg admits to wanting presents anyway. Similarly, Jo, the bookworm, yearns for a copy of Undine and Sintram, a book of two German tales. Beth wants new music, and Amy sighs for drawing pencils. Meg, who works as a nanny, and Jo, who works as a companion to Aunt March, complain about their jobs. Meanwhile, Beth complains about having to do the housekeeping, and Amy complains that she does not have a nice nose. The girls decide that they will each buy themselves a present in order to brighten their Christmas. Soon, however, they change their minds and resolve to buy presents for their mother, Marmee, instead. They then discuss Jo's play, \"The Witch's Curse,\" which they will perform on Christmas Day. While they talk, Marmee comes home with a letter from Mr. March, who is serving as a Union chaplain in the Civil War. The letter reminds his little women to be good, which makes them feel ashamed of their earlier complaining. They resolve to bear their burdens more cheerfully. Meg's burden is her vanity, Jo's is her temper, Beth's is her housework, and Amy's is her selfishness. Marmee suggests that the sisters pretend they are playing pilgrims, a game from the girls' childhood in which they act out scenes from John Bunyan's didactic novel The Pilgrim's Progress. In this game, each girl shoulders a burden and tries to make her way to the Celestial City. Bunyan's novel and the game are both allegories of living a Christian life. The physical burdens stand for real-life burdens, and the Celestial City stands for heaven. The sisters agree to try the game again, but this time by practicing Christian values in their real lives. They all sing before bedtime", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227184920/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/littlewomen/section1/"}