{"name": "Act 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219185923/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/the-seagull/summary/act-4", "summary": "It's two years later. We're back at Sorin's house, in the parlor. It's evening. Masha and Medvedenko enter. Medvedenko wants to go home, but Masha refuses. She's fine leaving their baby on his own. She really doesn't want to spend time with her family. Konstantin and Paulina enter, setting up a bed for Sorin in Konstantin's room. Paulina makes chitchat with Konstantin, who is now a real, money-earning writer. She wishes he would be nicer to her daughter Masha. The girl still has a crush on him. Konstantin gets up and goes out, uninterested in engaging in this line of conversation. Paulina and Masha talk about unrequited love. Masha still thinks that if she leaves, she can finally get over Konstantin. Medvedenko and Dorn enter, pushing Sorin, who is now in a wheelchair. Medvedenko hasn't left yet because Shamrayev won't give him a horse. Masha's annoyed. A conversation about Sorin's health. Dorn still won't give him medicine. He says Sorin shouldn't fear death. The philosophical doctor reflects on his favorite city, Genoa. Because of the crowds. Nina comes up in conversation, and Konstantin gives the report. She became an actress; had a baby by Trigorin. The writer abandoned her and the baby died. Her career has faltered. She's been writing to Konstantin--and now she's actually in town. Arkadina, Trigorin, and Shamrayev enter. Everyone reunites. Trigorin congratulates Konstantin on his new success. He's a little chattier than he was at the beginning of the play. Konstantin can barely tolerate it. Medvedenko finally leaves--without a horse. He'll walk four miles in the rain. Everyone sits down to play cards, but Konstantin leaves the room. He plays a melancholy waltz offstage while the others gossip about his bad reviews. After the card game, everyone leaves and Konstantin is left alone to write. Nina enters. Konstantin is ecstatic to see her. They catch up. Nina's nerves are obviously frail; as she talks she keeps reverting to the phrase \"I'm the seagull.\" Headed to a small town for some theater work, she can only stay for a moment. Konstantin wants her to stay for good. Through the door, Nina hears Trigorin's voice. She still loves him. Once Nina exits, Konstantin tears up his manuscripts. He goes into another room. The party returns with a game and some drinks, but from offstage comes the sound of a gunshot. Dorn runs off to investigate, inventing an excuse. He returns instantly and tells Trigorin to somehow get Arkadina out of there. Konstantin has shot himself. Ugh. Thanks, Chekhov. That was uplifting.", "analysis": ""}