{"name": "Act 1, Scene 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219163530/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/gentlemen-of-verona/summary/act-1-scene-2", "summary": "Meanwhile, Julia is lounging around her garden having a little girl talk with her woman in waiting, Lucetta. Julia is in desperate need of some advice about the following: Should she fall in love? If so, which one of her dozens of suitors should she hook up with? Julia ticks off a few names of guys who are drooling over her before she gets around to asking Lucetta what she thinks of Proteus. Lucetta's first response is something like \"That clown?\" But then she catches herself and says what Julia wants to hear--that Proteus is the best of the lot. Plus, he seems to love Julia the most. Julia wonders why Proteus hasn't proposed to her yet and declares that you can measure a guy's love by the amount of time he spends telling you he loves you. According to Julia, Proteus hasn't spent nearly enough time doing this. Then Lucetta is all, \"Oh yeah, this letter from Proteus came for you earlier\" and gives Julia the love letter. She also says that, um, she may have led the page to believe that she was Julia and accepted the letter in Julia's name. Julia is miffed! How could Lucetta accept a secret love letter on her behalf? Sneaking around is bad behavior for a lady of Julia's class, and she can't believe Lucetta represented her so poorly. Doesn't she take her job seriously? Sheesh. Julia orders Lucetta to return the letter to Proteus. Now. As soon as Lucetta leaves, Julia regrets her decision. She pretended to be mad that Proteus sent her a letter when deep down inside she was jumping for joy. She calls back Lucetta, who returns and then plays \"keep away\" with the letter and teases Julia about Proteus. Julia, who is now back in tantrum mode, grabs the letter and tears it to shreds to demonstrate that she doesn't really care about love. Julia's roller coaster ride of emotions isn't over--she immediately bends down and gathers the bits and pieces of the letter. She reads each snippet of paper aloud and tries to piece the fragments together. Lucetta comes back and tells Julia dinner's ready, and Julia again pretends not to care about the letter, even though Lucetta saw here picking up all the pieces. Lucetta lets her know she sees what's going on, even if Julia likes to pretend otherwise. Then they head off to get some grub.", "analysis": ""}