{"name": "act v, scene ii", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210309023132/https://www.sparknotes.com/shakespeare/muchado/section9/", "summary": "Meanwhile, near Leonato's estate, Benedick asks Margaret to bring Beatrice to speak to him. Alone, he laments his inability to write poetry. He has unsuccessfully attempted to write Beatrice a love sonnet according to the flowery and ornamental conventions of Renaissance love poetry. Ironically, despite his great skill at improvising in conversation, he is no good at all at writing. Beatrice arrives, and the two lovers flirt and tease each other with gentle insults but also with great affection--as they now seem always to have done. Benedick tells Beatrice he has challenged Claudio to a duel according to her wishes and that Claudio must respond to his challenge soon. Suddenly, the maid Ursula arrives in great haste to tell them that the scheme against Hero has come to light. Benedick pledges his love to Beatrice once again, and the two follow Ursula to Leonato and the rest of the house, which is in an uproar", "analysis": "Act V, scenes i-ii By showing Leonato's grief and anger to the audience, Shakespeare drives home the intensity of the pain and distress that Claudio's accusation against Hero has caused Hero and her family. Although Hero is not really dead, Leonato grieves as if she were, because she has lost her reputation. He has come to her side, believing that Claudio must have been wrong about her--\"My soul doth tell me Hero is belied,\" he confesses to Antonio . But his concern for her, coupled with the shock of Claudio's public humiliation of her, is enough to overwhelm him with grief. He rejects Antonio's attempts to make him feel better, telling him that \"men / Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief / Which they themselves not feel\" . He suggests that once a person actually becomes unhappy, good advice does him or her no good: \"For there was never yet philosopher / That could endure the toothache patiently\" . His anger at Claudio for ruining his daughter is very real, and this scene provides the audience with a fascinating view of Leonato. He is powerful here in his righteous anger, just as much as he is overwhelmed with despair in Act IV, scene i. The revelation of Borachio's crime to Claudio and the rest marks another turning point in the play. Don John's deception has led inexorably to Claudio's rejection of Hero, darkening the play's atmosphere of lighthearted comedy. Dogberry and the Watch's accusation of Borachio and Conrad seems to open the way to understanding and resolution. Claudio's reaction to the information mirrors what the wise friar predicts in Act IV, scene i: he begins to remember Hero's good qualities. \"Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear / In the rare semblance that I loved it first,\" he says to himself . The punishment that Leonato extracts from him might seem light revenge for the death of a daughter, but, of course, we know--as he knows--that Hero isn't really dead. The punishment obviously establishes the grounds for a happy ending. If all goes well, it seems, Claudio is being set up to marry Hero, in a sort of redemptive masquerade. Act V, scene ii, which develops the growing relationship between Benedick and Beatrice, is one of the funniest and most touching courtship scenes in Shakespeare's works. It gives the audience a chance to laugh at Benedick and Beatrice as they grapple with the apparent folly of their love for one another, and also to see that their relationship is developing into one that is both affectionate and mature. Moreover, somehow they manage to speak sweetly to each other without losing their biting wit. Benedick, in fact, laughs at himself when he laments his inability to write love poetry. \"No,\" Benedick concludes, \"I was not born under a rhyming planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms\" . Benedick's inability to write underlines the difference between the witty and improvisatory court rhetoric that he is so good at and the very stylized conventions of Renaissance love poetry. Beatrice and Benedick interlace their conversation with news about developments in the main plot of the play, but, throughout, they tease one another with gentle affection--and, of course, with never-ending insults. Benedick sums up their situation by saying, \"Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably\" . This assessment seems to be true in several respects--they will never have peace, for both are too lively and independent. But both are also wise, and it looks as if their love will grow into a deep, mature relationship in which both will continue to sparkle in the other's company. The two also express genuine fondness. To Beatrice's assertion that she feels unwell psychologically, Benedick asks her to \"serve God, love me, and mend\" . When she invites him to come with her to talk with Leonato, he answers, \"I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy eyes. And moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncle's\" . Here Benedick plays with a typical Renaissance sexual euphemism, the idea of dying referring to a sexual orgasm."}