{"name": "book 6, Chapter 49", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 49:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Sir James and Mr. Brooke are supposedly discussing Casaubon's last wish; they decide that whatever was in the will should be hidden from Dorothea until she is strong enough to hear of it, and until then she should be with her sister and her new baby. Sir James wants Will sent out of the country, which means that he had something to do with Casaubon's last wish; Mr. Brooke refuses to act so hastily, since Will has done very good work for him. They reveal that Casaubon added a codicil to his will, saying that if Dorothea marries Will, she will forfeit the land and money that Casaubon has left to her. The whole thing looks very bad, as if there was something sordid going on between Will and Dorothea. Sir James and Mr. Brooke come to the conclusion that if they sent Will away, it would make the situation look worse, and that they could not make him go unless he wanted to. Sir James is bent upon protecting Dorothea now however, as he could not do with her first marriage; she will be sent to Freshitt to live with Sir James and her sister for a while, and then more will be decided later. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>At this point, Sir James is embodying the theme of prejudice, which is prevalent in Middlemarch when it comes to outsiders like Will. It is not that Sir James knows Will personally, or has much grounds to dislike Will. Since Casaubon's will speaks ill of him, Will is of inferior social standing, and much public opinion is against him, Sir James assumes that Will is reprehensible, and is no good for his sister-in-law, Dorothea. This stance is ironic, given Sir James' misgivings about Casaubon; he does not consider what Dorothea, whom he cares about, might feel in the matter, nor what Will is really like. PARAGRAPH>Uncharacteristically, Mr. Brooke is more right-on about this situation than Sir James; he has far more information on which to make a decision, and knows the people concerned more personally. It seems that Sir James and Mr. Brooke are almost switching places in this one debate, still representing opposing positions. However, Mr. Brooke would be more expected to act on prejudice, and Sir James to be reasonable, according to their behavior up until this point. PARAGRAPH>Casaubon's will becomes a symbol and an embodiment of his bitterness, suspicion, and spite; it is as if he was not content on making Will and Dorothea miserable enough when he lived, that he had to leave a secret document that amounted to slander on both of their characters. This is the last impediment to Dorothea that Casaubon has left; at least she is free of him, her misery when she was around him, and her lonely imprisonment at Lowick. Hopefully, she will be able to shed the perverse, martyr-like, self-sacrificing qualities that led her to Casaubon in the first place, and be able to shed his miserable influence, and finally be happy", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-45-55"}