{"name": "book 7, Chapter 62", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 62:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Will sends a letter to Dorothea, saying that he cannot leave Middlemarch until he has seen her again. He already declared that he was leaving two months before, which is a point of suspicion with Sir James, who guards Dorothea jealously. Dorothea, however, is out when the letter comes, preparing for Mr. Brooke to come back to the Grange. She goes to Freshitt, to speak to her sister and Sir James, and Sir James tries to take the opportunity to dissuade Dorothea from seeing Will again. He and Mrs. Cadwallader make a few unkind remarks about Will, which makes Dorothea angry, and she goes home to find Will there, looking for some sketches he had left. PARAGRAPH>Will tells Dorothea that he knows about Casaubon's will, and Dorothea tries to reassure him that it had nothing to do with her wishes. Will gets angry at her about the whole thing, and says that everything prevents him from being with her. Dorothea realizes that he has acted honorably in every possible way, and is glad for this; but still, she is unable to show any signs that she loves Will, and he goes without this assurance. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Sir James' behavior with regard to Dorothea is very odd; he is more jealous on her account, and more protective, than he seems to be with any matters regarding his wife. Perhaps Dorothea does need someone to guide and advise her, but why Sir James takes up this role without Dorothea's direct involvement, indicates something a little strange in his character. His animosity toward Will is almost as great as Casaubon's was, though it is based only on suspicion, and no tangible reasons at all. It is ironic that Sir James is more possessive about his wife's sister than his wife, but then again, Dorothea seems to be vulnerable in ways that Celia, with all her sensibilities, could never be. PARAGRAPH>With some irony, it is Sir James' attempts to keep Dorothea away from Will that only gain her anger. When Sir James and Mrs. Cadwallader speak of Will in condescending, scornful tones, it is too much for Dorothea; her love is still strong, and cannot bear their allegations. Dorothea is jealous when they gossip that Will and Rosamond are perhaps in love; her jealousy conveys how strong her feelings are, and her anger toward them at saying such things only confirms this. PARAGRAPH>Pride is a trait that Will and Dorothea both possess in abundance; and pride is the theme in the story which keeps them apart at this particular point. Will's pride keeps him from inviting more scorn from the community by staying with Dorothea, and from saying that he loves her because then she will have the upper hand if she does not. Dorothea is too proud also to admit her love for him, or to try and give him the financial support he deserves; she does not want to stoop to him, or lose her advantages, so she withholds her affections. However, Dorothea is also proud of Will, of his honor, and this strengthens her regard for him; pride is a thing of paradox in Will and Dorothea's relationship, at once conspiring to keep them apart, and then bring them together. PARAGRAPH>The strong feelings that persist after they part foreshadows a later meeting, especially since Dorothea is satisfied in knowing that Will is honorable and trustworthy. Their parting was not necessarily a friendly one, but it did not do great damage either. And, when love and longing begins to overpower pride on both of their accounts, it seems certain that they will end up together once again. Fate is a theme running through the book, that also seems to be something that is used to shape the narrative itself; and when fate is at work, a couple so suited to each other as Will and Dorothea cannot be left torn apart", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-56-66"}