{"name": "book 3, Chapter 32", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 32:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Mr. Featherstone's relatives begin to pop out and appear, and all expect that he will die soon, and will leave them some bit of money, since he is their rich relation. They all expect that he should do something for them, that he owes them money because they are relatives; they do not consider that they have done nothing for him, but are like vultures circling, waiting to pick up his money once he dies. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Featherstone wants to see none of the greedy, crowding relatives; Mary Garth has to try and turn them away, but doesn't have the heart for the task. Mrs. Vincy hovers around, sure that Fred will receive most of the property and money anyway, as Featherstone regards and treats them so much better than his other relatives. Trumbull, an auctioneer and assistant to Featherstone in business matters, is the other person who Featherstone shows any regard for; on the basis of behavior alone, it would seem that these people would receive most from Featherstone's will. Mary Garth must put up with the various visitors and their varying degrees of rudeness, but manages to stay calm and make the constant crush of daytime visitors as comfortable as she can. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The theme of family and family obligations comes to the fore once again as Mr. Featherstone is dying; Featherstone, being the mean-hearted, always distempered person that he is, feels no kinship or kindness for family members, while others only pretend affection for him thinking that he will leave them money. People's conceptions of blood ties and what they entail vary widely; Mr. Featherstone disregards them entirely, some relatives believe it entitles them to gifts in Featherstone's will. PARAGRAPH>Fred and the Vincys believe that the fact that they are closely related to Featherstone means that they will gain the bulk of the money in the will, and regard Mr. Featherstone as a benefactor. There is a great deal of hypocrisy in people's conceptions of family, especially with the herds of distant relatives who believe that they are owed money simply because of being related, and not because they have done anything nice or been well-acquainted with Mr. Featherstone. It is a good thing that Featherstone sees through these attempts to flatter themselves into money, but a shame that he regards nearly everyone with great suspicion and meanness. PARAGRAPH>It is interesting how impressions of Mary Garth vary according to the personality of the person appraising her. Mrs. Waule, a naturally suspicious person, regards Mary as tricky because of her potential influence on Mr. Featherstone, and because she appears shy and intelligent; this view is ironic, since Mary is both of those things, but that Mrs. Waule loads these traits with such negative baggage. Mr. Trumbull compliments her and is very polite to her, because he is a person who regards his own social graces highly; others regard her kindly merely because they are looking for some way to get into Featherstone's will, and think that she is trustworthy enough to help them with that. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Trumbull makes a point worth noting at the end of the chapter, about marriage; \"a manshould think of his wife as a nurse,\" he says, and \"some men must marry to elevate themselves a little\". The first point is most applicable to Casaubon, who believes that Dorothea is responsible for curing all his ails, mental more so than physical; but it does no good to regard your wife as a nurse when you refuse to tell her what you need fixed, especially when it is something that only a person can fix for themselves. It seems that Lydgate is about to marry to elevate himself, in terms of style, breeding, and refinement; but it is still to be seen whether this will work. Mr. Trumbull's remarks aren't directed at any situation in particular, but his words put an interesting frame on a few of the relationships in the novel", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-33"}