{"name": "book 5, Chapter 36", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 36:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Fred is sorely disappointed with not getting any money; he expected that he would get a large amount, and would not have to work. Now, he will likely have to join the clergy, or find some form of work; he will finally have to stop being idle, as his father will tolerate his idleness no longer. Mr. Vincy also says that Rosamond will have to postpone her marriage, until the family are in a better position to pay for it; Mrs. Vincy, Fred, and Rosamond are all spendthrifts, expecting that the money they need will somehow drop into their laps. Rosamond takes the issue up with her father, and he caves in; Mr. Vincy doesn't have the heart to stand up to his daughter, though she clearly needs some reasonable advice on the subject of her marriage. PARAGRAPH>It seems that only Mrs. Bulstrode knows better on the subject of Rosamond and Lydgate's engagement; she knows how difficult it will be for Rosamond to live on little money, and how extravagant she is, and how ill prepared Lydgate is to live with a flighty girl like her. However, no one will listen to her; her advice, though it will prove correct, is unheeded. PARAGRAPH>Rosamond tells Lydgate that her father wishes their marriage to be postponed; Rosamond says that she refused, not so much out of love for Lydgate, but out of stubbornness. Lydgate urges her that they be married soon; Rosamond agrees to six weeks, and manages to convince her father. Lydgate soon starts buying new things for the house, though he has little money to do so; already, he is spending beyond his means, a dangerous habit. They will go to his uncle's estate for their honeymoon; he is a baronet, and wealthy, which boosts Lydgate's hopes for a better position. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Eliot compares Rosamond and Lydgate's love to a \"gossamer web,\" and indeed, the metaphor describes the relationship well, being based on tender moments together, delicate feelings, and easily dashed hopes. At the same time, the relationship is anything but solid, and certainly not based on genuine compatibility either; it is also ironic that Lydgate hurries forth with the relationship, after getting burned before by love, and the difficulty of his present circumstances. PARAGRAPH>Eliot's tone becomes slightly mocking, and shows the ridiculousness of Lydgate and Rosamond in their considerations of marriage. Rosamond's mental faculties are belittled, as becoming \"slightly meditative,\" quite a feat for her, amounts to no more than thinking of how long it will take for her marriage clothes to be made. That Lydgate and Rosamond consider everything in deciding to get married but whether they love each other and are compatible is an irony that dooms their relationship from the start. The demise of their union is foreshadowed by their consideration of only inconsequential things, and their inability to act outside of the confines of their pride, vanity, and stubbornness. PARAGRAPH>Lydgate too believes in the preconceived notions of the day about gender relations; the \"goose and gander\" model, as Eliot calls it, is his ideal. Indeed, Lydgate wants a woman who is unassuming, attractive, knows the appropriate arts and flourishes, and will obey him. Rosamond is all of these; but what he does not foresee is how little economy she has, how silly she really is, and how basically unsuited they are. Lydgate is misled by society's ideals of women, and of marriage; and in searching blindly after these ideals, he will make a marriage that will not be beneficial for him, an be very disappointed in the life he will have to live with Rosamond", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-34-44"}