{"name": "book 5, Chapter 38", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 38:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Mr. Brooke is making enemies through his advocacy for the Whig party, when Middlemarch is a predominantly conservative, Tory area. Bulstrode is allied with Brooke politically, but many of the neighbors disapprove, including Sir James. Sir James, Mrs. Cadwallader, and others are gossiping about Brooke and Will Ladislaw, Brooke's need to take care of his parish, and other subjects. Brooke comes by, in the middle of being discussed; they inquire about the state of his tenants, attacks that have been made on him, etc. PARAGRAPH>Brooke, however, does not wish to enter into any arguments, or listen to see if they do have any valid points to make amid the rumors they are discussing. Brooke runs out quickly, and the others wish that maybe he could see if he was doing something wrong, and act on that. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Middlemarch politics seem very modern, for all the wrangling an dealing that goes on; Sir James mentions that dirt will be dug up on Brooke, to discredit his opinions, a practice which is regular in today's politics. However, the enmity between the conservative Tories and the liberal Whigs is something that is a little uncommon; people seek to squelch minority opinion, something which is not as common today. Snobbery and social standing also have a great deal to do with political opinion, which is not as true now as it was then; the wealthy are mostly conservatives, and those who are not, like Mr. Brooke, are shunned. Middlemarch has its own \"liberal,\" Whig-leaning media in the form of its papers, plenty of political haggling, dirt-digging, wild rumors, all kinds of things which are still parts of politics today, which might be surprising, regarding the time period. PARAGRAPH>In Middlemarch, rumors are almost as good a currency as fact; this intermingling of rumor and fact and how each works compared to the other, is another theme. Brooke especially sees that insinuation can do as much damage as fact; when Sir James and his company are talking, hearsay is treated as fact, even as having more weight than Brooke's denials or explanations. PARAGRAPH>At the same time, Brooke could benefit from listening to the more mild, objective criticisms, and perhaps acting upon them; although he is politically liberal, it is his unique paradox that he is conservative when it comes to his own tenants and social improvements. Brooke would be better off if he did try to reconcile his public beliefs with his private actions; and his reluctance to do so foreshadows his downfall if he runs for office, especially since it is an idiosyncrasy that is well-known in the neighborhood, and much disputed", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-34-44"}