{"name": "book 5, Chapter 35", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 35:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>The funeral is over, and people are waiting anxiously for the will to be read and the sums they are to receive to be announced. There is a stranger among them, though, who makes them nervous; his name is Rigg, he is in his early 30's, and no one is quite sure of who he is or where he comes from. A lawyer is there, named Standish, who went through the will with two witnesses; he reads through the two wills that Featherstone left, regarding the last one as the most correct. Mary Garth is nervous, and somewhat excited, since her refusal to burn one of the documents has led to this outcome. The first leaves Fred a good bit of money, and gives something to most of the relatives; the second, which is considered the correct one, gives everything to Mr. Rigg, who doesn't seem surprised. PARAGRAPH>Upon hearing this, many of the relatives start complaining about the expense of traveling to the funeral, and how they should not have come if they were to get nothing. Mrs. Vincy cries, and Fred seems upset as well, to have a large bequest announced, and then taken back. No one seems very fond of Mr. Rigg, who takes the name Featherstone as requested in the will. But, it seems that all the greedy relatives, and the expectant Vincys, have all gotten their just desserts; the Garths could have been better served, but overall, people do get exactly what they deserve. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Eliot compares the procession of different relatives at Featherstone's funeral to the line of different paired animals onto the ark, and says that in both cases, it might have been thought that the sheer numbers would decrease rations, and that it was better to have fewer there. The parallel between the situations is clever, and it is certainly a fair description of the situation at the funeral, and before the will is read. PARAGRAPH>Money is said to bring out the worst in people, and here it does. With money present, people forget their shows of politeness, say rash and uncomplimentary things, are greedy, and jealous as well. When the theme of money is introduced in the novel, it is usually to show people at their basest, or illuminate their flaws; and here, when money becomes an issue in the plot, it does exactly this", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-34-44"}