{"name": "book 7, Chapter 60", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 60:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Mr. Larcher, one of the wealthiest people in Middlemarch, is auctioning off some furniture he does not need before he moves into a new, bigger, furnished home. The event is like a carnival, with everyone in Middlemarch in attendance; there is plenty of food and drink, drink especially so that people might make higher bids for things. Not everybody buys things, but everyone is there for this social, outdoor occasion anyway. Will is asked by Mr. Bulstrode to go and acquire a particular painting for him; Will goes, though he is determined to leave the town soon. Still, Will does not want to leave without seeing Dorothea again, so his departure will have to wait on that. PARAGRAPH>A good many things are sold before the particular painting comes up; Will bids for the painting, and gets it for the Bulstrodes for a decent bit of money. Mr. Raffles turns up there, having found Will Ladislaw by inquiring somehow; Will is a bit put-off by him, and Mr. Raffles starts speaking of Will's family. Will cannot tell what Raffles' intentions are, so he gets away, and tries to forget about him; but it seems that Raffles has some less-than-desirable stories to tell about Will's family, which gives Will even more of a reason to leave, before stories like those could besmirch his name even more. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Though Will has been in Middlemarch for a good time, still there are prejudices against him, based on his social standing and his politics. Casaubon's will has not helped his situation any either, and as news of the codicil has spread around, people have assumed that Will must be out for Dorothea's money, or someone of no account. They do not consider that the codicil said more about Casaubon's insecurity or meanness than Will's character, simply because Casaubon had money, and had lived in Middlemarch for some time. Social prejudice is still a theme that has much bearing on Will's story at this point, though Will tries his best to ignore it and go about his business. PARAGRAPH>The re-emergence of Raffles means that his position as a threat to Bulstrode has not been avoided; his presence foreshadows a future importance for him, and perhaps that he might blacken Bulstrode's name a bit. But Raffles' possible intentions toward Will are something of a mystery; yes, Raffles knew Will's parents and something of his family, but why would this be so important that Raffles feel the need to track Will down. Perhaps Raffles means to blackmail Will with something too, though from his almost cordial demeanor, this seems unlikely", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-56-66"}