{"name": "book 8, Chapter 76", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 76:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Dorothea wrote a letter to Lydgate, bidding him to come and visit her. Against Mr. Brooke and Sir James' advice, she has decided to try and clear Lydgate, if she can, and also to continue and support the hospital as well. Lydgate begins to tell her the whole truththey are good friends, and often feel that they can confide in each other. He tells her everything about the situation with Bulstrode, the money, and his continuing reservations about having taken it. Dorothea and Lydgate also speak of his troubles in his marriage; Dorothea senses that there is much difficulty communicating in their union, and decides to see Rosamond, and try to reassure her about her husband's worth, if she can. Dorothea would like Lydgate to stay until the negative opinion of him in the town diminishes; she would also like to see the hospital continue, under his able leadership. Lydgate determines to leave, since he has little faith that he would be able to do good at the hospital. But, Dorothea is determined to have him stay and give him aid; she decides to give him a thousand pounds to work at the hospital, and to see Rosamond the next day. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Dorothea has truly matured and changed since her marriage to Casaubon a few years ago; her wish to help others has finally become a reality to her, as she now has the means, and the will, to accomplish whatever she wishes. She is more knowledgeable about how the world works, even about how Middlemarch works; it seems likely that if Lydgate stays and tends to the hospital, that he will be able to thrive sometime in the near future, as she says. Dorothea has a much bigger heart, and a much more epic sense of charity, than do so many other people in Middlemarch; that is why Sir James fears so much for her, because he thinks that she could be taken advantage of by the wrong person. Perhaps she could be, but Dorothea has sense enough to keep to people whom she has an intellectual and emotional connection witha bond that is not easily come by in a place like Middlemarch. PARAGRAPH>Dorothea and Lydgate are alike in more ways than just in their actions as spouses; they both have a sense that they could make big differences in the world, if they only have drive and care enough. Lydgate and Dorothea want to make things better for people in their community, and Lydgate, through medical discovery, wants to help scientific progress improve lives in a much larger arena. Their lives should be spent in trying to help as many people as they can, as they believe that they both have the capacity to bring great changes and health and happiness to a great number of people", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77"}