{"name": "book 8, Chapter 74", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 74:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Now that Bulstrode and Lydgate have already been judged and condemned, it is the time for the wives of Middlemarch to assess and judge how Mrs. Bulstrode and Rosamond might be to blame as well. Mrs. Bulstrode is acquitted of her husband's wrongdoing, because she is a good person, and all wrongs were done before they were even married. Rosamond is also pardoned for the most part, because she is also one of the Vincys, and has married an \"interloper,\" as the townswomen say. PARAGRAPH>It takes Mrs. Bulstrode a while to find out what has happened with regard to her husband; she knows that he came home ill from the meeting, and seems much disturbed, but Lydgate will certainly not tell her why. Only through visiting her friends does she find out what has happened; her brother tells her everything, and she goes home, troubled at the knowledge. But though a light has been shed on her husband's character, she finds that there is no way for her to forsake him. She determines to try and live with him, and eventually to forgive him, though it will certainly be a long and painful time. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Without a trial or a judge, Bulstrode and Lydgate were found guilty, and shunned; now, the women of Middlemarch are convened to see if their wives deserve equal punishment. This is one of the quirks of small-town life, but it also reveals some of the less admirable tendencies of human nature; to judge others without mercy, be unwilling to forgive because of one's envy or other less honorable feelings, and to gossip viciously about others. At the same time, one person in a small town can inflict many wrongs, and do a great deal of damage; their measure is a mixture of necessary concern, and of vicious judgment too. PARAGRAPH>Although Harriet Bulstrode really deserves none of the disgrace that she must be going through, the women are right in assuming that Rosamond needs a lesson. Lydgate has been too soft to correct her in matters of spending, materialism, and vanity; she desperately needs to be brought low, and reform her character. Vanity has been Rosamond's stumbling block for too long, and it has been too important a theme in her story and her actions; it is time she was through with it, and start to be more pleasant about having very little. PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Bulstrode proves all the positive appraisals about her character true; she resolves to be faithful to her husband and not desert him, but at the same time, is deeply grieved by what has happened. Mrs. Bulstrode is a very good, sensible woman, much more so than Rosamond could ever hope to be; she certainly does not deserve the lot she is in, nor did her husband deserve a wife like her. However, Mrs. Bulstrode shows her honor by choosing to keep to the vows she made at marriage; she is a much stronger woman than most, and deserves to be commended in how she handled this difficult situation", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77"}