{"name": "book 7, Chapter 66", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 66:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Lydgate, out of desperation for money and foolish hope that some will come to him, begins to gamble. Usually this is something which he treats with contempt, but in the situation he is in, he decides to go to the Green Dragon and play billiards. He is very good at first, winning a good bit of money; Fred Vincy and a friend come in, and Fred is surprised, and displeased, to find his brother-in-law there. Fred has been working hard for six months and spending little, and figures he has a little bit to spare at gambling; but when he sees Lydgate there, he thinks better of it. Lydgate's luck changes and he begins to lose, and Fred is good enough to draw him away, and suggest that they see Farebrother, who is right downstairs. PARAGRAPH>Farebrother is there to speak to Fred rather than Lydgate; he tells Fred not to slip back into his old ways, lest he lose Mary and his position with Mr. Garth. He says that he, too, loves Mary, and that if Fred messes things up this time, he is not sure to win Mary back. Farebrother does not mean that he will steal Mary, he is simply warning Fred that he should try to deserve her, and make her happy too. Fred takes the point, and hopefully will try to be more careful and more devoted to her. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>It seems that Lydgate is falling into the same trap that Fred did, only with greater need and desperation. It is likely that he will end up in the same kind of situation as well; with such need and drive as he has, he is likely to go on betting more and more until he has finally lost it all. There are other parallels between Lydgate's situation and Fred's former one; neither truly know the value of money, preferring to have faith that chance will bring them funds where more respectable means have failed. Both are acting out of a great irresponsibility, Lydgate even more so; he is already deeply in debt and, unlike Fred, does not have anyone who could possibly afford to bail him out. PARAGRAPH>Lydgate and Fred become almost reversed in this encounter; usually they are juxtaposed against each other, Lydgate as a more stern, responsible man, and Fred as a flighty youth. However, the circumstances of both men have changed greatly; they are still juxtaposed in this moment, but Lydgate has become fiercely excited, desperate, while Fred is the one who is reticent and responsible. It is ironic that the less responsible of the two would be the conscience of the situation, and that the one of them with more to lose is gambling more than he can afford. But, these reversals of fate are not unknown in Middlemarch, and will certainly happen again. PARAGRAPH>The interconnection of so many things in Middlemarch is a theme which again surfaces here; Fred's hopes and Farebrother's hopes are directly at odds for each other, and actions on either part might affect who ends up with Mary Garth. Farebrother seems to expose some of the contrary aspects of his personality; his tone becomes dark and threatening when he speaks of their conflict of interest, and how Fred could possibly foul his situation up. Mary becomes a symbol of righteousness and goodness to both of them, something valuable to be won and treasured; once Fred is reassured in this, he decides to be more considerate and disciplined so he can win her. PARAGRAPH>Farebrother seems something of a paradox for a brief moment; although he is a trusted advisor and friend to many, here he pretends that vicious self-interest has been threatening to prevail. Was Farebrother really so ready to betray as he pretends. It is not completely clear, though it is certain that Farebrother, though he is a good man, is certainly not a saint through and through", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-56-66"}