{"name": "book 8, Chapter 75", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 75:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>It seems that Rosamond refuses to learn any lessons from her situation; to appease her vanity, she starts to think of Will Ladislaw, and imagines that he must love her instead of Dorothea, because she is so beautiful and charming. She continues to blame her husband for her unhappiness, not her rabid materialism; everything is someone else's fault, and she is still a creature who is perfectly innocent of blame. She gets a letter from Will, saying that he will be paying a visit sometime soon; Rosamond is cheered up by this, and decides to send out invitations for a dinner party. Of course, all invitations are denied, and Rosamond is still ignorant as to the reason why; she goes to visit her parents, and they tell her the terrible news. When she goes home, she tells her husband that she has heard about everything; she then reiterates that they must go to London, to lessen her suffering. He cannot stand to hear this, and storms out, without taking the time to correct her or explain anything. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>It is a shame that Rosamond prefers to blame her husband for every fault she finds in marriage. To be more honest, Rosamond is just not suited to the necessities of marriage; even when she had all the material things she needed, still things were not to her liking. Rosamond lacks the ability to compromise with Lydgate on anything; either she gets her way and things are great, or she is denied, and she thinks him a terrible, hateful man. She thinks that it is his duty to make her happy, and always to be cheerful and pleasant himself; she gives no thought to how she might ease his worry, or make things better for him. She is unable to communicate, except to make demands, manipulate him into something, or to say something proper and charming to someone else; she is completely empty-headed, which means she can only serve as an ornament, and can do nothing that a real wife or woman could. PARAGRAPH>Rosamond's vanity has become like an addiction, almost like a drug; if her husband cannot satisfy her enough, or some charming young man, like Will or Captain Lydgate, cannot fill her needs, she will delude herself to the point where she believes that she is sated. Rosamond is a girl desperate for affection, attention, and approval; but what she really needs is correction, discipline, and impetus to change herself dramatically. What an irony, that the very quality that attracted Lydgate to Rosamond, and kept her bound to him during the courtship, is now proving to be their undoing. PARAGRAPH>With all that Lydgate and Rosamond have been through, it would have been hoped that they break through their communication barriers, and come to some understanding. Only Lydgate knows enough to know how to do this; but already, he regards his wife as a lost cause, and prefers that he suffer through her ignorance than take the easier step of talking to her about what is happening. PARAGRAPH>Lydgate and Rosamond's marriage seems oddly similar to the union of Casaubon and Dorothea. Lydgate's role is parallel to Dorothea's; both of them had the task of trying to soothe their spouse and make their spouse happy, though no amount of Herculean effort on their part ever seemed to suffice. Casaubon and Rosamond are parallel as spouses because they believe that it is their spouse's only job to please them. Both have very unreasonable expectations about what their spouse should do, and sacrifice, in order to satisfy their desires, which are sometimes very petty. Both of them believe in restrictive ideas of roles that each partner should play in marriage; but although they excuse themselves from their own marital duties, they believe that their partner should do twice as much in return", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77"}