{"name": "book 8, Chapter 67", "summary": "Chapter 67:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Luckily, after losing at the Green Dragon, Lydgate feels no more desire to gamble. But, he is still in danger of losing his furniture because of his debt, and decides that he must apply to Bulstrode for money. Lydgate delays; and soon, Bulstrode has called on him to see to some health concerns of his. Bulstrode is feeling unwell probably because of the Raffles situation; but he also wants to speak of Lydgate about withdrawing his support from the hospital and moving away. Mrs. Casaubon, he says, would take his place as major supporter, though it would be best to merge the old Infirmary with the new hospital. Lydgate objects, because he knows that the people who run the Infirmary dislike him. Then, he takes the plunge, and tells Bulstrode that he needs a thousand pounds to discharge his debts and keep himself going; Bulstrode says that it would be better to declare bankruptcy, which Lydgate resents. Lydgate is still left with no way out, and his debt to the town tradespeople is very nearly due. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Lydgate is finally getting over his one major stumbling blockhis pridein order to do something about his debt. But pride, as the predominant theme of Lydgate's story and character, will not be so easy to overcome; how will Lydgate feel afterward if he has gotten the money. The debt has become a symbol of correction, for its sole purpose seems to be to rid Lydgate of his excessive pride, and get him to be more practical and straightforward. But, the irony is that Lydgate must apply to the one man he does not want to be any more beholden to; people wrongly consider Lydgate and Bulstrode closely allied, though they are not too much related. Another irony is that Bulstrode was one of the major causes that Lydgate's practice was much diminished; but, Lydgate chose to work with Bulstrode on the new hospital, so he certainly doesn't count as a victim in this case. PARAGRAPH>Lydgate does dismiss his pride, to the extent that he admits his situation to Bulstrode; however, it is still weighing him down, as he refuses stubbornly to allow the new hospital and the infirmary to merge, and also to declare bankruptcy, when that is what he should do. If Lydgate could focus on doing the right things to help his situation, maybe he could get through it and be fine. But then, there is the issue of Rosamond, who has also been like deadweight to him; he wants to make her happy, but when the only way to do so is to surround her with expensive things, he will surely fail", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77"}