{"name": "book 8, Chapter 71", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 71:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>It seems that Bulstrode has not effectively thwarted ruin; for Bambridge has heard how Bulstrode gained his fortune, and is ready to tell the lot of men at the Green Dragon. The story begins at this point to spread around Middlemarch, with mention of Will Ladislaw's family and how they were robbed by him too. When Bambridge mentions that the man's name was Raffles, someone present remembers that the funeral of Raffles was only the other day, that he died at Stone Court while Bulstrode was there. This looks very bad for Bulstrode; Caleb Garth confesses that he ceased all business with Bulstrode last week, which is taken as another proof of Bulstrode's wrong behavior. Also, gossip about Lydgate suddenly being able to pay his debt, but without aid from Rosamond's family, becomes public knowledge. When it is found out that he was attending on Raffles while he died, and that the money came from Bulstrode, it appears that Lydgate took a bribe so that he wouldn't tell of any foul play that happened. PARAGRAPH>All of Middlemarch is buzzing with the gossip, and people wonder whether Bulstrode can be legally stripped of his money for gaining it through illegal and immoral means. People guess that Lydgate poisoned Raffles, with the money as a bribe; all kinds of things are flying around, and have been spread all through Middlemarch before Lydgate and Bulstrode are even aware of it. Bulstrode is accused at a medical meeting, and again tries to defend himself through his services to the town. But Middlemarch opinion is against him, and believes Lydgate to be an accomplice. However, Dorothea would not see Lydgate slandered if such things proved untrue, and is determined to get the truth about the whole thing. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Once again, the workings of Middlemarch are laid bare, and shown in greater detail and clearness than in previous chapters. Eliot shows how a few words from one person can set an inquisition going against a member of the society; again, rumors and stories are credited as fact, and there are things that are true and untrue in the reports against Bulstrode. People's conjecture is also credited with having the force of truth, as people figure that Bulstrode must have bribed Lydgate, and then start to believe this as fervently as if it were proven fact. Without the aid of a judge and jury, Middlemarch has already condemned Bulstrode and Lydgate; and even if they can come up with some kind of defense, it seems that their names will be blackened forever in that region. PARAGRAPH>Lydgate's pride, at this point, has almost been too harshly punished; he is certainly innocent of wrongdoing, and can be excused for not making the same inquiry of Bulstrode on such a difficult case. But will Lydgate be condemned, along with Bulstrode. The outcome is still somewhat unclear, and though it is possible that Lydgate may indeed be exonerated by Dorothea's kind help, it is likely that his practice will be reduced to nothing, and he will continue to struggle for a living", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210125120143/https://www.gradesaver.com/middlemarch/study-guide/summary-chapters-67-77"}