{"name": "Chapter 20", "summary": "CHAPTER SUMMARY AND NOTES CHAPTER 20 Summary After describing Passepartout's activities in Hong Kong, in this chapter, the fate of Fogg and Aouda is delineated. As Aouda was to travel with Fogg to Europe, many purchases had to be made for her. Fogg accompanies her for shopping at Hong Kong and Aouda is grateful. Then they retire comfortably to their hotel rooms and the next day they reach the dockyard in order to board the Carnatic. But, to their disappointment they learn that the ship has already left. Fix meets them and inquires about their servant as well as about the fact that they have missed the ship. He is happy that Fogg is delayed but Fogg being the determined man he is, he manages to find a ship called Tankadere that can take them to Shanghai. The trustworthy John Bunsby pilots the ship and Fogg is kind enough to ask detective Fix to take a seat in this hired ship as well. Fix agrees and the group leaves Hong Kong on the ship, with the destination of Shanghai in mind. Notes Fogg is a true gentleman and looks after the ladylike Aouda quite well. But, one cannot fathom whether he is in love with her or is merely performing his duty. Even if he were in love with her, he would not have expressed it so readily, is what we realize. Nevertheless, Fogg and Aouda together in Hong Kong make a charming pair. Aouda is presented as delicate and very lady like. Both Fogg and Aouda are oblivious of the fact that while they shop, eat and rest at Hong Kong, the ship Carnatic has already departed. The next morning when they go to the dockyard they find that it has left for Yokohama. Even Passepartout has disappeared. Fogg maintains his calm as always. It is in this 20 th chapter, that Fix finally meets Fogg. He pretends that he too had planned to board the Carnatic and had missed the ship. Fix is so deceitful that he does not mention Passepartout's intoxication to Fogg. We can see that Aouda is genuinely concerned about Passepartout. Fogg too likes his valet though he does not show it too obviously. He does his duty well though and makes good arrangements for Passepartout at Hong Kong in case Passepartout goes to the Consulate or to the Police for help. Fogg is dependable and rational at all times. Fix is very happy that Fogg has missed the ship but his pleasure does not last long. Fogg manages to find another way of reaching the next ship to New York. He hires a ship to Shanghai. The captain of this ship-John Bunsby is a dependable and confident sailor. We indeed like this minor character. The Tankadere is described as a sturdy little ship. Aouda tells Fogg that she is not scared as long as she is with him. She is a brave young woman with style. Fogg is gentlemanly enough to ask Fix to join them. Fix of course is lowly enough to agree, even though his objective is only to spy on Fogg. Fix is truly a despicable character. We have no respect for him. Now, we wait to see how far the Tankadere can take Fogg and his fellow travelers.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820042551/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmAroundWorld59.asp"}