{"name": "Chapters 17\u201318", "summary": "\u201cA man will commit almost any wrong\u2014he will heap up an immense pile of wickedness, as hard as granite,\u00a0.\u00a0.\u00a0. only to build a great, gloomy, dark-chambered mansion, for himself to die in, and for his posterity to be miserable in.\u201d\t See Important Quotations Explained  Summary \u2014 Chapter 17: The Flight of Two Owls  Clifford and Hepzibah flee the house of the seven gables, worried that they will be implicated in the death of Judge Pyncheon. They walk along the village streets, fading into the gloomy background of the overcast day, noticed by no one. Hepzibah feels as if she is living in a nightmare, but Clifford has never seemed more youthful or alive; the death of the Judge has left him feeling liberated and elated. They board a train, and an old gentleman sitting on the other side of their passenger car strikes up a conversation with Clifford. He remarks that it is a poor day to travel and would be better spent inside near a fireplace. Clifford, however, disagrees, arguing that the \u201cadmirable invention of the railroad\u201d will \u201cdo away with those stale ideas of home and fireside, and substitute something better.\u201d The old man disagrees, and Clifford begins to speak at length. He outlines his belief that mankind moves in an \u201cascending spiral,\u201d where previous ideas are revived and reformed. In this case, the advent of the railroad will allow mankind to return to the nomadic culture of its primitive era, and will prevent people from becoming \u201cprisoner[s] for life in brick, and stone, and old worm-eaten timber.\u201d \tClifford becomes very animated and almost youthful during this lecture. He goes on to suggest that houses, particularly those created by people guilty of something, can visit old curses on future generations. Clifford describes a \u201chypothetical\u201d house, with seven gables, where a dead man sits in the parlor. He says, \u201cI could never flourish there, nor be happy,\u201d and claims it would be a relief if this house were torn down or destroyed. He hopes for a more \u201cnomadic\u201d future, where houses are out of daily use. He also believes that a more spiritual age is approaching, and speaks on the unifying nature of the telegraph, which he believes will serve to make the world smaller by allowing lovers to talk over long distances. He deplores, however, the ability of the telegraph to aid in hunting down criminals, because it prevents them from being able to escape their crimes and start afresh, robs them of their rights, and deprives them of a \u201ccity of refuge.\u201d The old man becomes very embarrassed and suspicious during Clifford\u2019s tirade. Clifford and Hepzibah get off the train at a lonely way station, where Clifford\u2019s strength leaves him. Exhausted, Clifford tells Hepzibah to do with him as she will. Summary \u2014 Chapter 18: Governor Pyncheon  Judge Pyncheon is both spoken of and directly addressed in this chapter, as if the man were not dead but merely asleep or meditating in his chair. The narrator exhorts the Judge to awaken while simultaneously listing all of the scheduled plans that the Judge is now missing. The most significant is a dinner meeting at which the Judge had planned to get himself nominated as a candidate for governor of Massachusetts. Even for this, however, the bloated body will not wake up. A solemn march of ghosts begins. Deceased Pyncheon after deceased Pyncheon parades by, from Colonel Pyncheon on. Each of them stops at the portrait of Colonel Pyncheon and shakes it, looking in vain for something hidden inside the painting. Among them is the Judge\u2019s own son, whom he has long ago disowned. The novel wonders what the son is doing here\u2014if he is dead, then the Judge\u2019s property will go to Clifford and Hepzibah. The next day comes, and Judge Pyncheon still resists the narrator\u2019s jeers and calls to wake up. A fly crawls across his face and creeps toward his open eyes. The narrator gives up in disgust. The Judge continues to sit slumped in his chair, and the novel\u2019s reverie is interrupted by the tinkling of the shop bell. Analysis \u2014 Chapters 17\u201318 In Clifford\u2019s animated discussion with the old gentleman on the train, we see both a continuation of and a variation on Holgrave\u2019s arguments in Chapter 12. Like Holgrave, Clifford ridicules the idea of relying too heavily on the institutions of the past; he sees society as rolling toward nomadic greatness on an unstoppable tidal wave of progress. He is especially offended by the habit of \u201cplanting\u201d a family in a single spot, which he says traps people in old misery and taunts them with the memories of their past glory. Unlike Holgrave, however, Clifford does not dismiss all of the past and even holds up humankind\u2019s primitive era as an example of the ideal society. His contempt seems to be more for the more recent past. Clifford\u2019s tirade constitutes an escape, a mental abandonment of the house that parallels his physical flight on the train, and his elation is due to the fact that he feels real liberty awaits him ahead. The house does not give up easily, though, and even at a distance it pushes Clifford toward insanity, prompting him to reveal the presence of his cousin\u2019s body in the house and to commit other indiscretions, even as he cheers on the house\u2019s destruction. \tChapter 18 is a descriptive tour de force. The rather unusual tactic of having the narrator jeer at the villain\u2019s corpse serves to lay bare both the full extent of the Judge\u2019s ambition and the extent to which he was hated. The Judge does not have the same powers of interior monologue as the other characters, so revealing the details of his day, most notably his bid for the governorship of Massachusetts, could be a tricky endeavor, one that falls well outside of the rest of the novel\u2019s narrative structure. Although the details provided here are not vital to the plot, they offer a powerful comment on the aspirations of the Judge and of people like him. The discussion also confirms what the novel has maintained since the beginning\u2014that it is when such men are on the verge of their greatest grasp that they are cut down, as was evidenced by the fate of both Gervayse and Colonel Pyncheon. Even more important, it allows us to witness firsthand the disdain the Judge deserves. There is something distasteful about gloating over the body of a fallen foe, but the fact that it occurs forces us to wonder what the Judge has done that could merit such mockery, and consequently to understand the threat that the Judge has posed to so many lives. \tThe other significant scene in this chapter is the ghostly procession of Pyncheons, a powerful moment that Hawthorne carefully disqualifies by saying, \u201cThe fantastic scene, just hinted at, must by no means be considered as forming an actual portion of our story.\u201d As with Holgrave\u2019s story about Alice Pyncheon, Hawthorne seems reluctant to sacrifice the novel\u2019s realism, so he casts the fantastic as a character\u2019s story or, in this case, as a flight of the imagination. By having the scene be a daydream instead of an actual occurrence, Hawthorne fulfills the promise he made in the Preface\u2014that he will balance the novel form with the romance. This story, like Holgrave\u2019s story about the younger Matthew Maule, is also a distinct foreshadowing of events, allowing us to divine that the frame surrounding the portrait will be of some importance in the future.", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210211164251/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/sevengables/section10/"}