{"name": "Chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200929182814/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/david-copperfield/summary/chapter-9", "summary": "Two months pass between the end of winter holidays and David's birthday in March. He remembers this birthday particularly because of what happened on it. Mr. Sharp, the teacher at Salem House, comes in to the classroom and tells David to go to the parlor. David thinks he's going to get another care package from Peggotty. He finds Mr. Creakle eating breakfast with Mrs. Creakle. Mrs. Creakle holds an open letter in front of her. She tells David that the world changes all around us all the time, and that people pass from it throughout our lives. And then Mrs. Creakle informs David that his mother has died, and that his little brother is ill and will probably pass away soon. Mrs. Creakle keeps David in the parlor all day while he weeps and dozes off in turn. David realizes that he is an orphan now. He is really sad that his mother has died, but at the same time, he is aware of a new dignity he feels in relation to his classmates. David heads home for the funeral. The man who escorts him through London this time is not Mr. Barkis: it is another man, Mr. Omer, who brings David to a workshop with three seamstresses who are stitching up a black set of clothes for David. It turns out that Mr. Omer also stitched the clothes David's father was buried in. Mr. Omer breaks the news that the baby has died. David starts to cry once more, and Minnie Omer comforts him. A man carrying some nails appears - he seems to be Minnie's sweetheart. He has built a coffin for David's mother and brother. Having made these funeral preparations, the Omers and Joram, the carpenter, all get into a coach with David. David feels odd: he is miserable, but he is surrounded by people enjoying their ride. When David arrives, he is immediately greeted by Peggotty, who bursts into tears and hugs him when she sees him. Mr. Murdstone is sitting in the parlor weeping silently next to the fire. Miss Murdstone asks David in a whisper if he has been measured for his mourning clothes. That's all she offers him in terms of comfort. Mr. Murdstone moves restlessly through the house, rarely speaking to Miss Murdstone and never to David. David also sees very little of Peggotty until the funeral. At the funeral, Mr. Chillip greets David kindly. Mr. Chillip tries to draw Miss Murdstone into a conversation about how much David has grown, but she refuses to acknowledge David. David recalls the pallbearers carrying his mother's coffin from the garden down the path to the cemetery. Peggotty comes in to David's room when all is finished. She explains that Mrs. Copperfield had been ill and unhappy for a long time, that she improved a bit when her baby was born, but she never really recovered her health. Mrs. Copperfield felt that she was going to die. She told Peggotty first and then Mr. Murdstone about a week before it happened. On her deathbed, Mrs. Copperfield tells Peggotty to bury her baby with her if he should die, too. She also praises Mr. Copperfield's loving heart. Finally, at dawn, Mrs. Copperfield asks Peggotty to hold her. She dies softly, like a child going to sleep. After his mother's death, David only remembers her as she used to be when he was a young child.", "analysis": ""}