{"name": "Chapter 64", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200929182814/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/david-copperfield/summary/chapter-64", "summary": "David is starting on his last chapter, and he's going to spend it looking back one last time at all of the characters of his story. He sees Agnes sitting next to him, surrounded by family and friends. He sees Miss Betsey, 80 years old but tough as ever, with Peggotty by her side. Miss Betsey has finally become a godmother to Betsey Trotwood - David's daughter. Peggotty always carries the old book David used to read with her, the Crocodile Book, to show to David's children. During the summer holidays, David's sons fly kites with Mr. Dick. Mr. Dick continues to promise that the Memorial will be finished when he has time. David sees a senile old woman who doesn't recognize him any more: Mrs. Steerforth. She is accompanied by Miss Dartle, as spiteful as ever, but still looking after Mrs. Steerforth. David sees Julia Mills, the woman who helped him meet up with Dora in secret all of those years ago. Miss Mills has gotten over her broken heart and married a rich man from Scotland. She has become spoiled and irritable with too much money. Julia has become a member of the dry, barren society that also controls Mr. Jack Maldon - the kind of society that looks down on good men like Doctor Strong. Doctor Strong continues to work on his dictionary. He lives happily with Annie. Mrs. Markleham also continues to live with the Strongs, but she's not so powerful now. Tommy Traddles has become bald and prosperous: he's going to be a judge soon. David attends family dinner with Traddles and Sophy, where he sees all of Traddles's Crewler sisters-in-law with their husbands and children. Traddles sits at the head of the table like a proper head of this giant family. The only unlucky Crewler has been the eldest, the Beauty, who has been left a widow with one child. She is living with Sophy and Traddles. All of these faces from his past fade from his memory except one, which shines before him like a light from heaven. That face is the one beside him now: Agnes, who continues to guide David to be a better man.", "analysis": ""}