{"name": "chapter fourteen: the knitting done", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Dickens/A_Tale_Of_Two_Cities_Study_Guide29.html", "summary": "While Darnay is being rescued, Madame Defarge sits in conference with The Vengeance and Jacques Three in the wood-sawyer's shop. She has decided to go ahead with the prosecution of Darnay's family without her husband's knowledge. She declares her intention of strengthening her case against Lucie by visiting her immediately. She is sure to catch Lucie mourning over her husband's execution; she may even get Lucie to denounce the Republic in her miserable and vulnerable state. Madame Defarge can then uses her words to convict her. Madame Defarge instructs The Vengeance to take her knitting and wait for her at the guillotine. Miss Pross and Jerry Cruncher have been left behind and plan to leave by the three o'clock coach. They have seen the carriage with Darnay in it speed safely away and are making the final preparations for their own departure. Miss Pross instructs Jerry Cruncher to go and get the carriage and wait for her outside Notre Dame Cathedral. Madame Defarge arrives ten minutes after Jerry's departure. She demands to know where Lucie is. Miss Pross places herself in front of the door to Lucie's chamber and attempts some explanation. Neither woman understands the other, for they speak in their own language. Miss Pross, however, clearly senses Madame Defarge's evil intentions. Madame Defarge, realizing that the other rooms are vacant, suspects that the family has escaped. She attempts to open the door behind Miss Pross to have proof of her suspicions. Miss Pross knows that the longer she keeps Madame Defarge from discovering that the room is empty, the greater the chance for the fugitives to escape. As a result, she struggles with Madame Defarge, who reaches for her knife. Miss Pross' arms encircle Defarge's waist and do not allow her access to the knife. She then reaches for the gun hidden in her blouse, but Miss Pross hits it away. The gun goes off with a crash and instantly kills Madame Defarge. The sound of the gunfire deafens Miss Pross for life.", "analysis": ""}