Between what matters and what seems to matter, how should the world we
know judge wisely?

When the scheming, indomitable brain of Sigsbee Manderson was scattered
by a shot from an unknown hand, that world lost nothing worth a single
tear; it gained something memorable in a harsh reminder of the vanity of
such wealth as this dead man had piled up--without making one loyal
friend to mourn him, without doing an act that could help his memory to
the least honor. But when the news of his end came, it seemed to those
living in the great vortices of business as if the earth, too, shuddered
under a blow.

In all the lurid commercial history of his country there had been no
figure that had so imposed itself upon the mind of the trading world. He
had a niche apart in its temples. Financial giants, strong to direct and
augment the forces of capital, and taking an approved toll in millions
for so doing, had existed before; but in the case of Manderson there had
been this singularity, that a pale halo of piratical romance, a thing
especially dear to the hearts of his countrymen, had remained
incongruously about his head through the years when he stood in every
eye as the unquestioned guardian of stability, the stamper-out of
manipulated crises, the foe of the raiding chieftains that infest the
borders of Wall Street.

The fortune left by his grandfather, who had been one of those
chieftains, on the smaller scale of his day, had descended to him with
accretion through his father, who during a long life had quietly
continued to lend money and never had margined a stock. Manderson, who
had at no time known what it was to be without large sums to his hand,
    should have been altogether of that newer American plutocracy which is
    steadied by the tradition and habit of great wealth. But it was not so.
    While his nurture and education had taught him European ideas of a rich
    man's proper external circumstance; while they had rooted in him an
    instinct for quiet magnificence, the larger costliness which does not
    shriek of itself with a thousand tongues; there had been handed on to
    him, nevertheless, much of the Forty-Niner and financial buccaneer, his
    forbear. During that first period of his business career which had been
    called his early bad manner he had been little more than a gambler of
    genius, his hand against every man's, an infant prodigy who brought to
    the enthralling pursuit of speculation a brain better endowed than any
    opposed to it. At St. Helena it was laid down that war is _une belle
    occupation_, and so the young Manderson had found the multitudinous and
    complicated dog-fight of the Stock Exchange of New York.

    Then came his change. At his father's death, when Manderson was thirty
    years old, some new revelation of the power and the glory of the god he
    served seemed to have come upon him. With the sudden, elastic
    adaptability of his nation he turned to steady labor in his father's
    banking business, closing his ears to the sound of the battles of the
    Street. In a few years he came to control all the activity of the great
    firm whose unimpeached conservatism, safety and financial weight lifted
    it like a cliff above the angry sea of the markets. All mistrust founded
    on the performances of his youth had vanished. He was quite plainly a
    different man. How the change came about none could with authority say,
    but there was a story of certain last words spoken by his father, whom
    alone he had respected and perhaps loved.

    He began to tower above the financial situation. Soon his name was
    current in the bourses of the world. One who spoke the name of Manderson
    called up a vision of all that was broad-based and firm in the vast
    wealth of the United States. He planned great combinations of capital,
    drew together and centralized industries of continental scope, financed
    with unerring judgment the large designs of state or of private
    enterprise. Many a time when he "took hold" to smash a strike, or to
    federate the ownership of some great field of labor, he sent ruin upon a
    multitude of tiny homes; and if miners or steel-workers or cattlemen
    defied him and invoked disorder, he could be more lawless and ruthless
    than they. But this was done in the pursuit of legitimate business ends.
    Tens of thousands of the poor might curse his name, but the financier
    and the speculator execrated him no more. He stretched a hand to protect
    or to manipulate the power of wealth in every corner of the country.
    Forcible, cold and unerring, in all he did he ministered to the national
    lust for magnitude; and a grateful country surnamed him the Colossus.

    But there was an aspect of Manderson in this later period that lay long
    unknown and unsuspected save by a few, his secretaries and lieutenants
    and certain of the associates of his bygone hurling time. This little
    circle knew that Manderson, the pillar of sound business and stability
    in the markets, had his hours of nostalgia for the lively times when the
    Street had trembled at his name. It was, said one of them, as if
    Blackbeard had settled down as a decent merchant in Bristol on the
    spoils of the Main. Now and then the pirate would glare suddenly out,
    the knife in his teeth and the sulphur matches sputtering in his
    hat-band. During such spasms of reversion to type a score of tempestuous
    raids upon the market had been planned on paper in the inner room of the
    offices of Manderson, Colefax and Company. But they were never carried
    out. Blackbeard would quell the mutiny of his old self within him and go
    soberly down to his counting-house--humming a stave or two of "Spanish
    Ladies," perhaps, under his breath. Manderson would allow himself the
    harmless satisfaction, as soon as the time for action had gone by, of
    pointing out to some Rupert of the markets how a coup worth a million to
    the depredator might have been made. "Seems to me," he would say almost
    wistfully, "the Street is getting to be a mighty dull place since I
    quit." By slow degrees this amiable weakness of the Colossus became
    known to the business world, which exulted greatly in the knowledge.

    *       *       *       *       *

    At the news of his death, panic went through the markets like a
    hurricane; for it came at a luckless time. Prices tottered and crashed
    like towers in an earthquake. For two days Wall Street was a clamorous
    inferno of pale despair. All over the United States, wherever
    speculation had its devotees, went a waft of ruin, a plague of suicide.
    In Europe also not a few took with their own hands lives that had become
    pitiably linked to the destiny of a financier whom most of them had
    never seen. In Paris a well-known banker walked quietly out of the
    Bourse and fell dead upon the broad steps among the raving crowd of
    Jews, a phial crushed in his hand. In Frankfort one leaped from the
    Cathedral top, leaving a redder stain where he struck the red tower. Men
    stabbed and shot and strangled themselves, drank death or breathed it as
    the air, because in a lonely corner of England the life had departed
    from one cold heart vowed to the service of greed.

    The blow could not have fallen at a more disastrous moment. It came when
    Wall Street was in a condition of suppressed "scare." Suppressed:
    because for a week past the great interests known to act with or to be
    actually controlled by the Colossus had been desperately combating the
    effects of the sudden arrest of Lucas Hahn, and the exposure of his
    plundering of the Hahn banks. This bombshell, in its turn, had fallen at
    a time when the market had been "boosted" beyond its real strength. In
    the language of the place, a slump was due. Reports from the corn-lands
    had not been good, and there had been two or three railway statements
    which had been expected to be much better than they were. But at
    whatever point in the vast area of speculation the shudder of the
    threatened break had been felt, "the Manderson crowd" had stepped in and
    held the market up. All through the week the speculator's mind, as
    shallow as it is quick-witted, as sentimental as greedy, had seen in
    this the hand of the giant stretched out in protection from afar.
    Manderson, said the newspapers in chorus, was in hourly communication
    with his lieutenants in the Street. One journal was able to give, in
    round figures, the sum spent on cabling between New York and Marlstone
    in the past twenty-four hours; it told how a small staff of expert
    operators had been sent down by the Post Office authorities to Marlstone
    to deal with the flood of messages. Another revealed that Manderson, on
    the first news of the Hahn crash, had arranged to abandon his holiday
    and return home by the _Lusitania_; but that he soon had the situation
    so well in hand that he had determined to remain where he was.

    All this was falsehood, more or less consciously elaborated by the
    "finance editors," consciously initiated and encouraged by the shrewd
    business men of the Manderson group, who knew that nothing could better
    help their plans than this illusion of hero-worship--knew also that no
    word had come from Manderson in answer to their messages, and that
    Howard B. Jeffrey, of Steel and Iron fame, was the true organizer of
    victory. So they fought down apprehension through four feverish days,
    and minds grew calmer. On Saturday, though the ground beneath the feet
    of Mr. Jeffrey yet rumbled now and then with AEtna-mutterings of
    disquiet, he deemed his task almost done. The market was firm and slowly
    advancing. Wall Street turned to its sleep of Sunday, worn out but
    thankfully at peace.

    In the first trading hour of Monday a hideous rumor flew round the sixty
    acres of the financial district. It came into being as the lightning
    comes, a blink that seems to begin nowhere; though it is to be suspected
    that it was first whispered over the telephone--together with an urgent
    selling order--by some employee in the cable service. In five minutes
    the dull noise of the curbstone market in Broad Street had leaped to a
    high note of frantic interrogation. From within the hive of the Exchange
    itself could be heard a droning hubbub of fear and men rushed hatless in
    and out. Was it true? asked every man; and every man replied, with
    trembling lips, that it was a lie put out by some unscrupulous "short"
    interest seeking to cover itself. In another quarter of an hour news
    came of a sudden and ruinous collapse of "Yankees" in London at the
    close of the Stock Exchange day. It was enough. New York had still four
    hours' trading in front of her. The strategy of pointing to Manderson as
    the savior and warden of the market had recoiled upon its authors with
    annihilating force, and Jeffrey, his ear at his private telephone,
    listened to the tale of disaster with a set jaw. The new Napoleon had
    lost his Marengo. He saw the whole financial landscape sliding and
    falling into chaos before him. In half an hour the news of the finding
    of Manderson's body, with the inevitable rumor that it was suicide, was
    printing in a dozen newspaper offices; but before a copy reached Wall
    Street the tornado of the panic was in full fury, and Howard B. Jeffrey
    and his collaborators were whirled away like leaves before its breath.

    *       *       *       *       *

    All this sprang out of nothing.

    Nothing in the texture of the general life had changed. The corn had not
    ceased to ripen in the sun. The rivers bore their barges and gave power
    to a myriad engines. The flocks fattened on the pastures, the herds were
    unnumbered. Men labored everywhere in the various servitudes to which
    they were born, and chafed not more than usual in their bonds. Bellona
    tossed and murmured as ever, yet still slept her uneasy sleep. To all
    mankind save a million or two of half-crazed gamblers, blind to all
    reality, the death of Manderson meant nothing; the life and work of the
    world went on. Weeks before he died strong hands had been in control of
    every wire in the huge network of commerce and industry that he had
    supervised. Before his corpse was buried his countrymen had made a
    strange discovery: that the existence of the potent engine of monopoly
    that went by the name of Sigsbee Manderson had not been a condition of
    even material prosperity. The panic blew itself out in two days, the
    pieces were picked up, the bankrupts withdrew out of sight; the market
    "recovered a normal tone."

    While the brief delirium was yet subsiding there broke out a domestic
    scandal in England that suddenly fixed the attention of two continents.
    Next morning the Chicago Limited was wrecked, and the same day a notable
    politician was shot down in cold blood by his wife's brother in the
    streets of New Orleans. Within a week of its arising "the Manderson
    story," to the trained sense of editors throughout the Union, was
    "cold." The tide of American visitors pouring through Europe made eddies
    round the memorial or statue of many a man who had died in poverty; and
    never thought of their most famous plutocrat. Like the poet who died in
    Rome, so young and poor, a hundred years ago, he was buried far away
    from his own land; but for all the men and women of Manderson's people
    who flock round the tomb of Keats in the cemetery under the Monte
    Testaccio, there is not one, nor ever will be, to stand in reverence by
    the rich man's grave beside the little church of Marlstone.
