{"name": "Chapter 27", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421150649/https://www.gradesaver.com/dracula/study-guide/summary-chapter-25-27", "summary": "Includes the November 1st and November 2nd entries of Mina Harker's journal; a memorandum by Van Helsing, dated November 4th and November 5th; the November 4th entry of Jonathan Harker's journal; the November 5th entry of Dr. Seward's diary; the November 5th entry of Van Helsing's memorandum; the November 6th entry of Mina Harker's journal; and a final note by Jonathan Harker. Mina begins to sleep more and more during the day, and she loses her appetite. Van Helsing can no longer hypnotize her, and he is worried about her changing habits. The two friends make it up through the Borgo Pass, using Jonathan's journal for guidance. When Mina and Van Helsing are drawing closer to the mountains on November 4th, Van Helsing makes camp as night falls and makes a circle of crushed holy wafer around Mina. He asks her to move out of the circle, and she cannot; Van Helsing is overjoyed. What Mina cannot do, the vampires will be unable to do. The three women appear that night, calling Mina \"sister\" and asking her to join them. But Mina does not go outside the circle. Van Helsing stays within the protective circle as well, but the horses are not so luckythey die of fright. Van Helsing makes his way to the castle, entering and using his hammer to destroy the doors so that he cannot be locked in. He finds the tombs of the three vampire women. He is conflicted about his task: their beauty and sensuality affects him, even in their sleep, and he is able to make himself go on only by thinking of Mina's peril. He also finds Dracula's great tomb, which he renders useless with a wafer. He then uses the hammer and stake to kill all three of the vampire women, whose bodies turn to dust immediately after the moment of deaththe decay that should have taken place centuries ago happens in an instant. At the moment of death, there is a look of peace on each of their faces. Before leaving, he uses the holy wafer to block all of the entrances to the castle. On foot, they go east to meet the others. Snow is falling heavily, and the sound of wolves is terrifying. As sunset nears on November 6th, they come upon a cart driven by gypsies. On the cart is the last box. Van Helsing makes a protective circle around Mina and prepares for battle. Quincey and Seward are galloping up the road from the south, and Arthur and Jonathan are coming from the north. The cart is surrounded, but if Dracula is not destroyed quickly, he will be in full possession of all of his powers in a matter of minutes. There is a fierce fight, but the gypsies are overpowered. Jonathan flings the coffin to the ground, and he and Quincey pry open the lid. They then kill Dracula just as the sun drops below the horizon, Jonathan's knife across the throat, Quincey's bowie knife into the heart. Mina notes that even Dracula, at the very end, has a look of peace on his face. The gypsies flee in terror. Quincey has been mortally wounded in the fight against the gypsies. Mina rushes to him, now able to pass through the barrier of holy wafers, and Quincey tells her that his death was worth it. He points out that the scar on Mina's forehead has vanished, signifying that the mark of the undead is gone from her, and then he dies, \"a gallant gentleman. In a final note, Jonathan says that seven years have passed since the events of the novel. The Harkers have a son that they have named Quincey, and both Seward and Arthur are married. Their writings have all been compiled, but even those who wrote them seem at times unable to believe them.", "analysis": "As the heroes journey farther into the wilderness, the land of the East itself, rather than Dracula, provides all of the dangers and obstacles. Dangerous rapids, wolves, snow, gypsies, and the three vampire women all combine to make for a treacherous journey. Mina reports at one point that the natives seem simple and strong, but they seem to exist at odds with their land, in constant fear of the evils that walk there. This last chapter drives home the theme of Christian redemption, which is possible for all. Although not exactly redemption in the strongest spiritual sense, Jonathan makes up for his earlier failure by being the fiercest in fighting the gypsies; he also is one of the men who deliver the killing blow against Dracula. Mina's full purity is restored. The three vampire women, before they die, have a look of peace on their faces. Even Dracula is allowed to know peace at the end. The heroes have not only ended the threat posed to England and Mina; they have also brought peace to Dracula's soul. Christian redemption awaits all, and Mina's earlier statement that perhaps these heroes were brought together to do God's will seems to have been accurate. The final coda ensures the reader that all the characters have lived happily ever after, while preserving, at the very end, the illusion that the reader has just read a factual account"}