{"name": "Chapter 11", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421150649/https://www.gradesaver.com/dracula/study-guide/summary-chapter-11-15", "summary": "Includes the September 12th entry of Lucy Westenra's diary; the September 13th entry of Dr. Seward's diary; the September 17th entry of Lucy Westenra's diary; a September 18th article from the Pall Mall Gazette; the September 17th entry of Dr. Seward's diary; a telegram from Van Helsing to Dr. Seward, dated September 17th; the September 18th entry of Dr. Seward's diary; a memorandum left by Lucy Westenra, dated September 17th. When Van Helsing and Seward arrive the next morning, they are greeted by Mrs. Westenra, who tells them cheerfully that she removed all of the flowers from the room, including the wreath around Lucy's neck, and opened the window to let in fresh air. Once Mrs. Westenra has left the room, Van Helsing breaks downthe first time Seward has seen his old mentor lose control. Van Helsing regains his composure and the two men go into Lucy's room to find her horribly drained. This time, Van Helsing is the donor of the needed blood. He then warns Mrs. Westenra to never remove anything from the room, and he tells Dr. Seward that he himself will stay with Lucy for the next few nights. In her diary, Lucy reports feeling much better, even though she can hear the sound of something flapping angrily outside of her window. The September 18th article in the Pall Mall Gazette reports that a large wolf has escaped from its cage and returned the next day, its head covered by broken glass. Back at the asylum and awaiting word from Van Helsing, Seward is working in his office when he is attacked by Renfield. The lunatic bursts in and attacks him with a knife, cutting his wrist. Seward knocks him back with a punch, and at that point Renfield seems to lose interest in him. As the attendants rush in, Renfield is busying himself licking up the small pool of Seward's blood on the floor. Meanwhile, Van Helsing sends a telegram telling Seward to go to Hillingham and spend the night watching Lucy, as the older doctor needs to spend a day in Amsterdam. The telegram is delayed by a day, so Seward does not get the instructions on time. Lucy has trouble sleeping, and her mother comes in to lie with her in bed. Suddenly, a wolf uses its head to smash through the window; only the animal's head breaks through the glass. Lucy's mother thrashes around fearfully, accidentally tearing away Lucy's garlic wreath. The old woman has a fatal heart attack. The wolf then withdraws its head and disappears, and Lucy loses consciousness. When she comes to, the four maids of the house come in. Terrified, they wrap Mrs. Westenra's body in a sheet and lay it on the bed. Lucy orders them to go to the kitchen and have a glass of wine to calm their nerves. She also lays all of the garlic flowers on her mother's body. When the maids don't come back, Lucy goes to the kitchen to find the four women unconscious; the wine smells like the drug laudanum. Lucy writes that the \"air seems full of specks, floating and circling,\" and finishes her entry fearful that she will not survive the night.", "analysis": "Van Helsing has very limited success in fighting Dracula. Mrs. Westenra unwittingly removes the garlic, dooming her daughter to another night of draining. Van Helsing tells no one of the thing that is responsible. When Lucy is revitalized by new blood, Seward is left doubting his own sanity, wondering if working at the asylum has incapacitated his mindhere, as elsewhere in the novel, a character's casual comments play on the theme of slippage between madness and sanity. Due to a delayed telegram, the vampire is given a window of opportunity, and here we see how cunning the Count can be. Although he is powerless to break through the entrance protected by garlic, he can use the wolf to smash through the glass. Note that Stoker places the newspaper article before the narrative of Lucy's memorandum, even though the dates show that the article came afterward. This move helps to create suspense, as the reader wonders about the significance of the escaped and returned wolf. Stoker's order also gives the events of the memorandum the climactic positioning in the chapter. The article reports that when the wolf returns, its head is covered in glass; this clue establishes that the wolf is the same animal Dracula uses to get to Lucy. In one move, Dracula causes the death of Mrs. Westenra, rids the room of the flowers , and creates an opening through which he can enter. He uses the more common tactic of drugging the wine to put the maids out of the way"}