{"name": "part ii, Chapter I", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417013424/https://www.gradesaver.com/gullivers-travels/study-guide/summary-part-ii-a-voyage-to-brobdingnag", "summary": "\"A great Storm described, the long Boat sent to fetch Water, the Author goes with it to discover the Country. He is left on Shoar, is seized by one of the Natives, and carry'd to a Farmer's House. His Reception there, with several Accidents that happen'd there. A Description of the Inhabitants. On June 20, 1702, ten months after his return from Lilliput and Blefuscu, Gulliver returns to the sea in a ship named Adventure. The journey begins very smoothly, the only delay being caused by an illness contracted by the captain. They continue on their journey for several months until a storm begins to brew, pushing the Adventure several miles off track. On June 16, 1703, the crew sees land and drops anchor, at which point the captain sends a dozen men on shore to fetch water. Gulliver wanders away from the other men to observe the countryside until he sees them in the boat hurrying back to the ship. He tries to call out to them, but he sees that they are being chased by a giant-though the giant is not able to catch the boat. Gulliver runs as fast as he can into the island. Gulliver finds that much of the island is well cultivated, but to his surprise, when he comes across a hayfield, he realizes that the grass is more than twenty feet tall. Similarly, corn is at least forty feet high. Gulliver sees another giant, this time well-dressed, walking along the path he is on. He notes that each of the giant's strides is about ten yards long. The well-dressed giant is joined by seven workers, whom he instructs to begin reaping the corn. Exhausted and filled with despair, Gulliver lies down and hopes that he will die. He writes, \"I bemoaned my desolate Widow, and Fatherless Children. He begins to think back on the Lilliputians who thought that he was such a powerful and strong creature, saying that he now feels as a single Lilliputian would feel among humans. Undoubtably,\" he muses, \"Philosophers are in the right when they tell us, that nothing is great or little otherwise than by Comparison. When he is about to be stepped on by one of the farmers, Gulliver cries out as loudly as he can. The giant stops short and picks up Gulliver to get a better look. Gulliver resists struggling in order to avoid being dropped sixty feet to the ground and instead brings his hands to a prayer position and points his eyes skyward. The giant seems pleased with Gulliver and, putting him in his pocket, heads over to show his master. The master takes Gulliver home to show his wife, who screams at first, but when she sees how polite Gulliver is, she quickly warms up to him. Gulliver and the farmer try to speak to each other but are unsuccessful. At dinnertime, Gulliver sees that the full family consists of the parents, three children, and an elderly grandmother. The farmer's wife breaks up some bread and a small piece of meat and hands them to Gulliver, who gets out his knife and fork and proceeds to eat, thoroughly delighting the whole family. Later, as Gulliver walks across the table toward the farmer , the farmer's son picks him up by one leg and dangles him in the air until the farmer grabs him back and boxes the boy's ear. Gulliver, not wanting to make an enemy in his new home, signals that he would like the boy to be pardoned, which he is. At this point an infant is brought into the room, who at the sight of Gulliver cries to get him into its hand-with which the mother obliges. Quickly the baby squeezes Gulliver and puts his head in its mouth, at which Gulliver cries out until the baby drops him, luckily into the mother's apron. The baby cannot be quieted until the nurse nurses it. The sight of the woman's breast is repulsive to Gulliver. It is so large in his view that he can see all of its defects. After dinner Gulliver signals that he is tired. The farmer's wife sets him on her bed and covers him with a handkerchief, where he sleeps until two rats the size of large dogs startle him. Gulliver fights them with his hanger , killing one and scaring the other away. Afterwards Gulliver signals that he needs time alone in the garden to relieve himself. He asks the reader to excuse him for dwelling on particulars", "analysis": "Whatever Gulliver did not gain in perspective  during his time in Lilliput, he gains in Brobdingnag.  His time here not only gives Gulliver an understanding of what it is like to be powerless, but it also shows Gulliver how the Lilliputians must have felt when near him.  Of course this situation is even more intimidating because here there are many giants, while in Lilliput he was the only one.  This is how a Lilliputian would feel in England.  The differences Gulliver experiences between the two islands are heightened because of the close proximity of the trips.  Gulliver feels even smaller in Brobdingnag than he would have felt if he had never journeyed to Lilliput. Gulliver's newfound understanding of perspective helps him to feel powerless more profoundly-first for himself, when he curls up and rather pathetically hopes to die, and then for others, especially for the Lilliputians he left behind.  As his fear rises, he becomes more and more emotional, eventually becoming so overwhelmed that he gives up, curling up into the fetal position. Once Gulliver is brought to the farmer's house, many challenges await him because of his lack of power in this land.  A mere baby threatens his life, as do two common rats.  Gulliver is able to fight them off in a seemingly heroic fashion, but it is clear that he could have lost the fight.  Gulliver is also surprised by the aesthetic differences of the world from this new perspective.  The nurse's breast is disgusting to him because he can clearly see every deformity and blemish.  He imagines what the Lilliputians thought of his physicality. In these chapters we again see Gulliver as less than heroic.  Just as in Lilliput, when Gulliver did not fight against his captivity , here Gulliver does nothing to try to avoid being captured.  He waits until he is about to be stepped on before taking any action at all.  And he only begs for mercy from the giant Brobdingnags.  Gulliver relies on the protection of a young girl who tucks him into a doll's cradle at night. Gulliver survives and thrives only partly on the basis of his good manners. For the most part, he is a pet and a curiosity. Gulliver's compliance continues when he is required to perform so that the farmer can earn money.  Gulliver becomes drastically emaciated, but he never resists what he is being told to do.  In fact, readers do not really learn that Gulliver hated his task until he is out of danger and complains to the queen of Brobdingnag.  Once Gulliver is seemingly safe at the court and has gained favor with the queen, he remains a plaything with very little respect, especially from the ladies at court. As a tiny person in the Brobdingnag world, Gulliver endures several trials that a larger person would never have to suffer.  This again reminds the reader of the importance of physical strength as well as intellectual strength.  Even when combat is not an issue, a large stature intimidates one's opponent.  As a tiny person, Gulliver is left to the whims of those around him.   In the fifth chapter, for instance, Gulliver is captured by a small monkey that would have been a minor threat in England. The overreaction of the queen and the rest of the government to this incident sheds important light on the Brobdingnag government.  It seems that this government is rash.  The killing of the monkey also shows that Gulliver has more status in the court than that of a toy or an animal. His nemesis is the dwarf, who used to be the small man in court. The king and Gulliver have long conversations about politics, but the king never really considers Gulliver's opinions on important matters. Being small, Gulliver is considered petty, and the idea of gaining power through gunpowder is anathema to the king. Through Gulliver's discussions with the king, the reader learns that perspective extends beyond size to opinion.  After several days of discussing the governments of England and Brobdingnag, the king declares the English to be \"the most pernicious Race of Little odious Vermin that Nature ever suffered to crawl upon the Surface of the Earth.\"  Again Gulliver's Travels brings light to the fact that people from different backgrounds often have different opinions on the same subjects, even though people tend to follow similar patterns. Gulliver finds that each people prefers its own ways, but a traveler who spends a long time elsewhere might  come to prefer the foreigners' ways over his own. Experience, thought, and tradition are important considerations in making this choice. As for gunpowder, for Gulliver , gunpowder represents the height of achievement primarily because of the power it has provided. The Brobdingnag king, however, is not corrupted by power.  He is able to see that the negative effects of gunpowder would far outweigh the positive ones in his society.  He might be right that Gulliver is narrow-minded, but his tirade on the general stupidity of the Brobdingnags takes the opposite point of view. Still, on this issue he is unable to see his own faults or those of his society. It is up to Swift to show us, through Gulliver's tale, what Gulliver's insistence on gunpowder means."}