

Flora could not help thinking how much good the forty
dollars, which her father would have to pay for the birthday
party, would do if given to the poor.

It seemed to her just like spending the money for a few
hours' pleasure; and even if they had a fine time, which
she was quite sure they would have, it would be soon over,
and not do any real good.

Forty dollars was a great deal of money. It would pay Mrs.
White's rent for a whole year; it would clothe her family,
and feed them nearly all the next winter. It appeared to her
like a shameful waste; and these thoughts promised to take
away a great deal from the pleasure of the occasion.

"I think, mother, I had just as lief not have the band, and
only have a supper of bread and butter and seed cakes."

"Why, Flora, what has got into you?" said her father.

Mrs. Lee laughed at the troubled looks of Flora, and
explained to her father the nature of her scruples in regard
to the party.

"Where did the child get this foolish idea?" asked her
father, who thought her notions were too old and too severe
for a little girl.

"Didn't I see last winter how much good only a little money
would do?" replied Flora.

"Don't you think it is wicked for me to live in this great
house, keep five or six horses, and nine or ten servants, when
I could live in a little house, like Mrs. White?" laughed
Mr. Lee.

"All the money you spend would take care of a dozen families
of poor folks," said Flora.

"That is very true. Suppose I should turn away all the men
and women that work for me,--those, I mean, who work about the
house and garden,--and give the money I spend in luxuries to
the poor."

"But what would John and Peter, Hannah and Bridget do then?
They would lose their places, and not be able to earn any
thing. Why, no, father; Peter has a family; he has got three
children, and he must take care of them."

"Ah, you begin to see it--do you?" said Mr. Lee, with a
smile. "All that I spend upon luxury goes into the pockets
of the farmer, mechanic, and laborer."

"I see that, father," replied Flora, looking as bright as
sunshine again; "but all the money spent on my party will be
wasted--won't it?"

"Not a cent of it; my child. If I were a miser, and kept my
money in an iron safe, and lived like a poor man, I should
waste it then."

"But twenty dollars for the Riverdale Band is a great deal
to give for a few hours' service. It don't do any good, I
think."

"Yes, it does; music improves our minds and hearts. It makes us
happy. I have engaged six men to play. They are musicians only
at such times as they can get a job. They are shoemakers, also,
and poor men; and the money which I shall pay them will help
support their families and educate them."

"What a fool I was, father!" exclaimed Flora.

"O, no; not so bad as that; for a great many older and wiser
persons than yourself have thought just what you think."

"But the supper, father,--the ice cream, the cake, and the
lemonade,--won't all the money spent for these things be
wasted?"

"No more than the money spent for the music. The confectioner
and those whom he employs depend upon their work for the
means of supporting themselves and their families."

"So they do, father. And when you have a party, you are
really doing good to the poor."

"That depends upon circumstances," replied Mr. Lee. "I don't
think it would be an act of charity for a person who could
not afford it to give a party. I only mean to say that when
we spend money for that which does not injure us or any body
else, what we spend goes into the pockets of those who need
it.

"A party--a proper party, I mean, such a one as you will
have--is a good thing in itself. Innocent amusement is just
as necessary as food and drink.

"God has given me wealth, Flora, and he expects me to do all
the good I can with it. I hold it as his steward. Now, when
I pay one of these musicians three or four dollars for an
afternoon's work, I do him a favor as well as you and those
whom you invite to your party.

"And I hope the party will make you love one another more
than ever before. I hope the music will warm your hearts,
and that the supper will make you happy, and render you
thankful to the Giver of all things for his constant
bounty."

"How funny that I should make such a blunder!" exclaimed
Flora. "I am sure I shall enjoy my party a great deal more
now that I understand these things."

"I hope you won't understand too much, Flora. Suppose you had
only a dollar, and that it had been given you to purchase a
story book. Then, suppose Mrs. White and her children were
suffering from want of fuel and clothing. What would you do
with your dollar?"

"I would----"

"Wait a minute, Flora," interposed her father. "When you
buy the book, you pay the printer, the paper maker, the
bookseller, the type founder, the miner who dug the lead and
the iron from the earth, the machinist who made the press,
and a great many other persons whose labor enters into the
making of a book--you pay all these men for their labor;
you give them money to help take care of their wives and
children, their fathers and mothers. You help all these
men when you buy a book. Now, what would you do with your
dollar?"

"I would give it to poor Mrs. White," promptly replied
Flora.

"I think you would do right, for your money would do more
good in her hands. The self-denial on your part would do you
good. I only wanted you to understand that, when you bought
a book,--even a book which was only to amuse you,--the money
is not thrown away.

"Riches are given to men for a good purpose; and they ought
to use their wealth for the benefit of others, as well as
for their own pleasure. If they spend money, even for things
that are of no real use to them, it helps the poor, for it
feeds and clothes them."

Flora was much interested in this conversation, and perhaps
some of my young friends will think she was an old head to
care for such things; but I think they can all understand
what was said as well as she did.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: On the Lawn.]
