

The great day at length arrived, and every thing was ready
for the party. On the lawn, by the side of the house, a
large tent had been put up, in which the children were to
have the feast.

Under a large maple tree, near the tent, a stage for the
musicians had been erected. Two swings had been put up; and
there was no good reason why the children should not enjoy
themselves to their hearts' content.

I think the teachers in the Riverdale school found it hard work
to secure the attention of their scholars on the forenoon of
that day, for all the boys and girls in the neighborhood were
thinking about the party.

As early as one o'clock in the afternoon the children began
to collect at the house of Mr. Lee, and at the end of an
hour all who had received invitations were present. The
band had arrived, and at a signal from Mr. Lee the music
commenced.

"Now, father, we are all here. What shall we do?" asked
Flora, who was so excited she did not know which way to
turn, or how to proceed to entertain the party.

"Wait a few minutes, and let the children listen to the
music. They seem to enjoy it very well."

"But we want to play something, father."

"Very soon, my child, we will play something."

"What shall we play, father?"

"There are plenty of plays. Wouldn't you like to march a
little while to the music?"

"March?"

"Yes, march to the tune of 'Hail, Columbia.' I will show you
how to do it."

"I don't know what you mean, father."

"Well, I will show you in a few minutes."

When the band had played a little while longer, Mr. Lee
assembled the children in the middle of the lawn, and asked
them if they would like to march.

They were pleased with the idea, though some of them thought it
would be rather tame amusement for such an exciting occasion.

"You want two leaders, and I think you had better choose
them yourselves. It would be the most proper to select two
boys."

Mr. Lee thought the choice of the leaders would amuse them;
so he proposed that they should vote for them.

"How shall we vote, father?" asked Frank.

"Three of the children must retire, and pick out four
persons; and the two of these four who get the most votes
shall be the leaders."

Mr. Lee appointed two girls and one boy to be on this
committee; but while he was doing so, Tommy Woggs said he
did not think this was a good play.

"I don't think they will choose the best leaders," said
Tommy.

"Don't you, Mr. Woggs?" asked Mr. Lee, laughing.

"No, sir, I do not. What do any of these boys know about
such things!" said Tommy, with a sneer. "I have been to New
York, and have seen a great many parades."

"Have you, indeed?"

"Yes, sir, I have."

"And you think you would make a better leader than any of
the others?"

"I think so, sir."

All the children laughed heartily at Master Woggs, who was
so very modest!

"None of these boys and girls have ever been to New York,"
added Tommy, his vanity increasing every moment.

"That is very true; and perhaps the children will select you
as their leader."

"They can do as they like. If they want me, I should be very
willing to be their leader," replied Tommy.

It was very clear that Master Woggs had a very good opinion
of himself. He seemed to think that the fact of his having
been to New York made a hero of him, and that all the boys
ought to take off their caps to him.

But it is quite as certain that the Riverdale children did
not think Master Woggs was a very great man. He thought so
much of himself, that there was no room for others to think
much of him.

The committee of three returned in a few minutes, and
reported the names of four boys to be voted for as the
leaders. They were Henry Vernon, Charley Green, David White,
and Tommy Woggs.

The important little gentleman who had been to New York, was
delighted with the action of the committee. He thought all
the children could see what a very fine leader he would
make, and that all of them would vote for him.

"What shall we do for votes, father?" asked Frank.

"We can easily manage that, Frank," replied Mr. Lee.

"We have no paper here."

"Listen to me a moment, children," continued Mr. Lee. "There
are four boys to be voted for; and we will choose one leader
first, and then the other.

"Those who want Henry Vernon for a leader will put a blade
of grass in the hat which will be the ballot box; those who
want Charley Green will put in a clover blossom; those who
want David White will put in a maple leaf; and those who
want to vote for Tommy Woggs will put in a--let me see--put
in a dandelion flower."

The children laughed, for they thought the dandelion was
just the thing for Master Woggs, who had been to New York.

One of the boys carried round Mr. Lee's hat, and it was
found that Henry Vernon had the most votes; so he was
declared to be the first leader.

"Humph!" said Tommy Woggs. "What does Henry Vernon know? He
has never been to New York."

"But he lives in Boston," added Charley Green.

"Boston is nothing side of New York."

"I think Boston is a great place," replied Charley.

"That's because you have never been to New York," said
Master Woggs. "They will, of course, all vote for me next
time. If they do, I will show them how things are done in
New York."

"Pooh!" exclaimed Charley, as he left the vain little man.

While all the children were wondering who would be the other
leader, Flora was electioneering among them for her favorite
candidate; that is, she was asking her friends to vote for
the one she wanted. Who do you suppose it was? Master Woggs?
No. It was David White.

The hat was passed round again, and when the votes were
counted, there was only one single dandelion blossom found
in the hat.

Tommy Woggs was mad, for he felt that his companions had
slighted him; but it was only because he was so vain and
silly. People do not often think much of those who think a
great deal of themselves.

There was a great demand for maple leaves, and David White
was chosen the second leader, and had nearly all the votes.
The boys then gave three cheers for the leaders, and the
lines were formed. Mr. Lee told Henry and David just how
they were to march, and the band at once began to play "Hail
Columbia."

The children first marched, two by two, round the lawn, and
then down the centre. When they reached the end, one leader
turned off to the right, and the other to the left, each
followed by a single line of the children.

Passing round the lawn, they came together again on the
other side. Then they formed a great circle, a circle within
a circle, and concluded the march with the "grand basket."

This was certainly a very simple play, but the children
enjoyed it ever so much--I mean all but vain Master Woggs,
who was so greatly displeased because he was not chosen one
of the leaders, that he said there was no fun at all in the
whole thing.

About half an hour was spent in marching, and then Mr. Lee
proposed a second game. The children wanted to march a little
longer; but there were a great number of things to be done
before night, and so it was thought best, on the whole, to
try a new game.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Old Fiddler.]
