

When the children had done marching, Mrs. Lee took charge of
the games. Several new plays, which none of them had heard
of before, were introduced. The boys and girls all liked
them very well, and the time passed away most rapidly.

Just before they were going to supper, an old man, with a
fiddle in his hand, tottered into the garden, and down the
lawn. He was a very queer-looking old man. He had long white
hair, and a long white beard.

He was dressed in old, worn-out, soldier clothes, in part,
and had a sailor's hat upon his head, so that they could not
tell whether he was a soldier or a sailor.

As he approached the children, they began to laugh with all
their might; and he certainly was a very funny old man. His
long beard and hair, his tattered finery, and his hobbling
walk, would have made almost any one laugh--much more a
company of children as full of fun as those who were
attending the birthday party.

"Children," said the old man, as he took off his hat and
made a low bow, "I heard there was a party here, and I came
to play the fiddle for you. All the boys and girls like a
fiddle, because it is so merry."

"O mother! what did send that old man here?" cried Flora.

"He came of himself, I suppose," replied Mrs. Lee,
laughing.

"I think it is too bad to laugh at an old man like him,"
added Flora.

"It would be, if he were in distress; but don't you see he
is as merry as any of the children?"

"Play us some tunes," said the children.

"I will, my little dears;" and the old man raised the
fiddle. "Let's see--I will play 'Napoleon's Grand March.'"

The fiddler played, but he behaved so queerly that the
children laughed so loud they could hardly hear the music.

"Why, that's 'Yankee Doodle,'" said Henry Vernon; and they
all shouted at the idea of calling that tune "Napoleon's
Grand March."

"Now I will play you the solo to the opera of 'La
Sonnambula,'" said the old man.

"Whew!" said Henry.

The old man fiddled again, with the same funny movements as
before.

"Why, that's 'Yankee Doodle' too!" exclaimed Henry.

"I guess he don't know any other tune."

"You like that tune so well, I will play you 'Washington's
March;'" and the funny old fiddler, with a great flourish,
began to play again; but still it was "Yankee Doodle."

And so he went on saying he would play many different tunes,
but he played nothing but "Yankee Doodle."

"Can't you tell us a story now?" asked Charley Green.

"O, yes, my little man, I can tell you a story. What shall
it be?"

"Are you a soldier or a sailor?"

"Neither, my boy."

"The story! the story!" shouted the boys, very much
excited.

"Some years ago I was in New York," the old man commenced.

"Did you see me there?" demanded Tommy Woggs.

"Well, my little man, I don't remember that I saw you."

"O, I was there;" and Tommy thrust his hands down to the
bottom of his pockets, and strutted up the space between
the children and the comical old fiddler.

"I did see a very nice-looking little gentleman----"

"That was me," pompously added Tommy.

"He was stalking up Broadway. He thought every body was
looking at and admiring him; but such was not the case. He
looked just like--just like----"

"Like me?" asked Tommy.

"Like a sick monkey," replied the fiddler.

"Go on with your story."

"I will, children. Several years ago I was in New York. It
is a great city; if you don't believe it, ask Master Tommy
Woggs."

"You tell the truth, Mr. Fiddler. It is a great city, and I
have been all over it, and can speak from observation,"
replied Master Woggs.

"The story!" shouted the children.

"I was walking up Broadway. This street is always crowded
with people, as well as with carts and carriages."

"I have seen that street," said Tommy.

"Now you keep still a few minutes, Tommy, if you can,"
interposed Mrs. Lee.

"At the corner of Wall Street----"

"I know where that is," exclaimed Tommy.

"At the corner of Wall Street there was a man with a kind of
cart, loaded with apples and candy, which he was selling to
the passers-by. Suddenly there came a stage down the street,
and ran into the apple cart."

"I saw the very same thing done," added Tommy, with his
usual self-important air.

"Keep still, Tom Woggs," said Charley Green.

"The apples were scattered all over the sidewalk; yet the
man picked up all but one of them, though he was very angry
with the driver of the stage for running against his cart."

"Why didn't he pick up the other apple?" asked Henry.

"A well-dressed man, with big black whiskers, picked that up.
'Give it to me,' said the apple man. 'I will not,' replied
the man with whiskers. The apple merchant was as mad as he
could be; and then the man with black whiskers put his hand
in his pocket and drew out a knife. The blade was six inches
long."

"O, dear me!" exclaimed Flora.

"Raising the knife, he at once moved towards the angry
apple merchant, and--and----"

"Well, what?" asked several, eagerly.

"And cut a piece out of the apple, and put it in his mouth."

The children all laughed heartily, for they were sure the
man with the whiskers was going to stab the apple merchant.

"He then took two cents from his pocket, paid for the
apple, and went his way," continued the old man. "Now, there
is one thing more I can do. I want to run a race with these
boys."

"Pooh! You run a race!" sneered Charley.

"I can beat you."

"Try it, and see."

The old man and Charley took places, and were to start at
the word from Henry. But when it was given, the fiddler
hobbled off, leaving Charley to follow at his leisure.

When the old man had got half way round the lawn, Charley
started, sure he could catch him long before he reached the
goal. But just as the boy was coming up with the man, the
latter began to run, and poor Charley found, much to his
surprise, that he ran very fast. He was unable to overtake
him, and consequently lost the race.

The children were much astonished when they saw the old man
run so fast. He appeared to have grown young all at once.
But he offered to race with any of the boys again; and half
a dozen of them agreed to run with him.

"I guess I will take my coat off this time," said the
fiddler.

As he threw away the coat, he slipped off the wig and false
beard he wore; and the children found, to their surprise,
that the old man was Mr. Lee, who had dressed himself up in
this disguise to please them.

The supper was now ready, and all the children were invited
to the tent. They had played so hard that all of them had
excellent appetites, and the supper was just as nice as a
supper could be.

It was now nearly dark, and the children had to go home; but
all of them declared the birthday party of Flora was the
best they ever attended.

"Only to think," said Flora, when she went to bed that
night, "the old fiddler was my father!"




LIZZIE.


    Mother, what ails our Lizzie dear,
      So cold and still she lies?
    She does not speak a word to-day,
      And closed her soft blue eyes.
    Why won't she look at me again,
      And laugh and play once more?
    I cannot make her look at me
      As she used to look before.

    Her face and neck as marble white,
      And, O, so very cold!
    Why don't you warm her, mother dear,
      Your cloak around her fold?
    Her little hand is cold as ice,
      Upon her waveless breast,--
    So pure, I thought I could see through
      The little hand I pressed.

    Your darling sister's dead, my child;
      She cannot see you now;
    The damps of death are gath'ring there
      Upon her marble brow.
    She cannot speak to you again,
      Her lips are sealed in death;
    That little hand will never move,
      Nor come that fleeting breath.

    All robed in white, and decked with flowers,
      We'll lay her in the tomb;
    The flower that bloomed so sweetly here,
      No more on earth will bloom;
    But in our hearts we'll lay her up,
      And love her all the more,
    Because she died in life's spring time,
      Ere earth had won her o'er.

    Nay, nay, my child, she is not dead,
      Although she slumbers there,
    And cold and still her marble brow,
      And free from pain and care.
    She slept, and passed from earth to heaven,
      And won her early crown:
    An angel now she dwells above,
      And looks in triumph down.

    She is not dead, for Jesus died
      That she might live again.
    "Forbid them not," the Saviour said,
      And blessed dear sister then.
    Her little lamp this morn went out
      On earth's time-bounded shore;
    But angels bright in heaven this morn
      Relighted it once more.

    Some time we, too, shall fall asleep,
      To wake in heaven above,
    And meet our angel Lizzie there
      In realms of endless love.
    We'll bear sweet sister in our hearts,
      And then there'll ever be
    An angel there to keep our souls
      From sin and sorrow free.




