{"name": "act 3, Scene 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210309152602/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-tempest/study-guide/summary-act-iii", "summary": "Alonso, Adrian, Francisco, Sebastian, Antonio, and Gonzalo are still wandering about the island, and Alonzo has finally given up any hope of his son Ferdinand being alive. Antonio and Sebastian decide to make their murderous move later that night, but their conspiracy is interrupted by Prospero sending in a huge banquet via his spirits, with he himself there, but invisible. They are all amazed, but not too taken aback that they will not eat the food; but, as they are about to eat, a vengeful Ariel enters, taking credit for their shipwreck, and makes the banquet vanish. Alonso recognizes Ariel's words as being of Prospero's pen, and the great guilt of Alonso, Antonio, and Sebastian begins to take them over, at the thought of Prospero being alive, and so nearby.", "analysis": "Ferdinand is stripped of the privileges of his rank by Prospero, who did the same to Caliban by making him a slave as well. Prospero's action in this case might not be fair, but Ferdinand bears it, and in so doing, legitimates Prospero's rule, just as Caliban did; this case again stresses the theme that willful obedience is a legitimate source of power. Prospero's tone, when speaking of Ferdinand in this act, is a curious mix of affection and distaste; he refers to Ferdinand as \"poor worm,\" which could be taken as a statement of endearment. However, the worm was often used as a symbol of corruption and lust, as mentioned in Act 2, scene 4 of Twelfth Night, and as it is represented in William Blake's poem \"The Rose\". In this case, the symbolic meaning foreshadows Prospero's suspicious warnings to the couple to wait until their wedding ceremony, and recalls his accusation of Ferdinand of treason and bad faith in the first act. In his speech in this act, Ferdinand employs paradox, overstatement, etc. in his many entreaties to Miranda. The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead, and makes my labours pleasures,\" Ferdinand says, using paradoxes that communicate how magical and wonderful his beloved is, to turn the unpleasant pleasant. A contrast between Miranda and her father shows her to be much more pleasant than her father, who's \"composed of harshness\": yet, he declares, with overstatement, that he will carry \"some thousands of these logs\" for his stern taskmaster, because of the great sweetness of Miranda. Ferdinand overstates his resolve, in order to impress upon Miranda how much he would do for her; he swears that he would rather \"crack sinews, break back\" than see her work, though his work could scarcely be hard enough to cause these injuries. They make all the vows of marriage to each other; Ferdinand swears to \"love, prize, and honour\" Miranda, and in turn Miranda pledges to give him her \"modesty,\" meaning her virginity. They give each other their hands, and Miranda declares him her \"husband\"; the show of love is nice, but they know almost nothing about each other, and given that they have been together for less than twenty-four hours, the sentiment is rather rash, and almost foolish. Ferdinand and Miranda speak with a poetic, romantic, unrealistic tone that is very similar to the tone used by Romeo and Juliet when they spoke to each other; the same devices, of overstatement, paradox, contrast, and comparison are used to make elegant compliments to each other, and high-flown declarations of love. Ferdinand slips into conventional, polished phrases when speaking to this woman whom he hardly knows, an example being when he tells her \"'tis fresh morning with me when you are by at night,\" though they have not been through a night together at all. Indeed, Ferdinand and Miranda's love is the same sort of instant physical attraction that Romeo and Juliet had, though Romeo and Juliet's love was not influenced by a mischievous sprite like Ariel. Although Ferdinand hardly knows Miranda, he brazenly declares her \"perfect and peerless,\" though she cannot be either of those. The mood and feel of these passages is very different from those appearing before it, and are guided by a blind sort of idealism, and a naive, young love. The language in these sections of the play also turns distinctly sexual, with maidenly Miranda showing her hidden, but mature knowledge of desire and sexual politics. Miranda explains the urgency of her love to Ferdinand by telling him \"all the more it seeks to hide itself, the bigger bulk it shows\"; note the image of a concealed pregnancy in her description, which coincides with the increase in their declared desire. Miranda \"dare not offer what desire to give\" to Ferdinand, betraying the lust behind her maidenly exterior; and she acknowledges the sexual exchange inherent in marriage, that the \"jewel in dower\" is the main treasure which she has to attract a husband. Miranda may seem young and isolated, but this scene shows that she is far more knowledgeable about worldly matters than one might expect, given her upbringing on this remote island"}