{"name": "Chapter XI", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XI - The New Tie To Life<PARAGRAPH>Dr. Flint visited Harriet in her grandmother's house and showered her with curses and the vilest abuse. He said her mistress had forbidden her to come back. He said she was lucky he did not kill her, and told her that he would take care of her and her child if she would henceforth have no communication with the father. She refused, but he had the parting shot as he left, saying he would never sell her. She had been hoping he would do so and that Mr. Sands could buy her. PARAGRAPH>Benjamin, or Benny, Harriet's baby, was born prematurely but survived. Throughout his first year he improved in health and Harriet marveled at how she loved him so dearly. She had initially prayed for him to die to spare him this life, but while he was sick she prayed for his recovery. She felt a dark cloud over her enjoyment of her baby, and believed that death was preferable to slavery", "analysis": "In these chapters Harriet continues to experience the lustful attention of Dr. Flint, her master. This was one of the most terrible things about slavery: a slaveowner's sexual desire for his slaves caused his own wife emotional duress, made him a rival to his son, forced his daughter to confront the ways of the world far too early, and, of course, destroyed the slave girl.  Slave girls could often not live the virtuous lives they wished or participate in a functional familial state . Their bodies were viewed as sexual objects that belonged to their master, spaces on which he could enact his most libidinal and primitive sexual desires.<PARAGRAPH>Thankfully, Dr. Flint never actually rapes Harriet; his persecution of her is limited to vile whispering, haunting her steps, and making threats. In order to prevent him from raping her, she decides to engage in sexual relations with a white man who treats her well - Mr. Sands. Harriet is very careful in how she explains this to her readers. Because her intended audience was white women, she had to proceed cautiously in explaining her choice to enter into sexual relations before she was married. While white, middle class women were also limited in their sexuality by the gender norms of the 19th century, black women faced even more censure and criticism of their sexual behavior.<PARAGRAPH>In order to reassure her readers that she was not a harlot, Jacobs first steps outside of the narrative, explaining how \"the remembrance fills me with sorrow and shame\" . It was not a choice she made out of ignorance or recklessness, but she does feel that it was a decision that these women should try to understand. Going even further and making one of the central points of Incidents, she writes \"O, ye happy women, whose purity has been sheltered from childhood, who have been free to choose the objects of your affection, whose homes are protected by law, do not judge the poor desolate slave girl too severely!\"  Even more succinctly, she writes \"I feel that the slave woman ought not to be judged by the same standard of others\" . This is a very important assertion to make; Harriet's tale is controversial in its frank discussion of sex, but she does not want her readers to think that she was condoning premarital sex. She needs to make the case that white women and black women faced unequivocally different situations and should not be privy to the same judgment.<PARAGRAPH>Along with the molestation and harassment of slave women at the hands of their masters, Incidents also demonstrates some of the other horrors of slavery. Slaves were pervasively lied to about the north in order to keep them quiet and hopeless. They were prohibited from reading and writing and exercising their minds in order to render them ignorant and docile. Harriet attacks the common assumption that blacks were naturally inferior in intellect, writing that she does indeed agree that the black man was inferior but only because whites have made him so through their denial of education: \"It is the ignorance in which white men compel him to live; it is the torturing whip that lashes manhood out of him; it is the fierce bloodhounds of the South, and the scarcely less cruel human bloodhounds of the north, who enforce the Fugitive Slave Law. They do the work\" of making him backward. Along with this invective, Harriet also narrates the many cruel punishments suffered by slaves. She makes the same claim as Frederick Douglass does in his autobiography: \"Cruelty is contagious in uncivilized communities\", and slavery is just as bad for the whites as it is for the blacks.<PARAGRAPH>Jacobs's work is not only a personal tale of struggle and suffering and an exposition on black women's sexual oppression, but also a record of historical events. In Chapter XII she discusses the ramifications of Nat Turner's Rebellion of 1831 on her North Carolina town of Edenton . This rebellion, which took place in Southampton, Virginia, took the lives of 55-65 white persons and resulted in the execution of 56 blacks and the death of over 100 who were killed in the subsequent backlash and militia uprisings. This rebellion, as with other slave rebellions in the antebellum south, struck fear into the hearts of slaveowners and caused them to implement even harsher laws and restrictions on the education and movements of slaves. Jacobs offers insight into one of the south's most interesting social classes - \"the low whites\". These men, who often owned merely a few or even no slaves, might not be assumed to fall on the side of wealthy planters, but that line of reasoning does not prove to be true. These coarse and uneducated men \"exulted in such a chance to exercise a little brief authority, and show their subserviency to the slaveholders; not reflecting that the power which trampled on the colored people also kept themselves in poverty, ignorance, and moral degradation\" . These men conducted many of the raids on slave homes as well as the rapes and murders of slaves. Jacobs is justly disgusted with the hypocrisy of this southern society, which boldly touted its commitment to \"justice\".", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-vii-xii"}