{"name": "Chapter XXXVII", "summary": "Chapter XXXVII - A Visit To England<PARAGRAPH>Harriet learned that her beloved Mrs. Bruce was dead. Her husband desired that Harriet accompany Mary, her little charge, to visit relatives in England. Harriet agreed, and putting Benny in a trade and leaving Ellen with her friend, traveled to England. She was amazed at how \"for the first time in my life I was in a place where I was treated according to my deportment, without reference to my complexion. There she felt a sense of \"pure, unadulterated freedom. England seemed in strong contrast to the \"stagnation in our Southern towns\" and she delighted in how busy and contented people seemed. PARAGRAPH>She did not want to romanticize the situation of the poor people of England however, because they truly did lack money and were subject to oppression, but \"the condition of even the meanest and most ignorant among them was vastly superior to the condition of the most favored slaves in America. They were protected by law, the bonds of parent and child and husband and wife were sacred, and they could receive education without fear of retribution. PARAGRAPH>In England Harriet also embraced religion, for it was much different from the religion she experienced in the south. It was truly inspiring that while in England she \"never saw the slightest symptom of prejudice against color", "analysis": "In these final chapters, Harriet is now thoroughly ensconced in the north, working for both Mrs. Bruces and trying to set up a home for herself and her children. The north, particularly New York, is not as friendly to African Americans as Harriet  previously believed. As discussed in the previous analysis, northerners were afflicted by pervasive racism as well and had moved to segregate many areas of public life. While offering many opportunities for blacks, the north also offered its own challenges. Harriet is much struck by the differences between America and England, writing that for the first time in her life she was not treated differently because of her complexion. There, people seemed free of hypocrisy, which extended into their views on religion as well. Although Harriet was a religious woman before traveling to England, her faith deepened during her time abroad. Writing of a clergyman with whom she stayed, she observed \"the beauty of his daily life inspired me with faith in the genuineness of Christian professions. Grace entered my heart, and I knelt at the communion table, I trust, in true humility of soul.\"<PARAGRAPH>One particular area of interest in the newer scholarly work on Harriet Jacobs is her entrance into the capitalist world from the precapitalist economic system of the south. The north had industrialized and emphasized contract relations as the basis of economic freedom; the south was characterized by a paternalistic ethos that was corrupt and antiquated. This contributed to the ideological divide between the two regions and informs Harriet's experiences in both. In the society she left, as scholar Virginia Cope writes, \"paternalism imagines an organic society of reciprocal relations in which some are born to rule, others to obey.\" This was categorically different from the north's emphasis on free labor. The paternalistic ideal was rarely achieved, however, for masters and mistresses were not benevolent or even wise, denying slaves promised freedom  or by being corrupted and so obsessed with control that they ignored their own self interest . Harriet also links the sexual exploitation of slave women with the economics of the slave society, explaining that masters benefitted from producing offspring by their slaves. Harriet was keen on denouncing the slave system throughout her text.<PARAGRAPH>When she reaches Philadelphia - the land of free labor and contracts - she immediately enters into capitalism by making a purchase of veils and gloves. Cope writes, \" demonstrates her ability to compete in a vibrant, competitive market, skillfully deploying the anonymity resumed in the transaction to hide her ignorance as well as her legal status.\" She is officially a consumer, the ultimate product of capitalism. She finds employment and is able to support herself and her children. However, the journey into the northern world is also one of disillusionment; northern racism creates uncomfortable and oppressive conditions much like slavery did. Harriet is forced into a second-class carriage, insulted by northern whites, and cannot sell her labor for what it is actually worth. She is not able to attain her own home, which, as she ends Incidents with - \"The dream of my life is not yet realized. I do not sit with my children in a home of my own. I still long for a hearthstone of my own, however humble\"  - is a failing of the north's free market economy which is successful partly by marginalizing African American laborers.<PARAGRAPH>Like the chapter on the Nat Turner Rebellion, Incidents gives a first-person perspective of one of the historical events that is ubiquitous in American history textbooks - the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850. A product of the Compromise of 1850, an attempt to keep the Union together orchestrated by Henry Clay and Stephen Douglas, the Act was extremely controversial. Northern authorities were required to return any captured fugitive slaves to their masters in the south. Often financial incentives or promotions were granted to officials who complied. Likewise, heavy fines were incurred by officials for inaction and by civilians who aided or abetted runaway slaves. Abolitionists nicknamed the Act the \"Bloodhound Law\" because of the dogs that were used to find escaped runaway slaves. Harriet explains that the Act was a \"reign of terror to the colored population\" and threw everyone into consternation and anxiety. Many northerners, however, refused to enforce the provisions of the law, which led to greater tensions between the two regions.<PARAGRAPH>In the final chapter Harriet's freedom is purchased by Mrs. Bruce against her wishes. Her response to Mrs. Bruce's proposal to buy her from Mr. Dodge is not the customary response that white readers might have expected. By the time this offer is suggested, Harriet has finally come to accept herself as free because she does not buy into the system that designated her as a slave; it is false, specious. She explains \"the more my mind had become enlightened, the more difficult it was for me to consider myself an article of property\" . After Mrs. Bruce purchases her freedom, Harriet experiences a feeling of gratitude and relief, but it is mingled with her disbelief that she, a human being, could be sold: \"So I was sold at last! A human being sold in the free city of New York!\"  No doubt the bill of sale would be a relic of a terrible past for contemporary readers to marvel at. Harriet's description of her reaction to being freed solidifies her reputation as a woman with a penchant for unswerving honesty and forthrightness; she does not sugarcoat her feelings or placate her readers.<PARAGRAPH>The end of her story is happy, as she and her children are free, but it is also tinged with melancholy. She cannot yet afford the home that she wants - a dream modeled on her early experience with her parents. It is also sobering to look beyond the text and realize that Jacobs was writing Incidents in secret in the home of her employers the Willis family  because of the assumption that Nathaniel Parker Willis would not approve of her endeavor. Her work is candidly forthright when she was not yet able to be.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-xxxvii-xli"}