{"name": "Chapter VII", "summary": "Chapter VII - The Lover<PARAGRAPH>As detailed in this chapter, Harriet made the mistake of falling in love with a free black carpenter in the neighborhood. She had forgotten that \"in the land of my birth the shadows are too dense for light to penetrate. Her lover wanted to buy her but Dr. Flint would not consent. Even Mrs. Flint did not want to get rid of her in that way. In addition, the husband of a slave has no power to protect his wife. It seemed that slaves were not allowed any family ties of their own. PARAGRAPH>Harriet talked to her grandmother about her fears. She then tried to appeal to a white woman friend of Dr. Flint's who had been kind to her, but she could not change the evil man's mind. He called Harriet into his study and asked if she wanted to be married. She said yes and he grew angry, saying if she wanted to be married she could marry one of his slaves. When she said it was \"right and honorable\" for her and her lover to feel affection for each other, Dr. Flint struck her for the first time. Dr. Flint said he had the power to do what he wanted to punish her disrespect, but said all he would do is ask that her lover's name never be spoken again. At this moment Harriet wrote that she truly hated him, and hatred felt like \"the atmosphere of hell. PARAGRAPH>Dr. Flint ignored Harriet for a while after this encounter, but this grew too difficult for him and he slipped her a note. He said he wanted to go to Louisiana and planned to take her with him. Harriet figured this would not happen, and eventually the scheme was dropped. PARAGRAPH>One day in the street Harriet stopped to speak with her lover, and unfortunately Dr. Flint saw them. He cursed her viciously. Harriet knew that there was no hope for her and her lover, for their marriage could not protect her from Dr. Flint. She encouraged him to go north where he could see about some property from an uncle and actually use his natural intelligence. He sadly agreed. Harriet wrote, \"The dream of my girlhood is over. I felt lonely and desolate", "analysis": "In these chapters Harriet continues to experience the lustful attention of Dr. Flint, her master. This was one of the most terrible things about slavery: a slaveowner's sexual desire for his slaves caused his own wife emotional duress, made him a rival to his son, forced his daughter to confront the ways of the world far too early, and, of course, destroyed the slave girl.  Slave girls could often not live the virtuous lives they wished or participate in a functional familial state . Their bodies were viewed as sexual objects that belonged to their master, spaces on which he could enact his most libidinal and primitive sexual desires.<PARAGRAPH>Thankfully, Dr. Flint never actually rapes Harriet; his persecution of her is limited to vile whispering, haunting her steps, and making threats. In order to prevent him from raping her, she decides to engage in sexual relations with a white man who treats her well - Mr. Sands. Harriet is very careful in how she explains this to her readers. Because her intended audience was white women, she had to proceed cautiously in explaining her choice to enter into sexual relations before she was married. While white, middle class women were also limited in their sexuality by the gender norms of the 19th century, black women faced even more censure and criticism of their sexual behavior.<PARAGRAPH>In order to reassure her readers that she was not a harlot, Jacobs first steps outside of the narrative, explaining how \"the remembrance fills me with sorrow and shame\" . It was not a choice she made out of ignorance or recklessness, but she does feel that it was a decision that these women should try to understand. Going even further and making one of the central points of Incidents, she writes \"O, ye happy women, whose purity has been sheltered from childhood, who have been free to choose the objects of your affection, whose homes are protected by law, do not judge the poor desolate slave girl too severely!\"  Even more succinctly, she writes \"I feel that the slave woman ought not to be judged by the same standard of others\" . This is a very important assertion to make; Harriet's tale is controversial in its frank discussion of sex, but she does not want her readers to think that she was condoning premarital sex. She needs to make the case that white women and black women faced unequivocally different situations and should not be privy to the same judgment.<PARAGRAPH>Along with the molestation and harassment of slave women at the hands of their masters, Incidents also demonstrates some of the other horrors of slavery. Slaves were pervasively lied to about the north in order to keep them quiet and hopeless. They were prohibited from reading and writing and exercising their minds in order to render them ignorant and docile. Harriet attacks the common assumption that blacks were naturally inferior in intellect, writing that she does indeed agree that the black man was inferior but only because whites have made him so through their denial of education: \"It is the ignorance in which white men compel him to live; it is the torturing whip that lashes manhood out of him; it is the fierce bloodhounds of the South, and the scarcely less cruel human bloodhounds of the north, who enforce the Fugitive Slave Law. They do the work\" of making him backward. Along with this invective, Harriet also narrates the many cruel punishments suffered by slaves. She makes the same claim as Frederick Douglass does in his autobiography: \"Cruelty is contagious in uncivilized communities\", and slavery is just as bad for the whites as it is for the blacks.<PARAGRAPH>Jacobs's work is not only a personal tale of struggle and suffering and an exposition on black women's sexual oppression, but also a record of historical events. In Chapter XII she discusses the ramifications of Nat Turner's Rebellion of 1831 on her North Carolina town of Edenton . This rebellion, which took place in Southampton, Virginia, took the lives of 55-65 white persons and resulted in the execution of 56 blacks and the death of over 100 who were killed in the subsequent backlash and militia uprisings. This rebellion, as with other slave rebellions in the antebellum south, struck fear into the hearts of slaveowners and caused them to implement even harsher laws and restrictions on the education and movements of slaves. Jacobs offers insight into one of the south's most interesting social classes - \"the low whites\". These men, who often owned merely a few or even no slaves, might not be assumed to fall on the side of wealthy planters, but that line of reasoning does not prove to be true. These coarse and uneducated men \"exulted in such a chance to exercise a little brief authority, and show their subserviency to the slaveholders; not reflecting that the power which trampled on the colored people also kept themselves in poverty, ignorance, and moral degradation\" . These men conducted many of the raids on slave homes as well as the rapes and murders of slaves. Jacobs is justly disgusted with the hypocrisy of this southern society, which boldly touted its commitment to \"justice\".", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-vii-xii"}