{"name": "Chapter XXIX", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XXIX - Preparations For Escape<PARAGRAPH>Harriet writes more of her restlessness and pain in her hiding place. It was slowly getting more and more uninhabitable, as rain was now leaking through the eaves. PARAGRAPH>In January, the time when slaves were bought and sold, Harriet heard about a woman named Fanny, the daughter of the elderly slave Aggie, who had escaped her new master. Fanny was hidden close to Harriet for weeks, but Fanny had no idea of their proximity. PARAGRAPH>Peter came one evening and told Harriet that there was finally a real plan to send her north to the Free states. Harriet wanted to consent but was worried about her son Benny. Phillip promised he would send Benny north or bring him there himself. Phillip talked to his mother and convinced her that it was necessary for Harriet to go. PARAGRAPH>Harriet was all set to proceed on the journey when word of a slave named James who was murdered for trying to escape came to the ears of her grandmother. She was filled with worry and begged Harriet not to go, assuming that she would befall the same fate. Her heart heavy, Harriet agreed. It was arranged that Fanny would go in Harriet's place. However, after a few days Harriet's grandmother changed her mind, telling Harriet: \"Poor child. my carelessness has ruined you. The boat ain't gone yet. Get ready immediately, and go with Fanny. PARAGRAPH>It was a bit nerve-wracking for Peter to get Harriet on the boat because Fanny had already arrived and was using the name Linda Brent. As Fanny was a runaway, her name would appear on notices so it was too risky to use her own name. Since it was assumed that Harriet  was already north, her name would not be known to those searching for runaways. Despite this confusion, the captain allowed Harriet to come aboard as well. Before the boat departed that evening, Harriet took the opportunity to reveal herself to her son. They had an emotional meeting, and Harriet promised Benny he would come north soon as well. PARAGRAPH>It was time to depart, and Harriet writes that even though she desired freedom, she \"felt very sad at leaving forever that old homestead, where I had been sheltered so long by the dear old grandmother; where I had dreamed my first dream of love; and where, after that had faded away, my children came to twine themselves so closely round my desolate heart", "analysis": "In the analysis of the previous section, the topic of the slaves' Christmas festivities of both African and Christian provenance was discussed amid the context of the tendency among slaves to fuse their two heritages to imbue their lives with meaning as well as, in some cases, to subvert their masters and undermine the system of slavery. The songs and spirituals echoing through the fields and slave quarters were very much the same; these forms of expression allowed slaves to give voice to their fears, desires, and longing as well as function as a way to communicate with each other without attracting the attention of their masters. As slave culture was very clearly an oral one, it is not surprising that stories and tales with familiar archetypes and tropes circulated widely throughout the African American population. Slaves particularly enjoyed tales of animals and tricksters. These folk tales usually had underlying meanings and signified far more than their humble words suggested.<PARAGRAPH>Harriet proves herself to be a trickster in multiple places in the text, but an honorable one. Her deception is not based in cruelty or avarice but rather out of a desire to free herself and her children from bondage. One of the first examples of her cleverness and propensity to be a trickster is when the band of marauding whites in the aftermath of Nat Turner's Rebellion searches her grandmother's house and finds one of her letters. Assuming there are more letters and disconcerted at her ability to read, the captain questions her, asking if there are more and wondering who wrote to her. She replies, \"Most of my letters are from white people. Some request me to burn them after they are read, and some I destroy without reading\" . Her sardonic and knowing reply surprises her inquisitors and exposes the problematic treatment of slave women by white men.<PARAGRAPH>However, it is her honorable deception of Dr. Flint in Chapter XXV that exemplifies her embodiment of the trickster. She knows that she must equal the Dr. in his cunning and arranges for him  to receive letters from her dated from New York. When he receives the letters, he fabricates one from Harriet and brings it to her grandmother's house, reading her the new letter while Harriet, hidden, listens on and marvels at the man's duplicity. This situation ends up revealing Dr. Flint as a trickster as well, but a dishonorable and deceitful one. Harriet is the smarter trickster and outwits the Dr. This is accomplished by, first of all, the fact that her grandmother knew the content of the actual letter Harriet sent her master; Aunt Marthy was not swayed by his fraudulent attempt to make Harriet show herself. Also, Harriet was smart enough to claim that she was in Boston, a city in which the Dr. would have no success searching for his runaway slave. The mayor of Boston cements the Dr.'s inability to procure Harriet by simply never responding to the letter the Dr. sends him. The hero theme that runs through the tales of the trickster - the hero exposes evil and triumphs - is present in this these parts of Harriet's story.<PARAGRAPH>During Harriet's goodbye to Benny in Chapter XXIX, it is revealed that her son is also somewhat of a trickster. Harriet learns that Benny figured out that his mother was hiding in the storeroom shortly after Ellen was sent to Brooklyn. He heard a cough and put two and two together. Harriet \"asked him if he ever mentioned his suspicions to his sister. He said he never did; but after he heard the cough, if he saw her playing with other children on that side of the house, he always tried to coax her round to the other side, for fear they would hear me cough, too...Such prudence may seem extraordinary in a boy of twelve years, but slaves, being surrounded by mysteries, deceptions, and dangers, early learn to be suspicious and watchful, and prematurely cautious and cunning.\"  Slavery necessitates that the oppressed devise \"tricks\" in order to preserve their well-being or humanity. Secrets can protect family members or even just give a small shred of power to the powerless.<PARAGRAPH>One disturbing moment in these chapters is the response that Mr. Sands has when William runs away from him. Prior to this scene, it was possible for readers to come to the conclusion that Mr. Sands was perhaps a different kind of southern white man - affectionate and respectful toward his slave lover, honest and forthright, free of debilitating racial prejudice. While he might be preferable to the Flint men, Mr. Sands proves himself to be part of the same destructive mindset that failed to see slaves as anything other than inferior human beings if not outright property. He complains that William is \"young and inconsiderate\"  and was swayed by the specious promises of the abolitionists. He is certain that William will come crawling back to him, and boasts that he will not go looking for his wayward slave. His tone is full of scorn and paternalism, and Harriet soon learns that his version of the story was far from accurate - William left of his own accord and did not seem to feel as confident as Mr. Sands did that he would be granted his freedom in five years. Indeed, throughout the rest of Incidents Harriet comes to doubt Mr. Sands' intention to free her children, even though he is full of seemingly kindhearted protestations that it is his intention to do so. Clearly Mr. Sands is privy to some of the same shortcomings as other southerners, and can only contribute to Harriet's inability to rest her trust in anyone with white skin.<PARAGRAPH>What is conspicuous in these chapters, besides the continuing depravity of white southerners, is the love, support, and sacrifice evinced by the black community. When Aunt Nancy dies, she is given \"a mighty grand funeral\" with \"a large concourse of colored people, bond and free\" . Aunt Nancy's life was a sad one, but she was a constant encourager and supporter of Harriet. She would often tell Harriet \"I could die happy if I could only see you and the children free\" . Similarly, Peter, Philip, and Harriet's grandmother are also crucial figures in Harriet making her escape to the north. The two men in particular arrange all of her travel and take considerable risks to see her away. Her grandmother, of course, is always her bedrock and her great source of love and succor. It is not just blood that matters, however, for another runaway slave named Fanny is also enveloped into the escape scheme. It is quite evident that the strong bonds of community provided the means for Harriet to run away from her master, hide in a crawlspace for seven years and survive, and make it to the north. The autonomous, independent slave has no place here.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-xxv-xxx"}