{"name": "Scene 2", "summary": "Act V, Scene 2 This scene shifts to York's palace in London. Bolingbroke's coronation as Henry IV has taken place and York is relating to his wife the events that occurred when Bolingbroke brought Richard to London. He tells her how the commoners abused Richard but showered blessings on Bolingbroke. York sees these events as being a part of the divine plan and says that he has transferred his loyalties to Bolingbroke. He notices the arrival of his son, Aumerle. He tells the duchess that Aumerle has lost his title of Duke of Aumerle for being Richard's friend and must be addressed as Rutland now. He also tells her that he has pledged Aumerle's loyalty and truth to Bolingbroke in parliament. Aumerle is extremely unhappy at the turn of events which has led to Richard's abdication. It is clear from the conversation with his parents that he has lost all interest in courtly life. Then York notices a sealed document hanging out of Aumerle's breast pocket and questions him about it. Aumerle downplays its importance, and York gets suspicious and snatches the paper from him. As he reads it, York erupts with rage and accuses Aumerle of being involved in the Abbot of Westminster's treacherous conspiracy to murder the new king at Oxford. York brushes aside his wife's frantic pleas and orders his horse to be saddled. He is determined to expose the plot to Bolingbroke. A violent quarrel ensues between York and his wife over this issue. The duchess thinks that York is too intense in his loyalty to Bolingbroke. She asks him in amazement, \"Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?\" She begs him to consider that Aumerle is their only son and she is past the age of child bearing. York criticizes her excessive maternal love, calling her a \"fond, mad woman.\" After York leaves to reveal the plot to the king, Aumerle and his mother rush Windsor Castle. The duchess bids Aumerle to gallop to London to beg forgiveness before York can accuse him. The duchess, meanwhile, will try to detain York.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820044717/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmRichard43.asp"}