{"name": "Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420021644/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-red-badge-of-courage/study-guide/summary-chapters-17-20", "summary": "The men stand in formation. With a gasp that is intended to be a cheer, the regiment starts running at the enemy troops. Henry fixes on a distant clump of trees and runs toward it as if toward a goal. His face is drawn tight, and his features look disheveled and crazed. Yellow flames leap out of the forest at the advancing soldiers. The line lurches, its parts staggering ahead of each other as the troops all run. Without realizing it, Henry takes the lead. Bullets fly all around. Shells scream overhead. Men, hit by flying metal, fall in agony. As the men run, the features of the enemy become clear. They can see a battery and the men working at it. The enemy infantry are still concealed by gray walls and smoke. The scene seems hyper-real to Henry. He sees the bold green of the grass and the features of the brown and gray trees. His mind makes an impression of everything, except the reasons why he is there. The men break into cheers as they run. They are in a blind frenzy to forestall despair and death. The breakneck pace eats up their energy and they stall. They begin to calculate and become self-aware once more. The moment the men stop, the musketry in front becomes a roar. Yellow flames cause inhuman whistling in the air. Some fall dead and others simply stand. They appear dazed and stupid. Their lieutenant curses and yells at them to keep going. Wilson, the friend, drops to his knees and fires a shot at the enemy. This awakens the men, who begin firing anew. They now move in small jerks, going forward a few steps, then stopping to reload and fire again. The shots against them keep coming. The smoke is so intense that it makes it difficult for the regiment to go forward with intelligence. The men stop behind trees, dumbstruck. It is as if some other force is driving them. As soon as they stop, the lieutenant is on them again, cursing and swearing for them to go on. He grabs Henry to drag him towards the line. The youth lashes out at his commander, saying, \"Come on yerself, then. Three men in front of the flag begin to yell to move. The flag sways proudly in the breeze. With a lunge, the men go forward and over the small field. They run and duck as they go. As he runs, Henry is filled with a fondness for the flag, marveling at its beauty and invulnerability. Because it still swayed proudly, he endows the flag with power. In the rush, the color sergeant is hit. He sways where he stands. Both Henry and Wilson jump for the flagpole. The dead man will not let go, still doing his job. Soon the two have wrenched the flag from the corpse's control", "analysis": "Though still \"the youth,\" Henry has changed from the day before. At the beginning of the fight that day, he is no longer thinking of the metaphoric monsters and war gods that threaten to eat him up. There is no large metaphor that he gives flesh and life -there is only an opposing army, coming at him in his position with an energy he does not feel and cannot understand. This fills him with rage instead of fear. While he thinks of the enemy as beasts having \"teeth and claws\" and being \"flies sucking insolently at his blood,\" they are still basically men. This is an important change from the day before. Given that the force he faces is of men and not mythical beasts, Henry is more likely to actually be brave. However, at first, his actions in battle were done without thought, consideration, or care. His heroism, if there was any in his actions, was accidental. Only when the lieutenant praises him does Henry begin to take pride in himself; he becomes a symbol of ferocity. Interestingly, this makes the youth fanatical, \"a barbarian,\" and \"a knight.\" These chapters highlight the difference between the foot soldiers of the novel and the men who inhabit the upper command. Throughout the story there have been occasional complaints from the troops about the general's lack of ability. It is true historically that in the Civil War, the Union army suffered from poor leadership in its upper ranks throughout much of the war. This fact, however, is not crucial for Crane's story. What is important is that the commanders do not see the men as individuals, but as a fighting force. The general and his staff almost crush a wounded man when riding along in the forest. They are oblivious to the suffering of this individual soldier and of individual soldiers in general. Their words are quotidian, not heroic. They are solidly technical and evaluative. Glory does not come easily even to a general. The general's words are a completely different way to look at the battle, separated from Henry by age, experience, and social class. There are few illusions held about the war. Henry, who has been obsessed with war glory since before his time in the army, waits for some grandiose language from these men. Instead, he learns that the attack they are about to commit to will likely kill many of the men. Henry's regiment is referred to as mules and brooms, tools to be employed and not men. The contradiction of this statement strikes Henry as odd and the dehumanization - that he is beginning to rise above - upsets him greatly. The doomed battle is strikingly rendered in gritty detail. Again, rather than a show of glory, the fighting is fraught with venal human emotions and utter confusion. The men become caught in between bravery and cowardice, reduced to inactivity. The lieutenant, who cares more for the success of the regiment than the individuals, presses the men to keep charging and fighting, rather than flee to safety. Yet soon his actions are reduced too, he only able to curse at his troops and tug at them to charge. Meanwhile the smoke of battle becomes so thick that the men do not know where to go. This adds to their general confusion, not just in the plot but also as a metaphor. They stop, illogically, in the middle of the battlefield because of it. However, Henry knows that on the other side, beyond this smoke of mystery, lay men of an opposing army. He must get through the smoke to see them and end his mythologizing of war. What breaks Henry from his lethargy is the vision of his regiment's flag. He latches on to the red and the white of war and power. The flag does not falter. His actions become slightly clearer, his energies more directed. He leaps for the flag. While it makes him more of a target, he also is attempting to master \"the colors.\" If he can handle the red and the white of the flag, he will finally master his experience of war. The flag is an important symbol for the troops, encapsulating what the young men are giving their lives for - freedom, country, and honor. As they lose their grasp on the direct motivation, they reach instead for the abstract, but powerful notion of brotherhood. Henry gains a sense of strength and pride while all of the other troops begin to falter. Throughout this part of the altercation, Henry can see the features of the enemy troops. They are no longer a strange force; they are actually men. In fact, they resemble his young regiment; their uniforms seem new, just like his was at the beginning of the novel. The mysteries of war are dissipating even more. He can see occasionally through the clouds of smoke and see that his foe is merely other men. The narrator adds at the end that now, the regiment \"were men.\" This is the crucial moment of the chapter. As a coming of age novel, the experience of this battle, where they saw and conquered their enemy, is the moment of maturity for the regiment. However, their trials are not over."}