{"name": "chapter 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025238/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/White_Fang/White_Fang10.html", "summary": "This chapter concentrates on the activities of the wolf pack, and the story is told from the perspective of the she-wolf. She is the leader of the pack along with a large gray wolf, a three year-old, and an old, one-eyed wolf seeking to assist her. Her three companions are her suitors, each trying his best to gain her favor. The weaker members of the pack, the very old and the very young, are led by the stronger members. Even though all the wolves are extremely thin, their energy seems inexhaustible. They cover a number of miles each day, traveling in light and dark. They hunt and kill a moose, whose eight hundred pounds of flesh feed the pack of forty wolves. The pack grows smaller and crosses into the lake country to the east, still led by the she-wolf. She constantly bites at her three male companions, who patiently tolerate her behavior. Finally, however, a fight breaks out among the three males, and the three-year-old is killed by the large gray wolf and the one-eyed wolf. The she-wolf is proud of inspiring this battle. Later, the gray wolf is also killed, and the one-eyed wolf is received kindly by the she-wolf. They mate, and the she-wolf begins to look for a safe place for her litter. They travel together across the country and down to the Mackenzie River, where they meet other wolves who want to join the pack. The one-eyed wolf will not permit newcomers. At one point the wolves encounter a group of Indians. The she-wolf is familiar with humans and is tempted to return to them, but she heads back to the woods. Next, they encounter a snow rabbit tied to a tree, and the one-eyed wolf is surprised at its speed. He is not able to catch it since it springs with the movement of the plant that holds it. The she-wolf is familiar with the Indians hunting snares, and carefully gnaws off the head of the rabbit without being ensnared.", "analysis": ""}