{"name": "Chapter 20", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 20<PARAGRAPH>When Maisie gets to her mother's house, it is clear that the Countess gave her too much money for the cab fare. Susan Ash takes one coin, and Maisie goes to sleep with the rest of the money tied in a handkerchief under her pillow. The next day, Mrs. Beale takes the money from Maisie, calling the coins \"wages of sin\"  and saying they must be sent back to the Countess. PARAGRAPH>A few days pass, and Sir Claude suddenly announces to Maisie that he is taking her and Susan Ash to Folkestone, a port town in south-east England. Maisie thinks that \"He had yielded to the action of the idea pumped into him for weeks by Mrs. Wix\" , namely of removing Maisie from the care of either of her parents and raising her himself, presumably along with Mrs. Wix. In Folkestone, Maisie thinks a lot about relationships and wonders whether they will go to France and be joined by Mrs. Beale. PARAGRAPH>Suddenly, Ida shows up while Maisie and Sir Claude are in the garden of the hotel where they are staying. Ida reveals that she found the letter Sir Claude had left for her in London and quickly changed her plans to follow them. She asks to speak to Maisie alone, which Sir Claude hesitates to allow. Ida, like Maisie's father at the Countess's house, plays the loving parent, cuddling and praising Maisie. Ida does not seem to want to change their plans, saying that she is planning to go abroad after leaving them because she is sick. Ida presses Sir Claude again to leave them alone, and Maisie supports her, thinking of the Captain and chanting, \"She's good, she's good. In a huff, Sir Claude leaves the garden", "analysis": "As a modern reader, it is difficult to read Maisie's racist impressions of the Countess in Chapter 19. She repeatedly calls the Countess \"the brown lady\"  and states that \"She literally struck the child more as an animal than as a 'real' lady; she might have been a clever frizzled poodle in a frill or a dreadful human monkey in a spangled petticoat. She had a nose that was far too big and eyes that were far too small and a moustache that was, well, not so happy a feature as Sir Claude's\" . This antiquated, discriminatory language toward people of African descent is all the more shocking and disturbing coming from a child. It must be imagined that Maisie's racist thoughts are the product of her upbringing, another negative effect of her parents' and guardians' speech and behavior being passed down to her. It is also important to note that James created the Countess as a confident, financially self-sufficient character, showing that any negative characterization comes from Maisie rather than the author or narrator.<PARAGRAPH>Ida's presence in Folkestone in Chapters 20 and 21 mark a turning point in the story: the last time either of Maisie's biological parents is involved in the story. This makes it an apt time to examine Jame's moral message regarding family. The story raises questions about three kinds of relations: biological, legal, and emotional. By the removal of Ida and Beale from Maisie's life, James shows that biological relation is not the last word in creating a stable family. The major question for the remainder of the book is whether legal relatedness will take any precedence over emotional relatedness in Maisie's choice of a guardian, as well as to whom, out of Sir Claude, Mrs. Wix, and Mrs. Beale, she has the strongest legal and emotional relationships.<PARAGRAPH>Letters are a motif in What Maisie Knew, particularly in this section of the novel. Throughout the book, letters are used to represent relationships. Communication by letter makes it easy to keep relationships secret, though it also makes relationships subject to obstruction by others. This can be seen earlier in the novel when Mrs. Wix tries to stay in communication with Maisie but is thwarted by Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale as well as when Sir Claude keeps his relationship with Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale a secret from Maisie by communicating with her mostly through letters. In this section of the book, Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale again communicate through letters, showing their continued romantic relationship. Of particular importance is the letter--or rather, letters--in Chapter 24. Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale sends a letter to Sir Claude which includes a letter from Beale to her effectively breaking off their marriage. The symbol of a letter within a letter shows how adultery and lies have muddled relationships between multiple characters.<PARAGRAPH>Another motif that recurs at multiple points in this section is the blushing and paling of characters. This communicates information about characters' emotional states. Characters are shown to pale in moments of shock or horror and blush in moments of embarrassment or passion. For example, when Beale asks Maisie if she'll join him in moving to America at the beginning of this section, James writes, \"Planted once more before him in the middle of the room she felt herself turning white\" . This shows her displeasure at the idea, even though she answers affirmatively. An example of a character blushing comes later in the section when Sir Claude asks Mrs. Wix whether Ida was alone when she came to call. The text reads, \"Mrs Wix was red now: his good humour wouldn't keep down her colour, which for a minute glowed there like her ugly honesty\" . In this case, Mrs. Wix's blush reveals her embarrassment for Sir Claude and her strong feelings about Ida's immorality.<PARAGRAPH>Violent imagery is used frequently in this section of the novel to depict Ida and Beale's behavior toward Maisie. In Chapter 21, Ida brutally tells Maisie that \"Your father wishes you were dead\" , and two chapters later Sir Claude remarks that \" has chucked our friend here overboard not a bit less than if she had shoved her, shrieking and pleading, out of that window and down two floors to the paving-stones\" . By describing both Beale and Ida wishing or causing the death of Maisie, James communicates that Maisie's relationship with her biological parents is completely finished. The vivid, violent language also communicates how severely James treats Ida and Beale's choice to abandon their child.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24"}