{"name": "Chapter 10", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 10<PARAGRAPH>This chapter consists entirely of a confusing conversation between Sir Claude and Maisie. They start by discussing Mrs. Beale; Maisie says that she knows Mrs. Beale won't give her up, even though Ida and Mrs. Wix won't let them be in contact. Sir Claude promises that he hasn't seen Mrs. Beale since the day he picked up Maisie to bring her to her mother's house. When Sir Claude brings up Mrs. Beale's youth, Maisie gets tangled up in the idea of which of her guardians are younger or older than one another. When Maisie comes out of this period of reflection, she and Sir Claude again discuss the idea of Maisie bringing Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale together. Sir Claude remarks, \"We are together--it's really most odd. She's thinking of us--of you and me--though we don't meet\". They move on to talking about whether Maisie will go back to her father's house, with Sir Claude saying she definitely will go back there. This brings Maisie to say that she has also brought Sir Claude and Mrs. Wix together, and Sir Claude responds that she has brought everyone together besides him and Maisie's mother, who are \"not together--not a bit\". Sir Claude says that he thinks Mrs. Beale will come to take Maisie back to her father's house at some point when Ida is away, and he promises that he'll find a way to visit her often when she's at her father's without her mother knowing. The chapter ends with Sir Claude saying he's not afraid of Maisie's father, but he is afraid of Maisie's mother", "analysis": "James creates parallels through purposefully confusing names in this section and throughout the rest of the book. Specifically, he has Miss Overmore take on the name Mrs. Beale once she marries Beale Farange. This is confusing because Ida is still generally referred to as Mrs. Farange, the last name of her ex-husband and the name the reader might expect Miss Overmore to take after marriage. The women's uses of these names are revealing on a number of levels. Firstly, Ida keeping the last name Farange shows her continued connection to Beale Farange. As the narrator ironically states in the first chapter of the book, Ida and Beale were in a way more married after their divorce. Secondly, Miss Overmore taking the name Mrs. Beale rather than Mrs. Farange shows that she has a less deep connection with him, as a first name has more connection to one's surface identity while a last name connects to one's family and history. Finally, Mrs. Farange and Mrs. Beale having names that could cause the reader to confuse which character is which brings out parallels between the women, such as their scheming natures and lack of genuine care for Maisie.<PARAGRAPH>Sir Claude's photograph, which Mrs. Wix shows and eventually gives to Maisie, is an important symbol in the book. Upon seeing the photo, Maisie instantly adores the man. The fact that Maisie feels such fixation on the man from only his photograph might imply that her love for Sir Claude is superficial. However, others might think this is evidence of a connection so deep that it could be experienced immediately--like love at first sight. In addition, Mrs. Wix having to make the decision of whether to let Maisie keep the photograph foreshadows Mrs. Wix's love for Sir Claude and Maisie's need to choose between the two caretakers in the last chapters of the book.<PARAGRAPH>Maisie's education is an important theme in these chapters, particularly because it is so neglected at such an important time in her childhood. Once Miss Overmore marries Beale to become Mrs. Beale, she focuses more on her husband than her student-cum-step-daughter. The couple does purport to explore the idea of Maisie attending boarding school, but this never comes to fruition. When Maisie is returned to the care of Mrs. Wix at her mother's house, she and Mrs. Wix spend whole days studying to make up for lost time; however, it was stated upon the introduction of Mrs. Wix earlier in the book that the woman had little formal education herself and mostly \"taught\" Maisie through telling her stories. Maisie's lack of education throughout the book is tangible evidence of the negative effect of her upbringing. Just as the emotional neglect she has suffered will likely affect her ability to form stable relationships, her educational neglect could prevent her from understanding the world and supporting herself.<PARAGRAPH>The subject of Maisie's parents cheating on their new spouses finally becomes explicit in Chapter 11 when the character of Mr. Perriam is introduced. While Maisie's parents have both acquired new, younger spouses in the chapters leading up to this point, this has been done after they were divorced from one another, and only vague reference is made to social taboos they may have broken while married. With the introduction of Mr. Perriam, it becomes clear to the reader that Ida is an adulterer. A number of Ida's lovers will be introduced throughout the rest of the book, including Lord Eric, the Captain, and Mr. Tischbein; Beale also has at least one extramarital affair, with a woman named the Countess, while married to Mrs. Beale. While Mrs. Beale's reaction to Beale's adultery will be shown to be strongly negative, Sir Claude seems to be almost completely unfazed by Ida's, perhaps because of his guilt over his continuing relationship with Mrs. Beale.<PARAGRAPH>A thread of irony that runs throughout What Maisie Knew, but is is made explicit in Chapter 12, is the fact that Maisie has more parents and homes than a child usually would, and yet she feels alone and homeless. Maisie thinks to herself, \"With two fathers, two mothers and two homes, six protections in all, she shouldn't know 'wherever' to go\" . This paradox calls attention to the impact of Maisie's parents' actions and speech toward her; because they constantly fight over her custody, she does not feel a sense of love and stability.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-7-12"}