{"name": "Chapter 24", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 24<PARAGRAPH>It continues to rain, keeping everyone cooped up in the hotel. Sir Claude meets with acquaintances, as he has multiple times over their days in France. Mrs. Wix is cold to Sir Claude, not wanting him to go back to England to see Mrs. Beale. Sir Claude shows Maisie and Mrs. Wix a letter he just received; the letter is sent from Mrs. Beale, but it contains another letter sent to her by Beale saying that he is leaving her. Mrs. Wix is horrified at the scandal, while Sir Claude is pleased. Maisie is silent through all of this, and when Sir Claude offers her the letter to look at, she is relieved that Mrs. Wix doesn't let her see it. Sir Claude calls Mrs. Beale \"free\" , but Mrs. Wix launches into a tirade about this. When Sir Claude implies that she is being hypocritical by supporting him leaving his wife but not Mrs. Beale in a very similar situation, Mrs. Wix slaps him. PARAGRAPH>Sir Claude repeats that he has to go to see Mrs. Beale, especially after this news, calling it \"common courtesy\". They continue to argue for quite a while. Eventually, Sir Claude says that Mrs. Wix simply can't make the decision for him; he will set them up to enjoy France totally while he is gone, but he is going. Mrs. Wix begs for him to do what she has always planned: go off with her and Maisie alone somewhere. Sir Claude does not quite know how to answer this passionate plea, so he tells Mrs. Wix to be nice to Maisie, and then he leaves", "analysis": "As a modern reader, it is difficult to read Maisie's racist impressions of the Countess in Chapter 19. She repeatedly calls the Countess \"the brown lady\"  and states that \"She literally struck the child more as an animal than as a 'real' lady; she might have been a clever frizzled poodle in a frill or a dreadful human monkey in a spangled petticoat. She had a nose that was far too big and eyes that were far too small and a moustache that was, well, not so happy a feature as Sir Claude's\" . This antiquated, discriminatory language toward people of African descent is all the more shocking and disturbing coming from a child. It must be imagined that Maisie's racist thoughts are the product of her upbringing, another negative effect of her parents' and guardians' speech and behavior being passed down to her. It is also important to note that James created the Countess as a confident, financially self-sufficient character, showing that any negative characterization comes from Maisie rather than the author or narrator.<PARAGRAPH>Ida's presence in Folkestone in Chapters 20 and 21 mark a turning point in the story: the last time either of Maisie's biological parents is involved in the story. This makes it an apt time to examine Jame's moral message regarding family. The story raises questions about three kinds of relations: biological, legal, and emotional. By the removal of Ida and Beale from Maisie's life, James shows that biological relation is not the last word in creating a stable family. The major question for the remainder of the book is whether legal relatedness will take any precedence over emotional relatedness in Maisie's choice of a guardian, as well as to whom, out of Sir Claude, Mrs. Wix, and Mrs. Beale, she has the strongest legal and emotional relationships.<PARAGRAPH>Letters are a motif in What Maisie Knew, particularly in this section of the novel. Throughout the book, letters are used to represent relationships. Communication by letter makes it easy to keep relationships secret, though it also makes relationships subject to obstruction by others. This can be seen earlier in the novel when Mrs. Wix tries to stay in communication with Maisie but is thwarted by Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale as well as when Sir Claude keeps his relationship with Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale a secret from Maisie by communicating with her mostly through letters. In this section of the book, Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale again communicate through letters, showing their continued romantic relationship. Of particular importance is the letter--or rather, letters--in Chapter 24. Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale sends a letter to Sir Claude which includes a letter from Beale to her effectively breaking off their marriage. The symbol of a letter within a letter shows how adultery and lies have muddled relationships between multiple characters.<PARAGRAPH>Another motif that recurs at multiple points in this section is the blushing and paling of characters. This communicates information about characters' emotional states. Characters are shown to pale in moments of shock or horror and blush in moments of embarrassment or passion. For example, when Beale asks Maisie if she'll join him in moving to America at the beginning of this section, James writes, \"Planted once more before him in the middle of the room she felt herself turning white\" . This shows her displeasure at the idea, even though she answers affirmatively. An example of a character blushing comes later in the section when Sir Claude asks Mrs. Wix whether Ida was alone when she came to call. The text reads, \"Mrs Wix was red now: his good humour wouldn't keep down her colour, which for a minute glowed there like her ugly honesty\" . In this case, Mrs. Wix's blush reveals her embarrassment for Sir Claude and her strong feelings about Ida's immorality.<PARAGRAPH>Violent imagery is used frequently in this section of the novel to depict Ida and Beale's behavior toward Maisie. In Chapter 21, Ida brutally tells Maisie that \"Your father wishes you were dead\" , and two chapters later Sir Claude remarks that \" has chucked our friend here overboard not a bit less than if she had shoved her, shrieking and pleading, out of that window and down two floors to the paving-stones\" . By describing both Beale and Ida wishing or causing the death of Maisie, James communicates that Maisie's relationship with her biological parents is completely finished. The vivid, violent language also communicates how severely James treats Ida and Beale's choice to abandon their child.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24"}