{"name": "Chapter 1", "summary": "Chapter 1, Henry James includes a short chapter titled \"What Maisie Knew. In this chapter, James gives the background of the situation that will play out over the course of the novel. A newly divorced couple, Beale and Ida Farange, are squabbling in court regarding the finances and care of their young daughter, Maisie. It is decided by the court that Maisie will be \"divided in two\" , which is to say that each of her parents \"would take her, in rotation, for six months at a time\". This is a surprising and disturbing verdict, as neither of Maisie's parents seem fit to raise a child, and many who had been following the drawn-out legal proceedings assumed Maisie would be put in the care of someone else entirely. It is foreshadowed that Maisie's movement back and forth, especially the disparagement of her father by her mother and vice versa, will be detrimental for her development. PARAGRAPH>James also introduces Beale and Ida Farange and the society they are part of. The author writes that, \"This was a society in which for the most part people were occupied only with chatter\" ; as a result people were actually pleased to be outraged and take sides during and after the Farange's legal dispute. Physically, both Faranges are tall and attractive, though Ida has strangely long arms which contribute to her extraordinary skill in billiards. Beale was once a foreign diplomat, but at the time of the story has \"only twenty-five hundred\". It is implied that Ida spent his money during their marriage, and she too has almost no money to her name. The author accounts for Maisie's care by explaining that \"The child was provided for, thanks to a crafty godmother\" , a matter which is not explicitly mentioned again in the book", "analysis": "Maisie is six when her parents divorce and begin sending her back and forth from house to house. This is a very impressionable age, and the emotional trauma she suffers affects her greatly. Importantly, James writes, \"She found in her mind a collection of images and echoes to which meanings were attachable--images and echoes kept for her in the childish dusk, the dim closet, the high drawers, like games she wasn't big enough to play...A wonderful assortment of objects of this kind she was to discover there later\" . This quote shows that the things Maisie witnessed during her parents' dysfunctional marriage and subsequent divorce will remain in her subconscious, affecting her feelings and decisions later in the book. James uses this metaphor to set up the moral of the story, which is that the way a child is raised, especially any neglect or trauma they suffer, will affect them greatly later in life.<PARAGRAPH>Further evidence of Maisie's trauma comes from the symbol of her doll Lisette. Maisie acts toward Lisette the way that her mother acts toward her, mimicking her mother's secretive and emotionally abusive behavior, particularly the way she would leave for long periods of time and be secretive about where she was going. Maisie's behavior toward Lisette demonstrates the effect of this treatment on Maisie's psyche. Her treatment of Lisette calls attention to the way parents can pass down behavior and traits to their children, especially those present during early childhood.<PARAGRAPH>From the beginning of the book, James challenges common perceptions about what constitutes a good mother. Maisie thinks to herself, \" had been, with passion and anguish, a mother, and...this was something Miss Overmore was not, something  that mamma was even less\" . This contradicts the belief that motherhood is fundamentally a biological relation. This quote, which occurs quite early in the book, also foreshadows Maisie's decision to live with Mrs. Wix rather than Ida or Miss Overmore in the last chapter of the story.<PARAGRAPH>Some important facts about Mrs. Wix are mentioned in this part of the book and then largely do not recur in the rest of the story. Specifically, she had a daughter named Clara Matilda and a husband who is unnamed. Both are said to have died, Clara Matilda in a carriage accident and the husband by unknown causes. It is likely, from the way that James describes Mrs. Wix's secretiveness and discomfort around the subject of her husband, that Mrs. Wix actually had Clara Matilda out of wedlock, which was quite scandalous at the time. Furthermore, while it is not mentioned over the course of the book, Mrs. Wix's grief over raising a child without a committed husband and then losing that child likely motivate her empathy for Maisie and her desire to live as a family with Maisie and Sir Claude.<PARAGRAPH>One example of irony in What Maisie Knew that is particularly present in this section is Maisie's precocious perceptiveness. For a child no older than eight or nine, she often notices and verbalizes things that surprise the adults around her, and in some cases she seems more aware than the adults themselves. For example, Maisie suggests that Sir Claude might become her tutor to make his relationship with Ida more proper. Maisie explains this to Miss Overmore by saying \"Mightn't that make it right--as right as your being my governess makes it for you to be with papa?\" . Miss Overmore blushes, showing that Maisie understands more than she expected about her relationship with Beale and Sir Claude's relationship with Ida. Maisie's idea even foreshadows Sir Claude's involvement in her education.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-6"}