{"name": "Chapter 31", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 31<PARAGRAPH>Since neither Maisie nor Sir Claude want to go back and face Mrs. Wix and Mrs. Beale, they go on a long walk around Boulogne. They come upon a train going to Paris and Maisie suddenly asks to go. She tells Sir Claude to get tickets, and they try to do so in a hurry, knowing the train is leaving in just two minutes. The train leaves while they are still negotiating about the tickets, and they silently watch it pull away. When train has disappeared, Maisie lays out her deal: she can give up Mrs. Wix if Sir Claude can give up Mrs. Beale. Sir Claude seems very afraid, and he doesn't give an answer. They look for a long while at a boat going back to England, still not wanting to face the women at the hotel. PARAGRAPH>Finally, Sir Claude and Maisie return to the hotel. Upon arriving, they see Mrs. Wix's bags packed in the hall as if she is leaving. Sir Claude says that Mrs. Wix must have thought Maisie had already given her up, causing Maisie to panic and repeat \"I must see her\". Maisie and Sir Claude again discuss the terms of their deal, but neither of them make any absolute promises about sacrificing Mrs. Wix or Mrs. Beale. Maisie suggests that they should both wait for the women to go on their own accord, but Sir Claude says that Mrs. Beale will never do so. PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Beale finds them and announces that Mrs. Wix is leaving because Sir Claude and Maisie left for so long. She says that she and Mrs. Wix had a big fight, and she herself criticizes them for being out such a long time without sending any word. Mrs. Beale reports that Mrs. Wix is so upset with Maisie \"for having no moral sense\"  that she is leaving her. Mrs. Wix enters the room and passionately denies this. She pleads with Maisie to come with her. Maisie turns to Sir Claude and pleads, \"Will you come. Mrs. Beale tries to make Maisie feel guilty, then commands her to go to her room. Mrs. Wix commands Maisie not to go, and Maisie stays in place. Mrs. Wix asks whether Maisie has lost her moral sense, and Maisie feels confused, as if she has forgotten a lesson. Despairingly, Maisie repeats, \"I don't know\". PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Wix accuses Sir Claude of killing Maisie's moral sense; he counters he hasn't killed something but rather \"produced life\". Sir Claude reveals his proposal to Maisie and tries to make Maisie admit that she is willing to give up Mrs. Wix. Mrs. Beale tries to hug Maisie, and Maisie closes her eyes as Sir Claude tries to get Mrs. Beale to release her. Maisie reveals her part of the deal: that Sir Claude would have to give up Mrs. Beale. Mrs. Beale calls it \"rubbish\" , and turns directly to Maisie to ask whether she really made such a proposal. Maisie begs Mrs. Beale directly to give up Sir Claude. Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale try to get Mrs. Wix to leave, saying she had already planned to do so, but Mrs. Wix is now adamant that she won't separate from Maisie. She tells Maisie that she will take her, causing Mrs. Beale to physically grab Maisie again. Mrs. Beale criticizes Mrs. Wix for having lied about leaving, but Maisie stays focused on Mrs. Beale, begging her again to leave Sir Claude. Mrs. Beale tells Maisie that she was the one who brought them together, and both Maisie and Sir Claude repeat this. Mrs. Beale says that she believed Maisie loved her; Maisie says that she loves Sir Claude and Sir Claude tells Mrs. Beale that Maisie hates her. PARAGRAPH>The conversation suddenly turns to the financial concerns of raising Maisie. Mrs. Beale says that Mrs. Wix can't raise Maisie because she doesn't have the money, but Sir Claude says he can get money from Maisie's father. Mrs. Beale says she's already tried to no avail, and Sir Claude says that they'll try again together. Sir Claude says that they're not good enough to raise Maisie, and he moves toward where Maisie and Mrs. Wix are standing. Mrs. Beale blocks the door, but Sir Claude tells her to stand aside and let Mrs. Wix and Maisie through. Mrs. Beale makes a last attempt, saying that she is Maisie's mother and Sir Claude her father. Maisie again pleads for her to leave Sir Claude. Sir Claude turns to Mrs. Beale and says that he can't give her up. She mocks him for this, but he seems pleased with the pronouncement. PARAGRAPH>Suddenly, the fight seems to be over. Maisie says goodbye to Sir Claude and he says goodbye to her. Mrs. Beale angrily says goodbye to Maisie and exits the room. Then Maisie follows Mrs. Wix out of the hotel and all the way to the boat. After they have ridden for a while, Mrs. Wix asks Maisie if Sir Claude watched them leave from the balcony. Maisie says he didn't", "analysis": "Contemporary readers might be confused by James's use of the phrase \"making love\" in this section of the book, as when James writes, \"There was a phrase familiar to Maisie, so often was it used by this lady to express the idea of one's getting what one wanted: one got it--Mrs. Beale always said she at all events always got it or proposed to get it--by 'making love'. She was at present making love, singular as it appeared, to Mrs. Wix\" . To understand what is going on in the plot at this point, a reader must look to the transformation of this phrase over time. Up until the late 19th century, the phrase was defined as wooing someone or making them fall in love with you. This was Mrs. Beale's goal in this chapter; while Mrs. Beale does not want Mrs. Wix to be romantically in love with her, she wants the woman to like and accept her. It was in the early 20th century that the phrase came to take on the connotation of sexual intercourse, meaning it is possible for James, who published the novel in 1897, to have intended for the phrase to be a double entendre.<PARAGRAPH>James escalates the suspense over who Maisie will choose as her guardian at the end of Chapter 28. Maisie and Mrs. Wix argue about whether Maisie should be raised by Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale, and Maisie professes that she wants to be raised by \" alone or nobody\" . When Mrs. Wix inquires, \"Not even me?\" , Maisie replies, \"Oh, you're nobody!\" . While Maisie's eventual choice of Mrs. Wix has been foreshadowed by the girl's trust of the governess ever since their first meeting, this moment subverts the reader's expectation, building tension and intrigue. Maisie's statement might even be read as attempting to push Mrs. Wix away to test her love.<PARAGRAPH>As Maisie and her guardians spend the final chapters of the book in Boulogne, France, James includes certain phrases in French without translation . As the novel was written in the late 19th century in England, James likely assumed that educated readers would be able to translate the French phrases. While many of the uses of French serve merely to create a rich setting and show Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale's comfort in France due to their levels of education, a particular situation at the end of Chapter 29 warrants further analysis. As Sir Claude and Maisie leave to get breakfast together, Sir Claude stops an employee of the hotel where they are staying to ask for food to be sent to Mrs. Wix. The employee responds, \"Soyez tranquille...Et pour Madame?\"  This translates to \"Rest assured...and for your wife?\" . This shows that the hotel is treating Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale as husband and wife, likely because they requested for her bags to be taken to his room. Sir Claude feigns confusion, responding, \"Madame?\" , perhaps because he fears Maisie would understand the underlying significance of what the employee has said.<PARAGRAPH>Morality is one of the major themes of What Maisie Knew, and it is particularly strong in the last chapters of the novel. Mrs. Wix begins to passionately question Maisie's morality in Chapter 26, asking her repeatedly if she has a \"moral sense\" . Mrs. Wix seems to be questioning Maisie's morality because Maisie does not denounce Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale's relationship. Maisie likely does not react strongly to Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale's affair because of how many examples of adultery she has seen in her childhood. This underscores the moral of the novel, which is that mistreating children or exposing them to trauma has long-lasting negative effects.<PARAGRAPH>James makes heavy use of tactile imagery in the final scene of the novel in which Mrs. Wix, Sir Claude, and Mrs. Beale battle to be Maisie's guardian. James writes, \" threw herself upon the child and, before Maisie could resist, had sunk with her upon the sofa, possessed of her, encircling her\" . The negative language used to describe the way Mrs. Beale is touching Maisie shows that young girl does not have a positive association with the woman and sees through her ploy of possessing her to ensnare Sir Claude. Later, when Mrs. Beale realizes that Maisie is not going to choose her, James writes, \"Maisie's back became aware of a push that vented resentment\" . Specifying that Maisie's back felt the push from Mrs. Beale gives the reader a vivid understanding of Maisie's sensations, keeping the reader focused on her perception of the event occurring.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-25-31"}