{"name": "Chapter 22", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820054109/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmFrankenstein32.asp", "summary": "Victor and his father have reached Paris. Victor cannot socialize with people and feels that he will be responsible for their eventual deaths. He constantly accuses himself of the deaths of William, Justine and Henry. His father attributes this behavior to delirium. Before they leave for Paris, Victor receives a letter from Elizabeth. She assures him of her love and wants to know if he is marrying her of his own free will and love or because of a feeling of obligation. Victor writes back saying that he loves her and will tell her of all the problems he has faced on the day after their marriage. Until then, she must be patient. He returns home and courts Elizabeth for a while. He is extremely paranoid about the monster attacking him at any moment and arms himself with many weapons. Elizabeth has inherited some property on the shores of Lake Como, and they plan to spend time at Villa Lavenza. They spend a happy time together, enjoying each other's company.", "analysis": "Notes Elizabeth and Victor seem to share an undying love for each other and are now certain that they want to be married. Elizabeth's love for Victor seems to be the only comforting factor in his life now that he has lost everyone he loves. He holds himself responsible for the deaths of William, Justine and Henry. This attitude is reflected in his solitude and in his inability to socialize. Although he reiterates that he is responsible for these deaths, he is also worried that he will be labeled a madman. Victor and Elizabeth share each other's lives during the courtship. It is one of the most beautiful times they have together. Victor makes the most of it although he is terrified that he will die on their wedding night. Victor interprets the monster's threat only as it relates to himself, and not to Elizabeth. He is curiously unaware of the fact that the monster seeks to destroy him through the murder of his loved ones. However, his paranoia is constantly apparent. He seeks solace in nature on the banks of Montalegre and at Mont Saleve."}