{"name": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302204210/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/howardsend/section2/", "summary": "The Schlegels take Aunt Juley, a German cousin,  and their cousin's suitor to a performance of  Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. There, Margaret meets  and converses with a lower-class young man named  Leonard Bast. Tibby watches the music with a  score on his knee, and Aunt Juley taps her foot. During the last two movements of the symphony,  Helen imagines goblins dancing over the universe,  implying that no valor or heroism exists in the  world. Moved, she runs from the room, accidentally  taking Leonard's umbrella. After the concert,  Leonard accompanies Margaret back to the  Schlegel house on Wickham Place to retrieve his  umbrella. At Wickham Place, Helen inadvertently  insults the umbrella, causing Leonard to hurry  away in shame. The Schlegels continue talking about art  and literature, but they are slightly unsettled by  their encounter. For his part, Leonard is poor, but not  desperately so: He has just enough education and  sufficient possessions to assert that he is not  inferior to the rich. Walking away from the  Schlegels,' he passes a fellow clerk on the street  and nods to him. He enters his dim basement  apartment, accidentally breaks a picture frame  surrounding a photograph of a smiling woman, and  begins reading Ruskin's Stones of Venice in  the hopes of learning to understand English prose. He thinks that if only he could acquire the kind of  culture the Schlegel sisters possess, he would be in a  different boat altogether. His lover Jacky, the  smiling woman from the photograph, enters;  thirty-three years old, she is plump, garish, and vulgar,  and loudly demands to know when he intends to marry  her. He repeats his promise to marry her on his  21st birthday. After a meager dinner, Jacky  goes to bed, and Leonard ignores the sound of her  voice calling him and continues to peruse the Ruskin  book. The day after the concert, Aunt Juley presents  Margaret with what she thinks is terrible news: The  Wilcoxes have taken a flat in a building on Wickham  Place, opposite the Schlegels.' Margaret is unperturbed,  saying that Helen's feelings for Paul are long since  dead; Aunt Juley insists that the Wilcoxes' presence  is a catastrophe. When Helen enters and learns what has  happened, she blushes furiously, lending credence to Aunt  Juley's theory. Luckily, Helen is planning a trip with  their German cousin Frieda, and will be away until  after the New Year. Shortly after the Wilcoxes move into their new flat,  Mrs. Wilcox calls on Margaret. Margaret, who is  not home when Mrs. Wilcox appears, does not return  the call, writing a note to Mrs. Wilcox suggesting  that, given the difficult situation Helen and Paul  placed them in, it would be best if they did not  meet. Mrs. Wilcox writes a note back saying that  Margaret has been rude--she only wanted to tell  Margaret that Paul has left for Nigeria. Feeling  horribly guilty, Margaret rushes to the Wilcoxes,'  where she apologizes profusely for having offended  Mrs. Wilcox. Frail and spending the day in bed, Mrs.  Wilcox asks Margaret to keep her company; Margaret  does so, and the two women gradually become friends. Margaret learns that Howards End actually belongs to  Mrs. Wilcox, not her husband. She was born there and  has lived there her whole life. Margaret gives a  luncheon for Mrs. Wilcox, but it is a complete  failure. Margaret's friends only talk about art,  culture, and politics, leaving Mrs. Wilcox, who has  spent her life caring for a husband and children,  with nothing to say. Nevertheless, they all feel  that in some indescribable way Mrs. Wilcox is greater  than they are, as though she transcends their  conversation. After the luncheon, Margaret  apologizes to Mrs. Wilcox again; Mrs. Wilcox insists  that she had a wonderful time, and the two women  clasp hands with genuine feeling.", "analysis": "Commentary The introduction of Leonard brings a third  symbolic type into the novel to contrast with the  wealthy and idealistic Schlegels and the wealthy and  pragmatic Wilcoxes. Leonard Bast does not exactly  represent the poor , but rather the very bottom rung of the  lower-middle class. He has an office job, a  furnished apartment, and the rudiments of an  education, but still he is light-years away from the  lifestyle enjoyed by the Schlegels, as his visit to  Wickham Place makes clear to him. His poverty makes  him suspicious and mean-spirited, and his home life,  with his bawdy, aging lover, Jacky, looming over his  shoulder, is made worse by the terrible contrast  between his surroundings and the book he is reading. Leonard believes that if he attends classical music  concerts and reads Ruskin , he will be able to better  himself. But the cultured, pampered voice in the book  is utterly irrelevant to his daily life as a  low-level clerk for an insurance company. Margaret's surprising friendship with Mrs.  Wilcox is Forster's second attempt to bring the two  main families of the novel--and the two symbolic  ideas they represent--into a union. Mrs. Wilcox is a  very different creature from her husband and  children, replacing their materialistic  hard-headedness with a kind of selfless, loving  sensitivity to those around her. It is also a  surprise for the reader to learn that Howards End  actually belongs to Mrs. Wilcox . In this sense, as the novel  progresses, Mrs. Wilcox emerges as a metaphor for  England's past, and Howards End becomes a metaphor  for England itself."}