{"name": "Chapters 1-4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302204210/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/howardsend/section1/", "summary": "Young, pretty Helen Schlegel has left her London  home to visit the Wilcox family estate,  Howards End. Margaret was also invited to Howards End,  but stayed home to care for their 16-year-old  brother Tibby, who has hay fever. From Howards End, Helen sends Margaret several letters describing  the beautiful estate and the energetic, materialistic  Wilcoxes. Her last letter sends a shock through  Margaret when she reads it:  Helen has fallen in love  with Paul, the youngest Wilcox son. Margaret reads the letter to Aunt Juley, who has  come to help care for Tibby. Aunt Juley is  scandalized and thinks that the engagement will  likely have to be broken off. She convinces Margaret  to let her go to Howards End to look into  matters. Margaret takes her to the train station and  sees her on her way; however, when she returns home,  there is a telegram from Helen informing her that the  love affair is over, and asking her not to tell  anyone what has happened. As she travels to Howards End, Aunt Juley thinks  about her peculiar nieces, who value art, idealism,  and human relationships above all things. The  children of her sister Emily and a German professor  who moved to England, Margaret and Helen have lived alone  since their parents died, but their house is  constantly filled with writers, artists, thinkers,  and friends. The girls are interested in  forward-looking causes such as women's suffrage and  socialism. Despite their connection to  Germany and the increasing tension between  English Imperial powers and German Imperial powers,  Aunt Juley still thinks of the Schlegels as \"English  through and through.\" After her train arrives, Aunt Juley meets Charles  Wilcox, Paul's older brother. Mistaking him for  Paul, Aunt Juley asks him about the engagement; this  is the first Charles has heard of any engagement. Furious, he announces that Paul does not have any  money, cannot marry, and must go to Nigeria to make  his fortune. As Charles drives Aunt Juley to Howards End, they argue the entire way about whether the  Schlegels are good enough for the Wilcoxes and vice  versa. At Howards End, Charles confronts Paul, but  the ethereal Mrs. Wilcox ends the dispute. Helen  returns home to London with Aunt Juley. Margaret and  Helen discuss what has happened--Helen and Paul  simply kissed, impetuously, one night, after Helen  had come to love the Wilcox family--and the  intensity of human emotions in general. Aunt Juley  selectively remembers her role in the incident, so  that in later years she thinks that the Wilcox affair  was the one time she really was able to help her  sister's children.", "analysis": "Commentary The first four chapters of Howards End,  dealing with Helen Schlegel's aborted romance  with Paul Wilcox, are mainly devoted to  introducing the two families around whose lives the  novel is centered, and to giving the reader some idea  of their moral, intellectual, and national  identities. The Schlegels, represented by  Margaret and Helen , are intellectual,  idealistic, somewhat flighty, romantic, and  impractical, dedicated to \"personal relations\" above  all things. The Wilcoxes, on the other hand, are  hard-nosed, pragmatic, materialistic, and patriotic. The only thing connecting the two families is money: They are both quite well-off, and represent two  different facets of the English upper class  at the time in which the novel is  set. The Schlegels represent culture, education, and  a kind of idealism that Forster implies can only be  obtained when one does not have to worry about money. The Wilcoxes represent the work ethic, materialism,  imperialism , conventionalism, and form. Not  surprisingly, the Wilcoxes are often characterized as  \"solid English,\" and exhibit the emotional restraint  and repressive conformity Forster considered typical  in the England of his time. The Schlegels, coming  from an English mother and a German father, are more  cosmopolitan and far less conventional. In the  pre-World War I years in which the  novel is set, the conflict between England and Germany is just  beginning to escalate into prejudice and hatred. The  Schlegels face some unpleasantness about their German  background, especially from people such as the Wilcoxes;  but they represent an older form of German  nationalism held over from the time of Kant and  Goethe. Symbolically, then, the attraction between Helen and Paul, between a Schlegel and a Wilcox, has the potential to connect the two aspects of the upper class, marrying the Schlegel intellectualism and idealism to the pragmatism and focus of the Wilcoxes. But the relationship falls apart before it can even begin; Helen leaves Howards End, and Forster makes it clear that the gulf separating his two symbolic archetypes is a very wide one indeed."}