{"name": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302204210/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/howardsend/section6/", "summary": "Margaret and Helen discuss Margaret's  engagement to Henry; Helen admits that she  does not like him, but promises to try to be civil to  him. Margaret travels with Henry to Hilton, where  they dine with Charles and Dolly, then take  an excursion to Howards End. When they arrive, they  realize that they have forgotten the key, and  Margaret is left alone on the porch in a driving rain  while Henry goes back to get it. She tries the door  and discovers that it is unlocked; it is the first  time she has ever been to Howards End, and as she  looks through the empty house she thinks that it,  like the giant wych-elm in the yard, is like England. It is so English that neither Henry nor her artistic  friends would be able to understand it. As she opens  the door to the stairs, she is startled to find an  old woman coming down them: It is Miss Avery, a  local spinster who says that Margaret frightened  her. She thought that Margaret was Mrs. Wilcox's  ghost. Evie is annoyed and a little petulant about her  father's engagement, and moves her own wedding up to  August to distract herself. Margaret travels with  Henry and some Wilcox family friends out to Oniton,  where the Wilcoxes have recently rented an ancient  estate . A train trip is followed by a car trip; suddenly  Margaret's car stops, and the men unload all the  women and force them into the second car. Margaret  demands to know what is happening, and learns that  their car has hit a dog. Margaret demands to be let  out so that she can return to the scene, but  Charles patronizingly refuses to stop--it is  nothing that a woman should see, he says. Furious,  Margaret jumps out of the car, injuring her left hand  in the process. As she approaches the scene, she  learns that the car did not hit a dog; it hit a cat. Feeling foolish, she apologizes for jumping from the  car, and tells Henry that she has been silly, knowing  that he will chalk up her behavior to feminine  nervousness. After Evie's forgettable wedding, the bride and groom  are driven away to their honeymoon, and Margaret and  Henry return to the Oniton manor. Here, they find a  trio of scraggly looking people waiting at the porch;  Henry thinks they must be townsfolk, and Margaret  promises to see that they leave. When she  approaches, she is shocked to see Helen,  accompanied by Leonard and Jacky Bast. Helen  indignantly claims that Leonard has lost his job at  the bank and is destitute; she says that it is all  their fault, because they advised him to leave the  Porphyrion. Margaret is annoyed with Helen for  having dragged the Basts out to the country, but  agrees to speak to Henry about giving Leonard a job. She asks him indirectly, and he agrees to speak to  Leonard. When he approaches, however, the drunken  Jacky calls him \"Hen\" and asks if he loves her. Margaret is embarrassed, but Henry seems excessively  humiliated and awkward; he angrily tells Margaret  that her plan has worked, and that she is released  from their engagement. Confused, Margaret presses  the matter and discovers that 10 years ago Jacky  was Henry's mistress. Henry believes Margaret  dragged the Basts down to Oniton to expose his  secret. But Margaret is not interested in Henry's  humiliation and suspicion. This is not her tragedy, she thinks, but Mrs. Wilcox's.", "analysis": "Commentary The main narrative event of this section, obviously,  is the revelation that Henry has had an  affair with Jacky. This not only serves  further to tangle the histories and fates of the  three main symbolic groups of the novel , it serves to introduce into the second half  of the novel a major referendum on sexual mores and  gender attitudes in early 20th century England. Margaret's plunge into a heightened consideration  of gender relations began in earnest when she became  engaged to Henry, who holds extremely  conventional views about the role of men and women. It reaches an early climax in this section when  Margaret leaps out of the moving car in defiance of  Charles' orders, determined to decide for herself  what she will do and where she will go, regardless of  the opinion of men. The emergence of Jacky as a former lover of  Henry--and, by heavy implication, as a former prostitute  --does  not assume its full symbolic significance in this  section, but will before the end of the novel. By and large, this section is devoted mainly to  foreshadowing key events. Jacky's revelation,  Helen's highly agitated mental state, and Miss  Avery's insistence that Margaret will soon come to  live at Howards End all predict major development to  come in the novel. Helen's imbalance predicts her  coming sexual encounter with Leonard, Miss Avery's  weird prophecy predicts the fact that Margaret  will soon move into Howards End, and Jacky's  revelation foreshadows the eventual exposure of Henry's  hypocrisy and his collapse. Another crucial moment in this section comes in  Chapter 24, when Margaret, \"starting from Howards  End, attempted to realize England.\" Howards End has  already been suggested as an important symbol for  England itself, but in this chapter, its symbolic  role in the novel becomes explicit. The question of  \"Who will inherit England?\" begins to revolve around  the various characters' relationships to Howards End: Margaret's awakening love for the house , Henry's indifference to  it, and Charles and the other Wilcox children's  strange though possessive distaste for it. Each  aspect of Howards End--its position halfway  between a rural environment and an urban environment;  its past as a farm; and its status as a former home  to Mrs. Wilcox, a character who evokes the past  of England--becomes metaphoric. Those elements  parallel the condition of the England at that time,  which was in a process of transition from a rural,  farm-based economy to an urban way of life  ."}