{"name": "Chapters 41-44", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302204210/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/howardsend/section10/", "summary": "After his indiscretion with Helen, Leonard is  consumed with a pitiless remorse that eats away at  him. Seeing Margaret and Tibby in a  cathedral one day, he resolves to confess his misdeed  to Margaret, hoping to ease his  conscience. However, he knows nothing of  Margaret--not even that she is married to Henry Wilcox--and it takes him some time to discover her whereabouts. He learns that she and Henry have gone to Howards  End; it is the very same day that Helen's pregnancy  is discovered, when Henry and Margaret have their  terrible fight. The next day, Leonard takes a train to Hilton and  walks to Howards End. On the way, he lapses into a  kind of daze, in which his extreme sorrow seems to  transform the squalor of his life into tragedy. His  grief seems to awaken something great in him. In the  meantime, Charles has gone to Howards End to  force Margaret and Helen to leave. When Leonard  arrives, he enters the house; Charles sees him, and,  echoing his father's desire to \"thrash him within an  inch of his life,\" seizes the Schlegels' great German  sword, and begins to beat Leonard with the flat of  the blade. Leonard stumbles backward into the  bookcase, which falls on him, covering him with  books. Leonard experiences heart failure and dies. Charles leaves, stopping at the police station to  tell them that Leonard had a heart attack. The  police tell him that there will have to be an  inquest. Margaret answers the policemen's questions, saying  that Charles' actions could not have caused Leonard's  death, though they may have hastened it. She  decides to go to Germany with Helen, and she tells  Henry this; Henry shocks her by telling her that the  police have found that manslaughter was the cause of  death. Charles will spend three years in prison. Henry is shattered. On the verge of a nervous  breakdown, he asks Margaret to take care of him. Fourteen months later, Margaret, Henry, Helen, and  Helen's child are all living happily at Howards End. Henry and Helen have learned to like one another, and  are now good friends; Helen's little boy plays  happily with the village children. London is barely  visible on the horizon. Henry is exhausted, and  still frail from his sudden confrontation with his  inner weakness; he is not his old self. He calls all  his children to Howards End--Dolly comes in  Charles' place--to tell them that he is leaving the  house to Margaret, in return for which she will  receive no money when he dies. The children all  accept the dictate, though Paul, now returned  from Nigeria to run his father's business, is  scornful. As they leave, Dolly comments that it is  odd that Mrs. Wilcox wanted Margaret to have  Howards End, and now she will after all. When they are alone, Margaret asks Henry about  Dolly's comment, and he reveals to her that his wife  wished to leave her Howards End. She tells him that  he did no wrong to keep it from her. Helen runs into  the room with the baby, announcing happily that the  meadow has been cut, and there will be \"such a crop  of hay as never!\"", "analysis": "Commentary The novel's conclusion is heavy with symbolism, but  the symbolism is fairly simple compared to the  nuanced ambiguities of the rest of the novel. Leonard's death comes when he topples a bookcase  on top of himself, symbolizing his terrible obsession  with educating himself and his failure to pull  himself from \"the abyss\"  with books--in  a way, books ruin him as a human being before they  smother him and cause his heart attack. Charles'  surprising conviction for manslaughter indicates the  eroding authority of the upper classes: no matter  how conventional and \"solid\" he acts, he cannot kill  a man with impunity and get away with it. The final scene at Howards End provides a happy ending for the novel, with Helen and Henry becoming friends at last, and Henry's hypocritical edifice being replaced with a more genuine human presence. This final chapter also directly addresses the question of \"Who will inherit England?\" by featuring Henry's decision about who will inherit Howards End itself. Margaret will inherit Howards End, and she intends to leave it to Helen's child. In other words, Howards End will fall from the materialistic upper class to the idealistic upper class, and thence to an offspring of the upper and lower classes. In a sense, the final living arrangement at Howards End indicates Forster's belief that, if people could \"only connect,\" there would be a place for every class at Howards End, and in England. The classes are becoming irrevocably mixed; London is encroaching on the countryside, and World War I is looming in the near future . But for the time, all is well; the classes can live together happily, and the future of England seems less uncertain, and less dim."}