{"name": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302204210/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/howardsend/section8/", "summary": "Margaret and Henry decide to build a new home  in Sussex. One day, as Margaret looks over the  plans, Dolly appears with a strange bit of news:   Miss Avery has begun unpacking all of the  Schlegels' luggage, and arranging their furniture and  possessions at Howards End. Charles, Dolly  inadvertently lets slip, suspects Margaret of  ordering her to do so as part of a covert plan to  take over Howards End. Margaret insists that she has  done no such thing, and travels to Howards End to set  Miss Avery straight. Here, the peculiar old woman  insists prophetically that Margaret will soon be  living at Howards End; she says that the house has  been empty long enough, and that Mrs. Wilcox  would like to see the Schlegels' furniture there. Aunt Juley becomes ill with pneumonia, and  Margaret and Tibby rush down to Swanage to be with  her on what seems to be her deathbed. Helen, to  Margaret's chagrin, has been lived abroad for many  months, and her correspondence seems troublingly  distant. She returns to England only reluctantly,  and when Aunt Juley recovers, she declines to leave London. She only sends a note asking Margaret where her books  are, saying that she intends to return to Bavaria at once  and would like to bring a few of her things with her. On  Tibby's advice, Margaret consults Henry about Helen's  strange behavior; his practical mind can only suggest that  she is exhibiting signs of mental illness, and he  orchestrates a scheme to surprise her with a doctor  at Howards End. On his orders, Margaret writes Helen  a letter telling her when she can retrieve her books  from Howards End; then she and Henry prepare to  surprise her there. At Hilton, Henry attempts to leave Margaret at  Charles' house and go to Howards End alone, but  Margaret leaps into the car just as he drives off. They stop to pick up a doctor, Margaret feeling  increasingly reluctant about the entire plan. At  Howards End, they find Helen on the porch. Margaret  sees immediately what has prompted Helen's strange  behavior: She is pregnant. She hurries Helen into  the house, and with difficulty persuades Henry and  the doctor to leave so that she can talk to Helen  alone. Feeling as though she is fighting for women  against men, Margaret ushers them away, then goes  into the house to talk to her sister.", "analysis": "Commentary This section of the novel is largely transitional, and  serves chiefly to move most of the important characters   into position for the  final conflict of the novel. Forster builds suspense  before the revelation of Helen's pregnancy by  leading the reader to suspect that she is mad, or at  least severely mentally unbalanced. Interestingly,  the only clue we have that Helen has had a traumatic  sexual episode with Leonard is her tearfulness  when she visits Tibby the next day, and that clue  also effectively plays into the idea that she is  really mad. When Forster shows Margaret  betraying her own principles to try to help Helen by  going to Henry for advice, he sets the stage for  a crisis situation. When Margaret discovers Helen's  actual condition, the crisis is replaced by a moment  of acute surprise, for the reader can hardly have  suspected the truth. At this point, any symbolic or thematic importance  ascribed to Helen's pregnancy itself is postponed;  what is important in these chapters is how Margaret  reacts to it. Margaret's first concern is for her  beloved sister, and she dismisses Henry and the  doctor with an argument that the most important thing  now is simply love. She says that she loves Helen  more than they do, and therefore she is the only  person who can help her. This kind of argument is  utterly alien to Henry's rather thoughtless,  emotionally repressed character, but Margaret fights  the battle as though she were fighting for all women. Forster implies that the unjust sexual dynamic  Margaret is forced to endure on a daily basis as a  result of her marriage--a dynamic which Margaret understands,  and endures willingly--has taken more of a toll on  her than she had expected. Now, she associates a  forceful restatement of her basic philosophy of  life--that human relations are more important than  anything else--with a forceful restatement of her  independent identity as a woman. Forster's critique of gender relations in Howards End is an extremely nuanced and subtle one, and the novel does not simply vilify men and glorify  feminism; rather, it simply portrays as accurately as  possible the way the individual characters really  feel about their positions, admitting that one of  Margaret's reasons for marrying Henry is that she is  gratified to be loved by \"a real man.\" But in this  chapter, Margaret is simply sick of being bustled  about and controlled by men. In the next section of  the novel, her impatience with Henry's chauvinism  will boil over into fury."}