{"name": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210302204210/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/howardsend/section9/", "summary": "Inside Howards End, Margaret does not ask  Helen to explain her pregnancy; nor does she ask  who the father is. She merely asks about Helen's  situation--she is living in Munich with a journalist  named Monica--and why Helen did not tell her what had  happened. At first, they seem far apart from one  another, and their conversation is awkward; but as  they look at all the old furniture from Wickham Place  arranged in Howards End, they realize how much they  love one another, and agree to spend the night  together in the house. Margaret goes back to  Charles' house to ask Henry's permission. Shockingly, he denies it: He expresses his desire to  thrash Helen's \"seducer\" \"within an inch of his  life,\" but despite his own extramarital affair, he  refuses to let a fallen woman such as Helen  spend a night in his house. Margaret furiously tries  to show him his own hypocrisy, but he merely stalks  away. Margaret returns to Helen at Howards End. After Henry learned of Helen's condition, he called  Charles to solicit his help; Charles immediately goes  to see Tibby, whom he bullies into telling him  the name of Leonard. Drawing the false  conclusion that Tibby condoned an affair between  Helen and Leonard, and offered his rooms as a place  for them to conduct the affair, Charles leaves Tibby  in disgust. Outside, under the great wych-elm at Howards End,  Helen tells Margaret the story of the night she slept  with Leonard--the night of Evie's wedding,  when she and Leonard talked in the hotel after  Jacky had gone to sleep and the same night Margaret  learned of Henry's affair with Jacky. Helen asks  Margaret to come to Germany with her, and Margaret,  though she loves England deeply, considers the idea. Suddenly imagining that she, Helen, Henry, and the  placid countryside around are all part of the dead  Mrs. Wilcox's mind, she wonders whether  Leonard is part of that mind as well.", "analysis": "Commentary Henry's shockingly hypocritical reaction to Helen's pregnancy reveals his inner crisis; he is  terribly unsure of how to act, so he simply does the  most conventional thing imaginable at every turn. This behavior leads him into the horribly contradictory position  of wishing to blame and punish Helen's seducer but  refusing to let Helen spend a single night in  his house. Here, Margaret's philosophy of \"Only  connect\" and Henry's philosophy of \"Concentrate\"  crash headlong into each other. Henry is  concentrating so hard on ideas of social morality  that he is unable to see that Helen is not guilty of  anything he himself has not done. She is actually  less guilty, as Margaret points out: Helen has only  hurt herself, while Henry was unfaithful to Mrs.  Wilcox. When Margaret, enraged, points this out to Henry in  terms that even he cannot fail to understand, he  falls to pieces, snarling his refusal once  more and then shambling away. As Forster points out  in a narrative aside, Margaret's only hope of saving  Henry lies in breaking him; as long as his outward  edifice is secure, he will never learn to \"connect.\" This scene in Chapter 38, though it does not complete  the process of breaking Henry, certainly prepares him  for the collapse he will experience after Charles  is charged with manslaughter. Helen's confession that Leonard is the father of  her unborn child serves to further entwine the fates  of the three main groups of the novel--it is clear  that the question of \"Who will inherit England?\" will  not have a simple answer. Of the two Schlegel  sisters, one has married a Wilcox and the other will  bear the child of a Bast. The message is that the  classes are mingling and the boundaries are becoming  indistinct. Howards End, like England, can no longer  belong to any one group, and soon, the groups  themselves will cease to exist as separate  classifications."}