Chapter XX. The Dainty China Country.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

While the Woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in the
forest Dorothy lay down and slept, for she was tired by the long walk.
The Lion also curled himself up to sleep and Toto lay beside him.

The Scarecrow watched the Woodman while he worked, and said to him:

"I cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of."

"Rest your brains and do not worry about the wall," replied the
Woodman; "when we have climbed over it we shall know what is on the
other side."

After a time the ladder was finished. It looked clumsy, but the Tin
Woodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose. The
Scarecrow waked Dorothy and the Lion and Toto, and told them that the
ladder was ready. The Scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but he
was so awkward that Dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him
from falling off. When he got his head over the top of the wall the
Scarecrow said,

"Oh, my!"

"Go on," exclaimed Dorothy.

So the Scarecrow climbed further up and sat down on the top of the
wall, and Dorothy put her head over and cried,

"Oh, my!" just as the Scarecrow had done.

Then Toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but Dorothy made
him be still.

The Lion climbed the ladder next, and the Tin Woodman came last; but
both of them cried, "Oh, my!" as soon as they looked over the wall.
When they were all sitting in a row on the top of the wall they
looked down and saw a strange sight.

[Illustration: "_These people were all made of china._"]

Before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as smooth
and shining and white as the bottom of a big platter. Scattered
around were many houses made entirely of china and painted in the
brightest colours. These houses were quite small, the biggest of them
reaching only as high as Dorothy's waist. There were also pretty
little barns, with china fences around them, and many cows and sheep
and horses and pigs and chickens, all made of china, were standing
about in groups.

But the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queer
country. There were milk-maids and shepherdesses, with bright-colored
bodices and golden spots all over their gowns; and princesses with
most gorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds
dressed in knee-breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down
them, and golden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jewelled
crowns upon their heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets; and
funny clowns in ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their cheeks
and tall, pointed caps. And, strangest of all, these people were all
made of china, even to their clothes, and were so small that the
tallest of them was no higher than Dorothy's knee.

No one did so much as look at the travellers at first, except one
little purple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the
wall and barked at them in a tiny voice, afterwards running away again.

"How shall we get down?" asked Dorothy.

They found the ladder so heavy they could not pull it up, so the
Scarecrow fell off the wall and the others jumped down upon him so
that the hard floor would not hurt their feet. Of course they took
pains not to light on his head and get the pins in their feet. When
all were safely down they picked up the Scarecrow, whose body was
quite flattened out, and patted his straw into shape again.

"We must cross this strange place in order to get to the other side,"
said Dorothy; "for it would be unwise for us to go any other way
except due South."

They began walking through the country of the china people, and the
first thing they came to was a china milk-maid milking a china cow.
As they drew near the cow suddenly gave a kick and kicked over the
stool, the pail, and even the milk-maid herself, all falling on the
china ground with a great clatter.

Dorothy was shocked to see that the cow had broken her leg short off,
and that the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the poor
milk-maid had a nick in her left elbow.

"There!" cried the milk-maid, angrily; "see what you have done! My
cow has broken her leg, and I must take her to the mender's shop
and have it glued on again. What do you mean by coming here and
frightening my cow?"

"I'm very sorry," returned Dorothy; "please forgive us."

But the pretty milk-maid was much too vexed to make any answer. She
picked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal
limping on three legs. As she left them the milk-maid cast many
reproachful glances over her shoulder at the clumsy strangers,
holding her nicked elbow close to her side.

[Illustration]

Dorothy was quite grieved at this mishap.

"We must be very careful here," said the kind-hearted Woodman, "or we
may hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over it."

A little farther on Dorothy met a most beautiful dressed young
princess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to
run away.

Dorothy wanted to see more of the Princess, so she ran after her; but
the china girl cried out,

"Don't chase me! don't chase me!"

She had such a frightened little voice that Dorothy stopped and said,

"Why not?"

"Because," answered the princess, also stopping, a safe distance
away, "if I run I may fall down and break myself."

"But couldn't you be mended?" asked the girl.

"Oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you know,"
replied the princess.

"I suppose not," said Dorothy.

"Now there is Mr. Joker, one of our clowns," continued the china
lady, "who is always trying to stand upon his head. He has broken
himself so often that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn't
look at all pretty. Here he comes now, so you can see for yourself."

Indeed, a jolly little Clown now came walking toward them, and
Dorothy could see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and
yellow and green he was completely covered with cracks, running every
which way and showing plainly that he had been mended in many places.

The Clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out his
cheeks and nodding his head at them saucily he said,

            "My lady fair,
             Why do you stare
          At poor old Mr. Joker?
             You're quite as stiff
             And prim as if
          You'd eaten up a poker!"

"Be quiet, sir!" said the princess; "can't you see these are
strangers, and should be treated with respect?"

"Well, that's respect, I expect," declared the Clown, and immediately
stood upon his head.

"Don't mind Mr. Joker," said the princess to Dorothy; "he is
considerably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish."

[Illustration]

"Oh, I don't mind him a bit," said Dorothy. "But you are so
beautiful," she continued, "that I am sure I could love you dearly.
Won't you let me carry you back to Kansas and stand you on Aunt Em's
mantle-shelf? I could carry you in my basket."

"That would make me very unhappy," answered the china princess. "You
see, here in our own country we live contentedly, and can talk and
move around as we please. But whenever any of us are taken away
our joints at once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look
pretty. Of course that is all that is expected of us when we are on
mantle-shelves and cabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives
are much pleasanter here in our own country."

"I would not make you unhappy for all the world!" exclaimed Dorothy;
"so I'll just say good-bye."

"Good-bye," replied the princess.

They walked carefully through the china country. The little animals
and all the people scampered out of their way, fearing the strangers
would break them, and after an hour or so the travellers reached the
other side of the country and came to another china wall.

It was not as high as the first, however, and by standing upon the
Lion's back they all managed to scramble to the top. Then the Lion
gathered his legs under him and jumped on the wall; but just as he
jumped he upset a china church with his tail and smashed it all to
pieces.

"That was too bad," said Dorothy, "but really I think we were lucky
in not doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow's leg
and a church. They are all so brittle!"

"They are, indeed," said the Scarecrow, "and I am thankful I am made
of straw and cannot be easily damaged. There are worse things in the
world than being a Scarecrow."





Chapter XXI. The Lion Becomes the King of Beasts.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

After climbing down from the china wall the travellers found
themselves in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and
covered with tall, rank grass. It was difficult to walk far without
falling into muddy holes, for the grass was so thick that it hid them
from sight. However, by carefully picking their way, they got safely
along until they reached solid ground. But here the country seemed
wilder than ever, and after a long and tiresome walk through the
underbrush they entered another forest, where the trees were bigger
and older than any they had ever seen.

"This forest is perfectly delightful," declared the Lion, looking
around him with joy; "never have I seen a more beautiful place."

"It seems gloomy," said the Scarecrow.

"Not a bit of it," answered the Lion; "I should like to live here all
my life. See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how
rich and green the moss is that clings to these old trees. Surely no
wild beast could wish a pleasanter home."

"Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now," said Dorothy.

"I suppose there are," returned the Lion; "but I do not see any of
them about."

They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any
farther. Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while the
Woodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.

When morning came they started again. Before they had gone far they
heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals. Toto
whimpered a little but none of the others was frightened and they kept
along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in the wood,
in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety. There were
tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all the others
in the natural history, and for a moment Dorothy was afraid. But the
Lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and he judged
by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble.

As he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once
the great assemblage hushed as if by magic. The biggest of the tigers
came up to the Lion and bowed, saying,

[Illustration]

"Welcome, O King of Beasts! You have come in good time to fight our
enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more."

"What is your trouble?" asked the Lion, quietly.

"We are all threatened," answered the tiger, "by a fierce enemy which
has lately come into this forest. It is a most tremendous monster, like
a great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and legs as long as
a tree trunk. It has eight of these long legs, and as the monster
crawls through the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it
to his mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly. Not one of us is
safe while this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a meeting
to decide how to take care of ourselves when you came among us."

The Lion thought for a moment.

"Are there any other lions in this forest?" he asked.

"No; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all. And,
besides, they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you."

"If I put an end to your enemy will you bow down to me and obey me as
King of the Forest?" enquired the Lion.

"We will do that gladly," returned the tiger; and all the other
beasts roared with a mighty roar: "We will!"

"Where is this great spider of yours now?" asked the Lion.

"Yonder, among the oak trees," said the tiger, pointing with his
fore-foot.

"Take good care of these friends of mine," said the Lion, "and I will
go at once to fight the monster."

He bade his comrades good-bye and marched proudly away to do battle
with the enemy.

The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and it
looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust. Its legs
were quite as long as the tiger had said, and it's body covered with
coarse black hair. It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth
a foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as
slender as a wasp's waist. This gave the Lion a hint of the best way
to attack the creature, and as he knew it was easier to fight it
asleep than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon
the monster's back. Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed
with sharp claws, he knocked the spider's head from its body. Jumping
down, he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he
knew it was quite dead.

The Lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest were
waiting for him and said, proudly, "You need fear your enemy no longer."

Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he promised
to come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely on her
way to Kansas.





Chapter XXII. The Country of the Quadlings


[Illustration]

[Illustration: "_The Head shot forward and struck the Scarecrow._"]

[Illustration]

The four travellers passed through the rest of the forest in safety,
and when they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill,
covered from top to bottom with great pieces of rock.

"That will be a hard climb," said the Scarecrow, "but we must get
over the hill, nevertheless."

So he led the way and the others followed. They had nearly reached
the first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out,

"Keep back!"

"Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow. Then a head showed itself over
the rock and the same voice said,

"This hill belongs to us, and we don't allow anyone to cross it."

"But we must cross it," said the Scarecrow. "We're going to the
country of the Quadlings."

"But you shall not!" replied the voice, and there stepped from behind
the rock the strangest man the travellers had ever seen.

He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at the
top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles. But he had no arms
at all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so helpless a
creature could prevent them from climbing the hill. So he said,

"I'm sorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your hill
whether you like it or not," and he walked boldly forward.

As quick as lightning the man's head shot forward and his neck
stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck
the Scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over,
down the hill. Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the
body, and the man laughed harshly as he said,

"It isn't as easy as you think!"

A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and
Dorothy saw hundreds of the armless Hammer-Heads upon the hillside,
one behind every rock.

The Lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the Scarecrow's
mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder he dashed up
the hill.

Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling down
the hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.

Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the Lion
came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said,

"It is useless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can
withstand them."

"What can we do, then?" she asked.

"Call the Winged Monkeys," suggested the Tin Woodman; "you have still
the right to command them once more."

"Very well," she answered, and putting on the Golden Cap she uttered
the magic words. The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a few
moments the entire band stood before her.

"What are your commands?" enquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing low.

"Carry us over the hill to the country of the Quadlings," answered
the girl.

"It shall be done," said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeys
caught the four travellers and Toto up in their arms and flew away
with them. As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled with
vexation, and shot their heads high in the air; but they could not
reach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades
safely over the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of
the Quadlings.

"This is the last time you can summon us," said the leader to
Dorothy; "so good-bye and good luck to you."

"Good-bye, and thank you very much," returned the girl; and the
Monkeys rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.

The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy. There was field
upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between,
and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them. The fences
and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they had
been painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in the
country of the Munchkins. The Quadlings themselves, who were short and
fat and looked chubby and good natured, were dressed all in red, which
showed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain.

The Monkeys had set them down near a farm house, and the four
travellers walked up to it and knocked at the door. It was opened by
the farmer's wife, and when Dorothy asked for something to eat the
woman gave them all a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four
kinds of cookies, and a bowl of milk for Toto.

"How far is it to the Castle of Glinda?" asked the child.

"It is not a great way," answered the farmer's wife. "Take the road
to the South and you will soon reach it."

Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fields
and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very
beautiful Castle. Before the gates were three young girls, dressed
in handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as Dorothy
approached one of them said to her,

"Why have you come to the South Country?"

"To see the Good Witch who rules here," she answered. "Will you take
me to her?"

"Let me have your name and I will ask Glinda if she will receive
you." They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the
Castle. After a few moments she came back to say that Dorothy and the
others were to be admitted at once.

[Illustration]





Chapter XXIII. The Good Witch Grants Dorothy's Wish.


[Illustration]

[Illustration: "_You must give me the Golden Cap._"]

[Illustration]

Before they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room of
the Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and
the Lion shook the dust out of his mane, and the Scarecrow patted
himself into his best shape, and the Woodman polished his tin and
oiled his joints.

When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girl
into a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of rubies.

She was both beautiful and young to their eyes. Her hair was a rich
red in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders. Her
dress was pure white; but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly
upon the little girl.

"What can I do for you, my child?" she asked.

Dorothy told the Witch all her story; how the cyclone had brought
her to the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of the
wonderful adventures they had met with.

"My greatest wish now," she added, "is to get back to Kansas, for
Aunt Em will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and
that will make her put on mourning; and unless the crops are better
this year than they were last I am sure Uncle Henry cannot afford it."

Glinda leaned forward and kissed the sweet, upturned face of the
loving little girl.

"Bless your dear heart," she said, "I am sure I can tell you of a way
to get back to Kansas." Then she added:

"But, if I do, you must give me the Golden Cap."

"Willingly!" exclaimed Dorothy; "indeed, it is of no use to me now,
and when you have it you can command the Winged Monkeys three times."

"And I think I shall need their service just those three times,"
answered Glinda, smiling.

Dorothy then gave her the Golden Cap, and the Witch said to the
Scarecrow,

"What will you do when Dorothy has left us?"

"I will return to the Emerald City," he replied, "for Oz has made me
its ruler and the people like me. The only thing that worries me is
how to cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads."

"By means of the Golden Cap I shall command the Winged Monkeys to
carry you to the gates of the Emerald City," said Glinda, "for it
would be a shame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler."

"Am I really wonderful?" asked the Scarecrow.

"You are unusual," replied Glinda.

Turning to the Tin Woodman, she asked:

"What will become of you when Dorothy leaves this country?"

He leaned on his axe and thought a moment. Then he said,

"The Winkies were very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them
after the Wicked Witch died. I am fond of the Winkies, and if I could
get back again to the country of the West I should like nothing
better than to rule over them forever."

"My second command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda, "will be that
they carry you safely to the land of the Winkies. Your brains may not
be so large to look at as those of the Scarecrow, but you are really
brighter than he is--when you are well polished--and I am sure you
will rule the Winkies wisely and well."

Then the Witch looked at the big, shaggy Lion and asked,

"When Dorothy has returned to her own home, what will become of you?"

"Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads," he answered, "lies a grand old
forest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their King.
If I could only get back to this forest I would pass my life very
happily there."

"My third command to the Winged Monkeys," said Glinda, "shall be to
carry you to your forest. Then, having used up the powers of the
Golden Cap, I shall give it to the King of the Monkeys, that he and
his band may thereafter be free for evermore."

The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion now thanked the Good
Witch earnestly for her kindness, and Dorothy exclaimed,

[Illustration]

"You are certainly as good as you are beautiful! But you have not yet
told me how to get back to Kansas."

"Your Silver Shoes will carry you over the desert," replied Glinda.
"If you had known their power you could have gone back to your Aunt
Em the very first day you came to this country."

"But then I should not have had my wonderful brains!" cried the
Scarecrow. "I might have passed my whole life in the farmer's
cornfield."

"And I should not have had my lovely heart," said the Tin Woodman. "I
might have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the world."

"And I should have lived a coward forever," declared the Lion, "and
no beast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to me."

"This is all true," said Dorothy, "and I am glad I was of use to
these good friends. But now that each of them has had what he most
desired, and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule beside, I
think I should like to go back to Kansas."

"The Silver Shoes," said the Good Witch, "have wonderful powers. And
one of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you to
any place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made in
the wink of an eye. All you have to do is to knock the heels together
three times and command the shoes to carry you wherever you wish to go."

"If that is so," said the child, joyfully, "I will ask them to carry
me back to Kansas at once."

She threw her arms around the Lion's neck and kissed him, patting
his big head tenderly. Then she kissed the Tin Woodman, who was
weeping in a way most dangerous to his joints. But she hugged the
soft, stuffed body of the Scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing
his painted face, and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful
parting from her loving comrades.

Glinda the Good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the little
girl a good-bye kiss, and Dorothy thanked her for all the kindness
she had shown to her friends and herself.

Dorothy now took Toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one
last good-bye she clapped the heels of her shoes together three
times, saying,

"Take me home to Aunt Em!"

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Instantly she was whirling through the air, so swiftly that all she
could see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears.

The Silver Shoes took but three steps, and then she stopped so
suddenly that she rolled over upon the grass several times before she
knew where she was.

At length, however, she sat up and looked about her.

"Good gracious!" she cried.

For she was sitting on the broad Kansas prairie, and just before
her was the new farm-house Uncle Henry built after the cyclone had
carried away the old one. Uncle Henry was milking the cows in the
barnyard, and Toto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward
the barn, barking joyously.

Dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet. For the
Silver Shoes had fallen off in her flight through the air, and were
lost forever in the desert.

[Illustration]





Chapter XXIV. Home Again.


Aunt Em had just come out of the house to water the cabbages when she
looked up and saw Dorothy running toward her.

"My darling child!" she cried, folding the little girl in her arms and
covering her face with kisses; "where in the world did you come from?"

"From the Land of Oz," said Dorothy, gravely. "And here is Toto, too.
And oh, Aunt Em! I'm so glad to be at home again!"

[Illustration]



