{"name": "Chapter 18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210309054006/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/kidnapped/section7/", "summary": "I Talk with Alan in the Wood of Lettermore Alan and David awake. David is angry; he believes Alan murdered Glenure in cold blood. He wants to part immediately, but Alan is offended and demands an explanation. When David voices his suspicions, Alan denies that he had anything to do with the murder, and points out that he would never do so without a sword or a pistol with him. He then swears that he had nothing to do with it, and David believes him. When David asks about the real killer--for he had a chance to see him as he ran away--Alan, who has clearly seen the fellow, pretends not to have seen him closely, and tries to confuse David's memory. In fact, Alan intended to use himself and David to draw away the blame from the real killer, something he thinks is his duty as a fellow Highlander and enemy of the Campbells. This impresses David greatly. Alan then points out that they are wanted criminals, and likely to die if caught. So they must flee through the heather, or the Scottish wilderness, until they can reach their destinations: Cramond for David, and France for Alan. Alan then tells David of what happened after he was washed overboard the Covenant. Alan, Captain Hoseason, Riach and several others sailors had made it to the shore; the rest of the sailors were not so lucky, including two who were trapped, wounded, in the forecastle, and had screamed horribly until the ship sunk. On the shore, Hoseason had ordered his men to lay hands on Alan and take his gold, but Riach had prevented them and Alan escaped.", "analysis": "This part of the story is probably the most difficult to believe. Not only does David stumble right into the very spot where Alan is, but also he is present for the murder of Glenure. It is arguable that Alan, despite his oath to David, may have had some part in the murder, though given Alan's character it seems unlikely he would swear such an oath if he was really involved. But the idea that David just happens to be present at the shooting requires a great suspension of disbelief. Many adventure stories have situations that are much more fantastic or unlikely, and once the reader has gotten this far and seen how David tends to stumble blindly into bad situations, it isn't very surprising that he ends up being accused as an accessory to Glenure's murder. Alan's willingness to sacrifice himself for the unknown killer of Glenure has a great effect upon David. The youth sees it as a noble thing to do, since he believes that Alan had nothing to do with the crime. Alan, on the other hand, sees it as his only real course of action. Stevenson is drawing a difference between a \"Highland code of ethics\" and the moral attitudes followed by the more \"Anglicized\" David. David is a product of Lowland society, which is largely English in nature, influence, and religion. Alan is a product of the wild Highlands. But David recognizes the virtue in Alan's self-sacrifice, saying, \"Mr. Henderson's words came back to me: that we ourselves might take a lesson by these wild Highlanders. Alan's morals were all tail-first; but he was ready to give his life for them, such as they were"}