{"name": "Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210614173333/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/ivanhoe/summary/chapter-10", "summary": "The epigraph for Chapter 10 is from the beginning of Act 2 of Christopher Marlowe's 1594 play, <em>The Jew of Malta</em>. The title character, a Jewish merchant named Barabas, has been forced by the Governor of Malta to give up his property. Barabas swears to destroy these Christian thieves. The Disinherited Knight has only one servant, a man who also seems to be in disguise. As soon as the Disinherited Knight finishes his meal, his servant announces the arrival of five men with armored horses at his tent. These are the squires of the five Norman knights he defeated that day. According to the rules of honor, each person who lost to the Disinherited Knight at the tournament owes the Knight the armor and horse that he used in the fight. The Disinherited Knight can either choose to keep these trophies or sell them back to his opponents. Each squire has 100 coins to offer in ransom for his master's armor and horse. The Disinherited Knight accepts the 100 coins ransom from the squires of Reginald Front-de-Boeuf, Philip de Malvoisin, Hugh de Grantmesnil, and Ralph de Vipont. These four knights get to keep their honor and their armor. But for Brian de Bois-Guilbert, the Disinherited Knight refuses to accept either ransom or armor. The Disinherited Knight tells Bois-Guilbert's squire that their fight is not over yet, not until they have fought it out with swords in mortal combat. The squires leave and the Disinherited Knight turns to his servant. It's Gurth, the pig-herder! Gurth is trying his best to imitate a Norman squire-at-arms, hence the disguise. The Disinherited Knight sends Gurth with the money to repay Isaac of York for the loan of his armor and horse. Meanwhile, in a Jewish home not far from Ashby and the tournament, Isaac and Rebecca are talking. Isaac is furious because he's had to loan fifty zecchins to Prince John. Rebecca tries to soothe his temper, but he's still angry. Isaac is also pretty sure that the Disinherited Knight is not going to repay his debt, since Isaac is a Jew. Gurth appears after dark on his errand from the Disinherited Knight. Isaac is thrilled, and he and Gurth start negotiating about how much the Disinherited Knight owes. Gurth pays up Isaac's asking price, which turns out to be half of the amount the Disinherited Knight originally gave to Gurth. Isaac is very pleased with the Disinherited Knight for his honesty. Rebecca slips out of the room during Gurth and Isaac's conversation, but she catches up with Gurth as he leaves. Rebecca hands Gurth a bag of coins to take to his master. She wants to pay for his horse and armor out of her own pocket.", "analysis": ""}