{"name": "Chapter 29", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210614173333/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/ivanhoe/summary/chapter-29", "summary": "We start out with a quote from Frederick Schiller's tragic play <em>Maid of Orleans</em>, based on the life of Joan of Arc. The speaker asks a soldier to climb the nearby watchtower to report on the battle. Rebecca is really enjoying this time with Ivanhoe. But she is always aware that he thinks of her coldly, as a Jewish woman. Ivanhoe asks how he has come to be prisoner in the castle of Front-de-Boeuf. Rebecca explains that the castle is under siege from outlaws, and that there is a Christian priest who might know more. Ivanhoe asks Rebecca to bring the friar to him. Rebecca goes and comes back, explaining her lack of success. They hear the noise of battle inside the castle. Ivanhoe is freaking out about not being able to join in. To calm Ivanhoe down, Rebecca offers to describe to him what she sees through the windows. Ivanhoe worries that Rebecca will be injured by a stray arrow, but she insists. Rebecca sees archers at the edge of the woods. The Saxons approaching the castle are carrying no banners or marks of their identity. But Rebecca can see their leader, a knight all in black. She sees the outlaws putting up heavy shields and preparing their battering rams. The Normans and Saxons start shooting arrows at each other. The Black Knight leads a charge against the outer wall of Torquilstone. They break through the outer wall and start fighting the castle's defenders hand to hand. Front-de-Boeuf and the Black Knight are in single combat. The Black Knight brings down Front-de-Boeuf. Bois-Guilbert runs to rescue Front-de-Boeuf. Bois-Guilbert and his men pull Front-de-Boeuf inside the castle. The outlaws have taken the outer battlements. The Black Knight is fighting his way through the second gate across the castle's moat. Ivanhoe is excited to hear all this news. But Rebecca is horrified by the violence that men do to one another. Ivanhoe wants to hear more: is there really no sign of who the Black Knight is? Rebecca describes his shield: black with a blue \"fetterlock\" a handcuff used to restrain prisoners and/or horses). Otherwise, he is all in black. The shield is meaningless to Ivanhoe. Still, Ivanhoe is impressed by the Black Knight's heroism. Ivanhoe and Rebecca start a serious debate. Ivanhoe believes that glory is the most important thing a man can achieve, regardless of the cost. Rebecca thinks that the \"great deeds\" done in battle are really just a waste of life and happiness. Rebecca is angry that Ivanhoe thinks she is a coward just because she does not celebrate violence. Ivanhoe has fallen asleep. Rebecca is doing her best not to love him, since she knows it would be a bad idea.", "analysis": ""}