{"name": "Chapter 21", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210614173333/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/ivanhoe/summary/chapter-21", "summary": "We have another passage from Joanna Baillie, this one from Act III, Scene I1 of Orra: A Tragedy . Orra, the speaker of the passage, is mourning the past and people long dead. Hmm. Sounds like we're in for some memories of the past from Cedric. While the outlaws are organizing the rescue of Cedric and Rowena, the Normans are lost in the forest. Bois-Guilbert tells De Bracy it's time for him to leave. It's now De Bracy's job to pretend to rescue Cedric and Rowena. De Bracy won't leave Bois-Guilbert until his captives are safely at Torquilstone Castle with Reginald Front-de-Boeuf. De Bracy doesn't trust Bois-Guilbert - he thinks he's double-cross him. But Bois-Guilbert doesn't care about Rowena. He has his eyes set on Rebecca. De Bracy asks whether it's Rebecca or her father's money that Bois-Guilbert finds so attractive. Bois-Guilbert likes both, but he has to share Isaac's money with Reginald Front-de-Boeuf. He wants Rebecca all to himself . Cedric yells at the guards: they are English, he is English, how can they be fighting against each other? When Cedric sees that they've arrived at Torquilstone Castle, he's shocked to realize that he has fallen into Norman hands. Cedric offers the guards Athelstane's and his own life if they can save the honor of Rowena. None of the \"outlaws\" answer him. At the castle, Rowena and Rebecca are taken into separate rooms. Isaac and the Saxon servants get taken off to other parts of the castle. Cedric and Athelstane wind up together. Cedric starts getting sentimental about the old days of England. He recalls that it was in this very hall of Torquilstone that King Harold II met with messengers from his rebel brother, Tosti. King Harold II was the last King of England before the Normans invaded Britain in 1066. Just before the Norman invasion, Tosti rebelled against his brother, King Harold, with the help of the Norwegian King Hardrada. Messengers from Tosti asked what King Harold would give his brother if Tosti surrendered. King Harold promised to give him the Earldom of Northumberland . But for Hardrada, King Harold promised \"seven feet of English ground\" , or maybe a bit more, since he is supposed to be very tall. In other words, King Harold offered Hardrada enough land for an English grave. When Tosti, Hardrada, and King Harold fought it out, Tosti and Hardrada were both killed, along with their bravest men. Little did the English know, fresh from their victory over the Norwegians, that the Normans were about to invade from France. Throughout all of Cedric's ranting about the past, Athelstane keeps wondering if and when they are going to eat. The longer Cedric spends in Athelstane's company, the more tired he gets of his laziness and obsession with food. Wearing masks to cover their faces, several Norman servants come in with food for Cedric and Athelstane. The Saxons hear three horn blasts coming from the gate. There is bustle in the halls: something is happening!", "analysis": ""}