7 THE INTERIOR* OF THE MUSKETEERS


When d'Artagnan was out of the Louvre, and consulted his friends upon
the use he had best make of his share of the forty pistoles, Athos
advised him to order a good repast at the Pomme-de-Pin, Porthos to
engage a lackey, and Aramis to provide himself with a suitable mistress.

    _*Domestic affairs, housekeeping_

The repast was carried into effect that very day, and the lackey waited
at table. The repast had been ordered by Athos, and the lackey furnished
by Porthos. He was a Picard, whom the glorious Musketeer had picked up
on the Bridge Tournelle, making rings and plashing in the water.

Porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflective and
contemplative organization, and he had brought him away without any
other recommendation. The noble carriage of this gentleman, for whom he
believed himself to be engaged, had won Planchet--that was the name of
the Picard. He felt a slight disappointment, however, when he saw that
this place was already taken by a compeer named Mousqueton, and when
Porthos signified to him that the state of his household, though great,
would not support two servants, and that he must enter into the service
of d'Artagnan. Nevertheless, when he waited at the dinner given by his
master, and saw him take out a handful of gold to pay for it, he
believed his fortune made, and returned thanks to heaven for having
thrown him into the service of such a Croesus. He preserved this opinion
even after the feast, with the remnants of which he repaired his own
long abstinence; but when in the evening he made his master's bed, the
chimeras of Planchet faded away. The bed was the only one in the
apartment, which consisted of an antechamber and a bedroom. Planchet
slept in the antechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of
d'Artagnan, and which d'Artagnan from that time made shift to do
without.

Athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in his service in a
thoroughly peculiar fashion, and who was named Grimaud. He was very
taciturn, this worthy signor. Be it understood we are speaking of Athos.
During the five or six years that he had lived in the strictest intimacy
with his companions, Porthos and Aramis, they could remember having
often seen him smile, but had never heard him laugh. His words were
brief and expressive, conveying all that was meant, and no more; no
embellishments, no embroidery, no arabesques. His conversation was a
matter of fact, without a single romance.

Although Athos was scarcely thirty years old, and was of great personal
beauty and intelligence of mind, no one knew whether he had ever had a
mistress. He never spoke of women. He certainly did not prevent others
from speaking of them before him, although it was easy to perceive that
this kind of conversation, in which he only mingled by bitter words and
misanthropic remarks, was very disagreeable to him. His reserve, his
roughness, and his silence made almost an old man of him. He had, then,
in order not to disturb his habits, accustomed Grimaud to obey him upon
a simple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips. He never spoke
to him, except under the most extraordinary occasions.

Sometimes, Grimaud, who feared his master as he did fire, while
entertaining a strong attachment to his person and a great veneration
for his talents, believed he perfectly understood what he wanted, flew
to execute the order received, and did precisely the contrary. Athos
then shrugged his shoulders, and, without putting himself in a passion,
thrashed Grimaud. On these days he spoke a little.

Porthos, as we have seen, had a character exactly opposite to that of
Athos. He not only talked much, but he talked loudly, little caring, we
must render him that justice, whether anybody listened to him or not. He
talked for the pleasure of talking and for the pleasure of hearing
himself talk. He spoke upon all subjects except the sciences, alleging
in this respect the inveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his
childhood. He had not so noble an air as Athos, and the commencement of
their intimacy often rendered him unjust toward that gentleman, whom he
endeavored to eclipse by his splendid dress. But with his simple
Musketeer's uniform and nothing but the manner in which he threw back
his head and advanced his foot, Athos instantly took the place which was
his due and consigned the ostentatious Porthos to the second rank.
Porthos consoled himself by filling the antechamber of M. de Treville
and the guardroom of the Louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes,
after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies, from
the lawyer's dame to the baroness, there was question of nothing less
with Porthos than a foreign princess, who was enormously fond of him.

An old proverb says, "Like master, like man." Let us pass, then, from
the valet of Athos to the valet of Porthos, from Grimaud to Mousqueton.

Mousqueton was a Norman, whose pacific name of Boniface his master had
changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of Mousqueton. He had
entered the service of Porthos upon condition that he should only be
clothed and lodged, though in a handsome manner; but he claimed two
hours a day to himself, consecrated to an employment which would provide
for his other wants. Porthos agreed to the bargain; the thing suited him
wonderfully well. He had doublets cut out of his old clothes and
cast-off cloaks for Mousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent tailor,
who made his clothes look as good as new by turning them, and whose wife
was suspected of wishing to make Porthos descend from his aristocratic
habits, Mousqueton made a very good figure when attending on his master.

As for Aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explained the
character--a character which, like that of his companions, we shall be
able to follow in its development--his lackey was called Bazin. Thanks
to the hopes which his master entertained of someday entering into
orders, he was always clothed in black, as became the servant of a
churchman. He was a Berrichon, thirty-five or forty years old, mild,
peaceable, sleek, employing the leisure his master left him in the
perusal of pious works, providing rigorously for two a dinner of few
dishes, but excellent. For the rest, he was dumb, blind, and deaf, and
of unimpeachable fidelity.

And now that we are acquainted, superficially at least, with the masters
and the valets, let us pass on to the dwellings occupied by each of
them.

Athos dwelt in the Rue Ferou, within two steps of the Luxembourg. His
apartment consisted of two small chambers, very nicely fitted up, in a
furnished house, the hostess of which, still young and still really
handsome, cast tender glances uselessly at him. Some fragments of past
splendor appeared here and there upon the walls of this modest lodging;
a sword, for example, richly embossed, which belonged by its make to the
times of Francis I, the hilt of which alone, encrusted with precious
stones, might be worth two hundred pistoles, and which, nevertheless, in
his moments of greatest distress Athos had never pledged or offered for
sale. It had long been an object of ambition for Porthos. Porthos would
have given ten years of his life to possess this sword.

One day, when he had an appointment with a duchess, he endeavored even
to borrow it of Athos. Athos, without saying anything, emptied his
pockets, got together all his jewels, purses, aiguillettes, and gold
chains, and offered them all to Porthos; but as to the sword, he said it
was sealed to its place and should never quit it until its master should
himself quit his lodgings. In addition to the sword, there was a
portrait representing a nobleman of the time of Henry III, dressed with
the greatest elegance, and who wore the Order of the Holy Ghost; and
this portrait had certain resemblances of lines with Athos, certain
family likenesses which indicated that this great noble, a knight of the
Order of the King, was his ancestor.

Besides these, a casket of magnificent goldwork, with the same arms as
the sword and the portrait, formed a middle ornament to the mantelpiece,
and assorted badly with the rest of the furniture. Athos always carried
the key of this coffer about him; but he one day opened it before
Porthos, and Porthos was convinced that this coffer contained nothing
but letters and papers--love letters and family papers, no doubt.

Porthos lived in an apartment, large in size and of very sumptuous
appearance, in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier. Every time he passed with a
friend before his windows, at one of which Mousqueton was sure to be
placed in full livery, Porthos raised his head and his hand, and said,
"That is my abode!" But he was never to be found at home; he never
invited anybody to go up with him, and no one could form an idea of what
his sumptuous apartment contained in the shape of real riches.

As to Aramis, he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir, an
eating room, and a bedroom, which room, situated, as the others were, on
the ground floor, looked out upon a little fresh green garden, shady and
impenetrable to the eyes of his neighbors.

With regard to d'Artagnan, we know how he was lodged, and we have
already made acquaintance with his lackey, Master Planchet.

D'Artagnan, who was by nature very curious--as people generally are who
possess the genius of intrigue--did all he could to make out who Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis really were (for under these pseudonyms each of
these young men concealed his family name)--Athos in particular, who, a
league away, savored of nobility. He addressed himself then to Porthos
to gain information respecting Athos and Aramis, and to Aramis in order
to learn something of Porthos.

Unfortunately Porthos knew nothing of the life of his silent companion
but what revealed itself. It was said Athos had met with great crosses
in love, and that a frightful treachery had forever poisoned the life of
this gallant man. What could this treachery be? All the world was
ignorant of it.

As to Porthos, except his real name (as was the case with those of his
two comrades), his life was very easily known. Vain and indiscreet, it
was as easy to see through him as through a crystal. The only thing to
mislead the investigator would have been belief in all the good things
he said of himself.

With respect to Aramis, though having the air of having nothing secret
about him, he was a young fellow made up of mysteries, answering little
to questions put to him about others, and having learned from him the
report which prevailed concerning the success of the Musketeer with a
princess, wished to gain a little insight into the amorous adventures of
his interlocutor. "And you, my dear companion," said he, "you speak of
the baronesses, countesses, and princesses of others?"

"PARDIEU! I spoke of them because Porthos talked of them himself,
because he had paraded all these fine things before me. But be assured,
my dear Monsieur d'Artagnan, that if I had obtained them from any other
source, or if they had been confided to me, there exists no confessor
more discreet than myself."

"Oh, I don't doubt that," replied d'Artagnan; "but it seems to me that
you are tolerably familiar with coats of arms--a certain embroidered
handkerchief, for instance, to which I owe the honor of your
acquaintance?"

This time Aramis was not angry, but assumed the most modest air and
replied in a friendly tone, "My dear friend, do not forget that I wish
to belong to the Church, and that I avoid all mundane opportunities. The
handkerchief you saw had not been given to me, but it had been forgotten
and left at my house by one of my friends. I was obliged to pick it up
in order not to compromise him and the lady he loves. As for myself, I
neither have, nor desire to have, a mistress, following in that respect
the very judicious example of Athos, who has none any more than I have."

"But what the devil! You are not a priest, you are a Musketeer!"

"A Musketeer for a time, my friend, as the cardinal says, a Musketeer
against my will, but a churchman at heart, believe me. Athos and Porthos
dragged me into this to occupy me. I had, at the moment of being
ordained, a little difficulty with--But that would not interest you, and
I am taking up your valuable time."

"Not at all; it interests me very much," cried d'Artagnan; "and at this
moment I have absolutely nothing to do."

"Yes, but I have my breviary to repeat," answered Aramis; "then some
verses to compose, which Madame d'Aiguillon begged of me. Then I must go
to the Rue St. Honore in order to purchase some rouge for Madame de
Chevreuse. So you see, my dear friend, that if you are not in a hurry, I
am very much in a hurry."

Aramis held out his hand in a cordial manner to his young companion, and
took leave of him.

Notwithstanding all the pains he took, d'Artagnan was unable to learn
any more concerning his three new-made friends. He formed, therefore,
the resolution of believing for the present all that was said of their
past, hoping for more certain and extended revelations in the future. In
the meanwhile, he looked upon Athos as an Achilles, Porthos as an Ajax,
and Aramis as a Joseph.

As to the rest, the life of the four young friends was joyous enough.
Athos played, and that as a rule unfortunately. Nevertheless, he never
borrowed a sou of his companions, although his purse was ever at their
service; and when he had played upon honor, he always awakened his
creditor by six o'clock the next morning to pay the debt of the
preceding evening.

Porthos had his fits. On the days when he won he was insolent and
ostentatious; if he lost, he disappeared completely for several days,
after which he reappeared with a pale face and thinner person, but with
money in his purse.

As to Aramis, he never played. He was the worst Musketeer and the most
unconvivial companion imaginable. He had always something or other to
do. Sometimes in the midst of dinner, when everyone, under the
attraction of wine and in the warmth of conversation, believed they had
two or three hours longer to enjoy themselves at table, Aramis looked at
his watch, arose with a bland smile, and took leave of the company, to
go, as he said, to consult a casuist with whom he had an appointment. At
other times he would return home to write a treatise, and requested his
friends not to disturb him.

At this Athos would smile, with his charming, melancholy smile, which so
became his noble countenance, and Porthos would drink, swearing that
Aramis would never be anything but a village CURE.

Planchet, d'Artagnan's valet, supported his good fortune nobly. He
received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned to his
lodgings gay as a chaffinch, and affable toward his master. When the
wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping of the Rue des
Fossoyeurs--that is to say, when the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII
were consumed or nearly so--he commenced complaints which Athos thought
nauseous, Porthos indecent, and Aramis ridiculous. Athos counseled
d'Artagnan to dismiss the fellow; Porthos was of the opinion that he
should give him a good thrashing first; and Aramis contended that a
master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.

"This is all very easy for you to say," replied d'Artagnan, "for you,
Athos, who live like a dumb man with Grimaud, who forbid him to speak,
and consequently never exchange ill words with him; for you, Porthos,
who carry matters in such a magnificent style, and are a god to your
valet, Mousqueton; and for you, Aramis, who, always abstracted by your
theological studies, inspire your servant, Bazin, a mild, religious man,
with a profound respect; but for me, who am without any settled means
and without resources--for me, who am neither a Musketeer nor even a
Guardsman, what am I to do to inspire either the affection, the terror,
or the respect in Planchet?"

"This is serious," answered the three friends; "it is a family affair.
It is with valets as with wives, they must be placed at once upon the
footing in which you wish them to remain. Reflect upon it."

D'Artagnan did reflect, and resolved to thrash Planchet provisionally;
which he did with the conscientiousness that d'Artagnan carried into
everything. After having well beaten him, he forbade him to leave his
service without his permission. "For," added he, "the future cannot fail
to mend; I inevitably look for better times. Your fortune is therefore
made if you remain with me, and I am too good a master to allow you to
miss such a chance by granting you the dismissal you require."

This manner of acting roused much respect for d'Artagnan's policy among
the Musketeers. Planchet was equally seized with admiration, and said no
more about going away.

The life of the four young men had become fraternal. D'Artagnan, who had
no settled habits of his own, as he came from his province into the
midst of a world quite new to him, fell easily into the habits of his
friends.

They rose about eight o'clock in the winter, about six in summer, and
went to take the countersign and see how things went on at M. de
Treville's. D'Artagnan, although he was not a Musketeer, performed the
duty of one with remarkable punctuality. He went on guard because he
always kept company with whoever of his friends was on duty. He was well
known at the Hotel of the Musketeers, where everyone considered him a
good comrade. M. de Treville, who had appreciated him at the first
glance and who bore him a real affection, never ceased recommending him
to the king.

On their side, the three Musketeers were much attached to their young
comrade. The friendship which united these four men, and the need they
felt of seeing another three or four times a day, whether for dueling,
business, or pleasure, caused them to be continually running after one
another like shadows; and the Inseparables were constantly to be met
with seeking one another, from the Luxembourg to the Place St. Sulpice,
or from the Rue du Vieux-Colombier to the Luxembourg.

In the meanwhile the promises of M. de Treville went on prosperously.
One fine morning the king commanded M. de Chevalier Dessessart to admit
d'Artagnan as a cadet in his company of Guards. D'Artagnan, with a sigh,
donned his uniform, which he would have exchanged for that of a
Musketeer at the expense of ten years of his existence. But M. de
Treville promised this favor after a novitiate of two years--a novitiate
which might besides be abridged if an opportunity should present itself
for d'Artagnan to render the king any signal service, or to distinguish
himself by some brilliant action. Upon this promise d'Artagnan withdrew,
and the next day he began service.

Then it became the turn of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis to mount guard
with d'Artagnan when he was on duty. The company of M. le Chevalier
Dessessart thus received four instead of one when it admitted
d'Artagnan.





8 CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE


In the meantime, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII, like all other
things of this world, after having had a beginning had an end, and after
this end our four companions began to be somewhat embarrassed. At first,
Athos supported the association for a time with his own means.

Porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearances to
which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wants of all for
a fortnight. At last it became Aramis's turn, who performed it with a
good grace and who succeeded--as he said, by selling some theological
books--in procuring a few pistoles.

Then, as they had been accustomed to do, they had recourse to M. de
Treville, who made some advances on their pay; but these advances could
not go far with three Musketeers who were already much in arrears and a
Guardsman who as yet had no pay at all.

At length when they found they were likely to be really in want, they
got together, as a last effort, eight or ten pistoles, with which
Porthos went to the gaming table. Unfortunately he was in a bad vein; he
lost all, together with twenty-five pistoles for which he had given his
word.

Then the inconvenience became distress. The hungry friends, followed by
their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guard rooms, picking up
among their friends abroad all the dinners they could meet with; for
according to the advice of Aramis, it was prudent to sow repasts right
and left in prosperity, in order to reap a few in time of need.

Athos was invited four times, and each time took his friends and their
lackeys with him. Porthos had six occasions, and contrived in the same
manner that his friends should partake of them; Aramis had eight of
them. He was a man, as must have been already perceived, who made but
little noise, and yet was much sought after.

As to d'Artagnan, who as yet knew nobody in the capital, he only found
one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his own province,
and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the Guards. He took his army
to the priest's, where they devoured as much provision as would have
lasted him for two months, and to the cornet's, who performed wonders;
but as Planchet said, "People do not eat at once for all time, even when
they eat a good deal."

D'Artagnan thus felt himself humiliated in having only procured one meal
and a half for his companions--as the breakfast at the priest's could
only be counted as half a repast--in return for the feasts which Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis had procured him. He fancied himself a burden to the
society, forgetting in his perfectly juvenile good faith that he had fed
this society for a month; and he set his mind actively to work. He
reflected that this coalition of four young, brave, enterprising, and
active men ought to have some other object than swaggering walks,
fencing lessons, and practical jokes, more or less witty.

In fact, four men such as they were--four men devoted to one another,
from their purses to their lives; four men always supporting one
another, never yielding, executing singly or together the resolutions
formed in common; four arms threatening the four cardinal points, or
turning toward a single point--must inevitably, either subterraneously,
in open day, by mining, in the trench, by cunning, or by force, open
themselves a way toward the object they wished to attain, however well
it might be defended, or however distant it may seem. The only thing
that astonished d'Artagnan was that his friends had never thought of
this.

He was thinking by himself, and even seriously racking his brain to find
a direction for this single force four times multiplied, with which he
did not doubt, as with the lever for which Archimedes sought, they
should succeed in moving the world, when someone tapped gently at his
door. D'Artagnan awakened Planchet and ordered him to open it.

From this phrase, "d'Artagnan awakened Planchet," the reader must not
suppose it was night, or that day was hardly come. No, it had just
struck four. Planchet, two hours before, had asked his master for some
dinner, and he had answered him with the proverb, "He who sleeps,
dines." And Planchet dined by sleeping.

A man was introduced of simple mien, who had the appearance of a
tradesman. Planchet, by way of dessert, would have liked to hear the
conversation; but the citizen declared to d'Artagnan that, what he had
to say being important and confidential, he desired to be left alone
with him.

D'Artagnan dismissed Planchet, and requested his visitor to be seated.
There was a moment of silence, during which the two men looked at each
other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance, after which d'Artagnan
bowed, as a sign that he listened.

"I have heard Monsieur d'Artagnan spoken of as a very brave young man,"
said the citizen; "and this reputation which he justly enjoys had
decided me to confide a secret to him."

"Speak, monsieur, speak," said d'Artagnan, who instinctively scented
something advantageous.

The citizen made a fresh pause and continued, "I have a wife who is
seamstress to the queen, monsieur, and who is not deficient in either
virtue or beauty. I was induced to marry her about three years ago,
although she had but very little dowry, because Monsieur Laporte, the
queen's cloak bearer, is her godfather, and befriends her."

"Well, monsieur?" asked d'Artagnan.

"Well!" resumed the citizen, "well, monsieur, my wife was abducted
yesterday morning, as she was coming out of her workroom."

"And by whom was your wife abducted?"

"I know nothing surely, monsieur, but I suspect someone."

"And who is the person whom you suspect?"

"A man who has pursued her a long time."

"The devil!"

"But allow me to tell you, monsieur," continued the citizen, "that I am
convinced that there is less love than politics in all this."

"Less love than politics," replied d'Artagnan, with a reflective air;
"and what do you suspect?"

"I do not know whether I ought to tell you what I suspect."

"Monsieur, I beg you to observe that I ask you absolutely nothing. It is
you who have come to me. It is you who have told me that you had a
secret to confide in me. Act, then, as you think proper; there is still
time to withdraw."

"No, monsieur, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and I will have
confidence in you. I believe, then, that it is not on account of any
intrigues of her own that my wife has been arrested, but because of
those of a lady much greater than herself."

"Ah, ah! Can it be on account of the amours of Madame de Bois-Tracy?"
said d'Artagnan, wishing to have the air, in the eyes of the citizen, of
being posted as to court affairs.

"Higher, monsieur, higher."

"Of Madame d'Aiguillon?"

"Still higher."

"Of Madame de Chevreuse?"

"Of the--" d'Artagnan checked himself.

"Yes, monsieur," replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so low that he
was scarcely audible.

"And with whom?"

"With whom can it be, if not the Duke of--"

"The Duke of--"

"Yes, monsieur," replied the citizen, giving a still fainter intonation
to his voice.

"But how do you know all this?"

"How do I know it?"

"Yes, how do you know it? No half-confidence, or--you understand!"

"I know it from my wife, monsieur--from my wife herself."

"Who learns it from whom?"

"From Monsieur Laporte. Did I not tell you that she was the goddaughter
of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of the queen? Well, Monsieur
Laporte placed her near her Majesty in order that our poor queen might
at least have someone in whom she could place confidence, abandoned as
she is by the king, watched as she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she
is by everybody."

"Ah, ah! It begins to develop itself," said d'Artagnan.

"Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur. One of her conditions
was that she should come and see me twice a week; for, as I had the
honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly--my wife, then, came and
confided to me that the queen at that very moment entertained great
fears."

"Truly!"

"Yes. The cardinal, as it appears, pursues her and persecutes her more
than ever. He cannot pardon her the history of the Saraband. You know
the history of the Saraband?"

"PARDIEU! Know it!" replied d'Artagnan, who knew nothing about it, but
who wished to appear to know everything that was going on.

"So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance."

"Indeed!"

"And the queen believes--"

"Well, what does the queen believe?"

"She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckingham in her
name."

"In the queen's name?"

"Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, to draw
him into some snare."

"The devil! But your wife, monsieur, what has she to do with all this?"

"Her devotion to the queen is known; and they wish either to remove her
from her mistress, or to intimidate her, in order to obtain her
Majesty's secrets, or to seduce her and make use of her as a spy."

"That is likely," said d'Artagnan; "but the man who has abducted her--do
you know him?"

"I have told you that I believe I know him."

"His name?"

"I do not know that; what I do know is that he is a creature of the
cardinal, his evil genius."

"But you have seen him?"

"Yes, my wife pointed him out to me one day."

"Has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognize him?"

"Oh, certainly; he is a noble of very lofty carriage, black hair,
swarthy complexion, piercing eye, white teeth, and has a scar on his
temple."

"A scar on his temple!" cried d'Artagnan; "and with that, white teeth, a
piercing eye, dark complexion, black hair, and haughty carriage--why,
that's my man of Meung."

"He is your man, do you say?"

"Yes, yes; but that has nothing to do with it. No, I am wrong. On the
contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly. If your man is mine, with
one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that's all; but where to find this
man?"

"I know not."

"Have you no information as to his abiding place?"

"None. One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre, he was
coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me."

"The devil! The devil!" murmured d'Artagnan; "all this is vague enough.
From whom have you learned of the abduction of your wife?"

"From Monsieur Laporte."

"Did he give you any details?"

"He knew none himself."

"And you have learned nothing from any other quarter?"

"Yes, I have received--"

"What?"

"I fear I am committing a great imprudence."

"You always come back to that; but I must make you see this time that it
is too late to retreat."

"I do not retreat, MORDIEU!" cried the citizen, swearing in order to
rouse his courage. "Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux--"

"You call yourself Bonacieux?" interrupted d'Artagnan.

"Yes, that is my name."

"You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux. Pardon me for interrupting
you, but it appears to me that that name is familiar to me."

"Possibly, monsieur. I am your landlord."

"Ah, ah!" said d'Artagnan, half rising and bowing; "you are my
landlord?"

"Yes, monsieur, yes. And as it is three months since you have been here,
and though, distracted as you must be in your important occupations, you
have forgotten to pay me my rent--as, I say, I have not tormented you a
single instant, I thought you would appreciate my delicacy."

"How can it be otherwise, my dear Bonacieux?" replied d'Artagnan; "trust
me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, and if, as I told
you, I can be of any service to you--"

"I believe you, monsieur, I believe you; and as I was about to say, by
the word of Bonacieux, I have confidence in you."

"Finish, then, what you were about to say."

The citizen took a paper from his pocket, and presented it to
d'Artagnan.

"A letter?" said the young man.

"Which I received this morning."

D'Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he
approached the window to read it. The citizen followed him.

"'Do not seek your wife,'" read d'Artagnan; "'she will be restored to
you when there is no longer occasion for her. If you make a single step
to find her you are lost.'

"That's pretty positive," continued d'Artagnan; "but after all, it is
but a menace."

"Yes; but that menace terrifies me. I am not a fighting man at all,
monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille."

"Hum!" said d'Artagnan. "I have no greater regard for the Bastille than
you. If it were nothing but a sword thrust, why then--"

"I have counted upon you on this occasion, monsieur."

"Yes?"

"Seeing you constantly surrounded by Musketeers of a very superb
appearance, and knowing that these Musketeers belong to Monsieur de
Treville, and were consequently enemies of the cardinal, I thought that
you and your friends, while rendering justice to your poor queen, would
be pleased to play his Eminence an ill turn."

"Without doubt."

"And then I have thought that considering three months' lodging, about
which I have said nothing--"

"Yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and I find it
excellent."

"Reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor to remain
in my house I shall never speak to you about rent--"

"Very kind!"

"And adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer you fifty
pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be short at the
present moment."

"Admirable! You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?"

"I am comfortably off, monsieur, that's all; I have scraped together
some such things as an income of two or three thousand crowns in the
haberdashery business, but more particularly in venturing some funds in
the last voyage of the celebrated navigator Jean Moquet; so that you
understand, monsieur--But!--" cried the citizen.

"What!" demanded d'Artagnan.

"Whom do I see yonder?"

"Where?"

"In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that door--a man
wrapped in a cloak."

"It is he!" cried d'Artagnan and the citizen at the same time, each
having recognized his man.

"Ah, this time," cried d'Artagnan, springing to his sword, "this time he
will not escape me!"

Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of the apartment. On
the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who were coming to see him. They
separated, and d'Artagnan rushed between them like a dart.

"Pah! Where are you going?" cried the two Musketeers in a breath.

"The man of Meung!" replied d'Artagnan, and disappeared.

D'Artagnan had more than once related to his friends his adventure with
the stranger, as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner, to
whom this man had confided some important missive.

The opinion of Athos was that d'Artagnan had lost his letter in the
skirmish. A gentleman, in his opinion--and according to d'Artagnan's
portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman--would be incapable of
the baseness of stealing a letter.

Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by a lady to a
cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had been disturbed by the
presence of d'Artagnan and his yellow horse.

Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, it was
better not to fathom them.

They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from d'Artagnan,
what affair was in hand, and as they thought that overtaking his man, or
losing sight of him, d'Artagnan would return to his rooms, they kept on
their way.

When they entered d'Artagnan's chamber, it was empty; the landlord,
dreading the consequences of the encounter which was doubtless about to
take place between the young man and the stranger, had, consistent with
the character he had given himself, judged it prudent to decamp.





9 D'ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF


As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a half hour,
d'Artagnan returned. He had again missed his man, who had disappeared as
if by enchantment. D'Artagnan had run, sword in hand, through all the
neighboring streets, but had found nobody resembling the man he sought
for. Then he came back to the point where, perhaps, he ought to have
begun, and that was to knock at the door against which the stranger had
leaned; but this proved useless--for though he knocked ten or twelve
times in succession, no one answered, and some of the neighbors, who put
their noses out of their windows or were brought to their doors by the
noise, had assured him that that house, all the openings of which were
tightly closed, had not been inhabited for six months.

While d'Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at doors,
Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning home d'Artagnan
found the reunion complete.

"Well!" cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeing d'Artagnan
enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his countenance upset
with anger.

"Well!" cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, "this man must be the
devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom, like a shade, like a
specter."

"Do you believe in apparitions?" asked Athos of Porthos.

"I never believe in anything I have not seen, and as I never have seen
apparitions, I don't believe in them."

"The Bible," said Aramis, "makes our belief in them a law; the ghost of
Samuel appeared to Saul, and it is an article of faith that I should be
very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon, Porthos."

"At all events, man or devil, body or shadow, illusion or reality, this
man is born for my damnation; for his flight has caused us to miss a
glorious affair, gentlemen--an affair by which there were a hundred
pistoles, and perhaps more, to be gained."

"How is that?" cried Porthos and Aramis in a breath.

As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented himself
with interrogating d'Artagnan by a look.

"Planchet," said d'Artagnan to his domestic, who just then insinuated
his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of
the conversation, "go down to my landlord, Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask
him to send me half a dozen bottles of Beaugency wine; I prefer that."

"Ah, ah! You have credit with your landlord, then?" asked Porthos.

"Yes," replied d'Artagnan, "from this very day; and mind, if the wine is
bad, we will send him to find better."

"We must use, and not abuse," said Aramis, sententiously.

"I always said that d'Artagnan had the longest head of the four," said
Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which d'Artagnan replied with
a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence.

"But come, what is this about?" asked Porthos.

"Yes," said Aramis, "impart it to us, my dear friend, unless the honor
of any lady be hazarded by this confidence; in that case you would do
better to keep it to yourself."

"Be satisfied," replied d'Artagnan; "the honor of no one will have cause
to complain of what I have to tell."

He then related to his friends, word for word, all that had passed
between him and his host, and how the man who had abducted the wife of
his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had had the difference at
the hostelry of the Jolly Miller.

"Your affair is not bad," said Athos, after having tasted like a
connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine
good; "and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man. Then
there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty pistoles
are worth the risk of four heads."

"But observe," cried d'Artagnan, "that there is a woman in the affair--a
woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened, tortured
perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her mistress."

"Beware, d'Artagnan, beware," said Aramis. "You grow a little too warm,
in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux. Woman was created for
our destruction, and it is from her we inherit all our miseries."

At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and he bit
his lips.

"It is not Madame Bonacieux about whom I am anxious," cried d'Artagnan,
"but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom the cardinal persecutes,
and who sees the heads of all her friends fall, one after the other."

"Why does she love what we hate most in the world, the Spaniards and the
English?"

"Spain is her country," replied d'Artagnan; "and it is very natural that
she should love the Spanish, who are the children of the same soil as
herself. As to the second reproach, I have heard it said that she does
not love the English, but an Englishman."

"Well, and by my faith," said Athos, "it must be acknowledged that this
Englishman is worthy of being loved. I never saw a man with a nobler air
than his."

"Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can," said Porthos. "I
was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered his pearls; and, PARDIEU,
I picked up two that I sold for ten pistoles each. Do you know him,
Aramis?"

"As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seized him in
the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, the queen's equerry,
introduced me. I was at school at the time, and the adventure appeared
to me to be cruel for the king."

"Which would not prevent me," said d'Artagnan, "if I knew where the Duke
of Buckingham was, from taking him by the hand and conducting him to the
queen, were it only to enrage the cardinal, and if we could find means
to play him a sharp turn, I vow that I would voluntarily risk my head in
doing it."

"And did the mercer*," rejoined Athos, "tell you, d'Artagnan, that the
queen thought that Buckingham had been brought over by a forged letter?"

    _*Haberdasher_

"She is afraid so."

"Wait a minute, then," said Aramis.

"What for?" demanded Porthos.

"Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances."

"And now I am convinced," said d'Artagnan, "that this abduction of the
queen's woman is connected with the events of which we are speaking, and
perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris."

"The Gascon is full of ideas," said Porthos, with admiration.

"I like to hear him talk," said Athos; "his dialect amuses me."

"Gentlemen," cried Aramis, "listen to this."

"Listen to Aramis," said his three friends.

"Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom I sometimes
consult about my studies."

Athos smiled.

"He resides in a quiet quarter," continued Aramis; "his tastes and his
profession require it. Now, at the moment when I left his house--"

Here Aramis paused.

"Well," cried his auditors; "at the moment you left his house?"

Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who, in the
full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped by some unforeseen
obstacle; but the eyes of his three companions were fixed upon him,
their ears were wide open, and there were no means of retreat.

"This doctor has a niece," continued Aramis.

"Ah, he has a niece!" interrupted Porthos.

"A very respectable lady," said Aramis.

The three friends burst into laughter.

"Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me," replied Aramis, "you shall know
nothing."

"We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones," said
Athos.

"I will continue, then," resumed Aramis. "This niece comes sometimes to
see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that I
was, and it was my duty to offer to conduct her to her carriage."

"Ah! She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?" interrupted
Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness of tongue. "A nice
acquaintance, my friend!"

"Porthos," replied Aramis, "I have had the occasion to observe to you
more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that is injurious to
you among the women."

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," cried d'Artagnan, who began to get a glimpse of
the result of the adventure, "the thing is serious. Let us try not to
jest, if we can. Go on Aramis, go on."

"All at once, a tall, dark gentleman--just like yours, d'Artagnan."

"The same, perhaps," said he.

"Possibly," continued Aramis, "came toward me, accompanied by five or
six men who followed about ten paces behind him; and in the politest
tone, 'Monsieur Duke,' said he to me, 'and you madame,' continued he,
addressing the lady on my arm--"

"The doctor's niece?"

"Hold your tongue, Porthos," said Athos; "you are insupportable."

"'--will you enter this carriage, and that without offering the least
resistance, without making the least noise?'"

"He took you for Buckingham!" cried d'Artagnan.

"I believe so," replied Aramis.

"But the lady?" asked Porthos.

"He took her for the queen!" said d'Artagnan.

"Just so," replied Aramis.

"The Gascon is the devil!" cried Athos; "nothing escapes him."

"The fact is," said Porthos, "Aramis is of the same height, and
something of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appears to me
that the dress of a Musketeer--"

"I wore an enormous cloak," said Aramis.

"In the month of July? The devil!" said Porthos. "Is the doctor afraid
that you may be recognized?"

"I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the person; but
the face--"

"I had a large hat," said Aramis.

"Oh, good lord," cried Porthos, "what precautions for the study of
theology!"

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "do not let us lose our time in
jesting. Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer's wife--that is the
key of the intrigue."

"A woman of such inferior condition! Can you believe so?" said Porthos,
protruding his lips with contempt.

"She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of the queen.
Have I not told you so, gentlemen? Besides, it has perhaps been her
Majesty's calculation to seek on this occasion for support so lowly.
High heads expose themselves from afar, and the cardinal is
longsighted."

"Well," said Porthos, "in the first place make a bargain with the
mercer, and a good bargain."

"That's useless," said d'Artagnan; "for I believe if he does not pay us,
we shall be well enough paid by another party."

At this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon the stairs;
the door was thrown violently open, and the unfortunate mercer rushed
into the chamber in which the council was held.

"Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!" cried he. "There
are four men come to arrest me. Save me! Save me!"

Porthos and Aramis arose.

"A moment," cried d'Artagnan, making them a sign to replace in the
scabbard their half-drawn swords. "It is not courage that is needed; it
is prudence."

"And yet," cried Porthos, "we will not leave--"

"You will leave d'Artagnan to act as he thinks proper," said Athos. "He
has, I repeat, the longest head of the four, and for my part I declare
that I will obey him. Do as you think best, d'Artagnan."

At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of the antechamber,
but seeing four Musketeers standing, and their swords by their sides,
they hesitated about going farther.

"Come in, gentlemen, come in," called d'Artagnan; "you are here in my
apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king and cardinal."

"Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we have
received?" asked one who appeared to be the leader of the party.

"On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it were necessary."

"What does he say?" grumbled Porthos.

"You are a simpleton," said Athos. "Silence!"

"But you promised me--" whispered the poor mercer.

"We can only save you by being free ourselves," replied d'Artagnan, in a
rapid, low tone; "and if we appear inclined to defend you, they will
arrest us with you."

"It seems, nevertheless--"

"Come, gentlemen, come!" said d'Artagnan, aloud; "I have no motive for
defending Monsieur. I saw him today for the first time, and he can tell
you on what occasion; he came to demand the rent of my lodging. Is that
not true, Monsieur Bonacieux? Answer!"

"That is the very truth," cried the mercer; "but Monsieur does not tell
you--"

"Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my friends;
silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin everybody without
saving yourself! Come, come, gentlemen, remove the fellow." And
d'Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer among the Guards, saying to
him, "You are a shabby old fellow, my dear. You come to demand money of
me--of a Musketeer! To prison with him! Gentlemen, once more, take him
to prison, and keep him under key as long as possible; that will give me
time to pay him."

The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey. As they were
going down d'Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of their leader.

"May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?" said d'Artagnan,
filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which he had obtained from
the liberality of M. Bonacieux.

"That will do me great honor," said the leader of the posse, "and I
accept thankfully."

"Then to yours, monsieur--what is your name?"

"Boisrenard."

"Monsieur Boisrenard."

"To yours, my gentlemen! What is your name, in your turn, if you
please?"

"d'Artagnan."

"To yours, monsieur."

"And above all others," cried d'Artagnan, as if carried away by his
enthusiasm, "to that of the king and the cardinal."

The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of
d'Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good, and he was
convinced.

"What diabolical villainy you have performed here," said Porthos, when
the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found
themselves alone. "Shame, shame, for four Musketeers to allow an
unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst! And
a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!"

"Porthos," said Aramis, "Athos has already told you that you are a
simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion. D'Artagnan, you are a great
man; and when you occupy Monsieur de Treville's place, I will come and
ask your influence to secure me an abbey."

"Well, I am in a maze," said Porthos; "do YOU approve of what d'Artagnan
has done?"

"PARBLEU! Indeed I do," said Athos; "I not only approve of what he has
done, but I congratulate him upon it."

"And now, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, without stopping to explain his
conduct to Porthos, "All for one, one for all--that is our motto, is it
not?"

"And yet--" said Porthos.

"Hold out your hand and swear!" cried Athos and Aramis at once.

Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthos
stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one voice the
formula dictated by d'Artagnan:

"All for one, one for all."

"That's well! Now let us everyone retire to his own home," said
d'Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life; "and
attention! For from this moment we are at feud with the cardinal."





10 A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY


The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; as soon as
societies, in forming, had invented any kind of police, that police
invented mousetraps.

As perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the Rue de
Jerusalem, and as it is fifteen years since we applied this word for the
first time to this thing, allow us to explain to them what is a
mousetrap.

When in a house, of whatever kind it may be, an individual suspected of
any crime is arrested, the arrest is held secret. Four or five men are
placed in ambuscade in the first room. The door is opened to all who
knock. It is closed after them, and they are arrested; so that at the
end of two or three days they have in their power almost all the
HABITUES of the establishment. And that is a mousetrap.

The apartment of M. Bonacieux, then, became a mousetrap; and whoever
appeared there was taken and interrogated by the cardinal's people. It
must be observed that as a separate passage led to the first floor, in
which d'Artagnan lodged, those who called on him were exempted from this
detention.

Besides, nobody came thither but the three Musketeers; they had all been
engaged in earnest search and inquiries, but had discovered nothing.
Athos had even gone so far as to question M. de Treville--a thing which,
considering the habitual reticence of the worthy Musketeer, had very
much astonished his captain. But M. de Treville knew nothing, except
that the last time he had seen the cardinal, the king, and the queen,
the cardinal looked very thoughtful, the king uneasy, and the redness of
the queen's eyes donated that she had been sleepless or tearful. But
this last circumstance was not striking, as the queen since her marriage
had slept badly and wept much.

M de Treville requested Athos, whatever might happen, to be observant of
his duty to the king, but particularly to the queen, begging him to
convey his desires to his comrades.

As to d'Artagnan, he did not budge from his apartment. He converted his
chamber into an observatory. From his windows he saw all the visitors
who were caught. Then, having removed a plank from his floor, and
nothing remaining but a simple ceiling between him and the room beneath,
in which the interrogatories were made, he heard all that passed between
the inquisitors and the accused.

The interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated upon the
persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: "Has Madame Bonacieux
sent anything to you for her husband, or any other person? Has Monsieur
Bonacieux sent anything to you for his wife, or for any other person?
Has either of them confided anything to you by word of mouth?"

"If they knew anything, they would not question people in this manner,"
said d'Artagnan to himself. "Now, what is it they want to know? Why,
they want to know if the Duke of Buckingham is in Paris, and if he has
had, or is likely to have, an interview with the queen."

D'Artagnan held onto this idea, which, from what he had heard, was not
wanting in probability.

In the meantime, the mousetrap continued in operation, and likewise
d'Artagnan's vigilance.

On the evening of the day after the arrest of poor Bonacieux, as Athos
had just left d'Artagnan to report at M. de Treville's, as nine o'clock
had just struck, and as Planchet, who had not yet made the bed, was
beginning his task, a knocking was heard at the street door. The door
was instantly opened and shut; someone was taken in the mousetrap.

D'Artagnan flew to his hole, laid himself down on the floor at full
length, and listened.

Cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared to be
endeavoring to stifle. There were no questions.

"The devil!" said d'Artagnan to himself. "It seems like a woman! They
search her; she resists; they use force--the scoundrels!"

In spite of his prudence, d'Artagnan restrained himself with great
difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going on below.

"But I tell you that I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen! I tell
you I am Madame Bonacieux; I tell you I belong to the queen!" cried the
unfortunate woman.

"Madame Bonacieux!" murmured d'Artagnan. "Can I be so lucky as to find
what everybody is seeking for?"

The voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movement shook
the partition. The victim resisted as much as a woman could resist four
men.

"Pardon, gentlemen--par--" murmured the voice, which could now only be
heard in inarticulate sounds.

"They are binding her; they are going to drag her away," cried
d'Artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor. "My sword! Good, it
is by my side! Planchet!"

"Monsieur."

"Run and seek Athos, Porthos and Aramis. One of the three will certainly
be at home, perhaps all three. Tell them to take arms, to come here, and
to run! Ah, I remember, Athos is at Monsieur de Treville's."

"But where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?"

"I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner," cried
d'Artagnan. "You put back the boards, sweep the floor, go out at the
door, and run as I told you."

"Oh, monsieur! Monsieur! You will kill yourself," cried Planchet.

"Hold your tongue, stupid fellow," said d'Artagnan; and laying hold of
the casement, he let himself gently down from the first story, which
fortunately was not very elevated, without doing himself the slightest
injury.

He then went straight to the door and knocked, murmuring, "I will go
myself and be caught in the mousetrap, but woe be to the cats that shall
pounce upon such a mouse!"

The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man before
the tumult ceased, steps approached, the door was opened, and
d'Artagnan, sword in hand, rushed into the rooms of M. Bonacieux, the
door of which, doubtless acted upon by a spring, closed after him.

Then those who dwelt in Bonacieux's unfortunate house, together with the
nearest neighbors, heard loud cries, stamping of feet, clashing of
swords, and breaking of furniture. A moment after, those who, surprised
by this tumult, had gone to their windows to learn the cause of it, saw
the door open, and four men, clothed in black, not COME out of it, but
FLY, like so many frightened crows, leaving on the ground and on the
corners of the furniture, feathers from their wings; that is to say,
patches of their clothes and fragments of their cloaks.

D'Artagnan was conqueror--without much effort, it must be confessed, for
only one of the officers was armed, and even he defended himself for
form's sake. It is true that the three others had endeavored to knock
the young man down with chairs, stools, and crockery; but two or three
scratches made by the Gascon's blade terrified them. Ten minutes
sufficed for their defeat, and d'Artagnan remained master of the field
of battle.

The neighbors who had opened their windows, with the coolness peculiar
to the inhabitants of Paris in these times of perpetual riots and
disturbances, closed them again as soon as they saw the four men in
black flee--their instinct telling them that for the time all was over.
Besides, it began to grow late, and then, as today, people went to bed
early in the quarter of the Luxembourg.

On being left alone with Mme. Bonacieux, d'Artagnan turned toward her;
the poor woman reclined where she had been left, half-fainting upon an
armchair. D'Artagnan examined her with a rapid glance.

She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six years, with dark
hair, blue eyes, and a nose slightly turned up, admirable teeth, and a
complexion marbled with rose and opal. There, however, ended the signs
which might have confounded her with a lady of rank. The hands were
white, but without delicacy; the feet did not bespeak the woman of
quality. Happily, d'Artagnan was not yet acquainted with such niceties.

While d'Artagnan was examining Mme. Bonacieux, and was, as we have said,
close to her, he saw on the ground a fine cambric handkerchief, which he
picked up, as was his habit, and at the corner of which he recognized
the same cipher he had seen on the handkerchief which had nearly caused
him and Aramis to cut each other's throat.

From that time, d'Artagnan had been cautious with respect to
handkerchiefs with arms on them, and he therefore placed in the pocket
of Mme. Bonacieux the one he had just picked up.

At that moment Mme. Bonacieux recovered her senses. She opened her eyes,
looked around her with terror, saw that the apartment was empty and that
she was alone with her liberator. She extended her hands to him with a
smile. Mme. Bonacieux had the sweetest smile in the world.

"Ah, monsieur!" said she, "you have saved me; permit me to thank you."

"Madame," said d'Artagnan, "I have only done what every gentleman would
have done in my place; you owe me no thanks."

"Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that you have
not served an ingrate. But what could these men, whom I at first took
for robbers, want with me, and why is Monsieur Bonacieux not here?"

"Madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers could have been,
for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as to your husband,
Monsieur Bonacieux, he is not here because he was yesterday evening
conducted to the Bastille."

"My husband in the Bastille!" cried Mme. Bonacieux. "Oh, my God! What
has he done? Poor dear man, he is innocence itself!"

And something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrified features of
the young woman.

"What has he done, madame?" said d'Artagnan. "I believe that his only
crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and the misfortune to
be your husband."

"But, monsieur, you know then--"

"I know that you have been abducted, madame."

"And by whom? Do you know him? Oh, if you know him, tell me!"

"By a man of from forty to forty-five years, with black hair, a dark
complexion, and a scar on his left temple."

"That is he, that is he; but his name?"

"Ah, his name? I do not know that."

"And did my husband know I had been carried off?"

"He was informed of it by a letter, written to him by the abductor
himself."

"And does he suspect," said Mme. Bonacieux, with some embarrassment,
"the cause of this event?"

"He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause."

"I doubted from the first; and now I think entirely as he does. Then my
dear Monsieur Bonacieux has not suspected me a single instant?"

"So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and above
all, of your love."

A second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips of the
pretty young woman.

"But," continued d'Artagnan, "how did you escape?"

"I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as I had
known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the help of the
sheets I let myself down from the window. Then, as I believed my husband
would be at home, I hastened hither."

"To place yourself under his protection?"

"Oh, no, poor dear man! I knew very well that he was incapable of
defending me; but as he could serve us in other ways, I wished to inform
him."

"Of what?"

"Oh, that is not my secret; I must not, therefore, tell you."

"Besides," said d'Artagnan, "pardon me, madame, if, guardsman as I am, I
remind you of prudence--besides, I believe we are not here in a very
proper place for imparting confidences. The men I have put to flight
will return reinforced; if they find us here, we are lost. I have sent
for three of my friends, but who knows whether they were at home?"

"Yes, yes! You are right," cried the affrighted Mme. Bonacieux; "let us
fly! Let us save ourselves."

At these words she passed her arm under that of d'Artagnan, and urged
him forward eagerly.

"But whither shall we fly--whither escape?"

"Let us first withdraw from this house; afterward we shall see."

The young woman and the young man, without taking the trouble to shut
the door after them, descended the Rue des Fossoyeurs rapidly, turned
into the Rue des Fosses-Monsieur-le-Prince, and did not stop till they
came to the Place St. Sulpice.

"And now what are we to do, and where do you wish me to conduct you?"
asked d'Artagnan.

"I am at quite a loss how to answer you, I admit," said Mme. Bonacieux.
"My intention was to inform Monsieur Laporte, through my husband, in
order that Monsieur Laporte might tell us precisely what had taken place
at the Louvre in the last three days, and whether there is any danger in
presenting myself there."

"But I," said d'Artagnan, "can go and inform Monsieur Laporte."

"No doubt you could, only there is one misfortune, and that is that
Monsieur Bonacieux is known at the Louvre, and would be allowed to pass;
whereas you are not known there, and the gate would be closed against
you."

"Ah, bah!" said d'Artagnan; "you have at some wicket of the Louvre a
CONCIERGE who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to a password, would--"

Mme. Bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man.

"And if I give you this password," said she, "would you forget it as
soon as you used it?"

"By my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!" said d'Artagnan, with an
accent so truthful that no one could mistake it.

"Then I believe you. You appear to be a brave young man; besides, your
fortune may perhaps be the result of your devotedness."

"I will do, without a promise and voluntarily, all that I can do to
serve the king and be agreeable to the queen. Dispose of me, then, as a
friend."

"But I--where shall I go meanwhile?"

"Is there nobody from whose house Monsieur Laporte can come and fetch
you?"

"No, I can trust nobody."

"Stop," said d'Artagnan; "we are near Athos's door. Yes, here it is."

"Who is this Athos?"

"One of my friends."

"But if he should be at home and see me?"

"He is not at home, and I will carry away the key, after having placed
you in his apartment."

"But if he should return?"

"Oh, he won't return; and if he should, he will be told that I have
brought a woman with me, and that woman is in his apartment."

"But that will compromise me sadly, you know."

"Of what consequence? Nobody knows you. Besides, we are in a situation
to overlook ceremony."

"Come, then, let us go to your friend's house. Where does he live?"

"Rue Ferou, two steps from here."

"Let us go!"

Both resumed their way. As d'Artagnan had foreseen, Athos was not
within. He took the key, which was customarily given him as one of the
family, ascended the stairs, and introduced Mme. Bonacieux into the
little apartment of which we have given a description.

"You are at home," said he. "Remain here, fasten the door inside, and
open it to nobody unless you hear three taps like this;" and he tapped
thrice--two taps close together and pretty hard, the other after an
interval, and lighter.

"That is well," said Mme. Bonacieux. "Now, in my turn, let me give you
my instructions."

"I am all attention."

"Present yourself at the wicket of the Louvre, on the side of the Rue de
l'Echelle, and ask for Germain."

"Well, and then?"

"He will ask you what you want, and you will answer by these two words,
'Tours' and 'Bruxelles.' He will at once put himself at your orders."

"And what shall I command him?"

"To go and fetch Monsieur Laporte, the queen's VALET DE CHAMBRE."

"And when he shall have informed him, and Monsieur Laporte is come?"

"You will send him to me."

"That is well; but where and how shall I see you again?"

"Do you wish to see me again?"

"Certainly."

"Well, let that care be mine, and be at ease."

"I depend upon your word."

"You may."

D'Artagnan bowed to Mme. Bonacieux, darting at her the most loving
glance that he could possibly concentrate upon her charming little
person; and while he descended the stairs, he heard the door closed and
double-locked. In two bounds he was at the Louvre; as he entered the
wicket of L'Echelle, ten o'clock struck. All the events we have
described had taken place within a half hour.

Everything fell out as Mme. Bonacieux prophesied. On hearing the
password, Germain bowed. In a few minutes, Laporte was at the lodge; in
two words d'Artagnan informed him where Mme. Bonacieux was. Laporte
assured himself, by having it twice repeated, of the accurate address,
and set off at a run. Hardly, however, had he taken ten steps before he
returned.

"Young man," said he to d'Artagnan, "a suggestion."

"What?"

"You may get into trouble by what has taken place."

"You believe so?"

"Yes. Have you any friend whose clock is too slow?"

"Well?"

"Go and call upon him, in order that he may give evidence of your having
been with him at half past nine. In a court of justice that is called an
alibi."

D'Artagnan found his advice prudent. He took to his heels, and was soon
at M. de Treville's; but instead of going into the saloon with the rest
of the crowd, he asked to be introduced to M. de Treville's office. As
d'Artagnan so constantly frequented the hotel, no difficulty was made in
complying with his request, and a servant went to inform M. de Treville
that his young compatriot, having something important to communicate,
solicited a private audience. Five minutes after, M. de Treville was
asking d'Artagnan what he could do to serve him, and what caused his
visit at so late an hour.

"Pardon me, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, who had profited by the moment
he had been left alone to put back M. de Treville's clock three-quarters
of an hour, "but I thought, as it was yet only twenty-five minutes past
nine, it was not too late to wait upon you."

"Twenty-five minutes past nine!" cried M. de Treville, looking at the
clock; "why, that's impossible!"

"Look, rather, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "the clock shows it."

"That's true," said M. de Treville; "I believed it later. But what can I
do for you?"

Then d'Artagnan told M. de Treville a long history about the queen. He
expressed to him the fears he entertained with respect to her Majesty;
he related to him what he had heard of the projects of the cardinal with
regard to Buckingham, and all with a tranquillity and candor of which M.
de Treville was the more the dupe, from having himself, as we have said,
observed something fresh between the cardinal, the king, and the queen.

As ten o'clock was striking, d'Artagnan left M. de Treville, who thanked
him for his information, recommended him to have the service of the king
and queen always at heart, and returned to the saloon; but at the foot
of the stairs, d'Artagnan remembered he had forgotten his cane. He
consequently sprang up again, re-entered the office, with a turn of his
finger set the clock right again, that it might not be perceived the
next day that it had been put wrong, and certain from that time that he
had a witness to prove his alibi, he ran downstairs and soon found
himself in the street.





