28 THE RETURN


D'Artagnan was astounded by the terrible confidence of Athos; yet many
things appeared very obscure to him in this half revelation. In the
first place it had been made by a man quite drunk to one who was half
drunk; and yet, in spite of the incertainty which the vapor of three or
four bottles of Burgundy carries with it to the brain, d'Artagnan, when
awaking on the following morning, had all the words of Athos as present
to his memory as if they then fell from his mouth--they had been so
impressed upon his mind. All this doubt only gave rise to a more lively
desire of arriving at a certainty, and he went into his friend's chamber
with a fixed determination of renewing the conversation of the preceding
evening; but he found Athos quite himself again--that is to say, the
most shrewd and impenetrable of men. Besides which, the Musketeer, after
having exchanged a hearty shake of the hand with him, broached the
matter first.

"I was pretty drunk yesterday, d'Artagnan," said he, "I can tell that by
my tongue, which was swollen and hot this morning, and by my pulse,
which was very tremulous. I wager that I uttered a thousand
extravagances."

While saying this he looked at his friend with an earnestness that
embarrassed him.

"No," replied d'Artagnan, "if I recollect well what you said, it was
nothing out of the common way."

"Ah, you surprise me. I thought I had told you a most lamentable story."
And he looked at the young man as if he would read the bottom of his
heart.

"My faith," said d'Artagnan, "it appears that I was more drunk than you,
since I remember nothing of the kind."

Athos did not trust this reply, and he resumed; "you cannot have failed
to remark, my dear friend, that everyone has his particular kind of
drunkenness, sad or gay. My drunkenness is always sad, and when I am
thoroughly drunk my mania is to relate all the lugubrious stories which
my foolish nurse inculcated into my brain. That is my failing--a capital
failing, I admit; but with that exception, I am a good drinker."

Athos spoke this in so natural a manner that d'Artagnan was shaken in
his conviction.

"It is that, then," replied the young man, anxious to find out the
truth, "it is that, then, I remember as we remember a dream. We were
speaking of hanging."

"Ah, you see how it is," said Athos, becoming still paler, but yet
attempting to laugh; "I was sure it was so--the hanging of people is my
nightmare."

"Yes, yes," replied d'Artagnan. "I remember now; yes, it was about--stop
a minute--yes, it was about a woman."

"That's it," replied Athos, becoming almost livid; "that is my grand
story of the fair lady, and when I relate that, I must be very drunk."

"Yes, that was it," said d'Artagnan, "the story of a tall, fair lady,
with blue eyes."

"Yes, who was hanged."

"By her husband, who was a nobleman of your acquaintance," continued
d'Artagnan, looking intently at Athos.

"Well, you see how a man may compromise himself when he does not know
what he says," replied Athos, shrugging his shoulders as if he thought
himself an object of pity. "I certainly never will get drunk again,
d'Artagnan; it is too bad a habit."

D'Artagnan remained silent; and then changing the conversation all at
once, Athos said:

"By the by, I thank you for the horse you have brought me."

"Is it to your mind?" asked d'Artagnan.

"Yes; but it is not a horse for hard work."

"You are mistaken; I rode him nearly ten leagues in less than an hour
and a half, and he appeared no more distressed than if he had only made
the tour of the Place St. Sulpice."

"Ah, you begin to awaken my regret."

"Regret?"

"Yes; I have parted with him."

"How?"

"Why, here is the simple fact. This morning I awoke at six o'clock. You
were still fast asleep, and I did not know what to do with myself; I was
still stupid from our yesterday's debauch. As I came into the public
room, I saw one of our Englishman bargaining with a dealer for a horse,
his own having died yesterday from bleeding. I drew near, and found he
was bidding a hundred pistoles for a chestnut nag. 'PARDIEU,' said I,
'my good gentleman, I have a horse to sell, too.' 'Ay, and a very fine
one! I saw him yesterday; your friend's lackey was leading him.' 'Do you
think he is worth a hundred pistoles?' 'Yes! Will you sell him to me for
that sum?' 'No; but I will play for him.' 'What?' 'At dice.' No sooner
said than done, and I lost the horse. Ah, ah! But please to observe I
won back the equipage," cried Athos.

D'Artagnan looked much disconcerted.

"This vexes you?" said Athos.

"Well, I must confess it does," replied d'Artagnan. "That horse was to
have identified us in the day of battle. It was a pledge, a remembrance.
Athos, you have done wrong."

"But, my dear friend, put yourself in my place," replied the Musketeer.
"I was hipped to death; and still further, upon my honor, I don't like
English horses. If it is only to be recognized, why the saddle will
suffice for that; it is quite remarkable enough. As to the horse, we can
easily find some excuse for its disappearance. Why the devil! A horse is
mortal; suppose mine had had the glanders or the farcy?"

D'Artagnan did not smile.

"It vexes me greatly," continued Athos, "that you attach so much
importance to these animals, for I am not yet at the end of my story."

"What else have you done."

"After having lost my own horse, nine against ten--see how near--I
formed an idea of staking yours."

"Yes; but you stopped at the idea, I hope?"

"No; for I put it in execution that very minute."

"And the consequence?" said d'Artagnan, in great anxiety.

"I threw, and I lost."

"What, my horse?"

"Your horse, seven against eight; a point short--you know the proverb."

"Athos, you are not in your right senses, I swear."

"My dear lad, that was yesterday, when I was telling you silly stories,
it was proper to tell me that, and not this morning. I lost him then,
with all his appointments and furniture."

"Really, this is frightful."

"Stop a minute; you don't know all yet. I should make an excellent
gambler if I were not too hot-headed; but I was hot-headed, just as if I
had been drinking. Well, I was not hot-headed then--"

"Well, but what else could you play for? You had nothing left?"

"Oh, yes, my friend; there was still that diamond left which sparkles on
your finger, and which I had observed yesterday."

"This diamond!" said d'Artagnan, placing his hand eagerly on his ring.

"And as I am a connoisseur in such things, having had a few of my own
once, I estimated it at a thousand pistoles."

"I hope," said d'Artagnan, half dead with fright, "you made no mention
of my diamond?"

"On the contrary, my dear friend, this diamond became our only resource;
with it I might regain our horses and their harnesses, and even money to
pay our expenses on the road."

"Athos, you make me tremble!" cried d'Artagnan.

"I mentioned your diamond then to my adversary, who had likewise
remarked it. What the devil, my dear, do you think you can wear a star
from heaven on your finger, and nobody observe it? Impossible!"

"Go on, go on, my dear fellow!" said d'Artagnan; "for upon my honor, you
will kill me with your indifference."

"We divided, then, this diamond into ten parts of a hundred pistoles
each."

"You are laughing at me, and want to try me!" said d'Artagnan, whom
anger began to take by the hair, as Minerva takes Achilles, in the
ILLIAD.

"No, I do not jest, MORDIEU! I should like to have seen you in my place!
I had been fifteen days without seeing a human face, and had been left
to brutalize myself in the company of bottles."

"That was no reason for staking my diamond!" replied d'Artagnan, closing
his hand with a nervous spasm.

"Hear the end. Ten parts of a hundred pistoles each, in ten throws,
without revenge; in thirteen throws I had lost all--in thirteen throws.
The number thirteen was always fatal to me; it was on the thirteenth of
July that--"

"VENTREBLEU!" cried d'Artagnan, rising from the table, the story of the
present day making him forget that of the preceding one.

"Patience!" said Athos; "I had a plan. The Englishman was an original; I
had seen him conversing that morning with Grimaud, and Grimaud had told
me that he had made him proposals to enter into his service. I staked
Grimaud, the silent Grimaud, divided into ten portions."

"Well, what next?" said d'Artagnan, laughing in spite of himself.

"Grimaud himself, understand; and with the ten parts of Grimaud, which
are not worth a ducatoon, I regained the diamond. Tell me, now, if
persistence is not a virtue?"

"My faith! But this is droll," cried d'Artagnan, consoled, and holding
his sides with laughter.

"You may guess, finding the luck turned, that I again staked the
diamond."

"The devil!" said d'Artagnan, becoming angry again.

"I won back your harness, then your horse, then my harness, then my
horse, and then I lost again. In brief, I regained your harness and then
mine. That's where we are. That was a superb throw, so I left off
there."

D'Artagnan breathed as if the whole hostelry had been removed from his
breast.

"Then the diamond is safe?" said he, timidly.

"Intact, my dear friend; besides the harness of your Bucephalus and
mine."

"But what is the use of harnesses without horses?"

"I have an idea about them."

"Athos, you make me shudder."

"Listen to me. You have not played for a long time, d'Artagnan."

"And I have no inclination to play."

"Swear to nothing. You have not played for a long time, I said; you
ought, then, to have a good hand."

"Well, what then?"

"Well; the Englishman and his companion are still here. I remarked that
he regretted the horse furniture very much. You appear to think much of
your horse. In your place I would stake the furniture against the
horse."

"But he will not wish for only one harness."

"Stake both, PARDIEU! I am not selfish, as you are."

"You would do so?" said d'Artagnan, undecided, so strongly did the
confidence of Athos begin to prevail, in spite of himself.

"On my honor, in one single throw."

"But having lost the horses, I am particularly anxious to preserve the
harnesses."

"Stake your diamond, then."

"This? That's another matter. Never, never!"

"The devil!" said Athos. "I would propose to you to stake Planchet, but
as that has already been done, the Englishman would not, perhaps, be
willing."

"Decidedly, my dear Athos," said d'Artagnan, "I should like better not
to risk anything."

"That's a pity," said Athos, coolly. "The Englishman is overflowing with
pistoles. Good Lord, try one throw! One throw is soon made!"

"And if I lose?"

"You will win."

"But if I lose?"

"Well, you will surrender the harnesses."

"Have with you for one throw!" said d'Artagnan.

Athos went in quest of the Englishman, whom he found in the stable,
examining the harnesses with a greedy eye. The opportunity was good. He
proposed the conditions--the two harnesses, either against one horse or
a hundred pistoles. The Englishman calculated fast; the two harnesses
were worth three hundred pistoles. He consented.

D'Artagnan threw the dice with a trembling hand, and turned up the
number three; his paleness terrified Athos, who, however, consented
himself with saying, "That's a sad throw, comrade; you will have the
horses fully equipped, monsieur."

The Englishman, quite triumphant, did not even give himself the trouble
to shake the dice. He threw them on the table without looking at them,
so sure was he of victory; d'Artagnan turned aside to conceal his ill
humor.

"Hold, hold, hold!" said Athos, wit his quiet tone; "that throw of the
dice is extraordinary. I have not seen such a one four times in my life.
Two aces!"

The Englishman looked, and was seized with astonishment. D'Artagnan
looked, and was seized with pleasure.

"Yes," continued Athos, "four times only; once at the house of Monsieur
Crequy; another time at my own house in the country, in my chateau
at--when I had a chateau; a third time at Monsieur de Treville's where
it surprised us all; and the fourth time at a cabaret, where it fell to
my lot, and where I lost a hundred louis and a supper on it."

"Then Monsieur takes his horse back again," said the Englishman.

"Certainly," said d'Artagnan.

"Then there is no revenge?"

"Our conditions said, 'No revenge,' you will please to recollect."

"That is true; the horse shall be restored to your lackey, monsieur."

"A moment," said Athos; "with your permission, monsieur, I wish to speak
a word with my friend."

"Say on."

Athos drew d'Artagnan aside.

"Well, Tempter, what more do you want with me?" said d'Artagnan. "You
want me to throw again, do you not?"

"No, I would wish you to reflect."

"On what?"

"You mean to take your horse?"

"Without doubt."

"You are wrong, then. I would take the hundred pistoles. You know you
have staked the harnesses against the horse or a hundred pistoles, at
your choice."

"Yes."

"Well, then, I repeat, you are wrong. What is the use of one horse for
us two? I could not ride behind. We should look like the two sons of
Anmon, who had lost their brother. You cannot think of humiliating me by
prancing along by my side on that magnificent charger. For my part, I
should not hesitate a moment; I should take the hundred pistoles. We
want money for our return to Paris."

"I am much attached to that horse, Athos."

"And there again you are wrong. A horse slips and injures a joint; a
horse stumbles and breaks his knees to the bone; a horse eats out of a
manger in which a glandered horse has eaten. There is a horse, while on
the contrary, the hundred pistoles feed their master."

"But how shall we get back?"

"Upon our lackey's horses, PARDIEU. Anybody may see by our bearing that
we are people of condition."

"Pretty figures we shall cut on ponies while Aramis and Porthos caracole
on their steeds."

"Aramis! Porthos!" cried Athos, and laughed aloud.

"What is it?" asked d'Artagnan, who did not at all comprehend the
hilarity of his friend.

"Nothing, nothing! Go on!"

"Your advice, then?"

"To take the hundred pistoles, d'Artagnan. With the hundred pistoles we
can live well to the end of the month. We have undergone a great deal of
fatigue, remember, and a little rest will do no harm."

"I rest? Oh, no, Athos. Once in Paris, I shall prosecute my search for
that unfortunate woman!"

"Well, you may be assured that your horse will not be half so
serviceable to you for that purpose as good golden louis. Take the
hundred pistoles, my friend; take the hundred pistoles!"

D'Artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied. This last reason
appeared convincing. Besides, he feared that by resisting longer he
should appear selfish in the eyes of Athos. He acquiesced, therefore,
and chose the hundred pistoles, which the Englishman paid down on the
spot.

They then determined to depart. Peace with the landlord, in addition to
Athos's old horse, cost six pistoles. D'Artagnan and Athos took the nags
of Planchet and Grimaud, and the two lackeys started on foot, carrying
the saddles on their heads.

However ill our two friends were mounted, they were soon far in advance
of their servants, and arrived at Creveccoeur. From a distance they
perceived Aramis, seated in a melancholy manner at his window, looking
out, like Sister Anne, at the dust in the horizon.

"HOLA, Aramis! What the devil are you doing there?" cried the two
friends.

"Ah, is that you, d'Artagnan, and you, Athos?" said the young man. "I
was reflecting upon the rapidity with which the blessings of this world
leave us. My English horse, which has just disappeared amid a cloud of
dust, has furnished me with a living image of the fragility of the
things of the earth. Life itself may be resolved into three words: ERAT,
EST, FUIT."

"Which means--" said d'Artagnan, who began to suspect the truth.

"Which means that I have just been duped-sixty louis for a horse which
by the manner of his gait can do at least five leagues an hour."

D'Artagnan and Athos laughed aloud.

"My dear d'Artagnan," said Aramis, "don't be too angry with me, I beg.
Necessity has no law; besides, I am the person punished, as that
rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis, at least. Ah, you
fellows are good managers! You ride on our lackey's horses, and have
your own gallant steeds led along carefully by hand, at short stages."

At the same instant a market cart, which some minutes before had
appeared upon the Amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and Planchet and
Grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads. The cart was
returning empty to Paris, and the two lackeys had agreed, for their
transport, to slake the wagoner's thirst along the route.

"What is this?" said Aramis, on seeing them arrive. "Nothing but
saddles?"

"Now do you understand?" said Athos.

"My friends, that's exactly like me! I retained my harness by instinct.
HOLA, Bazin! Bring my new saddle and carry it along with those of these
gentlemen."

"And what have you done with your ecclesiastics?" asked d'Artagnan.

"My dear fellow, I invited them to a dinner the next day," replied
Aramis. "They have some capital wine here--please to observe that in
passing. I did my best to make them drunk. Then the curate forbade me to
quit my uniform, and the Jesuit entreated me to get him made a
Musketeer."

"Without a thesis?" cried d'Artagnan, "without a thesis? I demand the
suppression of the thesis."

"Since then," continued Aramis, "I have lived very agreeably. I have
begun a poem in verses of one syllable. That is rather difficult, but
the merit in all things consists in the difficulty. The matter is
gallant. I will read you the first canto. It has four hundred lines, and
lasts a minute."

"My faith, my dear Aramis," said d'Artagnan, who detested verses almost
as much as he did Latin, "add to the merit of the difficulty that of the
brevity, and you are sure that your poem will at least have two merits."

"You will see," continued Aramis, "that it breathes irreproachable
passion. And so, my friends, we return to Paris? Bravo! I am ready. We
are going to rejoin that good fellow, Porthos. So much the better. You
can't think how I have missed him, the great simpleton. To see him so
self-satisfied reconciles me with myself. He would not sell his horse;
not for a kingdom! I think I can see him now, mounted upon his superb
animal and seated in his handsome saddle. I am sure he will look like
the Great Mogul!"

They made a halt for an hour to refresh their horses. Aramis discharged
his bill, placed Bazin in the cart with his comrades, and they set
forward to join Porthos.

They found him up, less pale than when d'Artagnan left him after his
first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he was alone, was
spread enough for four persons. This dinner consisted of meats nicely
dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit.

"Ah, PARDIEU!" said he, rising, "you come in the nick of time,
gentlemen. I was just beginning the soup, and you will dine with me."

"Oh, oh!" said d'Artagnan, "Mousqueton has not caught these bottles with
his lasso. Besides, here is a piquant FRICANDEAU and a fillet of beef."

"I am recruiting myself," said Porthos, "I am recruiting myself. Nothing
weakens a man more than these devilish strains. Did you ever suffer from
a strain, Athos?"

"Never! Though I remember, in our affair of the Rue Ferou, I received a
sword wound which at the end of fifteen or eighteen days produced the
same effect."

"But this dinner was not intended for you alone, Porthos?" said Aramis.

"No," said Porthos, "I expected some gentlemen of the neighborhood, who
have just sent me word they could not come. You will take their places
and I shall not lose by the exchange. HOLA, Mousqueton, seats, and order
double the bottles!"

"Do you know what we are eating here?" said Athos, at the end of ten
minutes.

"PARDIEU!" replied d'Artagnan, "for my part, I am eating veal garnished
with shrimps and vegetables."

"And I some lamb chops," said Porthos.

"And I a plain chicken," said Aramis.

"You are all mistaken, gentlemen," answered Athos, gravely; "you are
eating horse."

"Eating what?" said d'Artagnan.

"Horse!" said Aramis, with a grimace of disgust.

Porthos alone made no reply.

"Yes, horse. Are we not eating a horse, Porthos? And perhaps his saddle,
therewith."

"No, gentlemen, I have kept the harness," said Porthos.

"My faith," said Aramis, "we are all alike. One would think we had
tipped the wink."

"What could I do?" said Porthos. "This horse made my visitors ashamed of
theirs, and I don't like to humiliate people."

"Then your duchess is still at the waters?" asked d'Artagnan.

"Still," replied Porthos. "And, my faith, the governor of the
province--one of the gentlemen I expected today--seemed to have such a
wish for him, that I gave him to him."

"Gave him?" cried d'Artagnan.

"My God, yes, GAVE, that is the word," said Porthos; "for the animal was
worth at least a hundred and fifty louis, and the stingy fellow would
only give me eighty."

"Without the saddle?" said Aramis.

"Yes, without the saddle."

"You will observe, gentlemen," said Athos, "that Porthos has made the
best bargain of any of us."

And then commenced a roar of laughter in which they all joined, to the
astonishment of poor Porthos; but when he was informed of the cause of
their hilarity, he shared it vociferously according to his custom.

"There is one comfort, we are all in cash," said d'Artagnan.

"Well, for my part," said Athos, "I found Aramis's Spanish wine so good
that I sent on a hamper of sixty bottles of it in the wagon with the
lackeys. That has weakened my purse."

"And I," said Aramis, "imagined that I had given almost my last sou to
the church of Montdidier and the Jesuits of Amiens, with whom I had made
engagements which I ought to have kept. I have ordered Masses for
myself, and for you, gentlemen, which will be said, gentlemen, for which
I have not the least doubt you will be marvelously benefited."

"And I," said Porthos, "do you think my strain cost me nothing?--without
reckoning Mousqueton's wound, for which I had to have the surgeon twice
a day, and who charged me double on account of that foolish Mousqueton
having allowed himself a ball in a part which people generally only show
to an apothecary; so I advised him to try never to get wounded there any
more."

"Ay, ay!" said Athos, exchanging a smile with d'Artagnan and Aramis, "it
is very clear you acted nobly with regard to the poor lad; that is like
a good master."

"In short," said Porthos, "when all my expenses are paid, I shall have,
at most, thirty crowns left."

"And I about ten pistoles," said Aramis.

"Well, then it appears that we are the Croesuses of the society. How
much have you left of your hundred pistoles, d'Artagnan?"

"Of my hundred pistoles? Why, in the first place I gave you fifty."

"You think so?"

"PARDIEU!"
       "Ah, that is true. I recollect."

"Then I paid the host six."

"What a brute of a host! Why did you give him six pistoles?"

"You told me to give them to him."

"It is true; I am too good-natured. In brief, how much remains?"

"Twenty-five pistoles," said d'Artagnan.

"And I," said Athos, taking some small change from his pocket, "I--"

"You? Nothing!"

"My faith! So little that it is not worth reckoning with the general
stock."

"Now, then, let us calculate how much we posses in all."

"Porthos?"

"Thirty crowns."

"Aramis?"

"Ten pistoles."

"And you, d'Artagnan?"

"Twenty-five."

"That makes in all?" said Athos.

"Four hundred and seventy-five livres," said d'Artagnan, who reckoned
like Archimedes.

"On our arrival in Paris, we shall still have four hundred, besides the
harnesses," said Porthos.

"But our troop horses?" said Aramis.

"Well, of the four horses of our lackeys we will make two for the
masters, for which we will draw lots. With the four hundred livres we
will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and then we will
give the turnings out of our pockets to d'Artagnan, who has a steady
hand, and will go and play in the first gaming house we come to. There!"

"Let us dine, then," said Porthos; "it is getting cold."

The friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the repast,
the remains of which were abandoned to Mousqueton, Bazin, Planchet, and
Grimaud.

On arriving in Paris, d'Artagnan found a letter from M. de Treville,
which informed him that, at his request, the king had promised that he
should enter the company of the Musketeers.

As this was the height of d'Artagnan's worldly ambition--apart, be it
well understood, from his desire of finding Mme. Bonacieux--he ran, full
of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had left only half an hour before,
but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied. They were assembled
in council at the residence of Athos, which always indicated an event of
some gravity. M. de Treville had intimated to them his Majesty's fixed
intention to open the campaign on the first of May, and they must
immediately prepare their outfits.

The four philosophers looked at one another in a state of bewilderment.
M. de Treville never jested in matters relating to discipline.

"And what do you reckon your outfit will cost?" said d'Artagnan.

"Oh, we can scarcely say. We have made our calculations with Spartan
economy, and we each require fifteen hundred livres."

"Four times fifteen makes sixty--six thousand livres," said Athos.

"It seems to me," said d'Artagnan, "with a thousand livres each--I do
not speak as a Spartan, but as a procurator--"

This word PROCURATOR roused Porthos. "Stop," said he, "I have an idea."

"Well, that's something, for I have not the shadow of one," said Athos
coolly; "but as to d'Artagnan, gentlemen, the idea of belonging to OURS
has driven him out of his senses. A thousand livres! For my part, I
declare I want two thousand."

"Four times two makes eight," then said Aramis; "it is eight thousand
that we want to complete our outfits, toward which, it is true, we have
already the saddles."

"Besides," said Athos, waiting till d'Artagnan, who went to thank
Monsieur de Treville, had shut the door, "besides, there is that
beautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend. What the
devil! D'Artagnan is too good a comrade to leave his brothers in
embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king on his finger."





29 HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS


The most preoccupied of the four friends was certainly d'Artagnan,
although he, in his quality of Guardsman, would be much more easily
equipped than Messieurs the Musketeers, who were all of high rank; but
our Gascon cadet was, as may have been observed, of a provident and
almost avaricious character, and with that (explain the contradiction)
so vain as almost to rival Porthos. To this preoccupation of his vanity,
d'Artagnan at this moment joined an uneasiness much less selfish.
Notwithstanding all his inquiries respecting Mme. Bonacieux, he could
obtain no intelligence of her. M. de Treville had spoken of her to the
queen. The queen was ignorant where the mercer's young wife was, but had
promised to have her sought for; but this promise was very vague and did
not at all reassure d'Artagnan.

Athos did not leave his chamber; he made up his mind not to take a
single step to equip himself.

"We have still fifteen days before us," said he to his friends, "well,
if at the end of a fortnight I have found nothing, or rather if nothing
has come to find me, as I, too good a Catholic to kill myself with a
pistol bullet, I will seek a good quarrel with four of his Eminence's
Guards or with eight Englishmen, and I will fight until one of them has
killed me, which, considering the number, cannot fail to happen. It will
then be said of me that I died for the king; so that I shall have
performed my duty without the expense of an outfit."

Porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him, tossing his
head and repeating, "I shall follow up on my idea."

Aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.

It may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in
the community.

The lackeys on their part, like the coursers of Hippolytus, shared the
sadness of their masters. Mousqueton collected a store of crusts; Bazin,
who had always been inclined to devotion, never quit the churches;
Planchet watched the flight of flies; and Grimaud, whom the general
distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master,
heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.

The three friends--for, as we have said, Athos had sworn not to stir a
foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, and returned late
at night. They wandered about the streets, looking at the pavement as if
to see whether the passengers had not left a purse behind them. They
might have been supposed to be following tracks, so observant were they
wherever they went. When they met they looked desolately at one another,
as much as to say, "Have you found anything?"

However, as Porthos had first found an idea, and had thought of it
earnestly afterward, he was the first to act. He was a man of execution,
this worthy Porthos. D'Artagnan perceived him one day walking toward the
church of St. Leu, and followed him instinctively. He entered, after
having twisted his mustache and elongated his imperial, which always
announced on his part the most triumphant resolutions. As d'Artagnan
took some precautions to conceal himself, Porthos believed he had not
been seen. D'Artagnan entered behind him. Porthos went and leaned
against the side of a pillar. D'Artagnan, still unperceived, supported
himself against the other side.

There happened to be a sermon, which made the church very full of
people. Porthos took advantage of this circumstance to ogle the women.
Thanks to the cares of Mousqueton, the exterior was far from announcing
the distress of the interior. His hat was a little napless, his feather
was a little faded, his gold lace was a little tarnished, his laces were
a trifle frayed; but in the obscurity of the church these things were
not seen, and Porthos was still the handsome Porthos.

D'Artagnan observed, on the bench nearest to the pillar against which
Porthos leaned, a sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow and rather dry, but
erect and haughty under her black hood. The eyes of Porthos were
furtively cast upon this lady, and then roved about at large over the
nave.

On her side the lady, who from time to time blushed, darted with the
rapidity of lightning a glance toward the inconstant Porthos; and then
immediately the eyes of Porthos wandered anxiously. It was plain that
this mode of proceeding piqued the lady in the black hood, for she bit
her lips till they bled, scratched the end of her nose, and could not
sit still in her seat.

Porthos, seeing this, retwisted his mustache, elongated his imperial a
second time, and began to make signals to a beautiful lady who was near
the choir, and who not only was a beautiful lady, but still further, no
doubt, a great lady--for she had behind her a Negro boy who had brought
the cushion on which she knelt, and a female servant who held the
emblazoned bag in which was placed the book from which she read the
Mass.

The lady with the black hood followed through all their wanderings the
looks of Porthos, and perceived that they rested upon the lady with the
velvet cushion, the little Negro, and the maid-servant.

During this time Porthos played close. It was almost imperceptible
motions of his eyes, fingers placed upon the lips, little assassinating
smiles, which really did assassinate the disdained beauty.

Then she cried, "Ahem!" under cover of the MEA CULPA, striking her
breast so vigorously that everybody, even the lady with the red cushion,
turned round toward her. Porthos paid no attention. Nevertheless, he
understood it all, but was deaf.

The lady with the red cushion produced a great effect--for she was very
handsome--upon the lady with the black hood, who saw in her a rival
really to be dreaded; a great effect upon Porthos, who thought her much
prettier than the lady with the black hood; a great effect upon
d'Artagnan, who recognized in her the lady of Meung, of Calais, and of
Dover, whom his persecutor, the man with the scar, had saluted by the
name of Milady.

D'Artagnan, without losing sight of the lady of the red cushion,
continued to watch the proceedings of Porthos, which amused him greatly.
He guessed that the lady of the black hood was the procurator's wife of
the Rue aux Ours, which was the more probable from the church of St. Leu
being not far from that locality.

He guessed, likewise, by induction, that Porthos was taking his revenge
for the defeat of Chantilly, when the procurator's wife had proved so
refractory with respect to her purse.

Amid all this, d'Artagnan remarked also that not one countenance
responded to the gallantries of Porthos. There were only chimeras and
illusions; but for real love, for true jealousy, is there any reality
except illusions and chimeras?

The sermon over, the procurator's wife advanced toward the holy font.
Porthos went before her, and instead of a finger, dipped his whole hand
in. The procurator's wife smiled, thinking that it was for her Porthos
had put himself to this trouble; but she was cruelly and promptly
undeceived. When she was only about three steps from him, he turned his
head round, fixing his eyes steadfastly upon the lady with the red
cushion, who had risen and was approaching, followed by her black boy
and her woman.

When the lady of the red cushion came close to Porthos, Porthos drew his
dripping hand from the font. The fair worshipper touched the great hand
of Porthos with her delicate fingers, smiled, made the sign of the
cross, and left the church.

This was too much for the procurator's wife; she doubted not there was
an intrigue between this lady and Porthos. If she had been a great lady
she would have fainted; but as she was only a procurator's wife, she
contented herself saying to the Musketeer with concentrated fury, "Eh,
Monsieur Porthos, you don't offer me any holy water?"

Porthos, at the sound of that voice, started like a man awakened from a
sleep of a hundred years.

"Ma-madame!" cried he; "is that you? How is your husband, our dear
Monsieur Coquenard? Is he still as stingy as ever? Where can my eyes
have been not to have seen you during the two hours of the sermon?"

"I was within two paces of you, monsieur," replied the procurator's
wife; "but you did not perceive me because you had no eyes but for the
pretty lady to whom you just now gave the holy water."

Porthos pretended to be confused. "Ah," said he, "you have remarked--"

"I must have been blind not to have seen."

"Yes," said Porthos, "that is a duchess of my acquaintance whom I have
great trouble to meet on account of the jealousy of her husband, and who
sent me word that she should come today to this poor church, buried in
this vile quarter, solely for the sake of seeing me."

"Monsieur Porthos," said the procurator's wife, "will you have the
kindness to offer me your arm for five minutes? I have something to say
to you."

"Certainly, madame," said Porthos, winking to himself, as a gambler does
who laughs at the dupe he is about to pluck.

At that moment d'Artagnan passed in pursuit of Milady; he cast a passing
glance at Porthos, and beheld this triumphant look.

"Eh, eh!" said he, reasoning to himself according to the strangely easy
morality of that gallant period, "there is one who will be equipped in
good time!"

Porthos, yielding to the pressure of the arm of the procurator's wife,
as a bark yields to the rudder, arrived at the cloister St. Magloire--a
little-frequented passage, enclosed with a turnstile at each end. In the
daytime nobody was seen there but mendicants devouring their crusts, and
children at play.

"Ah, Monsieur Porthos," cried the procurator's wife, when she was
assured that no one who was a stranger to the population of the locality
could either see or hear her, "ah, Monsieur Porthos, you are a great
conqueror, as it appears!"

"I, madame?" said Porthos, drawing himself up proudly; "how so?"

"The signs just now, and the holy water! But that must be a princess, at
least--that lady with her Negro boy and her maid!"

"My God! Madame, you are deceived," said Porthos; "she is simply a
duchess."

"And that running footman who waited at the door, and that carriage with
a coachman in grand livery who sat waiting on his seat?"

Porthos had seen neither the footman nor the carriage, but with the eye
of a jealous woman, Mme. Coquenard had seen everything.

Porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of the red
cushion a princess.

"Ah, you are quite the pet of the ladies, Monsieur Porthos!" resumed the
procurator's wife, with a sigh.

"Well," responded Porthos, "you may imagine, with the physique with
which nature has endowed me, I am not in want of good luck."

"Good Lord, how quickly men forget!" cried the procurator's wife,
raising her eyes toward heaven.

"Less quickly than the women, it seems to me," replied Porthos; "for I,
madame, I may say I was your victim, when wounded, dying, I was
abandoned by the surgeons. I, the offspring of a noble family, who
placed reliance upon your friendship--I was near dying of my wounds at
first, and of hunger afterward, in a beggarly inn at Chantilly, without
you ever deigning once to reply to the burning letters I addressed to
you."

"But, Monsieur Porthos," murmured the procurator's wife, who began to
feel that, to judge by the conduct of the great ladies of the time, she
was wrong.

"I, who had sacrificed for you the Baronne de--"

"I know it well."

"The Comtesse de--"

"Monsieur Porthos, be generous!"

"You are right, madame, and I will not finish."

"But it was my husband who would not hear of lending."

"Madame Coquenard," said Porthos, "remember the first letter you wrote
me, and which I preserve engraved in my memory."

The procurator's wife uttered a groan.

"Besides," said she, "the sum you required me to borrow was rather
large."

"Madame Coquenard, I gave you the preference. I had but to write to the
Duchesse--but I won't repeat her name, for I am incapable of
compromising a woman; but this I know, that I had but to write to her
and she would have sent me fifteen hundred."

The procurator's wife shed a tear.

"Monsieur Porthos," said she, "I can assure you that you have severely
punished me; and if in the time to come you should find yourself in a
similar situation, you have but to apply to me."

"Fie, madame, fie!" said Porthos, as if disgusted. "Let us not talk
about money, if you please; it is humiliating."

"Then you no longer love me!" said the procurator's wife, slowly and
sadly.

Porthos maintained a majestic silence.

"And that is the only reply you make? Alas, I understand."

"Think of the offense you have committed toward me, madame! It remains
HERE!" said Porthos, placing his hand on his heart, and pressing it
strongly.

"I will repair it, indeed I will, my dear Porthos."

"Besides, what did I ask of you?" resumed Porthos, with a movement of
the shoulders full of good fellowship. "A loan, nothing more! After all,
I am not an unreasonable man. I know you are not rich, Madame Coquenard,
and that your husband is obliged to bleed his poor clients to squeeze a
few paltry crowns from them. Oh! If you were a duchess, a marchioness,
or a countess, it would be quite a different thing; it would be
unpardonable."

The procurator's wife was piqued.

"Please to know, Monsieur Porthos," said she, "that my strongbox, the
strongbox of a procurator's wife though it may be, is better filled than
those of your affected minxes."

"That doubles the offense," said Porthos, disengaging his arm from that
of the procurator's wife; "for if you are rich, Madame Coquenard, then
there is no excuse for your refusal."

"When I said rich," replied the procurator's wife, who saw that she had
gone too far, "you must not take the word literally. I am not precisely
rich, though I am pretty well off."

"Hold, madame," said Porthos, "let us say no more upon the subject, I
beg of you. You have misunderstood me, all sympathy is extinct between
us."

"Ingrate that you are!"

"Ah! I advise you to complain!" said Porthos.

"Begone, then, to your beautiful duchess; I will detain you no longer."

"And she is not to be despised, in my opinion."

"Now, Monsieur Porthos, once more, and this is the last! Do you love me
still?"

"Ah, madame," said Porthos, in the most melancholy tone he could assume,
"when we are about to enter upon a campaign--a campaign, in which my
presentiments tell me I shall be killed--"

"Oh, don't talk of such things!" cried the procurator's wife, bursting
into tears.

"Something whispers me so," continued Porthos, becoming more and more
melancholy.

"Rather say that you have a new love."

"Not so; I speak frankly to you. No object affects me; and I even feel
here, at the bottom of my heart, something which speaks for you. But in
fifteen days, as you know, or as you do not know, this fatal campaign is
to open. I shall be fearfully preoccupied with my outfit. Then I must
make a journey to see my family, in the lower part of Brittany, to
obtain the sum necessary for my departure."

Porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice.

"And as," continued he, "the duchess whom you saw at the church has
estates near to those of my family, we mean to make the journey
together. Journeys, you know, appear much shorter when we travel two in
company."

"Have you no friends in Paris, then, Monsieur Porthos?" said the
procurator's wife.

"I thought I had," said Porthos, resuming his melancholy air; "but I
have been taught my mistake."

"You have some!" cried the procurator's wife, in a transport that
surprised even herself. "Come to our house tomorrow. You are the son of
my aunt, consequently my cousin; you come from Noyon, in Picardy; you
have several lawsuits and no attorney. Can you recollect all that?"

"Perfectly, madame."

"Come at dinnertime."

"Very well."

"And be upon your guard before my husband, who is rather shrewd,
notwithstanding his seventy-six years."

"Seventy-six years! PESTE! That's a fine age!" replied Porthos.

"A great age, you mean, Monsieur Porthos. Yes, the poor man may be
expected to leave me a widow, any hour," continued she, throwing a
significant glance at Porthos. "Fortunately, by our marriage contract,
the survivor takes everything."

"All?"

"Yes, all."

"You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard," said
Porthos, squeezing the hand of the procurator's wife tenderly.

"We are then reconciled, dear Monsieur Porthos?" said she, simpering.

"For life," replied Porthos, in the same manner.

"Till we meet again, then, dear traitor!"

"Till we meet again, my forgetful charmer!"

"Tomorrow, my angel!"

"Tomorrow, flame of my life!"





