2 THE ANTECHAMBER OF M. DE TREVILLE


M de Troisville, as his family was still called in Gascony, or M. de
Treville, as he has ended by styling himself in Paris, had really
commenced life as d'Artagnan now did; that is to say, without a sou in
his pocket, but with a fund of audacity, shrewdness, and intelligence
which makes the poorest Gascon gentleman often derive more in his hope
from the paternal inheritance than the richest Perigordian or Berrichan
gentleman derives in reality from his. His insolent bravery, his still
more insolent success at a time when blows poured down like hail, had
borne him to the top of that difficult ladder called Court Favor, which
he had climbed four steps at a time.

He was the friend of the king, who honored highly, as everyone knows,
the memory of his father, Henry IV. The father of M. de Treville had
served him so faithfully in his wars against the league that in default
of money--a thing to which the Bearnais was accustomed all his life, and
who constantly paid his debts with that of which he never stood in need
of borrowing, that is to say, with ready wit--in default of money, we
repeat, he authorized him, after the reduction of Paris, to assume for
his arms a golden lion passant upon gules, with the motto FIDELIS ET
FORTIS. This was a great matter in the way of honor, but very little in
the way of wealth; so that when the illustrious companion of the great
Henry died, the only inheritance he was able to leave his son was his
sword and his motto. Thanks to this double gift and the spotless name
that accompanied it, M. de Treville was admitted into the household of
the young prince where he made such good use of his sword, and was so
faithful to his motto, that Louis XIII, one of the good blades of his
kingdom, was accustomed to say that if he had a friend who was about to
fight, he would advise him to choose as a second, himself first, and
Treville next--or even, perhaps, before himself.

Thus Louis XIII had a real liking for Treville--a royal liking, a
self-interested liking, it is true, but still a liking. At that unhappy
period it was an important consideration to be surrounded by such men as
Treville. Many might take for their device the epithet STRONG, which
formed the second part of his motto, but very few gentlemen could lay
claim to the FAITHFUL, which constituted the first. Treville was one of
these latter. His was one of those rare organizations, endowed with an
obedient intelligence like that of the dog; with a blind valor, a quick
eye, and a prompt hand; to whom sight appeared only to be given to see
if the king were dissatisfied with anyone, and the hand to strike this
displeasing personage, whether a Besme, a Maurevers, a Poltiot de Mere,
or a Vitry. In short, up to this period nothing had been wanting to
Treville but opportunity; but he was ever on the watch for it, and he
faithfully promised himself that he would not fail to seize it by its
three hairs whenever it came within reach of his hand. At last Louis
XIII made Treville the captain of his Musketeers, who were to Louis XIII
in devotedness, or rather in fanaticism, what his Ordinaries had been to
Henry III, and his Scotch Guard to Louis XI.

On his part, the cardinal was not behind the king in this respect. When
he saw the formidable and chosen body with which Louis XIII had
surrounded himself, this second, or rather this first king of France,
became desirous that he, too, should have his guard. He had his
Musketeers therefore, as Louis XIII had his, and these two powerful
rivals vied with each other in procuring, not only from all the
provinces of France, but even from all foreign states, the most
celebrated swordsmen. It was not uncommon for Richelieu and Louis XIII
to dispute over their evening game of chess upon the merits of their
servants. Each boasted the bearing and the courage of his own people.
While exclaiming loudly against duels and brawls, they excited them
secretly to quarrel, deriving an immoderate satisfaction or genuine
regret from the success or defeat of their own combatants. We learn this
from the memoirs of a man who was concerned in some few of these defeats
and in many of these victories.

Treville had grasped the weak side of his master; and it was to this
address that he owed the long and constant favor of a king who has not
left the reputation behind him of being very faithful in his
friendships. He paraded his Musketeers before the Cardinal Armand
Duplessis with an insolent air which made the gray moustache of his
Eminence curl with ire. Treville understood admirably the war method of
that period, in which he who could not live at the expense of the enemy
must live at the expense of his compatriots. His soldiers formed a
legion of devil-may-care fellows, perfectly undisciplined toward all but
himself.

Loose, half-drunk, imposing, the king's Musketeers, or rather M. de
Treville's, spread themselves about in the cabarets, in the public
walks, and the public sports, shouting, twisting their mustaches,
clanking their swords, and taking great pleasure in annoying the Guards
of the cardinal whenever they could fall in with them; then drawing in
the open streets, as if it were the best of all possible sports;
sometimes killed, but sure in that case to be both wept and avenged;
often killing others, but then certain of not rotting in prison, M. de
Treville being there to claim them. Thus M. de Treville was praised to
the highest note by these men, who adored him, and who, ruffians as they
were, trembled before him like scholars before their master, obedient to
his least word, and ready to sacrifice themselves to wash out the
smallest insult.

M de Treville employed this powerful weapon for the king, in the first
place, and the friends of the king--and then for himself and his own
friends. For the rest, in the memoirs of this period, which has left so
many memoirs, one does not find this worthy gentleman blamed even by his
enemies; and he had many such among men of the pen as well as among men
of the sword. In no instance, let us say, was this worthy gentleman
accused of deriving personal advantage from the cooperation of his
minions. Endowed with a rare genius for intrigue which rendered him the
equal of the ablest intriguers, he remained an honest man. Still
further, in spite of sword thrusts which weaken, and painful exercises
which fatigue, he had become one of the most gallant frequenters of
revels, one of the most insinuating lady's men, one of the softest
whisperers of interesting nothings of his day; the BONNES FORTUNES of de
Treville were talked of as those of M. de Bassompierre had been talked
of twenty years before, and that was not saying a little. The captain of
the Musketeers was therefore admired, feared, and loved; and this
constitutes the zenith of human fortune.

Louis XIV absorbed all the smaller stars of his court in his own vast
radiance; but his father, a sun PLURIBUS IMPAR, left his personal
splendor to each of his favorites, his individual value to each of his
courtiers. In addition to the leeves of the king and the cardinal, there
might be reckoned in Paris at that time more than two hundred smaller
but still noteworthy leeves. Among these two hundred leeves, that of
Treville was one of the most sought.

The court of his hotel, situated in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier,
resembled a camp from by six o'clock in the morning in summer and eight
o'clock in winter. From fifty to sixty Musketeers, who appeared to
replace one another in order always to present an imposing number,
paraded constantly, armed to the teeth and ready for anything. On one of
those immense staircases, upon whose space modern civilization would
build a whole house, ascended and descended the office seekers of Paris,
who ran after any sort of favor--gentlemen from the provinces anxious to
be enrolled, and servants in all sorts of liveries, bringing and
carrying messages between their masters and M. de Treville. In the
antechamber, upon long circular benches, reposed the elect; that is to
say, those who were called. In this apartment a continued buzzing
prevailed from morning till night, while M. de Treville, in his office
contiguous to this antechamber, received visits, listened to complaints,
gave his orders, and like the king in his balcony at the Louvre, had
only to place himself at the window to review both his men and arms.

The day on which d'Artagnan presented himself the assemblage was
imposing, particularly for a provincial just arriving from his province.
It is true that this provincial was a Gascon; and that, particularly at
this period, the compatriots of d'Artagnan had the reputation of not
being easily intimidated. When he had once passed the massive door
covered with long square-headed nails, he fell into the midst of a troop
of swordsmen, who crossed one another in their passage, calling out,
quarreling, and playing tricks one with another. In order to make one's
way amid these turbulent and conflicting waves, it was necessary to be
an officer, a great noble, or a pretty woman.

It was, then, into the midst of this tumult and disorder that our young
man advanced with a beating heart, ranging his long rapier up his lanky
leg, and keeping one hand on the edge of his cap, with that half-smile
of the embarrassed provincial who wishes to put on a good face. When he
had passed one group he began to breathe more freely; but he could not
help observing that they turned round to look at him, and for the first
time in his life d'Artagnan, who had till that day entertained a very
good opinion of himself, felt ridiculous.

Arrived at the staircase, it was still worse. There were four Musketeers
on the bottom steps, amusing themselves with the following exercise,
while ten or twelve of their comrades waited upon the landing place to
take their turn in the sport.

One of them, stationed upon the top stair, naked sword in hand,
prevented, or at least endeavored to prevent, the three others from
ascending.

These three others fenced against him with their agile swords.

D'Artagnan at first took these weapons for foils, and believed them to
be buttoned; but he soon perceived by certain scratches that every
weapon was pointed and sharpened, and that at each of these scratches
not only the spectators, but even the actors themselves, laughed like so
many madmen.

He who at the moment occupied the upper step kept his adversaries
marvelously in check. A circle was formed around them. The conditions
required that at every hit the man touched should quit the game,
yielding his turn for the benefit of the adversary who had hit him. In
five minutes three were slightly wounded, one on the hand, another on
the ear, by the defender of the stair, who himself remained intact--a
piece of skill which was worth to him, according to the rules agreed
upon, three turns of favor.

However difficult it might be, or rather as he pretended it was, to
astonish our young traveler, this pastime really astonished him. He had
seen in his province--that land in which heads become so easily
heated--a few of the preliminaries of duels; but the daring of these
four fencers appeared to him the strongest he had ever heard of even in
Gascony. He believed himself transported into that famous country of
giants into which Gulliver afterward went and was so frightened; and yet
he had not gained the goal, for there were still the landing place and
the antechamber.

On the landing they were no longer fighting, but amused themselves with
stories about women, and in the antechamber, with stories about the
court. On the landing d'Artagnan blushed; in the antechamber he
trembled. His warm and fickle imagination, which in Gascony had rendered
him formidable to young chambermaids, and even sometimes their
mistresses, had never dreamed, even in moments of delirium, of half the
amorous wonders or a quarter of the feats of gallantry which were here
set forth in connection with names the best known and with details the
least concealed. But if his morals were shocked on the landing, his
respect for the cardinal was scandalized in the antechamber. There, to
his great astonishment, d'Artagnan heard the policy which made all
Europe tremble criticized aloud and openly, as well as the private life
of the cardinal, which so many great nobles had been punished for trying
to pry into. That great man who was so revered by d'Artagnan the elder
served as an object of ridicule to the Musketeers of Treville, who
cracked their jokes upon his bandy legs and his crooked back. Some sang
ballads about Mme. d'Aguillon, his mistress, and Mme. Cambalet, his
niece; while others formed parties and plans to annoy the pages and
guards of the cardinal duke--all things which appeared to d'Artagnan
monstrous impossibilities.

Nevertheless, when the name of the king was now and then uttered
unthinkingly amid all these cardinal jests, a sort of gag seemed to
close for a moment on all these jeering mouths. They looked hesitatingly
around them, and appeared to doubt the thickness of the partition
between them and the office of M. de Treville; but a fresh allusion soon
brought back the conversation to his Eminence, and then the laughter
recovered its loudness and the light was not withheld from any of his
actions.

"Certes, these fellows will all either be imprisoned or hanged," thought
the terrified d'Artagnan, "and I, no doubt, with them; for from the
moment I have either listened to or heard them, I shall be held as an
accomplice. What would my good father say, who so strongly pointed out
to me the respect due to the cardinal, if he knew I was in the society
of such pagans?"

We have no need, therefore, to say that d'Artagnan dared not join in the
conversation, only he looked with all his eyes and listened with all his
ears, stretching his five senses so as to lose nothing; and despite his
confidence on the paternal admonitions, he felt himself carried by his
tastes and led by his instincts to praise rather than to blame the
unheard-of things which were taking place.

Although he was a perfect stranger in the court of M. de Treville's
courtiers, and this his first appearance in that place, he was at length
noticed, and somebody came and asked him what he wanted. At this demand
d'Artagnan gave his name very modestly, emphasized the title of
compatriot, and begged the servant who had put the question to him to
request a moment's audience of M. de Treville--a request which the
other, with an air of protection, promised to transmit in due season.

D'Artagnan, a little recovered from his first surprise, had now leisure
to study costumes and physiognomy.

The center of the most animated group was a Musketeer of great height
and haughty countenance, dressed in a costume so peculiar as to attract
general attention. He did not wear the uniform cloak--which was not
obligatory at that epoch of less liberty but more independence--but a
cerulean-blue doublet, a little faded and worn, and over this a
magnificent baldric, worked in gold, which shone like water ripples in
the sun. A long cloak of crimson velvet fell in graceful folds from his
shoulders, disclosing in front the splendid baldric, from which was
suspended a gigantic rapier. This Musketeer had just come off guard,
complained of having a cold, and coughed from time to time affectedly.
It was for this reason, as he said to those around him, that he had put
on his cloak; and while he spoke with a lofty air and twisted his
mustache disdainfully, all admired his embroidered baldric, and
d'Artagnan more than anyone.

"What would you have?" said the Musketeer. "This fashion is coming in.
It is a folly, I admit, but still it is the fashion. Besides, one must
lay out one's inheritance somehow."

"Ah, Porthos!" cried one of his companions, "don't try to make us
believe you obtained that baldric by paternal generosity. It was given
to you by that veiled lady I met you with the other Sunday, near the
gate St. Honor."

"No, upon honor and by the faith of a gentleman, I bought it with the
contents of my own purse," answered he whom they designated by the name
Porthos.

"Yes; about in the same manner," said another Musketeer, "that I bought
this new purse with what my mistress put into the old one."

"It's true, though," said Porthos; "and the proof is that I paid twelve
pistoles for it."

The wonder was increased, though the doubt continued to exist.

"Is it not true, Aramis?" said Porthos, turning toward another
Musketeer.

This other Musketeer formed a perfect contrast to his interrogator, who
had just designated him by the name of Aramis. He was a stout man, of
about two- or three-and-twenty, with an open, ingenuous countenance, a
black, mild eye, and cheeks rosy and downy as an autumn peach. His
delicate mustache marked a perfectly straight line upon his upper lip;
he appeared to dread to lower his hands lest their veins should swell,
and he pinched the tips of his ears from time to time to preserve their
delicate pink transparency. Habitually he spoke little and slowly, bowed
frequently, laughed without noise, showing his teeth, which were fine
and of which, as the rest of his person, he appeared to take great care.
He answered the appeal of his friend by an affirmative nod of the head.

This affirmation appeared to dispel all doubts with regard to the
baldric. They continued to admire it, but said no more about it; and
with a rapid change of thought, the conversation passed suddenly to
another subject.

"What do you think of the story Chalais's esquire relates?" asked
another Musketeer, without addressing anyone in particular, but on the
contrary speaking to everybody.

"And what does he say?" asked Porthos, in a self-sufficient tone.

"He relates that he met at Brussels Rochefort, the AME DAMNEE of the
cardinal disguised as a Capuchin, and that this cursed Rochefort, thanks
to his disguise, had tricked Monsieur de Laigues, like a ninny as he
is."

"A ninny, indeed!" said Porthos; "but is the matter certain?"

"I had it from Aramis," replied the Musketeer.

"Indeed?"

"Why, you knew it, Porthos," said Aramis. "I told you of it yesterday.
Let us say no more about it."

"Say no more about it? That's YOUR opinion!" replied Porthos.

"Say no more about it! PESTE! You come to your conclusions quickly.
What! The cardinal sets a spy upon a gentleman, has his letters stolen
from him by means of a traitor, a brigand, a rascal--has, with the help
of this spy and thanks to this correspondence, Chalais's throat cut,
under the stupid pretext that he wanted to kill the king and marry
Monsieur to the queen! Nobody knew a word of this enigma. You unraveled
it yesterday to the great satisfaction of all; and while we are still
gaping with wonder at the news, you come and tell us today, 'Let us say
no more about it.'"

"Well, then, let us talk about it, since you desire it," replied Aramis,
patiently.

"This Rochefort," cried Porthos, "if I were the esquire of poor Chalais,
should pass a minute or two very uncomfortably with me."

"And you--you would pass rather a sad quarter-hour with the Red Duke,"
replied Aramis.

"Oh, the Red Duke! Bravo! Bravo! The Red Duke!" cried Porthos, clapping
his hands and nodding his head. "The Red Duke is capital. I'll circulate
that saying, be assured, my dear fellow. Who says this Aramis is not a
wit? What a misfortune it is you did not follow your first vocation;
what a delicious abbe you would have made!"

"Oh, it's only a temporary postponement," replied Aramis; "I shall be
one someday. You very well know, Porthos, that I continue to study
theology for that purpose."

"He will be one, as he says," cried Porthos; "he will be one, sooner or
later."

"Sooner," said Aramis.

"He only waits for one thing to determine him to resume his cassock,
which hangs behind his uniform," said another Musketeer.

"What is he waiting for?" asked another.

"Only till the queen has given an heir to the crown of France."

"No jesting upon that subject, gentlemen," said Porthos; "thank God the
queen is still of an age to give one!"

"They say that Monsieur de Buckingham is in France," replied Aramis,
with a significant smile which gave to this sentence, apparently so
simple, a tolerably scandalous meaning.

"Aramis, my good friend, this time you are wrong," interrupted Porthos.
"Your wit is always leading you beyond bounds; if Monsieur de Treville
heard you, you would repent of speaking thus."

"Are you going to give me a lesson, Porthos?" cried Aramis, from whose
usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning.

"My dear fellow, be a Musketeer or an abbe. Be one or the other, but not
both," replied Porthos. "You know what Athos told you the other day; you
eat at everybody's mess. Ah, don't be angry, I beg of you, that would be
useless; you know what is agreed upon between you, Athos and me. You go
to Madame d'Aguillon's, and you pay your court to her; you go to Madame
de Bois-Tracy's, the cousin of Madame de Chevreuse, and you pass for
being far advanced in the good graces of that lady. Oh, good Lord! Don't
trouble yourself to reveal your good luck; no one asks for your
secret-all the world knows your discretion. But since you possess that
virtue, why the devil don't you make use of it with respect to her
Majesty? Let whoever likes talk of the king and the cardinal, and how he
likes; but the queen is sacred, and if anyone speaks of her, let it be
respectfully."

"Porthos, you are as vain as Narcissus; I plainly tell you so," replied
Aramis. "You know I hate moralizing, except when it is done by Athos. As
to you, good sir, you wear too magnificent a baldric to be strong on
that head. I will be an abbe if it suits me. In the meanwhile I am a
Musketeer; in that quality I say what I please, and at this moment it
pleases me to say that you weary me."

"Aramis!"

"Porthos!"

"Gentlemen! Gentlemen!" cried the surrounding group.

"Monsieur de Treville awaits Monsieur d'Artagnan," cried a servant,
throwing open the door of the cabinet.

At this announcement, during which the door remained open, everyone
became mute, and amid the general silence the young man crossed part of
the length of the antechamber, and entered the apartment of the captain
of the Musketeers, congratulating himself with all his heart at having
so narrowly escaped the end of this strange quarrel.





3 THE AUDIENCE


M de Treville was at the moment in rather ill-humor, nevertheless he
saluted the young man politely, who bowed to the very ground; and he
smiled on receiving d'Artagnan's response, the Bearnese accent of which
recalled to him at the same time his youth and his country--a double
remembrance which makes a man smile at all ages; but stepping toward the
antechamber and making a sign to d'Artagnan with his hand, as if to ask
his permission to finish with others before he began with him, he called
three times, with a louder voice at each time, so that he ran through
the intervening tones between the imperative accent and the angry
accent.

"Athos! Porthos! Aramis!"

The two Musketeers with whom we have already made acquaintance, and who
answered to the last of these three names, immediately quitted the group
of which they had formed a part, and advanced toward the cabinet, the
door of which closed after them as soon as they had entered. Their
appearance, although it was not quite at ease, excited by its
carelessness, at once full of dignity and submission, the admiration of
d'Artagnan, who beheld in these two men demigods, and in their leader an
Olympian Jupiter, armed with all his thunders.

When the two Musketeers had entered; when the door was closed behind
them; when the buzzing murmur of the antechamber, to which the summons
which had been made had doubtless furnished fresh food, had recommenced;
when M. de Treville had three or four times paced in silence, and with a
frowning brow, the whole length of his cabinet, passing each time before
Porthos and Aramis, who were as upright and silent as if on parade--he
stopped all at once full in front of them, and covering them from head
to foot with an angry look, "Do you know what the king said to me,"
cried he, "and that no longer ago than yesterday evening--do you know,
gentlemen?"

"No," replied the two Musketeers, after a moment's silence, "no, sir, we
do not."

"But I hope that you will do us the honor to tell us," added Aramis, in
his politest tone and with his most graceful bow.

"He told me that he should henceforth recruit his Musketeers from among
the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal."

"The Guards of the cardinal! And why so?" asked Porthos, warmly.

"Because he plainly perceives that his piquette* stands in need of being
enlivened by a mixture of good wine."

    _*A watered liquor, made from the second pressing of the grape._

The two Musketeers reddened to the whites of their eyes. D'Artagnan did
not know where he was, and wished himself a hundred feet underground.

"Yes, yes," continued M. de Treville, growing warmer as he spoke, "and
his majesty was right; for, upon my honor, it is true that the
Musketeers make but a miserable figure at court. The cardinal related
yesterday while playing with the king, with an air of condolence very
displeasing to me, that the day before yesterday those DAMNED
MUSKETEERS, those DAREDEVILS--he dwelt upon those words with an ironical
tone still more displeasing to me--those BRAGGARTS, added he, glancing
at me with his tiger-cat's eye, had made a riot in the Rue Ferou in a
cabaret, and that a party of his Guards (I thought he was going to laugh
in my face) had been forced to arrest the rioters! MORBLEU! You must
know something about it. Arrest Musketeers! You were among them--you
were! Don't deny it; you were recognized, and the cardinal named you.
But it's all my fault; yes, it's all my fault, because it is myself who
selects my men. You, Aramis, why the devil did you ask me for a uniform
when you would have been so much better in a cassock? And you, Porthos,
do you only wear such a fine golden baldric to suspend a sword of straw
from it? And Athos--I don't see Athos. Where is he?"

"Ill--"

"Very ill, say you? And of what malady?"

"It is feared that it may be the smallpox, sir," replied Porthos,
desirous of taking his turn in the conversation; "and what is serious is
that it will certainly spoil his face."

"The smallpox! That's a great story to tell me, Porthos! Sick of the
smallpox at his age! No, no; but wounded without doubt, killed, perhaps.
Ah, if I knew! S'blood! Messieurs Musketeers, I will not have this
haunting of bad places, this quarreling in the streets, this swordplay
at the crossways; and above all, I will not have occasion given for the
cardinal's Guards, who are brave, quiet, skillful men who never put
themselves in a position to be arrested, and who, besides, never allow
themselves to be arrested, to laugh at you! I am sure of it--they would
prefer dying on the spot to being arrested or taking back a step. To
save yourselves, to scamper away, to flee--that is good for the king's
Musketeers!"

Porthos and Aramis trembled with rage. They could willingly have
strangled M. de Treville, if, at the bottom of all this, they had not
felt it was the great love he bore them which made him speak thus. They
stamped upon the carpet with their feet; they bit their lips till the
blood came, and grasped the hilts of their swords with all their might.
All without had heard, as we have said, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis
called, and had guessed, from M. de Treville's tone of voice, that he
was very angry about something. Ten curious heads were glued to the
tapestry and became pale with fury; for their ears, closely applied to
the door, did not lose a syllable of what he said, while their mouths
repeated as he went on, the insulting expressions of the captain to all
the people in the antechamber. In an instant, from the door of the
cabinet to the street gate, the whole hotel was boiling.

"Ah! The king's Musketeers are arrested by the Guards of the cardinal,
are they?" continued M. de Treville, as furious at heart as his
soldiers, but emphasizing his words and plunging them, one by one, so to
say, like so many blows of a stiletto, into the bosoms of his auditors.
"What! Six of his Eminence's Guards arrest six of his Majesty's
Musketeers! MORBLEU! My part is taken! I will go straight to the louvre;
I will give in my resignation as captain of the king's Musketeers to
take a lieutenancy in the cardinal's Guards, and if he refuses me,
MORBLEU! I will turn abbe."

At these words, the murmur without became an explosion; nothing was to
be heard but oaths and blasphemies. The MORBLEUS, the SANG DIEUS, the
MORTS TOUTS LES DIABLES, crossed one another in the air. D'Artagnan
looked for some tapestry behind which he might hide himself, and felt an
immense inclination to crawl under the table.

"Well, my Captain," said Porthos, quite beside himself, "the truth is
that we were six against six. But we were not captured by fair means;
and before we had time to draw our swords, two of our party were dead,
and Athos, grievously wounded, was very little better. For you know
Athos. Well, Captain, he endeavored twice to get up, and fell again
twice. And we did not surrender--no! They dragged us away by force. On
the way we escaped. As for Athos, they believed him to be dead, and left
him very quiet on the field of battle, not thinking it worth the trouble
to carry him away. That's the whole story. What the devil, Captain, one
cannot win all one's battles! The great Pompey lost that of Pharsalia;
and Francis the First, who was, as I have heard say, as good as other
folks, nevertheless lost the Battle of Pavia."

"And I have the honor of assuring you that I killed one of them with his
own sword," said Aramis; "for mine was broken at the first parry. Killed
him, or poniarded him, sir, as is most agreeable to you."

"I did not know that," replied M. de Treville, in a somewhat softened
tone. "The cardinal exaggerated, as I perceive."

"But pray, sir," continued Aramis, who, seeing his captain become
appeased, ventured to risk a prayer, "do not say that Athos is wounded.
He would be in despair if that should come to the ears of the king; and
as the wound is very serious, seeing that after crossing the shoulder it
penetrates into the chest, it is to be feared--"

At this instant the tapestry was raised and a noble and handsome head,
but frightfully pale, appeared under the fringe.

"Athos!" cried the two Musketeers.

"Athos!" repeated M. de Treville himself.

"You have sent for me, sir," said Athos to M. de Treville, in a feeble
yet perfectly calm voice, "you have sent for me, as my comrades inform
me, and I have hastened to receive your orders. I am here; what do you
want with me?"

And at these words, the Musketeer, in irreproachable costume, belted as
usual, with a tolerably firm step, entered the cabinet. M. de Treville,
moved to the bottom of his heart by this proof of courage, sprang toward
him.

"I was about to say to these gentlemen," added he, "that I forbid my
Musketeers to expose their lives needlessly; for brave men are very dear
to the king, and the king knows that his Musketeers are the bravest on
the earth. Your hand, Athos!"

And without waiting for the answer of the newcomer to this proof of
affection, M. de Treville seized his right hand and pressed it with all
his might, without perceiving that Athos, whatever might be his
self-command, allowed a slight murmur of pain to escape him, and if
possible, grew paler than he was before.

The door had remained open, so strong was the excitement produced by the
arrival of Athos, whose wound, though kept as a secret, was known to
all. A burst of satisfaction hailed the last words of the captain; and
two or three heads, carried away by the enthusiasm of the moment,
appeared through the openings of the tapestry. M. de Treville was about
to reprehend this breach of the rules of etiquette, when he felt the
hand of Athos, who had rallied all his energies to contend against pain,
at length overcome by it, fell upon the floor as if he were dead.

"A surgeon!" cried M. de Treville, "mine! The king's! The best! A
surgeon! Or, s'blood, my brave Athos will die!"

At the cries of M. de Treville, the whole assemblage rushed into the
cabinet, he not thinking to shut the door against anyone, and all
crowded round the wounded man. But all this eager attention might have
been useless if the doctor so loudly called for had not chanced to be in
the hotel. He pushed through the crowd, approached Athos, still
insensible, and as all this noise and commotion inconvenienced him
greatly, he required, as the first and most urgent thing, that the
Musketeer should be carried into an adjoining chamber. Immediately M. de
Treville opened and pointed the way to Porthos and Aramis, who bore
their comrade in their arms. Behind this group walked the surgeon; and
behind the surgeon the door closed.

The cabinet of M. de Treville, generally held so sacred, became in an
instant the annex of the antechamber. Everyone spoke, harangued, and
vociferated, swearing, cursing, and consigning the cardinal and his
Guards to all the devils.

An instant after, Porthos and Aramis re-entered, the surgeon and M. de
Treville alone remaining with the wounded.

At length, M. de Treville himself returned. The injured man had
recovered his senses. The surgeon declared that the situation of the
Musketeer had nothing in it to render his friends uneasy, his weakness
having been purely and simply caused by loss of blood.

Then M. de Treville made a sign with his hand, and all retired except
d'Artagnan, who did not forget that he had an audience, and with the
tenacity of a Gascon remained in his place.

When all had gone out and the door was closed, M. de Treville, on
turning round, found himself alone with the young man. The event which
had occurred had in some degree broken the thread of his ideas. He
inquired what was the will of his persevering visitor. D'Artagnan then
repeated his name, and in an instant recovering all his remembrances of
the present and the past, M. de Treville grasped the situation.

"Pardon me," said he, smiling, "pardon me my dear compatriot, but I had
wholly forgotten you. But what help is there for it! A captain is
nothing but a father of a family, charged with even a greater
responsibility than the father of an ordinary family. Soldiers are big
children; but as I maintain that the orders of the king, and more
particularly the orders of the cardinal, should be executed--"

D'Artagnan could not restrain a smile. By this smile M. de Treville
judged that he had not to deal with a fool, and changing the
conversation, came straight to the point.

"I respected your father very much," said he. "What can I do for the
son? Tell me quickly; my time is not my own."

"Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "on quitting Tarbes and coming hither, it
was my intention to request of you, in remembrance of the friendship
which you have not forgotten, the uniform of a Musketeer; but after all
that I have seen during the last two hours, I comprehend that such a
favor is enormous, and tremble lest I should not merit it."

"It is indeed a favor, young man," replied M. de Treville, "but it may
not be so far beyond your hopes as you believe, or rather as you appear
to believe. But his majesty's decision is always necessary; and I inform
you with regret that no one becomes a Musketeer without the preliminary
ordeal of several campaigns, certain brilliant actions, or a service of
two years in some other regiment less favored than ours."

D'Artagnan bowed without replying, feeling his desire to don the
Musketeer's uniform vastly increased by the great difficulties which
preceded the attainment of it.

"But," continued M. de Treville, fixing upon his compatriot a look so
piercing that it might be said he wished to read the thoughts of his
heart, "on account of my old companion, your father, as I have said, I
will do something for you, young man. Our recruits from Bearn are not
generally very rich, and I have no reason to think matters have much
changed in this respect since I left the province. I dare say you have
not brought too large a stock of money with you?"

D'Artagnan drew himself up with a proud air which plainly said, "I ask
alms of no man."

"Oh, that's very well, young man," continued M. de Treville, "that's all
very well. I know these airs; I myself came to Paris with four crowns in
my purse, and would have fought with anyone who dared to tell me I was
not in a condition to purchase the Louvre."

D'Artagnan's bearing became still more imposing. Thanks to the sale of
his horse, he commenced his career with four more crowns than M. de
Treville possessed at the commencement of his.

"You ought, I say, then, to husband the means you have, however large
the sum may be; but you ought also to endeavor to perfect yourself in
the exercises becoming a gentleman. I will write a letter today to the
Director of the Royal Academy, and tomorrow he will admit you without
any expense to yourself. Do not refuse this little service. Our
best-born and richest gentlemen sometimes solicit it without being able
to obtain it. You will learn horsemanship, swordsmanship in all its
branches, and dancing. You will make some desirable acquaintances; and
from time to time you can call upon me, just to tell me how you are
getting on, and to say whether I can be of further service to you."

D'Artagnan, stranger as he was to all the manners of a court, could not
but perceive a little coldness in this reception.

"Alas, sir," said he, "I cannot but perceive how sadly I miss the letter
of introduction which my father gave me to present to you."

"I certainly am surprised," replied M. de Treville, "that you should
undertake so long a journey without that necessary passport, the sole
resource of us poor Bearnese."

"I had one, sir, and, thank God, such as I could wish," cried
d'Artagnan; "but it was perfidiously stolen from me."

He then related the adventure of Meung, described the unknown gentleman
with the greatest minuteness, and all with a warmth and truthfulness
that delighted M. de Treville.

"This is all very strange," said M. de Treville, after meditating a
minute; "you mentioned my name, then, aloud?"

"Yes, sir, I certainly committed that imprudence; but why should I have
done otherwise? A name like yours must be as a buckler to me on my way.
Judge if I should not put myself under its protection."

Flattery was at that period very current, and M. de Treville loved
incense as well as a king, or even a cardinal. He could not refrain from
a smile of visible satisfaction; but this smile soon disappeared, and
returning to the adventure of Meung, "Tell me," continued he, "had not
this gentlemen a slight scar on his cheek?"

"Yes, such a one as would be made by the grazing of a ball."

"Was he not a fine-looking man?"

"Yes."

"Of lofty stature."

"Yes."

"Of pale complexion and brown hair?"

"Yes, yes, that is he; how is it, sir, that you are acquainted with this
man? If I ever find him again--and I will find him, I swear, were it in
hell!"

"He was waiting for a woman," continued Treville.

"He departed immediately after having conversed for a minute with her
whom he awaited."

"You know not the subject of their conversation?"

"He gave her a box, told her not to open it except in London."

"Was this woman English?"

"He called her Milady."

"It is he; it must be he!" murmured Treville. "I believed him still at
Brussels."

"Oh, sir, if you know who this man is," cried d'Artagnan, "tell me who
he is, and whence he is. I will then release you from all your
promises--even that of procuring my admission into the Musketeers; for
before everything, I wish to avenge myself."

"Beware, young man!" cried Treville. "If you see him coming on one side
of the street, pass by on the other. Do not cast yourself against such a
rock; he would break you like glass."

"That will not prevent me," replied d'Artagnan, "if ever I find him."

"In the meantime," said Treville, "seek him not--if I have a right to
advise you."

All at once the captain stopped, as if struck by a sudden suspicion.
This great hatred which the young traveler manifested so loudly for this
man, who--a rather improbable thing--had stolen his father's letter from
him--was there not some perfidy concealed under this hatred? Might not
this young man be sent by his Eminence? Might he not have come for the
purpose of laying a snare for him? This pretended d'Artagnan--was he not
an emissary of the cardinal, whom the cardinal sought to introduce into
Treville's house, to place near him, to win his confidence, and
afterward to ruin him as had been done in a thousand other instances? He
fixed his eyes upon d'Artagnan even more earnestly than before. He was
moderately reassured, however, by the aspect of that countenance, full
of astute intelligence and affected humility. "I know he is a Gascon,"
reflected he, "but he may be one for the cardinal as well as for me. Let
us try him."

"My friend," said he, slowly, "I wish, as the son of an ancient
friend--for I consider this story of the lost letter perfectly true--I
wish, I say, in order to repair the coldness you may have remarked in my
reception of you, to discover to you the secrets of our policy. The king
and the cardinal are the best of friends; their apparent bickerings are
only feints to deceive fools. I am not willing that a compatriot, a
handsome cavalier, a brave youth, quite fit to make his way, should
become the dupe of all these artifices and fall into the snare after the
example of so many others who have been ruined by it. Be assured that I
am devoted to both these all-powerful masters, and that my earnest
endeavors have no other aim than the service of the king, and also the
cardinal--one of the most illustrious geniuses that France has ever
produced.

"Now, young man, regulate your conduct accordingly; and if you
entertain, whether from your family, your relations, or even from your
instincts, any of these enmities which we see constantly breaking out
against the cardinal, bid me adieu and let us separate. I will aid you
in many ways, but without attaching you to my person. I hope that my
frankness at least will make you my friend; for you are the only young
man to whom I have hitherto spoken as I have done to you."

Treville said to himself: "If the cardinal has set this young fox upon
me, he will certainly not have failed--he, who knows how bitterly I
execrate him--to tell his spy that the best means of making his court to
me is to rail at him. Therefore, in spite of all my protestations, if it
be as I suspect, my cunning gossip will assure me that he holds his
Eminence in horror."

It, however, proved otherwise. D'Artagnan answered, with the greatest
simplicity: "I came to Paris with exactly such intentions. My father
advised me to stoop to nobody but the king, the cardinal, and
yourself--whom he considered the first three personages in France."

D'Artagnan added M. de Treville to the others, as may be perceived; but
he thought this addition would do no harm.

"I have the greatest veneration for the cardinal," continued he, "and
the most profound respect for his actions. So much the better for me,
sir, if you speak to me, as you say, with frankness--for then you will
do me the honor to esteem the resemblance of our opinions; but if you
have entertained any doubt, as naturally you may, I feel that I am
ruining myself by speaking the truth. But I still trust you will not
esteem me the less for it, and that is my object beyond all others."

M de Treville was surprised to the greatest degree. So much penetration,
so much frankness, created admiration, but did not entirely remove his
suspicions. The more this young man was superior to others, the more he
was to be dreaded if he meant to deceive him. Nevertheless, he pressed
d'Artagnan's hand, and said to him: "You are an honest youth; but at the
present moment I can only do for you that which I just now offered. My
hotel will be always open to you. Hereafter, being able to ask for me at
all hours, and consequently to take advantage of all opportunities, you
will probably obtain that which you desire."

"That is to say," replied d'Artagnan, "that you will wait until I have
proved myself worthy of it. Well, be assured," added he, with the
familiarity of a Gascon, "you shall not wait long." And he bowed in
order to retire, and as if he considered the future in his own hands.

"But wait a minute," said M. de Treville, stopping him. "I promised you
a letter for the director of the Academy. Are you too proud to accept
it, young gentleman?"

"No, sir," said d'Artagnan; "and I will guard it so carefully that I
will be sworn it shall arrive at its address, and woe be to him who
shall attempt to take it from me!"

M de Treville smiled at this flourish; and leaving his young man
compatriot in the embrasure of the window, where they had talked
together, he seated himself at a table in order to write the promised
letter of recommendation. While he was doing this, d'Artagnan, having no
better employment, amused himself with beating a march upon the window
and with looking at the Musketeers, who went away, one after another,
following them with his eyes until they disappeared.

M de Treville, after having written the letter, sealed it, and rising,
approached the young man in order to give it to him. But at the very
moment when d'Artagnan stretched out his hand to receive it, M. de
Treville was highly astonished to see his protege make a sudden spring,
become crimson with passion, and rush from the cabinet crying, "S'blood,
he shall not escape me this time!"

"And who?" asked M. de Treville.

"He, my thief!" replied d'Artagnan. "Ah, the traitor!" and he
disappeared.

"The devil take the madman!" murmured M. de Treville, "unless," added
he, "this is a cunning mode of escaping, seeing that he had failed in
his purpose!"





4 THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THE HANDKERCHIEF OF ARAMIS


D'Artagnan, in a state of fury, crossed the antechamber at three bounds,
and was darting toward the stairs, which he reckoned upon descending
four at a time, when, in his heedless course, he ran head foremost
against a Musketeer who was coming out of one of M. de Treville's
private rooms, and striking his shoulder violently, made him utter a
cry, or rather a howl.

"Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, endeavoring to resume his course, "excuse
me, but I am in a hurry."

Scarcely had he descended the first stair, when a hand of iron seized
him by the belt and stopped him.

"You are in a hurry?" said the Musketeer, as pale as a sheet. "Under
that pretense you run against me! You say, 'Excuse me,' and you believe
that is sufficient? Not at all, my young man. Do you fancy because you
have heard Monsieur de Treville speak to us a little cavalierly today
that other people are to treat us as he speaks to us? Undeceive
yourself, comrade, you are not Monsieur de Treville."

"My faith!" replied d'Artagnan, recognizing Athos, who, after the
dressing performed by the doctor, was returning to his own apartment. "I
did not do it intentionally, and not doing it intentionally, I said
'Excuse me.' It appears to me that this is quite enough. I repeat to
you, however, and this time on my word of honor--I think perhaps too
often--that I am in haste, great haste. Leave your hold, then, I beg of
you, and let me go where my business calls me."

"Monsieur," said Athos, letting him go, "you are not polite; it is easy
to perceive that you come from a distance."

D'Artagnan had already strode down three or four stairs, but at Athos's
last remark he stopped short.

"MORBLEU, monsieur!" said he, "however far I may come, it is not you who
can give me a lesson in good manners, I warn you."

"Perhaps," said Athos.

"Ah! If I were not in such haste, and if I were not running after
someone," said d'Artagnan.

"Monsieur Man-in-a-hurry, you can find me without running--ME, you
understand?"

"And where, I pray you?"

"Near the Carmes-Deschaux."

"At what hour?"

"About noon."

"About noon? That will do; I will be there."

"Endeavor not to make me wait; for at quarter past twelve I will cut off
your ears as you run."

"Good!" cried d'Artagnan, "I will be there ten minutes before twelve."
And he set off running as if the devil possessed him, hoping that he
might yet find the stranger, whose slow pace could not have carried him
far.

But at the street gate, Porthos was talking with the soldier on guard.
Between the two talkers there was just enough room for a man to pass.
D'Artagnan thought it would suffice for him, and he sprang forward like
a dart between them. But d'Artagnan had reckoned without the wind. As he
was about to pass, the wind blew out Porthos's long cloak, and
d'Artagnan rushed straight into the middle of it. Without doubt, Porthos
had reasons for not abandoning this part of his vestments, for instead
of quitting his hold on the flap in his hand, he pulled it toward him,
so that d'Artagnan rolled himself up in the velvet by a movement of
rotation explained by the persistency of Porthos.

D'Artagnan, hearing the Musketeer swear, wished to escape from the
cloak, which blinded him, and sought to find his way from under the
folds of it. He was particularly anxious to avoid marring the freshness
of the magnificent baldric we are acquainted with; but on timidly
opening his eyes, he found himself with his nose fixed between the two
shoulders of Porthos--that is to say, exactly upon the baldric.

Alas, like most things in this world which have nothing in their favor
but appearances, the baldric was glittering with gold in the front, but
was nothing but simple buff behind. Vainglorious as he was, Porthos
could not afford to have a baldric wholly of gold, but had at least
half. One could comprehend the necessity of the cold and the urgency of
the cloak.

"Bless me!" cried Porthos, making strong efforts to disembarrass himself
of d'Artagnan, who was wriggling about his back; "you must be mad to run
against people in this manner."

"Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, reappearing under the shoulder of the
giant, "but I am in such haste--I was running after someone and--"

"And do you always forget your eyes when you run?" asked Porthos.

"No," replied d'Artagnan, piqued, "and thanks to my eyes, I can see what
other people cannot see."

Whether Porthos understood him or did not understand him, giving way to
his anger, "Monsieur," said he, "you stand a chance of getting chastised
if you rub Musketeers in this fashion."

"Chastised, Monsieur!" said d'Artagnan, "the expression is strong."

"It is one that becomes a man accustomed to look his enemies in the
face."

"Ah, PARDIEU! I know full well that you don't turn your back to yours."

And the young man, delighted with his joke, went away laughing loudly.

Porthos foamed with rage, and made a movement to rush after d'Artagnan.

"Presently, presently," cried the latter, "when you haven't your cloak
on."

"At one o'clock, then, behind the Luxembourg."

"Very well, at one o'clock, then," replied d'Artagnan, turning the angle
of the street.

But neither in the street he had passed through, nor in the one which
his eager glance pervaded, could he see anyone; however slowly the
stranger had walked, he was gone on his way, or perhaps had entered some
house. D'Artagnan inquired of everyone he met with, went down to the
ferry, came up again by the Rue de Seine, and the Red Cross; but
nothing, absolutely nothing! This chase was, however, advantageous to
him in one sense, for in proportion as the perspiration broke from his
forehead, his heart began to cool.

He began to reflect upon the events that had passed; they were numerous
and inauspicious. It was scarcely eleven o'clock in the morning, and yet
this morning had already brought him into disgrace with M. de Treville,
who could not fail to think the manner in which d'Artagnan had left him
a little cavalier.

Besides this, he had drawn upon himself two good duels with two men,
each capable of killing three d'Artagnans--with two Musketeers, in
short, with two of those beings whom he esteemed so greatly that he
placed them in his mind and heart above all other men.

The outlook was sad. Sure of being killed by Athos, it may easily be
understood that the young man was not very uneasy about Porthos. As
hope, however, is the last thing extinguished in the heart of man, he
finished by hoping that he might survive, even though with terrible
wounds, in both these duels; and in case of surviving, he made the
following reprehensions upon his own conduct:

"What a madcap I was, and what a stupid fellow I am! That brave and
unfortunate Athos was wounded on that very shoulder against which I must
run head foremost, like a ram. The only thing that astonishes me is that
he did not strike me dead at once. He had good cause to do so; the pain
I gave him must have been atrocious. As to Porthos--oh, as to Porthos,
faith, that's a droll affair!"

And in spite of himself, the young man began to laugh aloud, looking
round carefully, however, to see that his solitary laugh, without a
cause in the eyes of passers-by, offended no one.

"As to Porthos, that is certainly droll; but I am not the less a giddy
fool. Are people to be run against without warning? No! And have I any
right to go and peep under their cloaks to see what is not there? He
would have pardoned me, he would certainly have pardoned me, if I had
not said anything to him about that cursed baldric--in ambiguous words,
it is true, but rather drolly ambiguous. Ah, cursed Gascon that I am, I
get from one hobble into another. Friend d'Artagnan," continued he,
speaking to himself with all the amenity that he thought due himself,
"if you escape, of which there is not much chance, I would advise you to
practice perfect politeness for the future. You must henceforth be
admired and quoted as a model of it. To be obliging and polite does not
necessarily make a man a coward. Look at Aramis, now; Aramis is mildness
and grace personified. Well, did anybody ever dream of calling Aramis a
coward? No, certainly not, and from this moment I will endeavor to model
myself after him. Ah! That's strange! Here he is!"

D'Artagnan, walking and soliloquizing, had arrived within a few steps of
the hotel d'Arguillon and in front of that hotel perceived Aramis,
chatting gaily with three gentlemen; but as he had not forgotten that it
was in presence of this young man that M. de Treville had been so angry
in the morning, and as a witness of the rebuke the Musketeers had
received was not likely to be at all agreeable, he pretended not to see
him. D'Artagnan, on the contrary, quite full of his plans of
conciliation and courtesy, approached the young men with a profound bow,
accompanied by a most gracious smile. All four, besides, immediately
broke off their conversation.

D'Artagnan was not so dull as not to perceive that he was one too many;
but he was not sufficiently broken into the fashions of the gay world to
know how to extricate himself gallantly from a false position, like that
of a man who begins to mingle with people he is scarcely acquainted with
and in a conversation that does not concern him. He was seeking in his
mind, then, for the least awkward means of retreat, when he remarked
that Aramis had let his handkerchief fall, and by mistake, no doubt, had
placed his foot upon it. This appeared to be a favorable opportunity to
repair his intrusion. He stooped, and with the most gracious air he
could assume, drew the handkerchief from under the foot of the Musketeer
in spite of the efforts the latter made to detain it, and holding it out
to him, said, "I believe, monsieur, that this is a handkerchief you
would be sorry to lose?"

The handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered, and had a coronet and
arms at one of its corners. Aramis blushed excessively, and snatched
rather than took the handkerchief from the hand of the Gascon.

"Ah, ah!" cried one of the Guards, "will you persist in saying, most
discreet Aramis, that you are not on good terms with Madame de
Bois-Tracy, when that gracious lady has the kindness to lend you one of
her handkerchiefs?"

Aramis darted at d'Artagnan one of those looks which inform a man that
he has acquired a mortal enemy. Then, resuming his mild air, "You are
deceived, gentlemen," said he, "this handkerchief is not mine, and I
cannot fancy why Monsieur has taken it into his head to offer it to me
rather than to one of you; and as a proof of what I say, here is mine in
my pocket."

So saying, he pulled out his own handkerchief, likewise a very elegant
handkerchief, and of fine cambric--though cambric was dear at the
period--but a handkerchief without embroidery and without arms, only
ornamented with a single cipher, that of its proprietor.

This time d'Artagnan was not hasty. He perceived his mistake; but the
friends of Aramis were not at all convinced by his denial, and one of
them addressed the young Musketeer with affected seriousness. "If it
were as you pretend it is," said he, "I should be forced, my dear
Aramis, to reclaim it myself; for, as you very well know, Bois-Tracy is
an intimate friend of mine, and I cannot allow the property of his wife
to be sported as a trophy."

"You make the demand badly," replied Aramis; "and while acknowledging
the justice of your reclamation, I refuse it on account of the form."

"The fact is," hazarded d'Artagnan, timidly, "I did not see the
handkerchief fall from the pocket of Monsieur Aramis. He had his foot
upon it, that is all; and I thought from having his foot upon it the
handkerchief was his."

"And you were deceived, my dear sir," replied Aramis, coldly, very
little sensible to the reparation. Then turning toward that one of the
guards who had declared himself the friend of Bois-Tracy, "Besides,"
continued he, "I have reflected, my dear intimate of Bois-Tracy, that I
am not less tenderly his friend than you can possibly be; so that
decidedly this handkerchief is as likely to have fallen from your pocket
as mine."

"No, upon my honor!" cried his Majesty's Guardsman.

"You are about to swear upon your honor and I upon my word, and then it
will be pretty evident that one of us will have lied. Now, here,
Montaran, we will do better than that--let each take a half."

"Of the handkerchief?"

"Yes."

"Perfectly just," cried the other two Guardsmen, "the judgment of King
Solomon! Aramis, you certainly are full of wisdom!"

The young men burst into a laugh, and as may be supposed, the affair had
no other sequel. In a moment or two the conversation ceased, and the
three Guardsmen and the Musketeer, after having cordially shaken hands,
separated, the Guardsmen going one way and Aramis another.

"Now is my time to make peace with this gallant man," said d'Artagnan to
himself, having stood on one side during the whole of the latter part of
the conversation; and with this good feeling drawing near to Aramis, who
was departing without paying any attention to him, "Monsieur," said he,
"you will excuse me, I hope."

"Ah, monsieur," interrupted Aramis, "permit me to observe to you that
you have not acted in this affair as a gallant man ought."

"What, monsieur!" cried d'Artagnan, "and do you suppose--"

"I suppose, monsieur, that you are not a fool, and that you knew very
well, although coming from Gascony, that people do not tread upon
handkerchiefs without a reason. What the devil! Paris is not paved with
cambric!"

"Monsieur, you act wrongly in endeavoring to mortify me," said
d'Artagnan, in whom the natural quarrelsome spirit began to speak more
loudly than his pacific resolutions. "I am from Gascony, it is true; and
since you know it, there is no occasion to tell you that Gascons are not
very patient, so that when they have begged to be excused once, were it
even for a folly, they are convinced that they have done already at
least as much again as they ought to have done."

"Monsieur, what I say to you about the matter," said Aramis, "is not for
the sake of seeking a quarrel. Thank God, I am not a bravo! And being a
Musketeer but for a time, I only fight when I am forced to do so, and
always with great repugnance; but this time the affair is serious, for
here is a lady compromised by you."

"By US, you mean!" cried d'Artagnan.

"Why did you so maladroitly restore me the handkerchief?"

"Why did you so awkwardly let it fall?"

"I have said, monsieur, and I repeat, that the handkerchief did not fall
from my pocket."

"And thereby you have lied twice, monsieur, for I saw it fall."

"Ah, you take it with that tone, do you, Master Gascon? Well, I will
teach you how to behave yourself."

"And I will send you back to your Mass book, Master Abbe. Draw, if you
please, and instantly--"

"Not so, if you please, my good friend--not here, at least. Do you not
perceive that we are opposite the Hotel d'Arguillon, which is full of
the cardinal's creatures? How do I know that this is not his Eminence
who has honored you with the commission to procure my head? Now, I
entertain a ridiculous partiality for my head, it seems to suit my
shoulders so correctly. I wish to kill you, be at rest as to that, but
to kill you quietly in a snug, remote place, where you will not be able
to boast of your death to anybody."

"I agree, monsieur; but do not be too confident. Take your handkerchief;
whether it belongs to you or another, you may perhaps stand in need of
it."

"Monsieur is a Gascon?" asked Aramis.

"Yes. Monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence?"

"Prudence, monsieur, is a virtue sufficiently useless to Musketeers, I
know, but indispensable to churchmen; and as I am only a Musketeer
provisionally, I hold it good to be prudent. At two o'clock I shall have
the honor of expecting you at the hotel of Monsieur de Treville. There I
will indicate to you the best place and time."

The two young men bowed and separated, Aramis ascending the street which
led to the Luxembourg, while d'Artagnan, perceiving the appointed hour
was approaching, took the road to the Carmes-Deschaux, saying to
himself, "Decidedly I can't draw back; but at least, if I am killed, I
shall be killed by a Musketeer."





