8 CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE


In the meantime, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII, like all other
things of this world, after having had a beginning had an end, and after
this end our four companions began to be somewhat embarrassed. At first,
Athos supported the association for a time with his own means.

Porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearances to
which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wants of all for
a fortnight. At last it became Aramis's turn, who performed it with a
good grace and who succeeded--as he said, by selling some theological
books--in procuring a few pistoles.

Then, as they had been accustomed to do, they had recourse to M. de
Treville, who made some advances on their pay; but these advances could
not go far with three Musketeers who were already much in arrears and a
Guardsman who as yet had no pay at all.

At length when they found they were likely to be really in want, they
got together, as a last effort, eight or ten pistoles, with which
Porthos went to the gaming table. Unfortunately he was in a bad vein; he
lost all, together with twenty-five pistoles for which he had given his
word.

Then the inconvenience became distress. The hungry friends, followed by
their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guard rooms, picking up
among their friends abroad all the dinners they could meet with; for
according to the advice of Aramis, it was prudent to sow repasts right
and left in prosperity, in order to reap a few in time of need.

Athos was invited four times, and each time took his friends and their
lackeys with him. Porthos had six occasions, and contrived in the same
manner that his friends should partake of them; Aramis had eight of
them. He was a man, as must have been already perceived, who made but
little noise, and yet was much sought after.

As to d'Artagnan, who as yet knew nobody in the capital, he only found
one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his own province,
and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the Guards. He took his army
to the priest's, where they devoured as much provision as would have
lasted him for two months, and to the cornet's, who performed wonders;
but as Planchet said, "People do not eat at once for all time, even when
they eat a good deal."

D'Artagnan thus felt himself humiliated in having only procured one meal
and a half for his companions--as the breakfast at the priest's could
only be counted as half a repast--in return for the feasts which Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis had procured him. He fancied himself a burden to the
society, forgetting in his perfectly juvenile good faith that he had fed
this society for a month; and he set his mind actively to work. He
reflected that this coalition of four young, brave, enterprising, and
active men ought to have some other object than swaggering walks,
fencing lessons, and practical jokes, more or less witty.

In fact, four men such as they were--four men devoted to one another,
from their purses to their lives; four men always supporting one
another, never yielding, executing singly or together the resolutions
formed in common; four arms threatening the four cardinal points, or
turning toward a single point--must inevitably, either subterraneously,
in open day, by mining, in the trench, by cunning, or by force, open
themselves a way toward the object they wished to attain, however well
it might be defended, or however distant it may seem. The only thing
that astonished d'Artagnan was that his friends had never thought of
this.

He was thinking by himself, and even seriously racking his brain to find
a direction for this single force four times multiplied, with which he
did not doubt, as with the lever for which Archimedes sought, they
should succeed in moving the world, when someone tapped gently at his
door. D'Artagnan awakened Planchet and ordered him to open it.

From this phrase, "d'Artagnan awakened Planchet," the reader must not
suppose it was night, or that day was hardly come. No, it had just
struck four. Planchet, two hours before, had asked his master for some
dinner, and he had answered him with the proverb, "He who sleeps,
dines." And Planchet dined by sleeping.

A man was introduced of simple mien, who had the appearance of a
tradesman. Planchet, by way of dessert, would have liked to hear the
conversation; but the citizen declared to d'Artagnan that, what he had
to say being important and confidential, he desired to be left alone
with him.

D'Artagnan dismissed Planchet, and requested his visitor to be seated.
There was a moment of silence, during which the two men looked at each
other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance, after which d'Artagnan
bowed, as a sign that he listened.

"I have heard Monsieur d'Artagnan spoken of as a very brave young man,"
said the citizen; "and this reputation which he justly enjoys had
decided me to confide a secret to him."

"Speak, monsieur, speak," said d'Artagnan, who instinctively scented
something advantageous.

The citizen made a fresh pause and continued, "I have a wife who is
seamstress to the queen, monsieur, and who is not deficient in either
virtue or beauty. I was induced to marry her about three years ago,
although she had but very little dowry, because Monsieur Laporte, the
queen's cloak bearer, is her godfather, and befriends her."

"Well, monsieur?" asked d'Artagnan.

"Well!" resumed the citizen, "well, monsieur, my wife was abducted
yesterday morning, as she was coming out of her workroom."

"And by whom was your wife abducted?"

"I know nothing surely, monsieur, but I suspect someone."

"And who is the person whom you suspect?"

"A man who has pursued her a long time."

"The devil!"

"But allow me to tell you, monsieur," continued the citizen, "that I am
convinced that there is less love than politics in all this."

"Less love than politics," replied d'Artagnan, with a reflective air;
"and what do you suspect?"

"I do not know whether I ought to tell you what I suspect."

"Monsieur, I beg you to observe that I ask you absolutely nothing. It is
you who have come to me. It is you who have told me that you had a
secret to confide in me. Act, then, as you think proper; there is still
time to withdraw."

"No, monsieur, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and I will have
confidence in you. I believe, then, that it is not on account of any
intrigues of her own that my wife has been arrested, but because of
those of a lady much greater than herself."

"Ah, ah! Can it be on account of the amours of Madame de Bois-Tracy?"
said d'Artagnan, wishing to have the air, in the eyes of the citizen, of
being posted as to court affairs.

"Higher, monsieur, higher."

"Of Madame d'Aiguillon?"

"Still higher."

"Of Madame de Chevreuse?"

"Of the--" d'Artagnan checked himself.

"Yes, monsieur," replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so low that he
was scarcely audible.

"And with whom?"

"With whom can it be, if not the Duke of--"

"The Duke of--"

"Yes, monsieur," replied the citizen, giving a still fainter intonation
to his voice.

"But how do you know all this?"

"How do I know it?"

"Yes, how do you know it? No half-confidence, or--you understand!"

"I know it from my wife, monsieur--from my wife herself."

"Who learns it from whom?"

"From Monsieur Laporte. Did I not tell you that she was the goddaughter
of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of the queen? Well, Monsieur
Laporte placed her near her Majesty in order that our poor queen might
at least have someone in whom she could place confidence, abandoned as
she is by the king, watched as she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she
is by everybody."

"Ah, ah! It begins to develop itself," said d'Artagnan.

"Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur. One of her conditions
was that she should come and see me twice a week; for, as I had the
honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly--my wife, then, came and
confided to me that the queen at that very moment entertained great
fears."

"Truly!"

"Yes. The cardinal, as it appears, pursues her and persecutes her more
than ever. He cannot pardon her the history of the Saraband. You know
the history of the Saraband?"

"PARDIEU! Know it!" replied d'Artagnan, who knew nothing about it, but
who wished to appear to know everything that was going on.

"So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance."

"Indeed!"

"And the queen believes--"

"Well, what does the queen believe?"

"She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckingham in her
name."

"In the queen's name?"

"Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, to draw
him into some snare."

"The devil! But your wife, monsieur, what has she to do with all this?"

"Her devotion to the queen is known; and they wish either to remove her
from her mistress, or to intimidate her, in order to obtain her
Majesty's secrets, or to seduce her and make use of her as a spy."

"That is likely," said d'Artagnan; "but the man who has abducted her--do
you know him?"

"I have told you that I believe I know him."

"His name?"

"I do not know that; what I do know is that he is a creature of the
cardinal, his evil genius."

"But you have seen him?"

"Yes, my wife pointed him out to me one day."

"Has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognize him?"

"Oh, certainly; he is a noble of very lofty carriage, black hair,
swarthy complexion, piercing eye, white teeth, and has a scar on his
temple."

"A scar on his temple!" cried d'Artagnan; "and with that, white teeth, a
piercing eye, dark complexion, black hair, and haughty carriage--why,
that's my man of Meung."

"He is your man, do you say?"

"Yes, yes; but that has nothing to do with it. No, I am wrong. On the
contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly. If your man is mine, with
one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that's all; but where to find this
man?"

"I know not."

"Have you no information as to his abiding place?"

"None. One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre, he was
coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me."

"The devil! The devil!" murmured d'Artagnan; "all this is vague enough.
From whom have you learned of the abduction of your wife?"

"From Monsieur Laporte."

"Did he give you any details?"

"He knew none himself."

"And you have learned nothing from any other quarter?"

"Yes, I have received--"

"What?"

"I fear I am committing a great imprudence."

"You always come back to that; but I must make you see this time that it
is too late to retreat."

"I do not retreat, MORDIEU!" cried the citizen, swearing in order to
rouse his courage. "Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux--"

"You call yourself Bonacieux?" interrupted d'Artagnan.

"Yes, that is my name."

"You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux. Pardon me for interrupting
you, but it appears to me that that name is familiar to me."

"Possibly, monsieur. I am your landlord."

"Ah, ah!" said d'Artagnan, half rising and bowing; "you are my
landlord?"

"Yes, monsieur, yes. And as it is three months since you have been here,
and though, distracted as you must be in your important occupations, you
have forgotten to pay me my rent--as, I say, I have not tormented you a
single instant, I thought you would appreciate my delicacy."

"How can it be otherwise, my dear Bonacieux?" replied d'Artagnan; "trust
me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, and if, as I told
you, I can be of any service to you--"

"I believe you, monsieur, I believe you; and as I was about to say, by
the word of Bonacieux, I have confidence in you."

"Finish, then, what you were about to say."

The citizen took a paper from his pocket, and presented it to
d'Artagnan.

"A letter?" said the young man.

"Which I received this morning."

D'Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he
approached the window to read it. The citizen followed him.

"'Do not seek your wife,'" read d'Artagnan; "'she will be restored to
you when there is no longer occasion for her. If you make a single step
to find her you are lost.'

"That's pretty positive," continued d'Artagnan; "but after all, it is
but a menace."

"Yes; but that menace terrifies me. I am not a fighting man at all,
monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille."

"Hum!" said d'Artagnan. "I have no greater regard for the Bastille than
you. If it were nothing but a sword thrust, why then--"

"I have counted upon you on this occasion, monsieur."

"Yes?"

"Seeing you constantly surrounded by Musketeers of a very superb
appearance, and knowing that these Musketeers belong to Monsieur de
Treville, and were consequently enemies of the cardinal, I thought that
you and your friends, while rendering justice to your poor queen, would
be pleased to play his Eminence an ill turn."

"Without doubt."

"And then I have thought that considering three months' lodging, about
which I have said nothing--"

"Yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and I find it
excellent."

"Reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor to remain
in my house I shall never speak to you about rent--"

"Very kind!"

"And adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer you fifty
pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be short at the
present moment."

"Admirable! You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?"

"I am comfortably off, monsieur, that's all; I have scraped together
some such things as an income of two or three thousand crowns in the
haberdashery business, but more particularly in venturing some funds in
the last voyage of the celebrated navigator Jean Moquet; so that you
understand, monsieur--But!--" cried the citizen.

"What!" demanded d'Artagnan.

"Whom do I see yonder?"

"Where?"

"In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that door--a man
wrapped in a cloak."

"It is he!" cried d'Artagnan and the citizen at the same time, each
having recognized his man.

"Ah, this time," cried d'Artagnan, springing to his sword, "this time he
will not escape me!"

Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of the apartment. On
the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who were coming to see him. They
separated, and d'Artagnan rushed between them like a dart.

"Pah! Where are you going?" cried the two Musketeers in a breath.

"The man of Meung!" replied d'Artagnan, and disappeared.

D'Artagnan had more than once related to his friends his adventure with
the stranger, as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner, to
whom this man had confided some important missive.

The opinion of Athos was that d'Artagnan had lost his letter in the
skirmish. A gentleman, in his opinion--and according to d'Artagnan's
portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman--would be incapable of
the baseness of stealing a letter.

Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by a lady to a
cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had been disturbed by the
presence of d'Artagnan and his yellow horse.

Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, it was
better not to fathom them.

They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from d'Artagnan,
what affair was in hand, and as they thought that overtaking his man, or
losing sight of him, d'Artagnan would return to his rooms, they kept on
their way.

When they entered d'Artagnan's chamber, it was empty; the landlord,
dreading the consequences of the encounter which was doubtless about to
take place between the young man and the stranger, had, consistent with
the character he had given himself, judged it prudent to decamp.





9 D'ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF


As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a half hour,
d'Artagnan returned. He had again missed his man, who had disappeared as
if by enchantment. D'Artagnan had run, sword in hand, through all the
neighboring streets, but had found nobody resembling the man he sought
for. Then he came back to the point where, perhaps, he ought to have
begun, and that was to knock at the door against which the stranger had
leaned; but this proved useless--for though he knocked ten or twelve
times in succession, no one answered, and some of the neighbors, who put
their noses out of their windows or were brought to their doors by the
noise, had assured him that that house, all the openings of which were
tightly closed, had not been inhabited for six months.

While d'Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at doors,
Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning home d'Artagnan
found the reunion complete.

"Well!" cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeing d'Artagnan
enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his countenance upset
with anger.

"Well!" cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, "this man must be the
devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom, like a shade, like a
specter."

"Do you believe in apparitions?" asked Athos of Porthos.

"I never believe in anything I have not seen, and as I never have seen
apparitions, I don't believe in them."

"The Bible," said Aramis, "makes our belief in them a law; the ghost of
Samuel appeared to Saul, and it is an article of faith that I should be
very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon, Porthos."

"At all events, man or devil, body or shadow, illusion or reality, this
man is born for my damnation; for his flight has caused us to miss a
glorious affair, gentlemen--an affair by which there were a hundred
pistoles, and perhaps more, to be gained."

"How is that?" cried Porthos and Aramis in a breath.

As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented himself
with interrogating d'Artagnan by a look.

"Planchet," said d'Artagnan to his domestic, who just then insinuated
his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of
the conversation, "go down to my landlord, Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask
him to send me half a dozen bottles of Beaugency wine; I prefer that."

"Ah, ah! You have credit with your landlord, then?" asked Porthos.

"Yes," replied d'Artagnan, "from this very day; and mind, if the wine is
bad, we will send him to find better."

"We must use, and not abuse," said Aramis, sententiously.

"I always said that d'Artagnan had the longest head of the four," said
Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which d'Artagnan replied with
a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence.

"But come, what is this about?" asked Porthos.

"Yes," said Aramis, "impart it to us, my dear friend, unless the honor
of any lady be hazarded by this confidence; in that case you would do
better to keep it to yourself."

"Be satisfied," replied d'Artagnan; "the honor of no one will have cause
to complain of what I have to tell."

He then related to his friends, word for word, all that had passed
between him and his host, and how the man who had abducted the wife of
his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had had the difference at
the hostelry of the Jolly Miller.

"Your affair is not bad," said Athos, after having tasted like a
connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine
good; "and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man. Then
there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty pistoles
are worth the risk of four heads."

"But observe," cried d'Artagnan, "that there is a woman in the affair--a
woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened, tortured
perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her mistress."

"Beware, d'Artagnan, beware," said Aramis. "You grow a little too warm,
in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux. Woman was created for
our destruction, and it is from her we inherit all our miseries."

At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and he bit
his lips.

"It is not Madame Bonacieux about whom I am anxious," cried d'Artagnan,
"but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom the cardinal persecutes,
and who sees the heads of all her friends fall, one after the other."

"Why does she love what we hate most in the world, the Spaniards and the
English?"

"Spain is her country," replied d'Artagnan; "and it is very natural that
she should love the Spanish, who are the children of the same soil as
herself. As to the second reproach, I have heard it said that she does
not love the English, but an Englishman."

"Well, and by my faith," said Athos, "it must be acknowledged that this
Englishman is worthy of being loved. I never saw a man with a nobler air
than his."

"Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can," said Porthos. "I
was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered his pearls; and, PARDIEU,
I picked up two that I sold for ten pistoles each. Do you know him,
Aramis?"

"As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seized him in
the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, the queen's equerry,
introduced me. I was at school at the time, and the adventure appeared
to me to be cruel for the king."

"Which would not prevent me," said d'Artagnan, "if I knew where the Duke
of Buckingham was, from taking him by the hand and conducting him to the
queen, were it only to enrage the cardinal, and if we could find means
to play him a sharp turn, I vow that I would voluntarily risk my head in
doing it."

"And did the mercer*," rejoined Athos, "tell you, d'Artagnan, that the
queen thought that Buckingham had been brought over by a forged letter?"

    _*Haberdasher_

"She is afraid so."

"Wait a minute, then," said Aramis.

"What for?" demanded Porthos.

"Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances."

"And now I am convinced," said d'Artagnan, "that this abduction of the
queen's woman is connected with the events of which we are speaking, and
perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris."

"The Gascon is full of ideas," said Porthos, with admiration.

"I like to hear him talk," said Athos; "his dialect amuses me."

"Gentlemen," cried Aramis, "listen to this."

"Listen to Aramis," said his three friends.

"Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom I sometimes
consult about my studies."

Athos smiled.

"He resides in a quiet quarter," continued Aramis; "his tastes and his
profession require it. Now, at the moment when I left his house--"

Here Aramis paused.

"Well," cried his auditors; "at the moment you left his house?"

Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who, in the
full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped by some unforeseen
obstacle; but the eyes of his three companions were fixed upon him,
their ears were wide open, and there were no means of retreat.

"This doctor has a niece," continued Aramis.

"Ah, he has a niece!" interrupted Porthos.

"A very respectable lady," said Aramis.

The three friends burst into laughter.

"Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me," replied Aramis, "you shall know
nothing."

"We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones," said
Athos.

"I will continue, then," resumed Aramis. "This niece comes sometimes to
see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that I
was, and it was my duty to offer to conduct her to her carriage."

"Ah! She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?" interrupted
Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness of tongue. "A nice
acquaintance, my friend!"

"Porthos," replied Aramis, "I have had the occasion to observe to you
more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that is injurious to
you among the women."

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," cried d'Artagnan, who began to get a glimpse of
the result of the adventure, "the thing is serious. Let us try not to
jest, if we can. Go on Aramis, go on."

"All at once, a tall, dark gentleman--just like yours, d'Artagnan."

"The same, perhaps," said he.

"Possibly," continued Aramis, "came toward me, accompanied by five or
six men who followed about ten paces behind him; and in the politest
tone, 'Monsieur Duke,' said he to me, 'and you madame,' continued he,
addressing the lady on my arm--"

"The doctor's niece?"

"Hold your tongue, Porthos," said Athos; "you are insupportable."

"'--will you enter this carriage, and that without offering the least
resistance, without making the least noise?'"

"He took you for Buckingham!" cried d'Artagnan.

"I believe so," replied Aramis.

"But the lady?" asked Porthos.

"He took her for the queen!" said d'Artagnan.

"Just so," replied Aramis.

"The Gascon is the devil!" cried Athos; "nothing escapes him."

"The fact is," said Porthos, "Aramis is of the same height, and
something of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appears to me
that the dress of a Musketeer--"

"I wore an enormous cloak," said Aramis.

"In the month of July? The devil!" said Porthos. "Is the doctor afraid
that you may be recognized?"

"I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the person; but
the face--"

"I had a large hat," said Aramis.

"Oh, good lord," cried Porthos, "what precautions for the study of
theology!"

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "do not let us lose our time in
jesting. Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer's wife--that is the
key of the intrigue."

"A woman of such inferior condition! Can you believe so?" said Porthos,
protruding his lips with contempt.

"She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of the queen.
Have I not told you so, gentlemen? Besides, it has perhaps been her
Majesty's calculation to seek on this occasion for support so lowly.
High heads expose themselves from afar, and the cardinal is
longsighted."

"Well," said Porthos, "in the first place make a bargain with the
mercer, and a good bargain."

"That's useless," said d'Artagnan; "for I believe if he does not pay us,
we shall be well enough paid by another party."

At this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon the stairs;
the door was thrown violently open, and the unfortunate mercer rushed
into the chamber in which the council was held.

"Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!" cried he. "There
are four men come to arrest me. Save me! Save me!"

Porthos and Aramis arose.

"A moment," cried d'Artagnan, making them a sign to replace in the
scabbard their half-drawn swords. "It is not courage that is needed; it
is prudence."

"And yet," cried Porthos, "we will not leave--"

"You will leave d'Artagnan to act as he thinks proper," said Athos. "He
has, I repeat, the longest head of the four, and for my part I declare
that I will obey him. Do as you think best, d'Artagnan."

At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of the antechamber,
but seeing four Musketeers standing, and their swords by their sides,
they hesitated about going farther.

"Come in, gentlemen, come in," called d'Artagnan; "you are here in my
apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king and cardinal."

"Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we have
received?" asked one who appeared to be the leader of the party.

"On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it were necessary."

"What does he say?" grumbled Porthos.

"You are a simpleton," said Athos. "Silence!"

"But you promised me--" whispered the poor mercer.

"We can only save you by being free ourselves," replied d'Artagnan, in a
rapid, low tone; "and if we appear inclined to defend you, they will
arrest us with you."

"It seems, nevertheless--"

"Come, gentlemen, come!" said d'Artagnan, aloud; "I have no motive for
defending Monsieur. I saw him today for the first time, and he can tell
you on what occasion; he came to demand the rent of my lodging. Is that
not true, Monsieur Bonacieux? Answer!"

"That is the very truth," cried the mercer; "but Monsieur does not tell
you--"

"Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my friends;
silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin everybody without
saving yourself! Come, come, gentlemen, remove the fellow." And
d'Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer among the Guards, saying to
him, "You are a shabby old fellow, my dear. You come to demand money of
me--of a Musketeer! To prison with him! Gentlemen, once more, take him
to prison, and keep him under key as long as possible; that will give me
time to pay him."

The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey. As they were
going down d'Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of their leader.

"May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?" said d'Artagnan,
filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which he had obtained from
the liberality of M. Bonacieux.

"That will do me great honor," said the leader of the posse, "and I
accept thankfully."

"Then to yours, monsieur--what is your name?"

"Boisrenard."

"Monsieur Boisrenard."

"To yours, my gentlemen! What is your name, in your turn, if you
please?"

"d'Artagnan."

"To yours, monsieur."

"And above all others," cried d'Artagnan, as if carried away by his
enthusiasm, "to that of the king and the cardinal."

The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of
d'Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good, and he was
convinced.

"What diabolical villainy you have performed here," said Porthos, when
the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found
themselves alone. "Shame, shame, for four Musketeers to allow an
unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst! And
a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!"

"Porthos," said Aramis, "Athos has already told you that you are a
simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion. D'Artagnan, you are a great
man; and when you occupy Monsieur de Treville's place, I will come and
ask your influence to secure me an abbey."

"Well, I am in a maze," said Porthos; "do YOU approve of what d'Artagnan
has done?"

"PARBLEU! Indeed I do," said Athos; "I not only approve of what he has
done, but I congratulate him upon it."

"And now, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, without stopping to explain his
conduct to Porthos, "All for one, one for all--that is our motto, is it
not?"

"And yet--" said Porthos.

"Hold out your hand and swear!" cried Athos and Aramis at once.

Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthos
stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one voice the
formula dictated by d'Artagnan:

"All for one, one for all."

"That's well! Now let us everyone retire to his own home," said
d'Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life; "and
attention! For from this moment we are at feud with the cardinal."





