20 THE JOURNEY


At two o'clock in the morning, our four adventurers left Paris by the
Barriere St. Denis. As long as it was dark they remained silent; in
spite of themselves they submitted to the influence of the obscurity,
and apprehended ambushes on every side.

With the first rays of day their tongues were loosened; with the sun
gaiety revived. It was like the eve of a battle; the heart beat, the
eyes laughed, and they felt that the life they were perhaps going to
lose, was, after all, a good thing.

Besides, the appearance of the caravan was formidable. The black horses
of the Musketeers, their martial carriage, with the regimental step of
these noble companions of the soldier, would have betrayed the most
strict incognito. The lackeys followed, armed to the teeth.

All went well till they arrived at Chantilly, which they reached about
eight o'clock in the morning. They needed breakfast, and alighted at the
door of an AUBERGE, recommended by a sign representing St. Martin giving
half his cloak to a poor man. They ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle
the horses, and to hold themselves in readiness to set off again
immediately.

They entered the common hall, and placed themselves at table. A
gentleman, who had just arrived by the route of Dammartin, was seated at
the same table, and was breakfasting. He opened the conversation about
rain and fine weather; the travelers replied. He drank to their good
health, and the travelers returned his politeness.

But at the moment Mousqueton came to announce that the horses were
ready, and they were arising from table, the stranger proposed to
Porthos to drink the health of the cardinal. Porthos replied that he
asked no better if the stranger, in his turn, would drink the health of
the king. The stranger cried that he acknowledged no other king but his
Eminence. Porthos called him drunk, and the stranger drew his sword.

"You have committed a piece of folly," said Athos, "but it can't be
helped; there is no drawing back. Kill the fellow, and rejoin us as soon
as you can."

All three remounted their horses, and set out at a good pace, while
Porthos was promising his adversary to perforate him with all the
thrusts known in the fencing schools.

"There goes one!" cried Athos, at the end of five hundred paces.

"But why did that man attack Porthos rather than any other one of us?"
asked Aramis.

"Because, as Porthos was talking louder than the rest of us, he took him
for the chief," said d'Artagnan.

"I always said that this cadet from Gascony was a well of wisdom,"
murmured Athos; and the travelers continued their route.

At Beauvais they stopped two hours, as well to breathe their horses a
little as to wait for Porthos. At the end of two hours, as Porthos did
not come, not any news of him, they resumed their journey.

At a league from Beauvais, where the road was confined between two high
banks, they fell in with eight or ten men who, taking advantage of the
road being unpaved in this spot, appeared to be employed in digging
holes and filling up the ruts with mud.

Aramis, not liking to soil his boots with this artificial mortar,
apostrophized them rather sharply. Athos wished to restrain him, but it
was too late. The laborers began to jeer the travelers and by their
insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the cool Athos, who urged on
his horse against one of them.

Then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch, from which each
took a concealed musket; the result was that our seven travelers were
outnumbered in weapons. Aramis received a ball which passed through his
shoulder, and Mousqueton another ball which lodged in the fleshy part
which prolongs the lower portion of the loins. Therefore Mousqueton
alone fell from his horse, not because he was severely wounded, but not
being able to see the wound, he judged it to be more serious than it
really was.

"It was an ambuscade!" shouted d'Artagnan. "Don't waste a charge!
Forward!"

Aramis, wounded as he was, seized the mane of his horse, which carried
him on with the others. Mousqueton's horse rejoined them, and galloped
by the side of his companions.

"That will serve us for a relay," said Athos.

"I would rather have had a hat," said d'Artagnan. "Mine was carried away
by a ball. By my faith, it is very fortunate that the letter was not in
it."

"They'll kill poor Porthos when he comes up," said Aramis.

"If Porthos were on his legs, he would have rejoined us by this time,"
said Athos. "My opinion is that on the ground the drunken man was not
intoxicated."

They continued at their best speed for two hours, although the horses
were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soon refuse
service.

The travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they might meet
with less interruption; but at Crevecoeur, Aramis declared he could
proceed no farther. In fact, it required all the courage which he
concealed beneath his elegant form and polished manners to bear him so
far. He grew more pale every minute, and they were obliged to support
him on his horse. They lifted him off at the door of a cabaret, left
Bazin with him, who, besides, in a skirmish was more embarrassing than
useful, and set forward again in the hope of sleeping at Amiens.

"MORBLEU," said Athos, as soon as they were again in motion, "reduced to
two masters and Grimaud and Planchet! MORBLEU! I won't be their dupe, I
will answer for it. I will neither open my mouth nor draw my sword
between this and Calais. I swear by--"

"Don't waste time in swearing," said d'Artagnan; "let us gallop, if our
horses will consent."

And the travelers buried their rowels in their horses' flanks, who thus
vigorously stimulated recovered their energies. They arrived at Amiens
at midnight, and alighted at the AUBERGE of the Golden Lily.

The host had the appearance of as honest a man as any on earth. He
received the travelers with his candlestick in one hand and his cotton
nightcap in the other. He wished to lodge the two travelers each in a
charming chamber; but unfortunately these charming chambers were at the
opposite extremities of the hotel. D'Artagnan and Athos refused them.
The host replied that he had no other worthy of their Excellencies; but
the travelers declared they would sleep in the common chamber, each on a
mattress which might be thrown upon the ground. The host insisted; but
the travelers were firm, and he was obliged to do as they wished.

They had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door within, when
someone knocked at the yard shutter; they demanded who was there, and
recognizing the voices of their lackeys, opened the shutter. It was
indeed Planchet and Grimaud.

"Grimaud can take care of the horses," said Planchet. "If you are
willing, gentlemen, I will sleep across your doorway, and you will then
be certain that nobody can reach you."

"And on what will you sleep?" said d'Artagnan.

"Here is my bed," replied Planchet, producing a bundle of straw.

"Come, then," said d'Artagnan, "you are right. Mine host's face does not
please me at all; it is too gracious."

"Nor me either," said Athos.

Planchet mounted by the window and installed himself across the doorway,
while Grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable, undertaking that
by five o'clock in the morning he and the four horses should be ready.

The night was quiet enough. Toward two o'clock in the morning somebody
endeavored to open the door; but as Planchet awoke in an instant and
cried, "Who goes there?" somebody replied that he was mistaken, and went
away.

At four o'clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in the
stables. Grimaud had tried to waken the stable boys, and the stable boys
had beaten him. When they opened the window, they saw the poor lad lying
senseless, with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork.

Planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle the horses; but
the horses were all used up. Mousqueton's horse which had traveled for
five or six hours without a rider the day before, might have been able
to pursue the journey; but by an inconceivable error the veterinary
surgeon, who had been sent for, as it appeared, to bleed one of the
host's horses, had bled Mousqueton's.

This began to be annoying. All these successive accidents were perhaps
the result of chance; but they might be the fruits of a plot. Athos and
d'Artagnan went out, while Planchet was sent to inquire if there were
not three horses for sale in the neighborhood. At the door stood two
horses, fresh, strong, and fully equipped. These would just have suited
them. He asked where their masters were, and was informed that they had
passed the night in the inn, and were then settling their bill with the
host.

Athos went down to pay the reckoning, while d'Artagnan and Planchet
stood at the street door. The host was in a lower and back room, to
which Athos was requested to go.

Athos entered without the least mistrust, and took out two pistoles to
pay the bill. The host was alone, seated before his desk, one of the
drawers of which was partly open. He took the money which Athos offered
to him, and after turning and turning it over and over in his hands,
suddenly cried out that it was bad, and that he would have him and his
companions arrested as forgers.

"You blackguard!" cried Athos, going toward him, "I'll cut your ears
off!"

At the same instant, four men, armed to the teeth, entered by side
doors, and rushed upon Athos.

"I am taken!" shouted Athos, with all the power of his lungs. "Go on,
d'Artagnan! Spur, spur!" and he fired two pistols.

D'Artagnan and Planchet did not require twice bidding; they unfastened
the two horses that were waiting at the door, leaped upon them, buried
their spurs in their sides, and set off at full gallop.

"Do you know what has become of Athos?" asked d'Artagnan of Planchet, as
they galloped on.

"Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, "I saw one fall at each of his two shots,
and he appeared to me, through the glass door, to be fighting with his
sword with the others."

"Brave Athos!" murmured d'Artagnan, "and to think that we are compelled
to leave him; maybe the same fate awaits us two paces hence. Forward,
Planchet, forward! You are a brave fellow."

"As I told you, monsieur," replied Planchet, "Picards are found out by
being used. Besides, I am here in my own country, and that excites me."

And both, with free use of the spur, arrived at St. Omer without drawing
bit. At St. Omer they breathed their horses with the bridles passed
under their arms for fear of accident, and ate a morsel from their hands
on the stones of the street, after they departed again.

At a hundred paces from the gates of Calais, d'Artagnan's horse gave
out, and could not by any means be made to get up again, the blood
flowing from his eyes and his nose. There still remained Planchet's
horse; but he stopped short, and could not be made to move a step.

Fortunately, as we have said, they were within a hundred paces of the
city; they left their two nags upon the high road, and ran toward the
quay. Planchet called his master's attention to a gentleman who had just
arrived with his lackey, and only preceded them by about fifty paces.
They made all speed to come up to this gentleman, who appeared to be in
great haste. His boots were covered with dust, and he inquired if he
could not instantly cross over to England.

"Nothing would be more easy," said the captain of a vessel ready to set
sail, "but this morning came an order to let no one leave without
express permission from the cardinal."

"I have that permission," said the gentleman, drawing the paper from his
pocket; "here it is."

"Have it examined by the governor of the port," said the shipmaster,
"and give me the preference."

"Where shall I find the governor?"

"At his country house."

"And that is situated?"

"At a quarter of a league from the city. Look, you may see it from
here--at the foot of that little hill, that slated roof."

"Very well," said the gentleman. And, with his lackey, he took the road
to the governor's country house.

D'Artagnan and Planchet followed the gentleman at a distance of five
hundred paces. Once outside the city, d'Artagnan overtook the gentleman
as he was entering a little wood.

"Monsieur, you appear to be in great haste?"

"No one can be more so, monsieur."

"I am sorry for that," said d'Artagnan; "for as I am in great haste
likewise, I wish to beg you to render me a service."

"What?"

"To let me sail first."

"That's impossible," said the gentleman; "I have traveled sixty leagues
in forty hours, and by tomorrow at midday I must be in London."

"I have performed that same distance in forty hours, and by ten o'clock
in the morning I must be in London."

"Very sorry, monsieur; but I was here first, and will not sail second."

"I am sorry, too, monsieur; but I arrived second, and must sail first."

"The king's service!" said the gentleman.

"My own service!" said d'Artagnan.

"But this is a needless quarrel you seek with me, as it seems to me."

"PARBLEU! What do you desire it to be?"

"What do you want?"

"Would you like to know?"

"Certainly."

"Well, then, I wish that order of which you are bearer, seeing that I
have not one of my own and must have one."

"You jest, I presume."

"I never jest."

"Let me pass!"

"You shall not pass."

"My brave young man, I will blow out your brains. HOLA, Lubin, my
pistols!"

"Planchet," called out d'Artagnan, "take care of the lackey; I will
manage the master."

Planchet, emboldened by the first exploit, sprang upon Lubin; and being
strong and vigorous, he soon got him on the broad of his back, and
placed his knee upon his breast.

"Go on with your affair, monsieur," cried Planchet; "I have finished
mine."

Seeing this, the gentleman drew his sword, and sprang upon d'Artagnan;
but he had too strong an adversary. In three seconds d'Artagnan had
wounded him three times, exclaiming at each thrust, "One for Athos, one
for Porthos; and one for Aramis!"

At the third hit the gentleman fell like a log. D'Artagnan believed him
to be dead, or at least insensible, and went toward him for the purpose
of taking the order; but the moment he extended his hand to search for
it, the wounded man, who had not dropped his sword, plunged the point
into d'Artagnan's breast, crying, "One for you!"

"And one for me--the best for last!" cried d'Artagnan, furious, nailing
him to the earth with a fourth thrust through his body.

This time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted. D'Artagnan searched
his pockets, and took from one of them the order for the passage. It was
in the name of Comte de Wardes.

Then, casting a glance on the handsome young man, who was scarcely
twenty-five years of age, and whom he was leaving in his gore, deprived
of sense and perhaps dead, he gave a sigh for that unaccountable destiny
which leads men to destroy each other for the interests of people who
are strangers to them and who often do not even know that they exist.
But he was soon aroused from these reflections by Lubin, who uttered
loud cries and screamed for help with all his might.

Planchet grasped him by the throat, and pressed as hard as he could.
"Monsieur," said he, "as long as I hold him in this manner, he can't
cry, I'll be bound; but as soon as I let go he will howl again. I know
him for a Norman, and Normans are obstinate."

In fact, tightly held as he was, Lubin endeavored still to cry out.

"Stay!" said d'Artagnan; and taking out his handkerchief, he gagged him.

"Now," said Planchet, "let us bind him to a tree."

This being properly done, they drew the Comte de Wardes close to his
servant; and as night was approaching, and as the wounded man and the
bound man were at some little distance within the wood, it was evident
they were likely to remain there till the next day.

"And now," said d'Artagnan, "to the Governor's."

"But you are wounded, it seems," said Planchet.

"Oh, that's nothing! Let us attend to what is more pressing first, and
then we will attend to my wound; besides, it does not seem very
dangerous."

And they both set forward as fast as they could toward the country house
of the worthy functionary.

The Comte de Wardes was announced, and d'Artagnan was introduced.

"You have an order signed by the cardinal?" said the governor.

"Yes, monsieur," replied d'Artagnan; "here it is."

"Ah, ah! It is quite regular and explicit," said the governor.

"Most likely," said d'Artagnan; "I am one of his most faithful
servants."

"It appears that his Eminence is anxious to prevent someone from
crossing to England?"

"Yes; a certain d'Artagnan, a Bearnese gentleman who left Paris in
company with three of his friends, with the intention of going to
London."

"Do you know him personally?" asked the governor.

"Whom?"

"This d'Artagnan."

"Perfectly well."

"Describe him to me, then."

"Nothing more easy."

And d'Artagnan gave, feature for feature, a description of the Comte de
Wardes.

"Is he accompanied?"

"Yes; by a lackey named Lubin."

"We will keep a sharp lookout for them; and if we lay hands on them his
Eminence may be assured they will be reconducted to Paris under a good
escort."

"And by doing so, Monsieur the Governor," said d'Artagnan, "you will
deserve well of the cardinal."

"Shall you see him on your return, Monsieur Count?"

"Without a doubt."

"Tell him, I beg you, that I am his humble servant."

"I will not fail."

Delighted with this assurance the governor countersigned the passport
and delivered it to d'Artagnan. D'Artagnan lost no time in useless
compliments. He thanked the governor, bowed, and departed. Once outside,
he and Planchet set off as fast as they could; and by making a long
detour avoided the wood and reentered the city by another gate.

The vessel was quite ready to sail, and the captain was waiting on the
wharf. "Well?" said he, on perceiving d'Artagnan.

"Here is my pass countersigned," said the latter.

"And that other gentleman?

"He will not go today," said d'Artagnan; "but here, I'll pay you for us
two."

"In that case let us go," said the shipmaster.

"Let us go," repeated d'Artagnan.

He leaped with Planchet into the boat, and five minutes after they were
on board. It was time; for they had scarcely sailed half a league, when
d'Artagnan saw a flash and heard a detonation. It was the cannon which
announced the closing of the port.

He had now leisure to look to his wound. Fortunately, as d'Artagnan had
thought, it was not dangerous. The point of the sword had touched a rib,
and glanced along the bone. Still further, his shirt had stuck to the
wound, and he had lost only a few drops of blood.

D'Artagnan was worn out with fatigue. A mattress was laid upon the deck
for him. He threw himself upon it, and fell asleep.

On the morrow, at break of day, they were still three or four leagues
from the coast of England. The breeze had been so light all night, they
had made but little progress. At ten o'clock the vessel cast anchor in
the harbor of Dover, and at half past ten d'Artagnan placed his foot on
English land, crying, "Here I am at last!"

But that was not all; they must get to London. In England the post was
well served. D'Artagnan and Planchet took each a post horse, and a
postillion rode before them. In a few hours they were in the capital.

D'Artagnan did not know London; he did not know a word of English; but
he wrote the name of Buckingham on a piece of paper, and everyone
pointed out to him the way to the duke's hotel.

The duke was at Windsor hunting with the king. D'Artagnan inquired for
the confidential valet of the duke, who, having accompanied him in all
his voyages, spoke French perfectly well; he told him that he came from
Paris on an affair of life and death, and that he must speak with his
master instantly.

The confidence with which d'Artagnan spoke convinced Patrick, which was
the name of this minister of the minister. He ordered two horses to be
saddled, and himself went as guide to the young Guardsman. As for
Planchet, he had been lifted from his horse as stiff as a rush; the poor
lad's strength was almost exhausted. D'Artagnan seemed iron.

On their arrival at the castle they learned that Buckingham and the king
were hawking in the marshes two or three leagues away. In twenty minutes
they were on the spot named. Patrick soon caught the sound of his
master's voice calling his falcon.

"Whom must I announce to my Lord Duke?" asked Patrick.

"The young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on the Pont
Neuf, opposite the Samaritaine."

"A singular introduction!"

"You will find that it is as good as another."

Patrick galloped off, reached the duke, and announced to him in the
terms directed that a messenger awaited him.

Buckingham at once remembered the circumstance, and suspecting that
something was going on in France of which it was necessary he should be
informed, he only took the time to inquire where the messenger was, and
recognizing from afar the uniform of the Guards, he put his horse into a
gallop, and rode straight up to d'Artagnan. Patrick discreetly kept in
the background.

"No misfortune has happened to the queen?" cried Buckingham, the instant
he came up, throwing all his fear and love into the question.

"I believe not; nevertheless I believe she runs some great peril from
which your Grace alone can extricate her."

"I!" cried Buckingham. "What is it? I should be too happy to be of any
service to her. Speak, speak!"

"Take this letter," said d'Artagnan.

"This letter! From whom comes this letter?"

"From her Majesty, as I think."

"From her Majesty!" said Buckingham, becoming so pale that d'Artagnan
feared he would faint as he broke the seal.

"What is this rent?" said he, showing d'Artagnan a place where it had
been pierced through.

"Ah," said d'Artagnan, "I did not see that; it was the sword of the
Comte de Wardes which made that hole, when he gave me a good thrust in
the breast."

"You are wounded?" asked Buckingham, as he opened the letter.

"Oh, nothing but a scratch," said d'Artagnan.

"Just heaven, what have I read?" cried the duke. "Patrick, remain here,
or rather join the king, wherever he may be, and tell his Majesty that I
humbly beg him to excuse me, but an affair of the greatest importance
recalls me to London. Come, monsieur, come!" and both set off towards
the capital at full gallop.





21 THE COUNTESS DE WINTER


As they rode along, the duke endeavored to draw from d'Artagnan, not all
that had happened, but what d'Artagnan himself knew. By adding all that
he heard from the mouth of the young man to his own remembrances, he was
enabled to form a pretty exact idea of a position of the seriousness of
which, for the rest, the queen's letter, short but explicit, gave him
the clue. But that which astonished him most was that the cardinal, so
deeply interested in preventing this young man from setting his foot in
England, had not succeeded in arresting him on the road. It was then,
upon the manifestation of this astonishment, that d'Artagnan related to
him the precaution taken, and how, thanks to the devotion of his three
friends, whom he had left scattered and bleeding on the road, he had
succeeded in coming off with a single sword thrust, which had pierced
the queen's letter and for which he had repaid M. de Wardes with such
terrible coin. While he was listening to this recital, delivered with
the greatest simplicity, the duke looked from time to time at the young
man with astonishment, as if he could not comprehend how so much
prudence, courage, and devotedness could be allied with a countenance
which indicated not more than twenty years.

The horses went like the wind, and in a few minutes they were at the
gates of London. D'Artagnan imagined that on arriving in town the duke
would slacken his pace, but it was not so. He kept on his way at the
same rate, heedless about upsetting those whom he met on the road. In
fact, in crossing the city two or three accidents of this kind happened;
but Buckingham did not even turn his head to see what became of those he
had knocked down. D'Artagnan followed him amid cries which strongly
resembled curses.

On entering the court of his hotel, Buckingham sprang from his horse,
and without thinking what became of the animal, threw the bridle on his
neck, and sprang toward the vestibule. D'Artagnan did the same, with a
little more concern, however, for the noble creatures, whose merits he
fully appreciated; but he had the satisfaction of seeing three or four
grooms run from the kitchens and the stables, and busy themselves with
the steeds.

The duke walked so fast that d'Artagnan had some trouble in keeping up
with him. He passed through several apartments, of an elegance of which
even the greatest nobles of France had not even an idea, and arrived at
length in a bedchamber which was at once a miracle of taste and of
richness. In the alcove of this chamber was a door concealed in the
tapestry which the duke opened with a little gold key which he wore
suspended from his neck by a chain of the same metal. With discretion
d'Artagnan remained behind; but at the moment when Buckingham crossed
the threshold, he turned round, and seeing the hesitation of the young
man, "Come in!" cried he, "and if you have the good fortune to be
admitted to her Majesty's presence, tell her what you have seen."

Encouraged by this invitation, d'Artagnan followed the duke, who closed
the door after them. The two found themselves in a small chapel covered
with a tapestry of Persian silk worked with gold, and brilliantly
lighted with a vast number of candles. Over a species of altar, and
beneath a canopy of blue velvet, surmounted by white and red plumes, was
a full-length portrait of Anne of Austria, so perfect in its resemblance
that d'Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise on beholding it. One might
believe the queen was about to speak. On the altar, and beneath the
portrait, was the casket containing the diamond studs.

The duke approached the altar, knelt as a priest might have done before
a crucifix, and opened the casket. "There," said he, drawing from the
casket a large bow of blue ribbon all sparkling with diamonds, "there
are the precious studs which I have taken an oath should be buried with
me. The queen gave them to me, the queen requires them again. Her will
be done, like that of God, in all things."

Then, he began to kiss, one after the other, those dear studs with which
he was about to part. All at once he uttered a terrible cry.

"What is the matter?" exclaimed d'Artagnan, anxiously; "what has
happened to you, my Lord?"

"All is lost!" cried Buckingham, becoming as pale as a corpse; "two of
the studs are wanting, there are only ten."

"Can you have lost them, my Lord, or do you think they have been
stolen?"

"They have been stolen," replied the duke, "and it is the cardinal who
has dealt this blow. Hold; see! The ribbons which held them have been
cut with scissors."

"If my Lord suspects they have been stolen, perhaps the person who stole
them still has them in his hands."

"Wait, wait!" said the duke. "The only time I have worn these studs was
at a ball given by the king eight days ago at Windsor. The Comtesse de
Winter, with whom I had quarreled, became reconciled to me at that ball.
That reconciliation was nothing but the vengeance of a jealous woman. I
have never seen her from that day. The woman is an agent of the
cardinal."

"He has agents, then, throughout the world?" cried d'Artagnan.

"Oh, yes," said Buckingham, grating his teeth with rage. "Yes, he is a
terrible antagonist. But when is this ball to take place?"

"Monday next."

"Monday next! Still five days before us. That's more time than we want.
Patrick!" cried the duke, opening the door of the chapel, "Patrick!" His
confidential valet appeared.

"My jeweler and my secretary."

The valet went out with a mute promptitude which showed him accustomed
to obey blindly and without reply.

But although the jeweler had been mentioned first, it was the secretary
who first made his appearance. This was simply because he lived in the
hotel. He found Buckingham seated at a table in his bedchamber, writing
orders with his own hand.

"Mr. Jackson," said he, "go instantly to the Lord Chancellor, and tell
him that I charge him with the execution of these orders. I wish them to
be promulgated immediately."

"But, my Lord, if the Lord Chancellor interrogates me upon the motives
which may have led your Grace to adopt such an extraordinary measure,
what shall I reply?"

"That such is my pleasure, and that I answer for my will to no man."

"Will that be the answer," replied the secretary, smiling, "which he
must transmit to his Majesty if, by chance, his Majesty should have the
curiosity to know why no vessel is to leave any of the ports of Great
Britain?"

"You are right, Mr. Jackson," replied Buckingham. "He will say, in that
case, to the king that I am determined on war, and that this measure is
my first act of hostility against France."

The secretary bowed and retired.

"We are safe on that side," said Buckingham, turning toward d'Artagnan.
"If the studs are not yet gone to Paris, they will not arrive till after
you."

"How so?"

"I have just placed an embargo on all vessels at present in his
Majesty's ports, and without particular permission, not one dare lift an
anchor."

D'Artagnan looked with stupefaction at a man who thus employed the
unlimited power with which he was clothed by the confidence of a king in
the prosecution of his intrigues. Buckingham saw by the expression of
the young man's face what was passing in his mind, and he smiled.

"Yes," said he, "yes, Anne of Austria is my true queen. Upon a word from
her, I would betray my country, I would betray my king, I would betray
my God. She asked me not to send the Protestants of La Rochelle the
assistance I promised them; I have not done so. I broke my word, it is
true; but what signifies that? I obeyed my love; and have I not been
richly paid for that obedience? It was to that obedience I owe her
portrait."

D'Artagnan was amazed to note by what fragile and unknown threads the
destinies of nations and the lives of men are suspended. He was lost in
these reflections when the goldsmith entered. He was an Irishman--one of
the most skillful of his craft, and who himself confessed that he gained
a hundred thousand livres a year by the Duke of Buckingham.

"Mr. O'Reilly," said the duke, leading him into the chapel, "look at
these diamond studs, and tell me what they are worth apiece."

The goldsmith cast a glance at the elegant manner in which they were
set, calculated, one with another, what the diamonds were worth, and
without hesitation said, "Fifteen hundred pistoles each, my Lord."

"How many days would it require to make two studs exactly like them? You
see there are two wanting."

"Eight days, my Lord."

"I will give you three thousand pistoles apiece if I can have them by
the day after tomorrow."

"My Lord, they shall be yours."

"You are a jewel of a man, Mr. O'Reilly; but that is not all. These
studs cannot be trusted to anybody; it must be done in the palace."

"Impossible, my Lord! There is no one but myself can so execute them
that one cannot tell the new from the old."

"Therefore, my dear Mr. O'Reilly, you are my prisoner. And if you wish
ever to leave my palace, you cannot; so make the best of it. Name to me
such of your workmen as you need, and point out the tools they must
bring."

The goldsmith knew the duke. He knew all objection would be useless, and
instantly determined how to act.

"May I be permitted to inform my wife?" said he.

"Oh, you may even see her if you like, my dear Mr. O'Reilly. Your
captivity shall be mild, be assured; and as every inconvenience deserves
its indemnification, here is, in addition to the price of the studs, an
order for a thousand pistoles, to make you forget the annoyance I cause
you."

D'Artagnan could not get over the surprise created in him by this
minister, who thus open-handed, sported with men and millions.

As to the goldsmith, he wrote to his wife, sending her the order for the
thousand pistoles, and charging her to send him, in exchange, his most
skillful apprentice, an assortment of diamonds, of which he gave the
names and the weight, and the necessary tools.

Buckingham conducted the goldsmith to the chamber destined for him, and
which, at the end of half an hour, was transformed into a workshop. Then
he placed a sentinel at each door, with an order to admit nobody upon
any pretense but his VALET DE CHAMBRE, Patrick. We need not add that the
goldsmith, O'Reilly, and his assistant, were prohibited from going out
under any pretext. This point, settled, the duke turned to d'Artagnan.
"Now, my young friend," said he, "England is all our own. What do you
wish for? What do you desire?"

"A bed, my Lord," replied d'Artagnan. "At present, I confess, that is
the thing I stand most in need of."

Buckingham gave d'Artagnan a chamber adjoining his own. He wished to
have the young man at hand--not that he at all mistrusted him, but for
the sake of having someone to whom he could constantly talk of the
queen.

In one hour after, the ordinance was published in London that no vessel
bound for France should leave port, not even the packet boat with
letters. In the eyes of everybody this was a declaration of war between
the two kingdoms.

On the day after the morrow, by eleven o'clock, the two diamond studs
were finished, and they were so completely imitated, so perfectly alike,
that Buckingham could not tell the new ones from the old ones, and
experts in such matters would have been deceived as he was. He
immediately called d'Artagnan. "Here," said he to him, "are the diamond
studs that you came to bring; and be my witness that I have done all
that human power could do."

"Be satisfied, my Lord, I will tell all that I have seen. But does your
Grace mean to give me the studs without the casket?"

"The casket would encumber you. Besides, the casket is the more precious
from being all that is left to me. You will say that I keep it."

"I will perform your commission, word for word, my Lord."

"And now," resumed Buckingham, looking earnestly at the young man, "how
shall I ever acquit myself of the debt I owe you?"

D'Artagnan blushed up to the whites of his eyes. He saw that the duke
was searching for a means of making him accept something and the idea
that the blood of his friends and himself was about to be paid for with
English gold was strangely repugnant to him.

"Let us understand each other, my Lord," replied d'Artagnan, "and let us
make things clear beforehand in order that there may be no mistake. I am
in the service of the King and Queen of France, and form part of the
company of Monsieur Dessessart, who, as well as his brother-in-law,
Monsieur de Treville, is particularly attached to their Majesties. What
I have done, then, has been for the queen, and not at all for your
Grace. And still further, it is very probable I should not have done
anything of this, if it had not been to make myself agreeable to someone
who is my lady, as the queen is yours."

"Yes," said the duke, smiling, "and I even believe that I know that
other person; it is--"

"My Lord, I have not named her!" interrupted the young man, warmly.

"That is true," said the duke; "and it is to this person I am bound to
discharge my debt of gratitude."

"You have said, my Lord; for truly, at this moment when there is
question of war, I confess to you that I see nothing in your Grace but
an Englishman, and consequently an enemy whom I should have much greater
pleasure in meeting on the field of battle than in the park at Windsor
or the corridors of the Louvre--all which, however, will not prevent me
from executing to the very point my commission or from laying down my
life, if there be need of it, to accomplish it; but I repeat it to your
Grace, without your having personally on that account more to thank me
for in this second interview than for what I did for you in the first."

"We say, 'Proud as a Scotsman,'" murmured the Duke of Buckingham.

"And we say, 'Proud as a Gascon,'" replied d'Artagnan. "The Gascons are
the Scots of France."

D'Artagnan bowed to the duke, and was retiring.

"Well, are you going away in that manner? Where, and how?"

"That's true!"

"Fore Gad, these Frenchmen have no consideration!"

"I had forgotten that England was an island, and that you were the king
of it."

"Go to the riverside, ask for the brig SUND, and give this letter to the
captain; he will convey you to a little port, where certainly you are
not expected, and which is ordinarily only frequented by fishermen."

"The name of that port?"

"St. Valery; but listen. When you have arrived there you will go to a
mean tavern, without a name and without a sign--a mere fisherman's hut.
You cannot be mistaken; there is but one."

"Afterward?"

"You will ask for the host, and will repeat to him the word 'Forward!'"

"Which means?"

"In French, EN AVANT. It is the password. He will give you a horse all
saddled, and will point out to you the road you ought to take. You will
find, in the same way, four relays on your route. If you will give at
each of these relays your address in Paris, the four horses will follow
you thither. You already know two of them, and you appeared to
appreciate them like a judge. They were those we rode on; and you may
rely upon me for the others not being inferior to them. These horses are
equipped for the field. However proud you may be, you will not refuse to
accept one of them, and to request your three companions to accept the
others--that is, in order to make war against us. Besides, the end
justified the means, as you Frenchmen say, does it not?"

"Yes, my Lord, I accept them," said d'Artagnan; "and if it please God,
we will make a good use of your presents."

"Well, now, your hand, young man. Perhaps we shall soon meet on the
field of battle; but in the meantime we shall part good friends, I
hope."

"Yes, my Lord; but with the hope of soon becoming enemies."

"Be satisfied; I promise you that."

"I depend upon your word, my Lord."

D'Artagnan bowed to the duke, and made his way as quickly as possible to
the riverside. Opposite the Tower of London he found the vessel that had
been named to him, delivered his letter to the captain, who after having
it examined by the governor of the port made immediate preparations to
sail.

Fifty vessels were waiting to set out. Passing alongside one of them,
d'Artagnan fancied he perceived on board it the woman of Meung--the same
whom the unknown gentleman had called Milady, and whom d'Artagnan had
thought so handsome; but thanks to the current of the stream and a fair
wind, his vessel passed so quickly that he had little more than a
glimpse of her.

The next day about nine o'clock in the morning, he landed at St. Valery.
D'Artagnan went instantly in search of the inn, and easily discovered it
by the riotous noise which resounded from it. War between England and
France was talked of as near and certain, and the jolly sailors were
having a carousal.

D'Artagnan made his way through the crowd, advanced toward the host, and
pronounced the word "Forward!" The host instantly made him a sign to
follow, went out with him by a door which opened into a yard, led him to
the stable, where a saddled horse awaited him, and asked him if he stood
in need of anything else.

"I want to know the route I am to follow," said d'Artagnan.

"Go from hence to Blangy, and from Blangy to Neufchatel. At Neufchatel,
go to the tavern of the Golden Harrow, give the password to the
landlord, and you will find, as you have here, a horse ready saddled."

"Have I anything to pay?" demanded d'Artagnan.

"Everything is paid," replied the host, "and liberally. Begone, and may
God guide you!"

"Amen!" cried the young man, and set off at full gallop.

Four hours later he was in Neufchatel. He strictly followed the
instructions he had received. At Neufchatel, as at St. Valery, he found
a horse quite ready and awaiting him. He was about to remove the pistols
from the saddle he had quit to the one he was about to fill, but he
found the holsters furnished with similar pistols.

"Your address at Paris?"

"Hotel of the Guards, company of Dessessart."

"Enough," replied the questioner.

"Which route must I take?" demanded d'Artagnan, in his turn.

"That of Rouen; but you will leave the city on your right. You must stop
at the little village of Eccuis, in which there is but one tavern--the
Shield of France. Don't condemn it from appearances; you will find a
horse in the stables quite as good as this."

"The same password?"

"Exactly."

"Adieu, master!"

"A good journey, gentlemen! Do you want anything?"

D'Artagnan shook his head, and set off at full speed. At Eccuis, the
same scene was repeated. He found as provident a host and a fresh horse.
He left his address as he had done before, and set off again at the same
pace for Pontoise. At Pontoise he changed his horse for the last time,
and at nine o'clock galloped into the yard of Treville's hotel. He had
made nearly sixty leagues in little more than twelve hours.

M de Treville received him as if he had seen him that same morning;
only, when pressing his hand a little more warmly than usual, he
informed him that the company of Dessessart was on duty at the Louvre,
and that he might repair at once to his post.





22 THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON


On the morrow, nothing was talked of in Paris but the ball which the
aldermen of the city were to give to the king and queen, and in which
their Majesties were to dance the famous La Merlaison--the favorite
ballet of the king.

Eight days had been occupied in preparations at the Hotel de Ville for
this important evening. The city carpenters had erected scaffolds upon
which the invited ladies were to be placed; the city grocer had
ornamented the chambers with two hundred FLAMBEAUX of white wax, a piece
of luxury unheard of at that period; and twenty violins were ordered,
and the price for them fixed at double the usual rate, upon condition,
said the report, that they should be played all night.

At ten o'clock in the morning the Sieur de la Coste, ensign in the
king's Guards, followed by two officers and several archers of that
body, came to the city registrar, named Clement, and demanded of him all
the keys of the rooms and offices of the hotel. These keys were given up
to him instantly. Each of them had ticket attached to it, by which it
might be recognized; and from that moment the Sieur de la Coste was
charged with the care of all the doors and all the avenues.

At eleven o'clock came in his turn Duhallier, captain of the Guards,
bringing with him fifty archers, who were distributed immediately
through the Hotel de Ville, at the doors assigned them.

At three o'clock came two companies of the Guards, one French, the other
Swiss. The company of French guards was composed of half of M.
Duhallier's men and half of M. Dessessart's men.

At six in the evening the guests began to come. As fast as they entered,
they were placed in the grand saloon, on the platforms prepared for
them.

At nine o'clock Madame la Premiere Presidente arrived. As next to the
queen, she was the most considerable personage of the fete, she was
received by the city officials, and placed in a box opposite to that
which the queen was to occupy.

At ten o'clock, the king's collation, consisting of preserves and other
delicacies, was prepared in the little room on the side of the church of
St. Jean, in front of the silver buffet of the city, which was guarded
by four archers.

At midnight great cries and loud acclamations were heard. It was the
king, who was passing through the streets which led from the Louvre to
the Hotel de Ville, and which were all illuminated with colored
lanterns.

Immediately the aldermen, clothed in their cloth robes and preceded by
six sergeants, each holding a FLAMBEAU in his hand, went to attend upon
the king, whom they met on the steps, where the provost of the merchants
made him the speech of welcome--a compliment to which his Majesty
replied with an apology for coming so late, laying the blame upon the
cardinal, who had detained him till eleven o'clock, talking of affairs
of state.

His Majesty, in full dress, was accompanied by his royal Highness, M. le
Comte de Soissons, by the Grand Prior, by the Duc de Longueville, by the
Duc d'Euboeuf, by the Comte d'Harcourt, by the Comte de la Roche-Guyon,
by M. de Liancourt, by M. de Baradas, by the Comte de Cramail, and by
the Chevalier de Souveray. Everybody noticed that the king looked dull
and preoccupied.

A private room had been prepared for the king and another for Monsieur.
In each of these closets were placed masquerade dresses. The same had
been done for the queen and Madame the President. The nobles and ladies
of their Majesties' suites were to dress, two by two, in chambers
prepared for the purpose. Before entering his closet the king desired to
be informed the moment the cardinal arrived.

Half an hour after the entrance of the king, fresh acclamations were
heard; these announced the arrival of the queen. The aldermen did as
they had done before, and preceded by their sergeants, advanced to
receive their illustrious guest. The queen entered the great hall; and
it was remarked that, like the king, she looked dull and even weary.

At the moment she entered, the curtain of a small gallery which to that
time had been closed, was drawn, and the pale face of the cardinal
appeared, he being dressed as a Spanish cavalier. His eyes were fixed
upon those of the queen, and a smile of terrible joy passed over his
lips; the queen did not wear her diamond studs.

The queen remained for a short time to receive the compliments of the
city dignitaries and to reply to the salutations of the ladies. All at
once the king appeared with the cardinal at one of the doors of the
hall. The cardinal was speaking to him in a low voice, and the king was
very pale.

The king made his way through the crowd without a mask, and the ribbons
of his doublet scarcely tied. He went straight to the queen, and in an
altered voice said, "Why, madame, have you not thought proper to wear
your diamond studs, when you know it would give me so much
gratification?"

The queen cast a glance around her, and saw the cardinal behind, with a
diabolical smile on his countenance.

"Sire," replied the queen, with a faltering voice, "because, in the
midst of such a crowd as this, I feared some accident might happen to
them."

"And you were wrong, madame. If I made you that present it was that you
might adorn yourself therewith. I tell you that you were wrong."

The voice of the king was tremulous with anger. Everybody looked and
listened with astonishment, comprehending nothing of what passed.

"Sire," said the queen, "I can send for them to the Louvre, where they
are, and thus your Majesty's wishes will be complied with."

"Do so, madame, do so, and that at once; for within an hour the ballet
will commence."

The queen bent in token of submission, and followed the ladies who were
to conduct her to her room. On his part the king returned to his
apartment.

There was a moment of trouble and confusion in the assembly. Everybody
had remarked that something had passed between the king and queen; but
both of them had spoken so low that everybody, out of respect, withdrew
several steps, so that nobody had heard anything. The violins began to
sound with all their might, but nobody listened to them.

The king came out first from his room. He was in a most elegant hunting
costume; and Monsieur and the other nobles were dressed like him. This
was the costume that best became the king. So dressed, he really
appeared the first gentleman of his kingdom.

The cardinal drew near to the king, and placed in his hand a small
casket. The king opened it, and found in it two diamond studs.

"What does this mean?" demanded he of the cardinal.

"Nothing," replied the latter; "only, if the queen has the studs, which
I very much doubt, count them, sire, and if you only find ten, ask her
Majesty who can have stolen from her the two studs that are here."

The king looked at the cardinal as if to interrogate him; but he had not
time to address any question to him--a cry of admiration burst from
every mouth. If the king appeared to be the first gentleman of his
kingdom, the queen was without doubt the most beautiful woman in France.

It is true that the habit of a huntress became her admirably. She wore a
beaver hat with blue feathers, a surtout of gray-pearl velvet, fastened
with diamond clasps, and a petticoat of blue satin, embroidered with
silver. On her left shoulder sparkled the diamond studs, on a bow of the
same color as the plumes and the petticoat.

The king trembled with joy and the cardinal with vexation; although,
distant as they were from the queen, they could not count the studs. The
queen had them. The only question was, had she ten or twelve?

At that moment the violins sounded the signal for the ballet. The king
advanced toward Madame the President, with whom he was to dance, and his
Highness Monsieur with the queen. They took their places, and the ballet
began.

The king danced facing the queen, and every time he passed by her, he
devoured with his eyes those studs of which he could not ascertain the
number. A cold sweat covered the brow of the cardinal.

The ballet lasted an hour, and had sixteen ENTREES. The ballet ended
amid the applause of the whole assemblage, and everyone reconducted his
lady to her place; but the king took advantage of the privilege he had
of leaving his lady, to advance eagerly toward the queen.

"I thank you, madame," said he, "for the deference you have shown to my
wishes, but I think you want two of the studs, and I bring them back to
you."

With these words he held out to the queen the two studs the cardinal had
given him.

"How, sire?" cried the young queen, affecting surprise, "you are giving
me, then, two more: I shall have fourteen."

In fact the king counted them, and the twelve studs were all on her
Majesty's shoulder.

The king called the cardinal.

"What does this mean, Monsieur Cardinal?" asked the king in a severe
tone.

"This means, sire," replied the cardinal, "that I was desirous of
presenting her Majesty with these two studs, and that not daring to
offer them myself, I adopted this means of inducing her to accept them."

"And I am the more grateful to your Eminence," replied Anne of Austria,
with a smile that proved she was not the dupe of this ingenious
gallantry, "from being certain that these two studs alone have cost you
as much as all the others cost his Majesty."

Then saluting the king and the cardinal, the queen resumed her way to
the chamber in which she had dressed, and where she was to take off her
costume.

The attention which we have been obliged to give, during the
commencement of the chapter, to the illustrious personages we have
introduced into it, has diverted us for an instant from him to whom Anne
of Austria owed the extraordinary triumph she had obtained over the
cardinal; and who, confounded, unknown, lost in the crowd gathered at
one of the doors, looked on at this scene, comprehensible only to four
persons--the king, the queen, his Eminence, and himself.

The queen had just regained her chamber, and d'Artagnan was about to
retire, when he felt his shoulder lightly touched. He turned and saw a
young woman, who made him a sign to follow her. The face of this young
woman was covered with a black velvet mask; but notwithstanding this
precaution, which was in fact taken rather against others than against
him, he at once recognized his usual guide, the light and intelligent
Mme. Bonacieux.

On the evening before, they had scarcely seen each other for a moment at
the apartment of the Swiss guard, Germain, whither d'Artagnan had sent
for her. The haste which the young woman was in to convey to the queen
the excellent news of the happy return of her messenger prevented the
two lovers from exchanging more than a few words. D'Artagnan therefore
followed Mme. Bonacieux moved by a double sentiment--love and curiosity.
All the way, and in proportion as the corridors became more deserted,
d'Artagnan wished to stop the young woman, seize her and gaze upon her,
were it only for a minute; but quick as a bird she glided between his
hands, and when he wished to speak to her, her finger placed upon her
mouth, with a little imperative gesture full of grace, reminded him that
he was under the command of a power which he must blindly obey, and
which forbade him even to make the slightest complaint. At length, after
winding about for a minute or two, Mme. Bonacieux opened the door of a
closet, which was entirely dark, and led d'Artagnan into it. There she
made a fresh sign of silence, and opened a second door concealed by
tapestry. The opening of this door disclosed a brilliant light, and she
disappeared.

D'Artagnan remained for a moment motionless, asking himself where he
could be; but soon a ray of light which penetrated through the chamber,
together with the warm and perfumed air which reached him from the same
aperture, the conversation of two of three ladies in language at once
respectful and refined, and the word "Majesty" several times repeated,
indicated clearly that he was in a closet attached to the queen's
apartment. The young man waited in comparative darkness and listened.

The queen appeared cheerful and happy, which seemed to astonish the
persons who surrounded her and who were accustomed to see her almost
always sad and full of care. The queen attributed this joyous feeling to
the beauty of the fete, to the pleasure she had experienced in the
ballet; and as it is not permissible to contradict a queen, whether she
smile or weep, everybody expatiated on the gallantry of the aldermen of
the city of Paris.

Although d'Artagnan did not at all know the queen, he soon distinguished
her voice from the others, at first by a slightly foreign accent, and
next by that tone of domination naturally impressed upon all royal
words. He heard her approach and withdraw from the partially open door;
and twice or three times he even saw the shadow of a person intercept
the light.

At length a hand and an arm, surpassingly beautiful in their form and
whiteness, glided through the tapestry. D'Artagnan at once comprehended
that this was his recompense. He cast himself on his knees, seized the
hand, and touched it respectfully with his lips. Then the hand was
withdrawn, leaving in his an object which he perceived to be a ring. The
door immediately closed, and d'Artagnan found himself again in complete
obscurity.

D'Artagnan placed the ring on his finger, and again waited; it was
evident that all was not yet over. After the reward of his devotion,
that of his love was to come. Besides, although the ballet was danced,
the evening had scarcely begun. Supper was to be served at three, and
the clock of St. Jean had struck three quarters past two.

The sound of voices diminished by degrees in the adjoining chamber. The
company was then heard departing; then the door of the closet in which
d'Artagnan was, was opened, and Mme. Bonacieux entered.

"You at last?" cried d'Artagnan.

"Silence!" said the young woman, placing her hand upon his lips;
"silence, and go the same way you came!"

"But where and when shall I see you again?" cried d'Artagnan.

"A note which you will find at home will tell you. Begone, begone!"

At these words she opened the door of the corridor, and pushed
d'Artagnan out of the room. D'Artagnan obeyed like a child, without the
least resistance or objection, which proved that he was really in love.





