43 THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT


Meanwhile the king, who, with more reason than the cardinal, showed his
hatred for Buckingham, although scarcely arrived was in such a haste to
meet the enemy that he commanded every disposition to be made to drive
the English from the Isle of Re, and afterward to press the siege of La
Rochelle; but notwithstanding his earnest wish, he was delayed by the
dissensions which broke out between MM Bassompierre and Schomberg,
against the Duc d'Angouleme.

MM Bassompierre and Schomberg were marshals of France, and claimed their
right of commanding the army under the orders of the king; but the
cardinal, who feared that Bassompierre, a Huguenot at heart, might press
but feebly the English and Rochellais, his brothers in religion,
supported the Duc d'Angouleme, whom the king, at his instigation, had
named lieutenant general. The result was that to prevent MM Bassompierre
and Schomberg from deserting the army, a separate command had to be
given to each. Bassompierre took up his quarters on the north of the
city, between Leu and Dompierre; the Duc d'Angouleme on the east, from
Dompierre to Perigny; and M. de Schomberg on the south, from Perigny to
Angoutin.

The quarters of Monsieur were at Dompierre; the quarters of the king
were sometimes at Estree, sometimes at Jarrie; the cardinal's quarters
were upon the downs, at the bridge of La Pierre, in a simple house
without any entrenchment. So that Monsieur watched Bassompierre; the
king, the Duc d'Angouleme; and the cardinal, M. de Schomberg.

As soon as this organization was established, they set about driving the
English from the Isle.

The juncture was favorable. The English, who require, above everything,
good living in order to be good soldiers, only eating salt meat and bad
biscuit, had many invalids in their camp. Still further, the sea, very
rough at this period of the year all along the sea coast, destroyed
every day some little vessel; and the shore, from the point of
l'Aiguillon to the trenches, was at every tide literally covered with
the wrecks of pinnacles, roberges, and feluccas. The result was that
even if the king's troops remained quietly in their camp, it was evident
that some day or other, Buckingham, who only continued in the Isle from
obstinacy, would be obliged to raise the siege.

But as M. de Toiras gave information that everything was preparing in
the enemy's camp for a fresh assault, the king judged that it would be
best to put an end to the affair, and gave the necessary orders for a
decisive action.

As it is not our intention to give a journal of the siege, but on the
contrary only to describe such of the events of it as are connected with
the story we are relating, we will content ourselves with saying in two
words that the expedition succeeded, to the great astonishment of the
king and the great glory of the cardinal. The English, repulsed foot by
foot, beaten in all encounters, and defeated in the passage of the Isle
of Loie, were obliged to re-embark, leaving on the field of battle two
thousand men, among whom were five colonels, three lieutenant colonels,
two hundred and fifty captains, twenty gentlemen of rank, four pieces of
cannon, and sixty flags, which were taken to Paris by Claude de St.
Simon, and suspended with great pomp in the arches of Notre Dame.

Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughout France.

The cardinal was left free to carry on the siege, without having, at
least at the present, anything to fear on the part of the English.

But it must be acknowledged, this response was but momentary. An envoy
of the Duke of Buckingham, named Montague, was taken, and proof was
obtained of a league between the German Empire, Spain, England, and
Lorraine. This league was directed against France.

Still further, in Buckingham's lodging, which he had been forced to
abandon more precipitately than he expected, papers were found which
confirmed this alliance and which, as the cardinal asserts in his
memoirs, strongly compromised Mme. de Chevreuse and consequently the
queen.

It was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell, for one is
not a despotic minister without responsibility. All, therefore, of the
vast resources of his genius were at work night and day, engaged in
listening to the least report heard in any of the great kingdoms of
Europe.

The cardinal was acquainted with the activity, and more particularly the
hatred, of Buckingham. If the league which threatened France triumphed,
all his influence would be lost. Spanish policy and Austrian policy
would have their representatives in the cabinet of the Louvre, where
they had as yet but partisans; and he, Richelieu--the French minister,
the national minister--would be ruined. The king, even while obeying him
like a child, hated him as a child hates his master, and would abandon
him to the personal vengeance of Monsieur and the queen. He would then
be lost, and France, perhaps, with him. All this must be prepared
against.

Courtiers, becoming every instant more numerous, succeeded one another,
day and night, in the little house of the bridge of La Pierre, in which
the cardinal had established his residence.

There were monks who wore the frock with such an ill grace that it was
easy to perceive they belonged to the church militant; women a little
inconvenienced by their costume as pages and whose large trousers could
not entirely conceal their rounded forms; and peasants with blackened
hands but with fine limbs, savoring of the man of quality a league off.

There were also less agreeable visits--for two or three times reports
were spread that the cardinal had nearly been assassinated.

It is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it was he himself
who set these bungling assassins to work, in order to have, if wanted,
the right of using reprisals; but we must not believe everything
ministers say, nor everything their enemies say.

These attempts did not prevent the cardinal, to whom his most inveterate
detractors have never denied personal bravery, from making nocturnal
excursions, sometimes to communicate to the Duc d'Angouleme important
orders, sometimes to confer with the king, and sometimes to have an
interview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see at home.

On their part the Musketeers, who had not much to do with the siege,
were not under very strict orders and led a joyous life. This was the
more easy for our three companions in particular; for being friends of
M. de Treville, they obtained from him special permission to be absent
after the closing of the camp.

Now, one evening when d'Artagnan, who was in the trenches, was not able
to accompany them, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, mounted on their battle
steeds, enveloped in their war cloaks, with their hands upon their
pistol butts, were returning from a drinking place called the Red
Dovecot, which Athos had discovered two days before upon the route to
Jarrie, following the road which led to the camp and quite on their
guard, as we have stated, for fear of an ambuscade, when, about a
quarter of a league from the village of Boisnau, they fancied they heard
the sound of horses approaching them. They immediately all three halted,
closed in, and waited, occupying the middle of the road. In an instant,
and as the moon broke from behind a cloud, they saw at a turning of the
road two horsemen who, on perceiving them, stopped in their turn,
appearing to deliberate whether they should continue their route or go
back. The hesitation created some suspicion in the three friends, and
Athos, advancing a few paces in front of the others, cried in a firm
voice, "Who goes there?"

"Who goes there, yourselves?" replied one of the horsemen.

"That is not an answer," replied Athos. "Who goes there? Answer, or we
charge."

"Beware of what you are about, gentlemen!" said a clear voice which
seemed accustomed to command.

"It is some superior officer making his night rounds," said Athos. "What
do you wish, gentlemen?"

"Who are you?" said the same voice, in the same commanding tone. "Answer
in your turn, or you may repent of your disobedience."

"King's Musketeers," said Athos, more and more convinced that he who
interrogated them had the right to do so.

"What company?"

"Company of Treville."

"Advance, and give an account of what you are doing here at this hour."

The three companions advanced rather humbly--for all were now convinced
that they had to do with someone more powerful than themselves--leaving
Athos the post of speaker.

One of the two riders, he who had spoken second, was ten paces in front
of his companion. Athos made a sign to Porthos and Aramis also to remain
in the rear, and advanced alone.

"Your pardon, my officer," said Athos; "but we were ignorant with whom
we had to do, and you may see that we were keeping good guard."

"Your name?" said the officer, who covered a part of his face with his
cloak.

"But yourself, monsieur," said Athos, who began to be annoyed by this
inquisition, "give me, I beg you, the proof that you have the right to
question me."

"Your name?" repeated the cavalier a second time, letting his cloak
fall, and leaving his face uncovered.

"Monsieur the Cardinal!" cried the stupefied Musketeer.

"Your name?" cried his Eminence, for the third time.

"Athos," said the Musketeer.

The cardinal made a sign to his attendant, who drew near. "These three
Musketeers shall follow us," said he, in an undertone. "I am not willing
it should be known I have left the camp; and if they follow us we shall
be certain they will tell nobody."

"We are gentlemen, monseigneur," said Athos; "require our parole, and
give yourself no uneasiness. Thank God, we can keep a secret."

The cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageous speaker.

"You have a quick ear, Monsieur Athos," said the cardinal; "but now
listen to this. It is not from mistrust that I request you to follow me,
but for my security. Your companions are no doubt Messieurs Porthos and
Aramis."

"Yes, your Eminence," said Athos, while the two Musketeers who had
remained behind advanced hat in hand.

"I know you, gentlemen," said the cardinal, "I know you. I know you are
not quite my friends, and I am sorry you are not so; but I know you are
brave and loyal gentlemen, and that confidence may be placed in you.
Monsieur Athos, do me, then, the honor to accompany me; you and your two
friends, and then I shall have an escort to excite envy in his Majesty,
if we should meet him."

The three Musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses.

"Well, upon my honor," said Athos, "your Eminence is right in taking us
with you; we have seen several ill-looking faces on the road, and we
have even had a quarrel at the Red Dovecot with four of those faces."

"A quarrel, and what for, gentlemen?" said the cardinal; "you know I
don't like quarrelers."

"And that is the reason why I have the honor to inform your Eminence of
what has happened; for you might learn it from others, and upon a false
account believe us to be in fault."

"What have been the results of your quarrel?" said the cardinal,
knitting his brow.

"My friend, Aramis, here, has received a slight sword wound in the arm,
but not enough to prevent him, as your Eminence may see, from mounting
to the assault tomorrow, if your Eminence orders an escalade."

"But you are not the men to allow sword wounds to be inflicted upon you
thus," said the cardinal. "Come, be frank, gentlemen, you have settled
accounts with somebody! Confess; you know I have the right of giving
absolution."

"I, monseigneur?" said Athos. "I did not even draw my sword, but I took
him who offended me round the body, and threw him out of the window. It
appears that in falling," continued Athos, with some hesitation, "he
broke his thigh."

"Ah, ah!" said the cardinal; "and you, Monsieur Porthos?"

"I, monseigneur, knowing that dueling is prohibited--I seized a bench,
and gave one of those brigands such a blow that I believe his shoulder
is broken."

"Very well," said the cardinal; "and you, Monsieur Aramis?"

"Monseigneur, being of a very mild disposition, and being, likewise, of
which Monseigneur perhaps is not aware, about to enter into orders, I
endeavored to appease my comrades, when one of these wretches gave me a
wound with a sword, treacherously, across my left arm. Then I admit my
patience failed me; I drew my sword in my turn, and as he came back to
the charge, I fancied I felt that in throwing himself upon me, he let it
pass through his body. I only know for a certainty that he fell; and it
seemed to me that he was borne away with his two companions."

"The devil, gentlemen!" said the cardinal, "three men placed hors de
combat in a cabaret squabble! You don't do your work by halves. And pray
what was this quarrel about?"

"These fellows were drunk," said Athos, "and knowing there was a lady
who had arrived at the cabaret this evening, they wanted to force her
door."

"Force her door!" said the cardinal, "and for what purpose?"

"To do her violence, without doubt," said Athos. "I have had the honor
of informing your Eminence that these men were drunk."

"And was this lady young and handsome?" asked the cardinal, with a
certain degree of anxiety.

"We did not see her, monseigneur," said Athos.

"You did not see her? Ah, very well," replied the cardinal, quickly.
"You did well to defend the honor of a woman; and as I am going to the
Red Dovecot myself, I shall know if you have told me the truth."

"Monseigneur," said Athos, haughtily, "we are gentlemen, and to save our
heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood."

"Therefore I do not doubt what you say, Monsieur Athos, I do not doubt
it for a single instant; but," added he, "to change the conversation,
was this lady alone?"

"The lady had a cavalier shut up with her," said Athos, "but as
notwithstanding the noise, this cavalier did not show himself, it is to
be presumed that he is a coward."

"'Judge not rashly', says the Gospel," replied the cardinal.

Athos bowed.

"And now, gentlemen, that's well," continued the cardinal. "I know what
I wish to know; follow me."

The three Musketeers passed behind his Eminence, who again enveloped his
face in his cloak, and put his horse in motion, keeping from eight to
ten paces in advance of his four companions.

They soon arrived at the silent, solitary inn. No doubt the host knew
what illustrious visitor was expected, and had consequently sent
intruders out of the way.

Ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to his esquire and the
three Musketeers to halt. A saddled horse was fastened to the window
shutter. The cardinal knocked three times, and in a peculiar manner.

A man, enveloped in a cloak, came out immediately, and exchanged some
rapid words with the cardinal; after which he mounted his horse, and set
off in the direction of Surgeres, which was likewise the way to Paris.

"Advance, gentlemen," said the cardinal.

"You have told me the truth, my gentlemen," said he, addressing the
Musketeers, "and it will not be my fault if our encounter this evening
be not advantageous to you. In the meantime, follow me."

The cardinal alighted; the three Musketeers did likewise. The cardinal
threw the bridle of his horse to his esquire; the three Musketeers
fastened the horses to the shutters.

The host stood at the door. For him, the cardinal was only an officer
coming to visit a lady.

"Have you any chamber on the ground floor where these gentlemen can wait
near a good fire?" said the cardinal.

The host opened the door of a large room, in which an old stove had just
been replaced by a large and excellent chimney.

"I have this," said he.

"That will do," replied the cardinal. "Enter, gentlemen, and be kind
enough to wait for me; I shall not be more than half an hour."

And while the three Musketeers entered the ground floor room, the
cardinal, without asking further information, ascended the staircase
like a man who has no need of having his road pointed out to him.





44 THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES


It was evident that without suspecting it, and actuated solely by their
chivalrous and adventurous character, our three friends had just
rendered a service to someone the cardinal honored with his special
protection.

Now, who was that someone? That was the question the three Musketeers
put to one another. Then, seeing that none of their replies could throw
any light on the subject, Porthos called the host and asked for dice.

Porthos and Aramis placed themselves at the table and began to play.
Athos walked about in a contemplative mood.

While thinking and walking, Athos passed and repassed before the pipe of
the stove, broken in halves, the other extremity passing into the
chamber above; and every time he passed and repassed he heard a murmur
of words, which at length fixed his attention. Athos went close to it,
and distinguished some words that appeared to merit so great an interest
that he made a sign to his friends to be silent, remaining himself bent
with his ear directed to the opening of the lower orifice.

"Listen, Milady," said the cardinal, "the affair is important. Sit down,
and let us talk it over."

"Milady!" murmured Athos.

"I listen to your Eminence with greatest attention," replied a female
voice which made the Musketeer start.

"A small vessel with an English crew, whose captain is on my side,
awaits you at the mouth of Charente, at Fort La Pointe*. He will set
sail tomorrow morning."

    _*Fort La Pointe, or Fort Vasou, was not built until 1672,
            nearly 50 years later._

"I must go thither tonight?"

"Instantly! That is to say, when you have received my instructions. Two
men, whom you will find at the door on going out, will serve you as
escort. You will allow me to leave first; then, after half an hour, you
can go away in your turn."

"Yes, monseigneur. Now let us return to the mission with which you wish
to charge me; and as I desire to continue to merit the confidence of
your Eminence, deign to unfold it to me in terms clear and precise, that
I may not commit an error."

There was an instant of profound silence between the two interlocutors.
It was evident that the cardinal was weighing beforehand the terms in
which he was about to speak, and that Milady was collecting all her
intellectual faculties to comprehend the things he was about to say, and
to engrave them in her memory when they should be spoken.

Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two companions to fasten
the door inside, and to make them a sign to come and listen with him.

The two Musketeers, who loved their ease, brought a chair for each of
themselves and one for Athos. All three then sat down with their heads
together and their ears on the alert.

"You will go to London," continued the cardinal. "Arrived in London, you
will seek Buckingham."

"I must beg your Eminence to observe," said Milady, "that since the
affair of the diamond studs, about which the duke always suspected me,
his Grace distrusts me."

"Well, this time," said the cardinal, "it is not necessary to steal his
confidence, but to present yourself frankly and loyally as a
negotiator."

"Frankly and loyally," repeated Milady, with an unspeakable expression
of duplicity.

"Yes, frankly and loyally," replied the cardinal, in the same tone. "All
this negotiation must be carried on openly."

"I will follow your Eminence's instructions to the letter. I only wait
till you give them."

"You will go to Buckingham in my behalf, and you will tell him I am
acquainted with all the preparations he has made; but that they give me
no uneasiness, since at the first step he takes I will ruin the queen."

"Will he believe that your Eminence is in a position to accomplish the
threat thus made?"

"Yes; for I have the proofs."

"I must be able to present these proofs for his appreciation."

"Without doubt. And you will tell him I will publish the report of
Bois-Robert and the Marquis de Beautru, upon the interview which the
duke had at the residence of Madame the Constable with the queen on the
evening Madame the Constable gave a masquerade. You will tell him, in
order that he may not doubt, that he came there in the costume of the
Great Mogul, which the Chevalier de Guise was to have worn, and that he
purchased this exchange for the sum of three thousand pistoles."

"Well, monseigneur?"

"All the details of his coming into and going out of the palace--on the
night when he introduced himself in the character of an Italian fortune
teller--you will tell him, that he may not doubt the correctness of my
information; that he had under his cloak a large white robe dotted with
black tears, death's heads, and crossbones--for in case of a surprise,
he was to pass for the phantom of the White Lady who, as all the world
knows, appears at the Louvre every time any great event is impending."

"Is that all, monseigneur?"

"Tell him also that I am acquainted with all the details of the
adventure at Amiens; that I will have a little romance made of it,
wittily turned, with a plan of the garden and portraits of the principal
actors in that nocturnal romance."

"I will tell him that."

"Tell him further that I hold Montague in my power; that Montague is in
the Bastille; that no letters were found upon him, it is true, but that
torture may make him tell much of what he knows, and even what he does
not know."

"Exactly."

"Then add that his Grace has, in the precipitation with which he quit
the Isle of Re, forgotten and left behind him in his lodging a certain
letter from Madame de Chevreuse which singularly compromises the queen,
inasmuch as it proves not only that her Majesty can love the enemies of
the king but that she can conspire with the enemies of France. You
recollect perfectly all I have told you, do you not?"

"Your Eminence will judge: the ball of Madame the Constable; the night
at the Louvre; the evening at Amiens; the arrest of Montague; the letter
of Madame de Chevreuse."

"That's it," said the cardinal, "that's it. You have an excellent
memory, Milady."

"But," resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed this flattering
compliment, "if, in spite of all these reasons, the duke does not give
way and continues to menace France?"

"The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly," replied Richelieu,
with great bitterness. "Like the ancient paladins, he has only
undertaken this war to obtain a look from his lady love. If he becomes
certain that this war will cost the honor, and perhaps the liberty, of
the lady of his thoughts, as he says, I will answer for it he will look
twice."

"And yet," said Milady, with a persistence that proved she wished to see
clearly to the end of the mission with which she was about to be
charged, "if he persists?"

"If he persists?" said the cardinal. "That is not probable."

"It is possible," said Milady.

"If he persists--" His Eminence made a pause, and resumed: "If he
persists--well, then I shall hope for one of those events which change
the destinies of states."

"If your Eminence would quote to me some one of these events in
history," said Milady, "perhaps I should partake of your confidence as
to the future."

"Well, here, for example," said Richelieu: "when, in 1610, for a cause
similar to that which moves the duke, King Henry IV, of glorious memory,
was about, at the same time, to invade Flanders and Italy, in order to
attack Austria on both sides. Well, did there not happen an event which
saved Austria? Why should not the king of France have the same chance as
the emperor?"

"Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Rue de la
Feronnerie?"

"Precisely," said the cardinal.

"Does not your Eminence fear that the punishment inflicted upon
Ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the idea of imitating
him?"

"There will be, in all times and in all countries, particularly if
religious divisions exist in those countries, fanatics who ask nothing
better than to become martyrs. Ay, and observe--it just occurs to me
that the Puritans are furious against Buckingham, and their preachers
designate him as the Antichrist."

"Well?" said Milady.

"Well," continued the cardinal, in an indifferent tone, "the only thing
to be sought for at this moment is some woman, handsome, young, and
clever, who has cause of quarrel with the duke. The duke has had many
affairs of gallantry; and if he has fostered his amours by promises of
eternal constancy, he must likewise have sown the seeds of hatred by his
eternal infidelities."

"No doubt," said Milady, coolly, "such a woman may be found."

"Well, such a woman, who would place the knife of Jacques Clement or of
Ravaillac in the hands of a fanatic, would save France."

"Yes; but she would then be the accomplice of an assassination."

"Were the accomplices of Ravaillac or of Jacques Clement ever known?"

"No; for perhaps they were too high-placed for anyone to dare look for
them where they were. The Palace of Justice would not be burned down for
everybody, monseigneur."

"You think, then, that the fire at the Palace of Justice was not caused
by chance?" asked Richelieu, in the tone with which he would have put a
question of no importance.

"I, monseigneur?" replied Milady. "I think nothing; I quote a fact, that
is all. Only I say that if I were named Madame de Montpensier, or the
Queen Marie de Medicis, I should use less precautions than I take, being
simply called Milady Clarik."

"That is just," said Richelieu. "What do you require, then?"

"I require an order which would ratify beforehand all that I should
think proper to do for the greatest good of France."

"But in the first place, this woman I have described must be found who
is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke."

"She is found," said Milady.

"Then the miserable fanatic must be found who will serve as an
instrument of God's justice."

"He will be found."

"Well," said the cardinal, "then it will be time to claim the order
which you just now required."

"Your Eminence is right," replied Milady; "and I have been wrong in
seeing in the mission with which you honor me anything but that which it
really is--that is, to announce to his Grace, on the part of your
Eminence, that you are acquainted with the different disguises by means
of which he succeeded in approaching the queen during the fete given by
Madame the Constable; that you have proofs of the interview granted at
the Louvre by the queen to a certain Italian astrologer who was no other
than the Duke of Buckingham; that you have ordered a little romance of a
satirical nature to be written upon the adventures of Amiens, with a
plan of the gardens in which those adventures took place, and portraits
of the actors who figured in them; that Montague is in the Bastille, and
that the torture may make him say things he remembers, and even things
he has forgotten; that you possess a certain letter from Madame de
Chevreuse, found in his Grace's lodging, which singularly compromises
not only her who wrote it, but her in whose name it was written. Then,
if he persists, notwithstanding all this--as that is, as I have said,
the limit of my mission--I shall have nothing to do but to pray God to
work a miracle for the salvation of France. That is it, is it not,
monseigneur, and I shall have nothing else to do?"

"That is it," replied the cardinal, dryly.

"And now," said Milady, without appearing to remark the change of the
duke's tone toward her--"now that I have received the instructions of
your Eminence as concerns your enemies, Monseigneur will permit me to
say a few words to him of mine?"

"Have you enemies, then?" asked Richelieu.

"Yes, monseigneur, enemies against whom you owe me all your support, for
I made them by serving your Eminence."

"Who are they?" replied the duke.

"In the first place, there is a little intrigante named Bonacieux."

"She is in the prison of Nantes."

"That is to say, she was there," replied Milady; "but the queen has
obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed
to a convent."

"To a convent?" said the duke.

"Yes, to a convent."

"And to which?"

"I don't know; the secret has been well kept."

"But I will know!"

"And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is?"

"I can see nothing inconvenient in that," said the cardinal.

"Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this
little Madame Bonacieux."

"Who is that?"

"Her lover."

"What is his name?"

"Oh, your Eminence knows him well," cried Milady, carried away by her
anger. "He is the evil genius of both of us. It is he who in an
encounter with your Eminence's Guards decided the victory in favor of
the king's Musketeers; it is he who gave three desperate wounds to de
Wardes, your emissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs to
fail; it is he who, knowing it was I who had Madame Bonacieux carried
off, has sworn my death."

"Ah, ah!" said the cardinal, "I know of whom you speak."

"I mean that miserable d'Artagnan."

"He is a bold fellow," said the cardinal.

"And it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he is the more to be
feared."

"I must have," said the duke, "a proof of his connection with
Buckingham."

"A proof?" cried Milady; "I will have ten."

"Well, then, it becomes the simplest thing in the world; get me that
proof, and I will send him to the Bastille."

"So far good, monseigneur; but afterwards?"

"When once in the Bastille, there is no afterward!" said the cardinal,
in a low voice. "Ah, pardieu!" continued he, "if it were as easy for me
to get rid of my enemy as it is easy to get rid of yours, and if it were
against such people you require impunity--"

"Monseigneur," replied Milady, "a fair exchange. Life for life, man for
man; give me one, I will give you the other."

"I don't know what you mean, nor do I even desire to know what you
mean," replied the cardinal; "but I wish to please you, and see nothing
out of the way in giving you what you demand with respect to so infamous
a creature--the more so as you tell me this d'Artagnan is a libertine, a
duelist, and a traitor."

"An infamous scoundrel, monseigneur, a scoundrel!"

"Give me paper, a quill, and some ink, then," said the cardinal.

"Here they are, monseigneur."

There was a moment of silence, which proved that the cardinal was
employed in seeking the terms in which he should write the note, or else
in writing it. Athos, who had not lost a word of the conversation, took
his two companions by the hand, and led them to the other end of the
room.

"Well," said Porthos, "what do you want, and why do you not let us
listen to the end of the conversation?"

"Hush!" said Athos, speaking in a low voice. "We have heard all it was
necessary we should hear; besides, I don't prevent you from listening,
but I must be gone."

"You must be gone!" said Porthos; "and if the cardinal asks for you,
what answer can we make?"

"You will not wait till he asks; you will speak first, and tell him that
I am gone on the lookout, because certain expressions of our host have
given me reason to think the road is not safe. I will say two words
about it to the cardinal's esquire likewise. The rest concerns myself;
don't be uneasy about that."

"Be prudent, Athos," said Aramis.

"Be easy on that head," replied Athos; "you know I am cool enough."

Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.

As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took his horse, which was
tied with those of his friends to the fastenings of the shutters, in
four words convinced the attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for
their return, carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew his
sword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.





45 A CONJUGAL SCENE


As Athos had foreseen, it was not long before the cardinal came down. He
opened the door of the room in which the Musketeers were, and found
Porthos playing an earnest game of dice with Aramis. He cast a rapid
glance around the room, and perceived that one of his men was missing.

"What has become of Monseigneur Athos?" asked he.

"Monseigneur," replied Porthos, "he has gone as a scout, on account of
some words of our host, which made him believe the road was not safe."

"And you, what have you done, Monsieur Porthos?"

"I have won five pistoles of Aramis."

"Well; now will you return with me?"

"We are at your Eminence's orders."

"To horse, then, gentlemen; for it is getting late."

The attendant was at the door, holding the cardinal's horse by the
bridle. At a short distance a group of two men and three horses appeared
in the shade. These were the two men who were to conduct Milady to Fort
La Pointe, and superintend her embarkation.

The attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the two Musketeers had
already said with respect to Athos. The cardinal made an approving
gesture, and retraced his route with the same precautions he had used
incoming.

Let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected by his esquire
and the two Musketeers, and return to Athos.

For a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which he started; but
when out of sight he turned his horse to the right, made a circuit, and
came back within twenty paces of a high hedge to watch the passage of
the little troop. Having recognized the laced hats of his companions and
the golden fringe of the cardinal's cloak, he waited till the horsemen
had turned the angle of the road, and having lost sight of them, he
returned at a gallop to the inn, which was opened to him without
hesitation.

The host recognized him.

"My officer," said Athos, "has forgotten to give a piece of very
important information to the lady, and has sent me back to repair his
forgetfulness."

"Go up," said the host; "she is still in her chamber."

Athos availed himself of the permission, ascended the stairs with his
lightest step, gained the landing, and through the open door perceived
Milady putting on her hat.

He entered the chamber and closed the door behind him. At the noise he
made in pushing the bolt, Milady turned round.

Athos was standing before the door, enveloped in his cloak, with his hat
pulled down over his eyes. On seeing this figure, mute and immovable as
a statue, Milady was frightened.

"Who are you, and what do you want?" cried she.

"Humph," murmured Athos, "it is certainly she!"

And letting fall his cloak and raising his hat, he advanced toward
Milady.

"Do you know me, madame?" said he.

Milady made one step forward, and then drew back as if she had seen a
serpent.

"So far, well," said Athos, "I perceive you know me."

"The Comte de la Fere!" murmured Milady, becoming exceedingly pale, and
drawing back till the wall prevented her from going any farther.

"Yes, Milady," replied Athos; "the Comte de la Fere in person, who comes
expressly from the other world to have the pleasure of paying you a
visit. Sit down, madame, and let us talk, as the cardinal said."

Milady, under the influence of inexpressible terror, sat down without
uttering a word.

"You certainly are a demon sent upon the earth!" said Athos. "Your power
is great, I know; but you also know that with the help of God men have
often conquered the most terrible demons. You have once before thrown
yourself in my path. I thought I had crushed you, madame; but either I
was deceived or hell has resuscitated you!"

Milady at these words, which recalled frightful remembrances, hung down
her head with a suppressed groan.

"Yes, hell has resuscitated you," continued Athos. "Hell has made you
rich, hell has given you another name, hell has almost made you another
face; but it has neither effaced the stains from your soul nor the brand
from your body."

Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyes flashed
lightning. Athos remained sitting.

"You believed me to be dead, did you not, as I believed you to be? And
the name of Athos as well concealed the Comte de la Fere, as the name
Milady Clarik concealed Anne de Breuil. Was it not so you were called
when your honored brother married us? Our position is truly a strange
one," continued Athos, laughing. "We have only lived up to the present
time because we believed each other dead, and because a remembrance is
less oppressive than a living creature, though a remembrance is
sometimes devouring."

"But," said Milady, in a hollow, faint voice, "what brings you back to
me, and what do you want with me?"

"I wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your eyes, I have
not lost sight of you."

"You know what I have done?"

"I can relate to you, day by day, your actions from your entrance to the
service of the cardinal to this evening."

A smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of Milady.

"Listen! It was you who cut off the two diamond studs from the shoulder
of the Duke of Buckingham; it was you had the Madame Bonacieux carried
off; it was you who, in love with de Wardes and thinking to pass the
night with him, opened the door to Monsieur d'Artagnan; it was you who,
believing that de Wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killed by
his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered your infamous
secret, wished to have him killed in his turn by two assassins, whom you
sent in pursuit of him; it was you who, finding the balls had missed
their mark, sent poisoned wine with a forged letter, to make your victim
believe that the wine came from his friends. In short, it was you who
have but now in this chamber, seated in this chair I now fill, made an
engagement with Cardinal Richelieu to cause the Duke of Buckingham to be
assassinated, in exchange for the promise he has made you to allow you
to assassinate d'Artagnan."

Milady was livid.

"You must be Satan!" cried she.

"Perhaps," said Athos; "But at all events listen well to this.
Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him to be assassinated--I
care very little about that! I don't know him. Besides, he is an
Englishman. But do not touch with the tip of your finger a single hair
of d'Artagnan, who is a faithful friend whom I love and defend, or I
swear to you by the head of my father the crime which you shall have
endeavored to commit, or shall have committed, shall be the last."

"Monsieur d'Artagnan has cruelly insulted me," said Milady, in a hollow
tone; "Monsieur d'Artagnan shall die!"

"Indeed! Is it possible to insult you, madame?" said Athos, laughing;
"he has insulted you, and he shall die!"

"He shall die!" replied Milady; "she first, and he afterward."

Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo. The sight of this creature, who
had nothing of the woman about her, recalled awful remembrances. He
thought how one day, in a less dangerous situation than the one in which
he was now placed, he had already endeavored to sacrifice her to his
honor. His desire for blood returned, burning his brain and pervading
his frame like a raging fever; he arose in his turn, reached his hand to
his belt, drew forth a pistol, and cocked it.

Milady, pale as a corpse, endeavored to cry out; but her swollen tongue
could utter no more than a hoarse sound which had nothing human in it
and resembled the rattle of a wild beast. Motionless against the dark
tapestry, with her hair in disorder, she appeared like a horrid image of
terror.

Athos slowly raised his pistol, stretched out his arm so that the weapon
almost touched Milady's forehead, and then, in a voice the more terrible
from having the supreme calmness of a fixed resolution, "Madame," said
he, "you will this instant deliver to me the paper the cardinal signed;
or upon my soul, I will blow your brains out."

With another man, Milady might have preserved some doubt; but she knew
Athos. Nevertheless, she remained motionless.

"You have one second to decide," said he.

Milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that the trigger was
about to be pulled; she reached her hand quickly to her bosom, drew out
a paper, and held it toward Athos.

"Take it," said she, "and be accursed!"

Athos took the paper, returned the pistol to his belt, approached the
lamp to be assured that it was the paper, unfolded it, and read:

"Dec. 3, 1627

"It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this
has done what he has done.

"RICHELIEU"

"And now," said Athos, resuming his cloak and putting on his hat, "now
that I have drawn your teeth, viper, bite if you can."

And he left the chamber without once looking behind him.

At the door he found the two men and the spare horse which they held.

"Gentlemen," said he, "Monseigneur's order is, you know, to conduct that
woman, without losing time, to Fort La Pointe, and never to leave her
till she is on board."

As these words agreed wholly with the order they had received, they
bowed their heads in sign of assent.

With regard to Athos, he leaped lightly into the saddle and set out at
full gallop; only instead of following the road, he went across the
fields, urging his horse to the utmost and stopping occasionally to
listen.

In one of those halts he heard the steps of several horses on the road.
He had no doubt it was the cardinal and his escort. He immediately made
a new point in advance, rubbed his horse down with some heath and leaves
of trees, and placed himself across the road, about two hundred paces
from the camp.

"Who goes there?" cried he, as soon as he perceived the horsemen.

"That is our brave Musketeer, I think," said the cardinal.

"Yes, monseigneur," said Porthos, "it is he."

"Monsieur Athos," said Richelieu, "receive my thanks for the good guard
you have kept. Gentlemen, we are arrived; take the gate on the left. The
watchword is, 'King and Re.'"

Saying these words, the cardinal saluted the three friends with an
inclination of his head, and took the right hand, followed by his
attendant--for that night he himself slept in the camp.

"Well!" said Porthos and Aramis together, as soon as the cardinal was
out of hearing, "well, he signed the paper she required!"

"I know it," said Athos, coolly, "since here it is."

And the three friends did not exchange another word till they reached
their quarters, except to give the watchword to the sentinels. Only they
sent Mousqueton to tell Planchet that his master was requested, the
instant that he left the trenches, to come to the quarters of the
Musketeers.

Milady, as Athos had foreseen, on finding the two men that awaited her,
made no difficulty in following them. She had had for an instant an
inclination to be reconducted to the cardinal, and relate everything to
him; but a revelation on her part would bring about a revelation on the
part of Athos. She might say that Athos had hanged her; but then Athos
would tell that she was branded. She thought it was best to preserve
silence, to discreetly set off to accomplish her difficult mission with
her usual skill; and then, all things being accomplished to the
satisfaction of the cardinal, to come to him and claim her vengeance.

In consequence, after having traveled all night, at seven o'clock she
was at the fort of the Point; at eight o'clock she had embarked; and at
nine, the vessel, which with letters of marque from the cardinal was
supposed to be sailing for Bayonne, raised anchor, and steered its
course toward England.





