49 FATALITY


Meantime Milady, drunk with passion, roaring on the deck like a lioness
that has been embarked, had been tempted to throw herself into the sea
that she might regain the coast, for she could not get rid of the
thought that she had been insulted by d'Artagnan, threatened by Athos,
and that she had quit France without being revenged on them. This idea
soon became so insupportable to her that at the risk of whatever
terrible consequences might result to herself from it, she implored the
captain to put her on shore; but the captain, eager to escape from his
false position--placed between French and English cruisers, like the bat
between the mice and the birds--was in great haste to regain England,
and positively refused to obey what he took for a woman's caprice,
promising his passenger, who had been particularly recommended to him by
the cardinal, to land her, if the sea and the French permitted him, at
one of the ports of Brittany, either at Lorient or Brest. But the wind
was contrary, the sea bad; they tacked and kept offshore. Nine days
after leaving the Charente, pale with fatigue and vexation, Milady saw
only the blue coasts of Finisterre appear.

She calculated that to cross this corner of France and return to the
cardinal it would take her at least three days. Add another day for
landing, and that would make four. Add these four to the nine others,
that would be thirteen days lost--thirteen days, during which so many
important events might pass in London. She reflected likewise that the
cardinal would be furious at her return, and consequently would be more
disposed to listen to the complaints brought against her than to the
accusations she brought against others.

She allowed the vessel to pass Lorient and Brest without repeating her
request to the captain, who, on his part, took care not to remind her of
it. Milady therefore continued her voyage, and on the very day that
Planchet embarked at Portsmouth for France, the messenger of his
Eminence entered the port in triumph.

All the city was agitated by an extraordinary movement. Four large
vessels, recently built, had just been launched. At the end of the
jetty, his clothes richly laced with gold, glittering, as was customary
with him, with diamonds and precious stones, his hat ornamented with a
white feather which drooped upon his shoulder, Buckingham was seen
surrounded by a staff almost as brilliant as himself.

It was one of those rare and beautiful days in winter when England
remembers that there is a sun. The star of day, pale but nevertheless
still splendid, was setting in the horizon, glorifying at once the
heavens and the sea with bands of fire, and casting upon the towers and
the old houses of the city a last ray of gold which made the windows
sparkle like the reflection of a conflagration. Breathing that sea
breeze, so much more invigorating and balsamic as the land is
approached, contemplating all the power of those preparations she was
commissioned to destroy, all the power of that army which she was to
combat alone--she, a woman with a few bags of gold--Milady compared
herself mentally to Judith, the terrible Jewess, when she penetrated the
camp of the Assyrians and beheld the enormous mass of chariots, horses,
men, and arms, which a gesture of her hand was to dissipate like a cloud
of smoke.

They entered the roadstead; but as they drew near in order to cast
anchor, a little cutter, looking like a coastguard formidably armed,
approached the merchant vessel and dropped into the sea a boat which
directed its course to the ladder. This boat contained an officer, a
mate, and eight rowers. The officer alone went on board, where he was
received with all the deference inspired by the uniform.

The officer conversed a few instants with the captain, gave him several
papers, of which he was the bearer, to read, and upon the order of the
merchant captain the whole crew of the vessel, both passengers and
sailors, were called upon deck.

When this species of summons was made the officer inquired aloud the
point of the brig's departure, its route, its landings; and to all these
questions the captain replied without difficulty and without hesitation.
Then the officer began to pass in review all the people, one after the
other, and stopping when he came to Milady, surveyed her very closely,
but without addressing a single word to her.

He then returned to the captain, said a few words to him, and as if from
that moment the vessel was under his command, he ordered a maneuver
which the crew executed immediately. Then the vessel resumed its course,
still escorted by the little cutter, which sailed side by side with it,
menacing it with the mouths of its six cannon. The boat followed in the
wake of the ship, a speck near the enormous mass.

During the examination of Milady by the officer, as may well be
imagined, Milady on her part was not less scrutinizing in her glances.
But however great was the power of this woman with eyes of flame in
reading the hearts of those whose secrets she wished to divine, she met
this time with a countenance of such impassivity that no discovery
followed her investigation. The officer who had stopped in front of her
and studied her with so much care might have been twenty-five or
twenty-six years of age. He was of pale complexion, with clear blue
eyes, rather deeply set; his mouth, fine and well cut, remained
motionless in its correct lines; his chin, strongly marked, denoted that
strength of will which in the ordinary Britannic type denotes mostly
nothing but obstinacy; a brow a little receding, as is proper for poets,
enthusiasts, and soldiers, was scarcely shaded by short thin hair which,
like the beard which covered the lower part of his face, was of a
beautiful deep chestnut color.

When they entered the port, it was already night. The fog increased the
darkness, and formed round the sternlights and lanterns of the jetty a
circle like that which surrounds the moon when the weather threatens to
become rainy. The air they breathed was heavy, damp, and cold.

Milady, that woman so courageous and firm, shivered in spite of herself.

The officer desired to have Milady's packages pointed out to him, and
ordered them to be placed in the boat. When this operation was complete,
he invited her to descend by offering her his hand.

Milady looked at this man, and hesitated. "Who are you, sir," asked she,
"who has the kindness to trouble yourself so particularly on my
account?"

"You may perceive, madame, by my uniform, that I am an officer in the
English navy," replied the young man.

"But is it the custom for the officers in the English navy to place
themselves at the service of their female compatriots when they land in
a port of Great Britain, and carry their gallantry so far as to conduct
them ashore?"

"Yes, madame, it is the custom, not from gallantry but prudence, that in
time of war foreigners should be conducted to particular hotels, in
order that they may remain under the eye of the government until full
information can be obtained about them."

These words were pronounced with the most exact politeness and the most
perfect calmness. Nevertheless, they had not the power of convincing
Milady.

"But I am not a foreigner, sir," said she, with an accent as pure as
ever was heard between Portsmouth and Manchester; "my name is Lady
Clarik, and this measure--"

"This measure is general, madame; and you will seek in vain to evade
it."

"I will follow you, then, sir."

Accepting the hand of the officer, she began the descent of the ladder,
at the foot of which the boat waited. The officer followed her. A large
cloak was spread at the stern; the officer requested her to sit down
upon this cloak, and placed himself beside her.

"Row!" said he to the sailors.

The eight oars fell at once into the sea, making but a single sound,
giving but a single stroke, and the boat seemed to fly over the surface
of the water.

In five minutes they gained the land.

The officer leaped to the pier, and offered his hand to Milady. A
carriage was in waiting.

"Is this carriage for us?" asked Milady.

"Yes, madame," replied the officer.

"The hotel, then, is far away?"

"At the other end of the town."

"Very well," said Milady; and she resolutely entered the carriage.

The officer saw that the baggage was fastened carefully behind the
carriage; and this operation ended, he took his place beside Milady, and
shut the door.

Immediately, without any order being given or his place of destination
indicated, the coachman set off at a rapid pace, and plunged into the
streets of the city.

So strange a reception naturally gave Milady ample matter for
reflection; so seeing that the young officer did not seem at all
disposed for conversation, she reclined in her corner of the carriage,
and one after the other passed in review all the surmises which
presented themselves to her mind.

At the end of a quarter of an hour, however, surprised at the length of
the journey, she leaned forward toward the door to see whither she was
being conducted. Houses were no longer to be seen; trees appeared in the
darkness like great black phantoms chasing one another. Milady
shuddered.

"But we are no longer in the city, sir," said she.

The young officer preserved silence.

"I beg you to understand, sir, I will go no farther unless you tell me
whither you are taking me."

This threat brought no reply.

"Oh, this is too much," cried Milady. "Help! help!"

No voice replied to hers; the carriage continued to roll on with
rapidity; the officer seemed a statue.

Milady looked at the officer with one of those terrible expressions
peculiar to her countenance, and which so rarely failed of their effect;
anger made her eyes flash in the darkness.

The young man remained immovable.

Milady tried to open the door in order to throw herself out.

"Take care, madame," said the young man, coolly, "you will kill yourself
in jumping."

Milady reseated herself, foaming. The officer leaned forward, looked at
her in his turn, and appeared surprised to see that face, just before so
beautiful, distorted with passion and almost hideous. The artful
creature at once comprehended that she was injuring herself by allowing
him thus to read her soul; she collected her features, and in a
complaining voice said: "In the name of heaven, sir, tell me if it is to
you, if it is to your government, if it is to an enemy I am to attribute
the violence that is done me?"

"No violence will be offered to you, madame, and what happens to you is
the result of a very simple measure which we are obliged to adopt with
all who land in England."

"Then you don't know me, sir?"

"It is the first time I have had the honor of seeing you."

"And on your honor, you have no cause of hatred against me?"

"None, I swear to you."

There was so much serenity, coolness, mildness even, in the voice of the
young man, that Milady felt reassured.

At length after a journey of nearly an hour, the carriage stopped before
an iron gate, which closed an avenue leading to a castle severe in form,
massive, and isolated. Then, as the wheels rolled over a fine gravel,
Milady could hear a vast roaring, which she at once recognized as the
noise of the sea dashing against some steep cliff.

The carriage passed under two arched gateways, and at length stopped in
a court large, dark, and square. Almost immediately the door of the
carriage was opened, the young man sprang lightly out and presented his
hand to Milady, who leaned upon it, and in her turn alighted with
tolerable calmness.

"Still, then, I am a prisoner," said Milady, looking around her, and
bringing back her eyes with a most gracious smile to the young officer;
"but I feel assured it will not be for long," added she. "My own
conscience and your politeness, sir, are the guarantees of that."

However flattering this compliment, the officer made no reply; but
drawing from his belt a little silver whistle, such as boatswains use in
ships of war, he whistled three times, with three different modulations.
Immediately several men appeared, who unharnessed the smoking horses,
and put the carriage into a coach house.

Then the officer, with the same calm politeness, invited his prisoner to
enter the house. She, with a still-smiling countenance, took his arm,
and passed with him under a low arched door, which by a vaulted passage,
lighted only at the farther end, led to a stone staircase around an
angle of stone. They then came to a massive door, which after the
introduction into the lock of a key which the young man carried with
him, turned heavily upon its hinges, and disclosed the chamber destined
for Milady.

With a single glance the prisoner took in the apartment in its minutest
details. It was a chamber whose furniture was at once appropriate for a
prisoner or a free man; and yet bars at the windows and outside bolts at
the door decided the question in favor of the prison.

In an instant all the strength of mind of this creature, though drawn
from the most vigorous sources, abandoned her; she sank into a large
easy chair, with her arms crossed, her head lowered, and expecting every
instant to see a judge enter to interrogate her.

But no one entered except two or three marines, who brought her trunks
and packages, deposited them in a corner, and retired without speaking.

The officer superintended all these details with the same calmness
Milady had constantly seen in him, never pronouncing a word himself, and
making himself obeyed by a gesture of his hand or a sound of his
whistle.

It might have been said that between this man and his inferiors spoken
language did not exist, or had become useless.

At length Milady could hold out no longer; she broke the silence. "In
the name of heaven, sir," cried she, "what means all that is passing?
Put an end to my doubts; I have courage enough for any danger I can
foresee, for every misfortune which I understand. Where am I, and why am
I here? If I am free, why these bars and these doors? If I am a
prisoner, what crime have I committed?"

"You are here in the apartment destined for you, madame. I received
orders to go and take charge of you on the sea, and to conduct you to
this castle. This order I believe I have accomplished with all the
exactness of a soldier, but also with the courtesy of a gentleman. There
terminates, at least to the present moment, the duty I had to fulfill
toward you; the rest concerns another person."

"And who is that other person?" asked Milady, warmly. "Can you not tell
me his name?"

At the moment a great jingling of spurs was heard on the stairs. Some
voices passed and faded away, and the sound of a single footstep
approached the door.

"That person is here, madame," said the officer, leaving the entrance
open, and drawing himself up in an attitude of respect.

At the same time the door opened; a man appeared on the threshold. He
was without a hat, carried a sword, and flourished a handkerchief in his
hand.

Milady thought she recognized this shadow in the gloom; she supported
herself with one hand upon the arm of the chair, and advanced her head
as if to meet a certainty.

The stranger advanced slowly, and as he advanced, after entering into
the circle of light projected by the lamp, Milady involuntarily drew
back.

Then when she had no longer any doubt, she cried, in a state of stupor,
"What, my brother, is it you?"

"Yes, fair lady!" replied Lord de Winter, making a bow, half courteous,
half ironical; "it is I, myself."

"But this castle, then?"

"Is mine."

"This chamber?"

"Is yours."

"I am, then, your prisoner?"

"Nearly so."

"But this is a frightful abuse of power!"

"No high-sounding words! Let us sit down and chat quietly, as brother
and sister ought to do."

Then, turning toward the door, and seeing that the young officer was
waiting for his last orders, he said. "All is well, I thank you; now
leave us alone, Mr. Felton."





50 CHAT BETWEEN BROTHER AND SISTER


During the time which Lord de Winter took to shut the door, close a
shutter, and draw a chair near to his sister-in-law's fauteuil, Milady,
anxiously thoughtful, plunged her glance into the depths of possibility,
and discovered all the plan, of which she could not even obtain a glance
as long as she was ignorant into whose hands she had fallen. She knew
her brother-in-law to be a worthy gentleman, a bold hunter, an intrepid
player, enterprising with women, but by no means remarkable for his
skill in intrigues. How had he discovered her arrival, and caused her to
be seized? Why did he detain her?

Athos had dropped some words which proved that the conversation she had
with the cardinal had fallen into outside ears; but she could not
suppose that he had dug a countermine so promptly and so boldly. She
rather feared that her preceding operations in England might have been
discovered. Buckingham might have guessed that it was she who had cut
off the two studs, and avenge himself for that little treachery; but
Buckingham was incapable of going to any excess against a woman,
particularly if that woman was supposed to have acted from a feeling of
jealousy.

This supposition appeared to her most reasonable. It seemed to her that
they wanted to revenge the past, and not to anticipate the future. At
all events, she congratulated herself upon having fallen into the hands
of her brother-in-law, with whom she reckoned she could deal very
easily, rather than into the hands of an acknowledged and intelligent
enemy.

"Yes, let us chat, brother," said she, with a kind of cheerfulness,
decided as she was to draw from the conversation, in spite of all the
dissimulation Lord de Winter could bring, the revelations of which she
stood in need to regulate her future conduct.

"You have, then, decided to come to England again," said Lord de Winter,
"in spite of the resolutions you so often expressed in Paris never to
set your feet on British ground?"

Milady replied to this question by another question. "To begin with,
tell me," said she, "how have you watched me so closely as to be aware
beforehand not only of my arrival, but even of the day, the hour, and
the port at which I should arrive?"

Lord de Winter adopted the same tactics as Milady, thinking that as his
sister-in-law employed them they must be the best.

"But tell me, my dear sister," replied he, "what makes you come to
England?"

"I come to see you," replied Milady, without knowing how much she
aggravated by this reply the suspicions to which d'Artagnan's letter had
given birth in the mind of her brother-in-law, and only desiring to gain
the good will of her auditor by a falsehood.

"Ah, to see me?" said de Winter, cunningly.

"To be sure, to see you. What is there astonishing in that?"

"And you had no other object in coming to England but to see me?"

"No."

"So it was for me alone you have taken the trouble to cross the
Channel?"

"For you alone."

"The deuce! What tenderness, my sister!"

"But am I not your nearest relative?" demanded Milady, with a tone of
the most touching ingenuousness.

"And my only heir, are you not?" said Lord de Winter in his turn, fixing
his eyes on those of Milady.

Whatever command she had over herself, Milady could not help starting;
and as in pronouncing the last words Lord de Winter placed his hand upon
the arm of his sister, this start did not escape him.

In fact, the blow was direct and severe. The first idea that occurred to
Milady's mind was that she had been betrayed by Kitty, and that she had
recounted to the baron the selfish aversion toward himself of which she
had imprudently allowed some marks to escape before her servant. She
also recollected the furious and imprudent attack she had made upon
d'Artagnan when he spared the life of her brother.

"I do not understand, my Lord," said she, in order to gain time and make
her adversary speak out. "What do you mean to say? Is there any secret
meaning concealed beneath your words?"

"Oh, my God, no!" said Lord de Winter, with apparent good nature. "You
wish to see me, and you come to England. I learn this desire, or rather
I suspect that you feel it; and in order to spare you all the annoyances
of a nocturnal arrival in a port and all the fatigues of landing, I send
one of my officers to meet you, I place a carriage at his orders, and he
brings you hither to this castle, of which I am governor, whither I come
every day, and where, in order to satisfy our mutual desire of seeing
each other, I have prepared you a chamber. What is there more
astonishing in all that I have said to you than in what you have told
me?"

"No; what I think astonishing is that you should expect my coming."

"And yet that is the most simple thing in the world, my dear sister.
Have you not observed that the captain of your little vessel, on
entering the roadstead, sent forward, in order to obtain permission to
enter the port, a little boat bearing his logbook and the register of
his voyagers? I am commandant of the port. They brought me that book. I
recognized your name in it. My heart told me what your mouth has just
confirmed--that is to say, with what view you have exposed yourself to
the dangers of a sea so perilous, or at least so troublesome at this
moment--and I sent my cutter to meet you. You know the rest."

Milady knew that Lord de Winter lied, and she was the more alarmed.

"My brother," continued she, "was not that my Lord Buckingham whom I saw
on the jetty this evening as we arrived?"

"Himself. Ah, I can understand how the sight of him struck you," replied
Lord de Winter. "You came from a country where he must be very much
talked of, and I know that his armaments against France greatly engage
the attention of your friend the cardinal."

"My friend the cardinal!" cried Milady, seeing that on this point as on
the other Lord de Winter seemed well instructed.

"Is he not your friend?" replied the baron, negligently. "Ah, pardon! I
thought so; but we will return to my Lord Duke presently. Let us not
depart from the sentimental turn our conversation had taken. You came,
you say, to see me?"

"Yes."

"Well, I reply that you shall be served to the height of your wishes,
and that we shall see each other every day."

"Am I, then, to remain here eternally?" demanded Milady, with a certain
terror.

"Do you find yourself badly lodged, sister? Demand anything you want,
and I will hasten to have you furnished with it."

"But I have neither my women nor my servants."

"You shall have all, madame. Tell me on what footing your household was
established by your first husband, and although I am only your
brother-in-law, I will arrange one similar."

"My first husband!" cried Milady, looking at Lord de Winter with eyes
almost starting from their sockets.

"Yes, your French husband. I don't speak of my brother. If you have
forgotten, as he is still living, I can write to him and he will send me
information on the subject."

A cold sweat burst from the brow of Milady.

"You jest!" said she, in a hollow voice.

"Do I look so?" asked the baron, rising and going a step backward.

"Or rather you insult me," continued she, pressing with her stiffened
hands the two arms of her easy chair, and raising herself upon her
wrists.

"I insult you!" said Lord de Winter, with contempt. "In truth, madame,
do you think that can be possible?"

"Indeed, sir," said Milady, "you must be either drunk or mad. Leave the
room, and send me a woman."

"Women are very indiscreet, my sister. Cannot I serve you as a waiting
maid? By that means all our secrets will remain in the family."

"Insolent!" cried Milady; and as if acted upon by a spring, she bounded
toward the baron, who awaited her attack with his arms crossed, but
nevertheless with one hand on the hilt of his sword.

"Come!" said he. "I know you are accustomed to assassinate people; but I
warn you I shall defend myself, even against you."

"You are right," said Milady. "You have all the appearance of being
cowardly enough to lift your hand against a woman."

"Perhaps so; and I have an excuse, for mine would not be the first hand
of a man that has been placed upon you, I imagine."

And the baron pointed, with a slow and accusing gesture, to the left
shoulder of Milady, which he almost touched with his finger.

Milady uttered a deep, inward shriek, and retreated to a corner of the
room like a panther which crouches for a spring.

"Oh, growl as much as you please," cried Lord de Winter, "but don't try
to bite, for I warn you that it would be to your disadvantage. There are
here no procurators who regulate successions beforehand. There is no
knight-errant to come and seek a quarrel with me on account of the fair
lady I detain a prisoner; but I have judges quite ready who will quickly
dispose of a woman so shameless as to glide, a bigamist, into the bed of
Lord de Winter, my brother. And these judges, I warn you, will soon send
you to an executioner who will make both your shoulders alike."

The eyes of Milady darted such flashes that although he was a man and
armed before an unarmed woman, he felt the chill of fear glide through
his whole frame. However, he continued all the same, but with increasing
warmth: "Yes, I can very well understand that after having inherited the
fortune of my brother it would be very agreeable to you to be my heir
likewise; but know beforehand, if you kill me or cause me to be killed,
my precautions are taken. Not a penny of what I possess will pass into
your hands. Were you not already rich enough--you who possess nearly a
million? And could you not stop your fatal career, if you did not do
evil for the infinite and supreme joy of doing it? Oh, be assured, if
the memory of my brother were not sacred to me, you should rot in a
state dungeon or satisfy the curiosity of sailors at Tyburn. I will be
silent, but you must endure your captivity quietly. In fifteen or twenty
days I shall set out for La Rochelle with the army; but on the eve of my
departure a vessel which I shall see depart will take you hence and
convey you to our colonies in the south. And be assured that you shall
be accompanied by one who will blow your brains out at the first attempt
you make to return to England or the Continent."

Milady listened with an attention that dilated her inflamed eyes.

"Yes, at present," continued Lord de Winter, "you will remain in this
castle. The walls are thick, the doors strong, and the bars solid;
besides, your window opens immediately over the sea. The men of my crew,
who are devoted to me for life and death, mount guard around this
apartment, and watch all the passages that lead to the courtyard. Even
if you gained the yard, there would still be three iron gates for you to
pass. The order is positive. A step, a gesture, a word, on your part,
denoting an effort to escape, and you are to be fired upon. If they kill
you, English justice will be under an obligation to me for having saved
it trouble. Ah! I see your features regain their calmness, your
countenance recovers its assurance. You are saying to yourself: 'Fifteen
days, twenty days? Bah! I have an inventive mind; before that is expired
some idea will occur to me. I have an infernal spirit. I shall meet with
a victim. Before fifteen days are gone by I shall be away from here.'
Ah, try it!"

Milady, finding her thoughts betrayed, dug her nails into her flesh to
subdue every emotion that might give to her face any expression except
agony.

Lord de Winter continued: "The officer who commands here in my absence
you have already seen, and therefore know him. He knows how, as you must
have observed, to obey an order--for you did not, I am sure, come from
Portsmouth hither without endeavoring to make him speak. What do you say
of him? Could a statue of marble have been more impassive and more mute?
You have already tried the power of your seductions upon many men, and
unfortunately you have always succeeded; but I give you leave to try
them upon this one. PARDIEU! if you succeed with him, I pronounce you
the demon himself."

He went toward the door and opened it hastily.

"Call Mr. Felton," said he. "Wait a minute longer, and I will introduce
him to you."

There followed between these two personages a strange silence, during
which the sound of a slow and regular step was heard approaching.
Shortly a human form appeared in the shade of the corridor, and the
young lieutenant, with whom we are already acquainted, stopped at the
threshold to receive the orders of the baron.

"Come in, my dear John," said Lord de Winter, "come in, and shut the
door."

The young officer entered.

"Now," said the baron, "look at this woman. She is young; she is
beautiful; she possesses all earthly seductions. Well, she is a monster,
who, at twenty-five years of age, has been guilty of as many crimes as
you could read of in a year in the archives of our tribunals. Her voice
prejudices her hearers in her favor; her beauty serves as a bait to her
victims; her body even pays what she promises--I must do her that
justice. She will try to seduce you, perhaps she will try to kill you. I
have extricated you from misery, Felton; I have caused you to be named
lieutenant; I once saved your life, you know on what occasion. I am for
you not only a protector, but a friend; not only a benefactor, but a
father. This woman has come back again into England for the purpose of
conspiring against my life. I hold this serpent in my hands. Well, I
call you, and say to you: Friend Felton, John, my child, guard me, and
more particularly guard yourself, against this woman. Swear, by your
hopes of salvation, to keep her safely for the chastisement she has
merited. John Felton, I trust your word! John Felton, I put faith in
your loyalty!"

"My Lord," said the young officer, summoning to his mild countenance all
the hatred he could find in his heart, "my Lord, I swear all shall be
done as you desire."

Milady received this look like a resigned victim; it was impossible to
imagine a more submissive or a more mild expression than that which
prevailed on her beautiful countenance. Lord de Winter himself could
scarcely recognize the tigress who, a minute before, prepared apparently
for a fight.

"She is not to leave this chamber, understand, John," continued the
baron. "She is to correspond with nobody; she is to speak to no one but
you--if you will do her the honor to address a word to her."

"That is sufficient, my Lord! I have sworn."

"And now, madame, try to make your peace with God, for you are judged by
men!"

Milady let her head sink, as if crushed by this sentence. Lord de Winter
went out, making a sign to Felton, who followed him, shutting the door
after him.

One instant after, the heavy step of a marine who served as sentinel was
heard in the corridor--his ax in his girdle and his musket on his
shoulder.

Milady remained for some minutes in the same position, for she thought
they might perhaps be examining her through the keyhole; she then slowly
raised her head, which had resumed its formidable expression of menace
and defiance, ran to the door to listen, looked out of her window, and
returning to bury herself again in her large armchair, she reflected.





51 OFFICER


Meanwhile, the cardinal looked anxiously for news from England; but no
news arrived that was not annoying and threatening.

Although La Rochelle was invested, however certain success might
appear--thanks to the precautions taken, and above all to the dyke,
which prevented the entrance of any vessel into the besieged city--the
blockade might last a long time yet. This was a great affront to the
king's army, and a great inconvenience to the cardinal, who had no
longer, it is true, to embroil Louis XIII with Anne of Austria--for that
affair was over--but he had to adjust matters for M. de Bassompierre,
who was embroiled with the Duc d'Angouleme.

As to Monsieur, who had begun the siege, he left to the cardinal the
task of finishing it.

The city, notwithstanding the incredible perseverance of its mayor, had
attempted a sort of mutiny for a surrender; the mayor had hanged the
mutineers. This execution quieted the ill-disposed, who resolved to
allow themselves to die of hunger--this death always appearing to them
more slow and less sure than strangulation.

On their side, from time to time, the besiegers took the messengers
which the Rochellais sent to Buckingham, or the spies which Buckingham
sent to the Rochellais. In one case or the other, the trial was soon
over. The cardinal pronounced the single word, "Hanged!" The king was
invited to come and see the hanging. He came languidly, placing himself
in a good situation to see all the details. This amused him sometimes a
little, and made him endure the siege with patience; but it did not
prevent his getting very tired, or from talking at every moment of
returning to Paris--so that if the messengers and the spies had failed,
his Eminence, notwithstanding all his inventiveness, would have found
himself much embarrassed.

Nevertheless, time passed on, and the Rochellais did not surrender. The
last spy that was taken was the bearer of a letter. This letter told
Buckingham that the city was at an extremity; but instead of adding, "If
your succor does not arrive within fifteen days, we will surrender," it
added, quite simply, "If your succor comes not within fifteen days, we
shall all be dead with hunger when it comes."

The Rochellais, then, had no hope but in Buckingham. Buckingham was
their Messiah. It was evident that if they one day learned positively
that they must not count on Buckingham, their courage would fail with
their hope.

The cardinal looked, then, with great impatience for the news from
England which would announce to him that Buckingham would not come.

The question of carrying the city by assault, though often debated in
the council of the king, had been always rejected. In the first place,
La Rochelle appeared impregnable. Then the cardinal, whatever he said,
very well knew that the horror of bloodshed in this encounter, in which
Frenchman would combat against Frenchman, was a retrograde movement of
sixty years impressed upon his policy; and the cardinal was at that
period what we now call a man of progress. In fact, the sack of La
Rochelle, and the assassination of three of four thousand Huguenots who
allowed themselves to be killed, would resemble too closely, in 1628,
the massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572; and then, above all this, this
extreme measure, which was not at all repugnant to the king, good
Catholic as he was, always fell before this argument of the besieging
generals--La Rochelle is impregnable except to famine.

The cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear he entertained of
his terrible emissary--for he comprehended the strange qualities of this
woman, sometimes a serpent, sometimes a lion. Had she betrayed him? Was
she dead? He knew her well enough in all cases to know that, whether
acting for or against him, as a friend or an enemy, she would not remain
motionless without great impediments; but whence did these impediments
arise? That was what he could not know.

And yet he reckoned, and with reason, on Milady. He had divined in the
past of this woman terrible things which his red mantle alone could
cover; and he felt, from one cause or another, that this woman was his
own, as she could look to no other but himself for a support superior to
the danger which threatened her.

He resolved, then, to carry on the war alone, and to look for no success
foreign to himself, but as we look for a fortunate chance. He continued
to press the raising of the famous dyke which was to starve La Rochelle.
Meanwhile, he cast his eyes over that unfortunate city, which contained
so much deep misery and so many heroic virtues, and recalling the saying
of Louis XI, his political predecessor, as he himself was the
predecessor of Robespierre, he repeated this maxim of Tristan's gossip:
"Divide in order to reign."

Henry IV, when besieging Paris, had loaves and provisions thrown over
the walls. The cardinal had little notes thrown over in which he
represented to the Rochellais how unjust, selfish, and barbarous was the
conduct of their leaders. These leaders had corn in abundance, and would
not let them partake of it; they adopted as a maxim--for they, too, had
maxims--that it was of very little consequence that women, children, and
old men should die, so long as the men who were to defend the walls
remained strong and healthy. Up to that time, whether from devotedness
or from want of power to act against it, this maxim, without being
generally adopted, nevertheless passed from theory into practice; but
the notes did it injury. The notes reminded the men that the children,
women, and old men whom they allowed to die were their sons, their
wives, and their fathers, and that it would be more just for everyone to
be reduced to the common misery, in order that equal conditions should
give birth to unanimous resolutions.

These notes had all the effect that he who wrote them could expect, in
that they induced a great number of the inhabitants to open private
negotiations with the royal army.

But at the moment when the cardinal saw his means already bearing fruit,
and applauded himself for having put it in action, an inhabitant of La
Rochelle who had contrived to pass the royal lines--God knows how, such
was the watchfulness of Bassompierre, Schomberg, and the Duc
d'Angouleme, themselves watched over by the cardinal--an inhabitant of
La Rochelle, we say, entered the city, coming from Portsmouth, and
saying that he had seen a magnificent fleet ready to sail within eight
days. Still further, Buckingham announced to the mayor that at length
the great league was about to declare itself against France, and that
the kingdom would be at once invaded by the English, Imperial, and
Spanish armies. This letter was read publicly in all parts of the city.
Copies were put up at the corners of the streets; and even they who had
begun to open negotiations interrupted them, being resolved to await the
succor so pompously announced.

This unexpected circumstance brought back Richelieu's former anxiety,
and forced him in spite of himself once more to turn his eyes to the
other side of the sea.

During this time, exempt from the anxiety of its only and true chief,
the royal army led a joyous life, neither provisions nor money being
wanting in the camp. All the corps rivaled one another in audacity and
gaiety. To take spies and hang them, to make hazardous expeditions upon
the dyke or the sea, to imagine wild plans, and to execute them
coolly--such were the pastimes which made the army find these days short
which were not only so long to the Rochellais, a prey to famine and
anxiety, but even to the cardinal, who blockaded them so closely.

Sometimes when the cardinal, always on horseback, like the lowest
GENDARME of the army, cast a pensive glance over those works, so slowly
keeping pace with his wishes, which the engineers, brought from all the
corners of France, were executing under his orders, if he met a
Musketeer of the company of Treville, he drew near and looked at him in
a peculiar manner, and not recognizing in him one of our four
companions, he turned his penetrating look and profound thoughts in
another direction.

One day when oppressed with a mortal weariness of mind, without hope in
the negotiations with the city, without news from England, the cardinal
went out, without any other aim than to be out of doors, and accompanied
only by Cahusac and La Houdiniere, strolled along the beach. Mingling
the immensity of his dreams with the immensity of the ocean, he came,
his horse going at a foot's pace, to a hill from the top of which he
perceived behind a hedge, reclining on the sand and catching in its
passage one of those rays of the sun so rare at this period of the year,
seven men surrounded by empty bottles. Four of these men were our
Musketeers, preparing to listen to a letter one of them had just
received. This letter was so important that it made them forsake their
cards and their dice on the drumhead.

The other three were occupied in opening an enormous flagon of Collicure
wine; these were the lackeys of these gentlemen.

The cardinal was, as we have said, in very low spirits; and nothing when
he was in that state of mind increased his depression so much as gaiety
in others. Besides, he had another strange fancy, which was always to
believe that the causes of his sadness created the gaiety of others.
Making a sign to La Houdiniere and Cahusac to stop, he alighted from his
horse, and went toward these suspected merry companions, hoping, by
means of the sand which deadened the sound of his steps and of the hedge
which concealed his approach, to catch some words of this conversation
which appeared so interesting. At ten paces from the hedge he recognized
the talkative Gascon; and as he had already perceived that these men
were Musketeers, he did not doubt that the three others were those
called the Inseparables; that is to say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

It may be supposed that his desire to hear the conversation was
augmented by this discovery. His eyes took a strange expression, and
with the step of a tiger-cat he advanced toward the hedge; but he had
not been able to catch more than a few vague syllables without any
positive sense, when a sonorous and short cry made him start, and
attracted the attention of the Musketeers.

"Officer!" cried Grimaud.

"You are speaking, you scoundrel!" said Athos, rising upon his elbow,
and transfixing Grimaud with his flaming look.

Grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech, but contented himself
with pointing his index finger in the direction of the hedge, announcing
by this gesture the cardinal and his escort.

With a single bound the Musketeers were on their feet, and saluted with
respect.

The cardinal seemed furious.

"It appears that Messieurs the Musketeers keep guard," said he. "Are the
English expected by land, or do the Musketeers consider themselves
superior officers?"

"Monseigneur," replied Athos, for amid the general fright he alone had
preserved the noble calmness and coolness that never forsook him,
"Monseigneur, the Musketeers, when they are not on duty, or when their
duty is over, drink and play at dice, and they are certainly superior
officers to their lackeys."

"Lackeys?" grumbled the cardinal. "Lackeys who have the order to warn
their masters when anyone passes are not lackeys, they are sentinels."

"Your Eminence may perceive that if we had not taken this precaution, we
should have been exposed to allowing you to pass without presenting you
our respects or offering you our thanks for the favor you have done us
in uniting us. D'Artagnan," continued Athos, "you, who but lately were
so anxious for such an opportunity for expressing your gratitude to
Monseigneur, here it is; avail yourself of it."

These words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm which
distinguished Athos in the hour of danger, and with that excessive
politeness which made of him at certain moments a king more majestic
than kings by birth.

D'Artagnan came forward and stammered out a few words of gratitude which
soon expired under the gloomy looks of the cardinal.

"It does not signify, gentlemen," continued the cardinal, without
appearing to be in the least swerved from his first intention by the
diversion which Athos had started, "it does not signify, gentlemen. I do
not like to have simple soldiers, because they have the advantage of
serving in a privileged corps, thus to play the great lords; discipline
is the same for them as for everybody else."

Athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely, and bowed
in sign of assent. Then he resumed in his turn: "Discipline,
Monseigneur, has, I hope, in no way been forgotten by us. We are not on
duty, and we believed that not being on duty we were at liberty to
dispose of our time as we pleased. If we are so fortunate as to have
some particular duty to perform for your Eminence, we are ready to obey
you. Your Eminence may perceive," continued Athos, knitting his brow,
for this sort of investigation began to annoy him, "that we have not
come out without our arms."

And he showed the cardinal, with his finger, the four muskets piled near
the drum, on which were the cards and dice.

"Your Eminence may believe," added d'Artagnan, "that we would have come
to meet you, if we could have supposed it was Monseigneur coming toward
us with so few attendants."

The cardinal bit his mustache, and even his lips a little.

"Do you know what you look like, all together, as you are armed and
guarded by your lackeys?" said the cardinal. "You look like four
conspirators."

"Oh, as to that, Monseigneur, it is true," said Athos; "we do conspire,
as your Eminence might have seen the other morning. Only we conspire
against the Rochellais."

"Ah, you gentlemen of policy!" replied the cardinal, knitting his brow
in his turn, "the secret of many unknown things might perhaps be found
in your brains, if we could read them as you read that letter which you
concealed as soon as you saw me coming."

The color mounted to the face of Athos, and he made a step toward his
Eminence.

"One might think you really suspected us, monseigneur, and we were
undergoing a real interrogatory. If it be so, we trust your Eminence
will deign to explain yourself, and we should then at least be
acquainted with our real position."

"And if it were an interrogatory!" replied the cardinal. "Others besides
you have undergone such, Monsieur Athos, and have replied thereto."

"Thus I have told your Eminence that you had but to question us, and we
are ready to reply."

"What was that letter you were about to read, Monsieur Aramis, and which
you so promptly concealed?"

"A woman's letter, monseigneur."

"Ah, yes, I see," said the cardinal; "we must be discreet with this sort
of letters; but nevertheless, we may show them to a confessor, and you
know I have taken orders."

"Monseigneur," said Athos, with a calmness the more terrible because he
risked his head in making this reply, "the letter is a woman's letter,
but it is neither signed Marion de Lorme, nor Madame d'Aiguillon."

The cardinal became as pale as death; lightning darted from his eyes. He
turned round as if to give an order to Cahusac and Houdiniere. Athos saw
the movement; he made a step toward the muskets, upon which the other
three friends had fixed their eyes, like men ill-disposed to allow
themselves to be taken. The cardinalists were three; the Musketeers,
lackeys included, were seven. He judged that the match would be so much
the less equal, if Athos and his companions were really plotting; and by
one of those rapid turns which he always had at command, all his anger
faded away into a smile.

"Well, well!" said he, "you are brave young men, proud in daylight,
faithful in darkness. We can find no fault with you for watching over
yourselves, when you watch so carefully over others. Gentlemen, I have
not forgotten the night in which you served me as an escort to the Red
Dovecot. If there were any danger to be apprehended on the road I am
going, I would request you to accompany me; but as there is none, remain
where you are, finish your bottles, your game, and your letter. Adieu,
gentlemen!"

And remounting his horse, which Cahusac led to him, he saluted them with
his hand, and rode away.

The four young men, standing and motionless, followed him with their
eyes without speaking a single word until he had disappeared. Then they
looked at one another.

The countenances of all gave evidence of terror, for notwithstanding the
friendly adieu of his Eminence, they plainly perceived that the cardinal
went away with rage in his heart.

Athos alone smiled, with a self-possessed, disdainful smile.

When the cardinal was out of hearing and sight, "That Grimaud kept bad
watch!" cried Porthos, who had a great inclination to vent his ill-humor
on somebody.

Grimaud was about to reply to excuse himself. Athos lifted his finger,
and Grimaud was silent.

"Would you have given up the letter, Aramis?" said d'Artagnan.

"I," said Aramis, in his most flutelike tone, "I had made up my mind. If
he had insisted upon the letter being given up to him, I would have
presented the letter to him with one hand, and with the other I would
have run my sword through his body."

"I expected as much," said Athos; "and that was why I threw myself
between you and him. Indeed, this man is very much to blame for talking
thus to other men; one would say he had never had to do with any but
women and children."

"My dear Athos, I admire you, but nevertheless we were in the wrong,
after all."

"How, in the wrong?" said Athos. "Whose, then, is the air we breathe?
Whose is the ocean upon which we look? Whose is the sand upon which we
were reclining? Whose is that letter of your mistress? Do these belong
to the cardinal? Upon my honor, this man fancies the world belongs to
him. There you stood, stammering, stupefied, annihilated. One might have
supposed the Bastille appeared before you, and that the gigantic Medusa
had converted you into stone. Is being in love conspiring? You are in
love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up, and you
wish to get her out of the hands of the cardinal. That's a match you are
playing with his Eminence; this letter is your game. Why should you
expose your game to your adversary? That is never done. Let him find it
out if he can! We can find out his!"

"Well, that's all very sensible, Athos," said d'Artagnan.

"In that case, let there be no more question of what's past, and let
Aramis resume the letter from his cousin where the cardinal interrupted
him."

Aramis drew the letter from his pocket; the three friends surrounded
him, and the three lackeys grouped themselves again near the wine jar.

"You had only read a line or two," said d'Artagnan; "read the letter
again from the commencement."

"Willingly," said Aramis.

"My dear Cousin,

"I think I shall make up my mind to set out for Bethune, where my sister
has placed our little servant in the convent of the Carmelites; this
poor child is quite resigned, as she knows she cannot live elsewhere
without the salvation of her soul being in danger. Nevertheless, if the
affairs of our family are arranged, as we hope they will be, I believe
she will run the risk of being damned, and will return to those she
regrets, particularly as she knows they are always thinking of her.
Meanwhile, she is not very wretched; what she most desires is a letter
from her intended. I know that such viands pass with difficulty through
convent gratings; but after all, as I have given you proofs, my dear
cousin, I am not unskilled in such affairs, and I will take charge of
the commission. My sister thanks you for your good and eternal
remembrance. She has experienced much anxiety; but she is now at length
a little reassured, having sent her secretary away in order that nothing
may happen unexpectedly.

"Adieu, my dear cousin. Tell us news of yourself as often as you can;
that is to say, as often as you can with safety. I embrace you.

"MARIE MICHON"

"Oh, what do I not owe you, Aramis?" said d'Artagnan. "Dear Constance! I
have at length, then, intelligence of you. She lives; she is in safety
in a convent; she is at Bethune! Where is Bethune, Athos?"

"Why, upon the frontiers of Artois and of Flanders. The siege once over,
we shall be able to make a tour in that direction."

"And that will not be long, it is to be hoped," said Porthos; "for they
have this morning hanged a spy who confessed that the Rochellais were
reduced to the leather of their shoes. Supposing that after having eaten
the leather they eat the soles, I cannot see much that is left unless
they eat one another."

"Poor fools!" said Athos, emptying a glass of excellent Bordeaux wine
which, without having at that period the reputation it now enjoys,
merited it no less, "poor fools! As if the Catholic religion was not the
most advantageous and the most agreeable of all religions! All the
same," resumed he, after having clicked his tongue against his palate,
"they are brave fellows! But what the devil are you about, Aramis?"
continued Athos. "Why, you are squeezing that letter into your pocket!"

"Yes," said d'Artagnan, "Athos is right, it must be burned. And yet if
we burn it, who knows whether Monsieur Cardinal has not a secret to
interrogate ashes?"

"He must have one," said Athos.

"What will you do with the letter, then?" asked Porthos.

"Come here, Grimaud," said Athos. Grimaud rose and obeyed. "As a
punishment for having spoken without permission, my friend, you will
please to eat this piece of paper; then to recompense you for the
service you will have rendered us, you shall afterward drink this glass
of wine. First, here is the letter. Eat heartily."

Grimaud smiled; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass which Athos held
in his hand, he ground the paper well between his teeth and then
swallowed it.

"Bravo, Monsieur Grimaud!" said Athos; "and now take this. That's well.
We dispense with your saying grace."

Grimaud silently swallowed the glass of Bordeaux wine; but his eyes,
raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation, spoke a language
which, though mute, was not the less expressive.

"And now," said Athos, "unless Monsieur Cardinal should form the
ingenious idea of ripping up Grimaud, I think we may be pretty much at
our ease respecting the letter."

Meantime, his Eminence continued his melancholy ride, murmuring between
his mustaches, "These four men must positively be mine."





