23 THE RENDEZVOUS


D'Artagnan ran home immediately, and although it was three o'clock in
the morning and he had some of the worst quarters of Paris to traverse,
he met with no misadventure. Everyone knows that drunkards and lovers
have a protecting deity.

He found the door of his passage open, sprang up the stairs and knocked
softly in a manner agreed upon between him and his lackey. Planchet*,
whom he had sent home two hours before from the Hotel de Ville, telling
him to sit up for him, opened the door for him.

    _*The reader may ask, "How came Planchet here?" when he was left
            "stiff as a rush" in London. In the intervening time
            Buckingham perhaps sent him to Paris, as he did the
            horses._

"Has anyone brought a letter for me?" asked d'Artagnan, eagerly.

"No one has BROUGHT a letter, monsieur," replied Planchet; "but one has
come of itself."

"What do you mean, blockhead?"

"I mean to say that when I came in, although I had the key of your
apartment in my pocket, and that key had never quit me, I found a letter
on the green table cover in your bedroom."

"And where is that letter?"

"I left it where I found it, monsieur. It is not natural for letters to
enter people's houses in this manner. If the window had been open or
even ajar, I should think nothing of it; but, no--all was hermetically
sealed. Beware, monsieur; there is certainly some magic underneath."

Meanwhile, the young man had darted in to his chamber, and opened the
letter. It was from Mme. Bonacieux, and was expressed in these terms:

"There are many thanks to be offered to you, and to be transmitted to
you. Be this evening about ten o'clock at St. Cloud, in front of the
pavilion which stands at the corner of the house of M. d'Estrees.--C.B."

While reading this letter, d'Artagnan felt his heart dilated and
compressed by that delicious spasm which tortures and caresses the
hearts of lovers.

It was the first billet he had received; it was the first rendezvous
that had been granted him. His heart, swelled by the intoxication of
joy, felt ready to dissolve away at the very gate of that terrestrial
paradise called Love!

"Well, monsieur," said Planchet, who had observed his master grow red
and pale successively, "did I not guess truly? Is it not some bad
affair?"

"You are mistaken, Planchet," replied d'Artagnan; "and as a proof, there
is a crown to drink my health."

"I am much obliged to Monsieur for the crown he had given me, and I
promise him to follow his instructions exactly; but it is not the less
true that letters which come in this way into shut-up houses--"

"Fall from heaven, my friend, fall from heaven."

"Then Monsieur is satisfied?" asked Planchet.

"My dear Planchet, I am the happiest of men!"

"And I may profit by Monsieur's happiness, and go to bed?"

"Yes, go."

"May the blessings of heaven fall upon Monsieur! But it is not the less
true that that letter--"

And Planchet retired, shaking his head with an air of doubt, which the
liberality of d'Artagnan had not entirely effaced.

Left alone, d'Artagnan read and reread his billet. Then he kissed and
rekissed twenty times the lines traced by the hand of his beautiful
mistress. At length he went to bed, fell asleep, and had golden dreams.

At seven o'clock in the morning he arose and called Planchet, who at the
second summons opened the door, his countenance not yet quite freed from
the anxiety of the preceding night.

"Planchet," said d'Artagnan, "I am going out for all day, perhaps. You
are, therefore, your own master till seven o'clock in the evening; but
at seven o'clock you must hold yourself in readiness with two horses."

"There!" said Planchet. "We are going again, it appears, to have our
hides pierced in all sorts of ways."

"You will take your musketoon and your pistols."

"There, now! Didn't I say so?" cried Planchet. "I was sure of it--the
cursed letter!"

"Don't be afraid, you idiot; there is nothing in hand but a party of
pleasure."

"Ah, like the charming journey the other day, when it rained bullets and
produced a crop of steel traps!"

"Well, if you are really afraid, Monsieur Planchet," resumed d'Artagnan,
"I will go without you. I prefer traveling alone to having a companion
who entertains the least fear."

"Monsieur does me wrong," said Planchet; "I thought he had seen me at
work."

"Yes, but I thought perhaps you had worn out all your courage the first
time."

"Monsieur shall see that upon occasion I have some left; only I beg
Monsieur not to be too prodigal of it if he wishes it to last long."

"Do you believe you have still a certain amount of it to expend this
evening?"

"I hope so, monsieur."

"Well, then, I count on you."

"At the appointed hour I shall be ready; only I believed that Monsieur
had but one horse in the Guard stables."

"Perhaps there is but one at this moment; but by this evening there will
be four."

"It appears that our journey was a remounting journey, then?"

"Exactly so," said d'Artagnan; and nodding to Planchet, he went out.

M Bonacieux was at his door. D'Artagnan's intention was to go out
without speaking to the worthy mercer; but the latter made so polite and
friendly a salutation that his tenant felt obliged, not only to stop,
but to enter into conversation with him.

Besides, how is it possible to avoid a little condescension toward a
husband whose pretty wife has appointed a meeting with you that same
evening at St. Cloud, opposite D'Estrees's pavilion? D'Artagnan
approached him with the most amiable air he could assume.

The conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of the poor man.
M. Bonacieux, who was ignorant that d'Artagnan had overheard his
conversation with the stranger of Meung, related to his young tenant the
persecutions of that monster, M. de Laffemas, whom he never ceased to
designate, during his account, by the title of the "cardinal's
executioner," and expatiated at great length upon the Bastille, the
bolts, the wickets, the dungeons, the gratings, the instruments of
torture.

D'Artagnan listened to him with exemplary complaisance, and when he had
finished said, "And Madame Bonacieux, do you know who carried her
off?--For I do not forget that I owe to that unpleasant circumstance the
good fortune of having made your acquaintance."

"Ah!" said Bonacieux, "they took good care not to tell me that; and my
wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that's sacred that she does
not know. But you," continued M. Bonacieux, in a tine of perfect good
fellowship, "what has become of you all these days? I have not seen you
nor your friends, and I don't think you could gather all that dust that
I saw Planchet brush off your boots yesterday from the pavement of
Paris."

"You are right, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, my friends and I have been
on a little journey."

"Far from here?"

"Oh, Lord, no! About forty leagues only. We went to take Monsieur Athos
to the waters of Forges, where my friends still remain."

"And you have returned, have you not?" replied M. Bonacieux, giving to
his countenance a most sly air. "A handsome young fellow like you does
not obtain long leaves of absence from his mistress; and we were
impatiently waited for at Paris, were we not?"

"My faith!" said the young man, laughing, "I confess it, and so much
more the readily, my dear Bonacieux, as I see there is no concealing
anything from you. Yes, I was expected, and very impatiently, I
acknowledge."

A slight shade passed over the brow of Bonacieux, but so slight that
d'Artagnan did not perceive it.

"And we are going to be recompensed for our diligence?" continued the
mercer, with a trifling alteration in his voice--so trifling, indeed,
that d'Artagnan did not perceive it any more than he had the momentary
shade which, an instant before, had darkened the countenance of the
worthy man.

"Ah, may you be a true prophet!" said d'Artagnan, laughing.

"No; what I say," replied Bonacieux, "is only that I may know whether I
am delaying you."

"Why that question, my dear host?" asked d'Artagnan. "Do you intend to
sit up for me?"

"No; but since my arrest and the robbery that was committed in my house,
I am alarmed every time I hear a door open, particularly in the night.
What the deuce can you expect? I am no swordsman."

"Well, don't be alarmed if I return at one, two or three o'clock in the
morning; indeed, do not be alarmed if I do not come at all."

This time Bonacieux became so pale that d'Artagnan could not help
perceiving it, and asked him what was the matter.

"Nothing," replied Bonacieux, "nothing. Since my misfortunes I have been
subject to faintnesses, which seize me all at once, and I have just felt
a cold shiver. Pay no attention to it; you have nothing to occupy
yourself with but being happy."

"Then I have full occupation, for I am so."

"Not yet; wait a little! This evening, you said."

"Well, this evening will come, thank God! And perhaps you look for it
with as much impatience as I do; perhaps this evening Madame Bonacieux
will visit the conjugal domicile."

"Madame Bonacieux is not at liberty this evening," replied the husband,
seriously; "she is detained at the Louvre this evening by her duties."

"So much the worse for you, my dear host, so much the worse! When I am
happy, I wish all the world to be so; but it appears that is not
possible."

The young man departed, laughing at the joke, which he thought he alone
could comprehend.

"Amuse yourself well!" replied Bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.

But d'Artagnan was too far off to hear him; and if he had heard him in
the disposition of mind he then enjoyed, he certainly would not have
remarked it.

He took his way toward the hotel of M. de Treville; his visit of the day
before, it is to be remembered, had been very short and very little
explicative.

He found Treville in a joyful mood. He had thought the king and queen
charming at the ball. It is true the cardinal had been particularly
ill-tempered. He had retired at one o'clock under the pretense of being
indisposed. As to their Majesties, they did not return to the Louvre
till six o'clock in the morning.

"Now," said Treville, lowering his voice, and looking into every corner
of the apartment to see if they were alone, "now let us talk about
yourself, my young friend; for it is evident that your happy return has
something to do with the joy of the king, the triumph of the queen, and
the humiliation of his Eminence. You must look out for yourself."

"What have I to fear," replied d'Artagnan, "as long as I shall have the
luck to enjoy the favor of their Majesties?"

"Everything, believe me. The cardinal is not the man to forget a
mystification until he has settled account with the mystifier; and the
mystifier appears to me to have the air of being a certain young Gascon
of my acquaintance."

"Do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself, and
knows that I have been to London?"

"The devil! You have been to London! Was it from London you brought that
beautiful diamond that glitters on your finger? Beware, my dear
d'Artagnan! A present from an enemy is not a good thing. Are there not
some Latin verses upon that subject? Stop!"

"Yes, doubtless," replied d'Artagnan, who had never been able to cram
the first rudiments of that language into his head, and who had by his
ignorance driven his master to despair, "yes, doubtless there is one."

"There certainly is one," said M. de Treville, who had a tincture of
literature, "and Monsieur de Benserade was quoting it to me the other
day. Stop a minute--ah, this is it: 'Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes,'
which means, 'Beware of the enemy who makes you presents."

"This diamond does not come from an enemy, monsieur," replied
d'Artagnan, "it comes from the queen."

"From the queen! Oh, oh!" said M. de Treville. "Why, it is indeed a true
royal jewel, which is worth a thousand pistoles if it is worth a denier.
By whom did the queen send you this jewel?"

"She gave it to me herself."

"Where?"

"In the room adjoining the chamber in which she changed her toilet."

"How?"

"Giving me her hand to kiss."

"You have kissed the queen's hand?" said M. de Treville, looking
earnestly at d'Artagnan.

"Her Majesty did me the honor to grant me that favor."

"And that in the presence of witnesses! Imprudent, thrice imprudent!"

"No, monsieur, be satisfied; nobody saw her," replied d'Artagnan, and he
related to M. de Treville how the affair came to pass.

"Oh, the women, the women!" cried the old soldier. "I know them by their
romantic imagination. Everything that savors of mystery charms them. So
you have seen the arm, that was all. You would meet the queen, and she
would not know who you are?"

"No; but thanks to this diamond," replied the young man.

"Listen," said M. de Treville; "shall I give you counsel, good counsel,
the counsel of a friend?"

"You will do me honor, monsieur," said d'Artagnan.

"Well, then, off to the nearest goldsmith's, and sell that diamond for
the highest price you can get from him. However much of a Jew he may be,
he will give you at least eight hundred pistoles. Pistoles have no name,
young man, and that ring has a terrible one, which may betray him who
wears it."

"Sell this ring, a ring which comes from my sovereign? Never!" said
d'Artagnan.

"Then, at least turn the gem inside, you silly fellow; for everybody
must be aware that a cadet from Gascony does not find such stones in his
mother's jewel case."

"You think, then, I have something to dread?" asked d'Artagnan.

"I mean to say, young man, that he who sleeps over a mine the match of
which is already lighted, may consider himself in safety in comparison
with you."

"The devil!" said d'Artagnan, whom the positive tone of M. de Treville
began to disquiet, "the devil! What must I do?"

"Above all things be always on your guard. The cardinal has a tenacious
memory and a long arm; you may depend upon it, he will repay you by some
ill turn."

"But of what sort?"

"Eh! How can I tell? Has he not all the tricks of a demon at his
command? The least that can be expected is that you will be arrested."

"What! Will they dare to arrest a man in his Majesty's service?"

"PARDIEU! They did not scruple much in the case of Athos. At all events,
young man, rely upon one who has been thirty years at court. Do not lull
yourself in security, or you will be lost; but, on the contrary--and it
is I who say it--see enemies in all directions. If anyone seeks a
quarrel with you, shun it, were it with a child of ten years old. If you
are attacked by day or by night, fight, but retreat, without shame; if
you cross a bridge, feel every plank of it with your foot, lest one
should give way beneath you; if you pass before a house which is being
built, look up, for fear a stone should fall upon your head; if you stay
out late, be always followed by your lackey, and let your lackey be
armed--if, by the by, you can be sure of your lackey. Mistrust
everybody, your friend, your brother, your mistress--your mistress above
all."

D'Artagnan blushed.

"My mistress above all," repeated he, mechanically; "and why her rather
than another?"

"Because a mistress is one of the cardinal's favorite means; he has not
one that is more expeditious. A woman will sell you for ten pistoles,
witness Delilah. You are acquainted with the Scriptures?"

D'Artagnan thought of the appointment Mme. Bonacieux had made with him
for that very evening; but we are bound to say, to the credit of our
hero, that the bad opinion entertained by M. de Treville of women in
general, did not inspire him with the least suspicion of his pretty
hostess.

"But, A PROPOS," resumed M. de Treville, "what has become of your three
companions?"

"I was about to ask you if you had heard any news of them?"

"None, monsieur."

"Well, I left them on my road--Porthos at Chantilly, with a duel on his
hands; Aramis at Crevecoeur, with a ball in his shoulder; and Athos at
Amiens, detained by an accusation of coining."

"See there, now!" said M. de Treville; "and how the devil did you
escape?"

"By a miracle, monsieur, I must acknowledge, with a sword thrust in my
breast, and by nailing the Comte de Wardes on the byroad to Calais, like
a butterfly on a tapestry."

"There again! De Wardes, one of the cardinal's men, a cousin of
Rochefort! Stop, my friend, I have an idea."

"Speak, monsieur."

"In your place, I would do one thing."

"What?"

"While his Eminence was seeking for me in Paris, I would take, without
sound of drum or trumpet, the road to Picardy, and would go and make
some inquiries concerning my three companions. What the devil! They
merit richly that piece of attention on your part."

"The advice is good, monsieur, and tomorrow I will set out."

"Tomorrow! Any why not this evening?"

"This evening, monsieur, I am detained in Paris by indispensable
business."

"Ah, young man, young man, some flirtation or other. Take care, I repeat
to you, take care. It is woman who has ruined us, still ruins us, and
will ruin us, as long as the world stands. Take my advice and set out
this evening."

"Impossible, monsieur."

"You have given your word, then?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"Ah, that's quite another thing; but promise me, if you should not be
killed tonight, that you will go tomorrow."

"I promise it."

"Do you need money?"

"I have still fifty pistoles. That, I think, is as much as I shall
want."

"But your companions?"

"I don't think they can be in need of any. We left Paris, each with
seventy-five pistoles in his pocket."

"Shall I see you again before your departure?"

"I think not, monsieur, unless something new should happen."

"Well, a pleasant journey."

"Thanks, monsieur."

D'Artagnan left M. de Treville, touched more than ever by his paternal
solicitude for his Musketeers.

He called successively at the abodes of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
Neither of them had returned. Their lackeys likewise were absent, and
nothing had been heard of either the one or the other. He would have
inquired after them of their mistresses, but he was neither acquainted
with Porthos's nor Aramis's, and as to Athos, he had none.

As he passed the Hotel des Gardes, he took a glance in to the stables.
Three of the four horses had already arrived. Planchet, all
astonishment, was busy grooming them, and had already finished two.

"Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, on perceiving d'Artagnan, "how glad I am
to see you."

"Why so, Planchet?" asked the young man.

"Do you place confidence in our landlord--Monsieur Bonacieux?"

"I? Not the least in the world."

"Oh, you do quite right, monsieur."

"But why this question?"

"Because, while you were talking with him, I watched you without
listening to you; and, monsieur, his countenance changed color two or
three times!"

"Bah!"

"Preoccupied as Monsieur was with the letter he had received, he did not
observe that; but I, whom the strange fashion in which that letter came
into the house had placed on my guard--I did not lose a movement of his
features."

"And you found it?"

"Traitorous, monsieur."

"Indeed!"

"Still more; as soon as Monsieur had left and disappeared round the
corner of the street, Monsieur Bonacieux took his hat, shut his door,
and set off at a quick pace in an opposite direction."

"It seems you are right, Planchet; all this appears to be a little
mysterious; and be assured that we will not pay him our rent until the
matter shall be categorically explained to us."

"Monsieur jests, but Monsieur will see."

"What would you have, Planchet? What must come is written."

"Monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening?"

"Quite the contrary, Planchet; the more ill will I have toward Monsieur
Bonacieux, the more punctual I shall be in keeping the appointment made
by that letter which makes you so uneasy."

"Then that is Monsieur's determination?"

"Undeniably, my friend. At nine o'clock, then, be ready here at the
hotel, I will come and take you."

Planchet seeing there was no longer any hope of making his master
renounce his project, heaved a profound sigh and set to work to groom
the third horse.

As to d'Artagnan, being at bottom a prudent youth, instead of returning
home, went and dined with the Gascon priest, who, at the time of the
distress of the four friends, had given them a breakfast of chocolate.





24 THE PAVILION


At nine o'clock d'Artagnan was at the Hotel des Gardes; he found
Planchet all ready. The fourth horse had arrived.

Planchet was armed with his musketoon and a pistol. D'Artagnan had his
sword and placed two pistols in his belt; then both mounted and departed
quietly. It was quite dark, and no one saw them go out. Planchet took
place behind his master, and kept at a distance of ten paces from him.

D'Artagnan crossed the quays, went out by the gate of La Conference and
followed the road, much more beautiful then than it is now, which leads
to St. Cloud.

As long as he was in the city, Planchet kept at the respectful distance
he had imposed upon himself; but as soon as the road began to be more
lonely and dark, he drew softly nearer, so that when they entered the
Bois de Boulogne he found himself riding quite naturally side by side
with his master. In fact, we must not dissemble that the oscillation of
the tall trees and the reflection of the moon in the dark underwood gave
him serious uneasiness. D'Artagnan could not help perceiving that
something more than usual was passing in the mind of his lackey and
said, "Well, Monsieur Planchet, what is the matter with us now?"

"Don't you think, monsieur, that woods are like churches?"

"How so, Planchet?"

"Because we dare not speak aloud in one or the other."

"But why did you not dare to speak aloud, Planchet--because you are
afraid?"

"Afraid of being heard? Yes, monsieur."

"Afraid of being heard! Why, there is nothing improper in our
conversation, my dear Planchet, and no one could find fault with it."

"Ah, monsieur!" replied Planchet, recurring to his besetting idea, "that
Monsieur Bonacieux has something vicious in his eyebrows, and something
very unpleasant in the play of his lips."

"What the devil makes you think of Bonacieux?"

"Monsieur, we think of what we can, and not of what we will."

"Because you are a coward, Planchet."

"Monsieur, we must not confound prudence with cowardice; prudence is a
virtue."

"And you are very virtuous, are you not, Planchet?"

"Monsieur, is not that the barrel of a musket which glitters yonder? Had
we not better lower our heads?"

"In truth," murmured d'Artagnan, to whom M. de Treville's recommendation
recurred, "this animal will end by making me afraid." And he put his
horse into a trot.

Planchet followed the movements of his master as if he had been his
shadow, and was soon trotting by his side.

"Are we going to continue this pace all night?" asked Planchet.

"No; you are at your journey's end."

"How, monsieur! And you?"

"I am going a few steps farther."

"And Monsieur leaves me here alone?"

"You are afraid, Planchet?"

"No; I only beg leave to observe to Monsieur that the night will be very
cold, that chills bring on rheumatism, and that a lackey who has the
rheumatism makes but a poor servant, particularly to a master as active
as Monsieur."

"Well, if you are cold, Planchet, you can go into one of those cabarets
that you see yonder, and be in waiting for me at the door by six o'clock
in the morning."

"Monsieur, I have eaten and drunk respectfully the crown you gave me
this morning, so that I have not a sou left in case I should be cold."

"Here's half a pistole. Tomorrow morning."

D'Artagnan sprang from his horse, threw the bridle to Planchet, and
departed at a quick pace, folding his cloak around him.

"Good Lord, how cold I am!" cried Planchet, as soon as he had lost sight
of his master; and in such haste was he to warm himself that he went
straight to a house set out with all the attributes of a suburban
tavern, and knocked at the door.

In the meantime d'Artagnan, who had plunged into a bypath, continued his
route and reached St. Cloud; but instead of following the main street he
turned behind the chateau, reached a sort of retired lane, and found
himself soon in front of the pavilion named. It was situated in a very
private spot. A high wall, at the angle of which was the pavilion, ran
along one side of this lane, and on the other was a little garden
connected with a poor cottage which was protected by a hedge from
passers-by.

He gained the place appointed, and as no signal had been given him by
which to announce his presence, he waited.

Not the least noise was to be heard; it might be imagined that he was a
hundred miles from the capital. D'Artagnan leaned against the hedge,
after having cast a glance behind it. Beyond that hedge, that garden,
and that cottage, a dark mist enveloped with its folds that immensity
where Paris slept--a vast void from which glittered a few luminous
points, the funeral stars of that hell!

But for d'Artagnan all aspects were clothed happily, all ideas wore a
smile, all shades were diaphanous. The appointed hour was about to
strike. In fact, at the end of a few minutes the belfry of St. Cloud let
fall slowly ten strokes from its sonorous jaws. There was something
melancholy in this brazen voice pouring out its lamentations in the
middle of the night; but each of those strokes, which made up the
expected hour, vibrated harmoniously to the heart of the young man.

His eyes were fixed upon the little pavilion situated at the angle of
the wall, of which all the windows were closed with shutters, except one
on the first story. Through this window shone a mild light which
silvered the foliage of two or three linden trees which formed a group
outside the park. There could be no doubt that behind this little
window, which threw forth such friendly beams, the pretty Mme. Bonacieux
expected him.

Wrapped in this sweet idea, d'Artagnan waited half an hour without the
least impatience, his eyes fixed upon that charming little abode of
which he could perceive a part of the ceiling with its gilded moldings,
attesting the elegance of the rest of the apartment.

The belfry of St. Cloud sounded half past ten.

This time, without knowing why, d'Artagnan felt a cold shiver run
through his veins. Perhaps the cold began to affect him, and he took a
perfectly physical sensation for a moral impression.

Then the idea seized him that he had read incorrectly, and that the
appointment was for eleven o'clock. He drew near to the window, and
placing himself so that a ray of light should fall upon the letter as he
held it, he drew it from his pocket and read it again; but he had not
been mistaken, the appointment was for ten o'clock. He went and resumed
his post, beginning to be rather uneasy at this silence and this
solitude.

Eleven o'clock sounded.

D'Artagnan began now really to fear that something had happened to Mme.
Bonacieux. He clapped his hands three times--the ordinary signal of
lovers; but nobody replied to him, not even an echo.

He then thought, with a touch of vexation, that perhaps the young woman
had fallen asleep while waiting for him. He approached the wall, and
tried to climb it; but the wall had been recently pointed, and
d'Artagnan could get no hold.

At that moment he thought of the trees, upon whose leaves the light
still shone; and as one of them drooped over the road, he thought that
from its branches he might get a glimpse of the interior of the
pavilion.

The tree was easy to climb. Besides, d'Artagnan was but twenty years
old, and consequently had not yet forgotten his schoolboy habits. In an
instant he was among the branches, and his keen eyes plunged through the
transparent panes into the interior of the pavilion.

It was a strange thing, and one which made d'Artagnan tremble from the
sole of his foot to the roots of his hair, to find that this soft light,
this calm lamp, enlightened a scene of fearful disorder. One of the
windows was broken, the door of the chamber had been beaten in and hung,
split in two, on its hinges. A table, which had been covered with an
elegant supper, was overturned. The decanters broken in pieces, and the
fruits crushed, strewed the floor. Everything in the apartment gave
evidence of a violent and desperate struggle. D'Artagnan even fancied he
could recognize amid this strange disorder, fragments of garments, and
some bloody spots staining the cloth and the curtains. He hastened to
descend into the street, with a frightful beating at his heart; he
wished to see if he could find other traces of violence.

The little soft light shone on in the calmness of the night. D'Artagnan
then perceived a thing that he had not before remarked--for nothing had
led him to the examination--that the ground, trampled here and
hoofmarked there, presented confused traces of men and horses. Besides,
the wheels of a carriage, which appeared to have come from Paris, had
made a deep impression in the soft earth, which did not extend beyond
the pavilion, but turned again toward Paris.

At length d'Artagnan, in pursuing his researches, found near the wall a
woman's torn glove. This glove, wherever it had not touched the muddy
ground, was of irreproachable odor. It was one of those perfumed gloves
that lovers like to snatch from a pretty hand.

As d'Artagnan pursued his investigations, a more abundant and more icy
sweat rolled in large drops from his forehead; his heart was oppressed
by a horrible anguish; his respiration was broken and short. And yet he
said, to reassure himself, that this pavilion perhaps had nothing in
common with Mme. Bonacieux; that the young woman had made an appointment
with him before the pavilion, and not in the pavilion; that she might
have been detained in Paris by her duties, or perhaps by the jealousy of
her husband.

But all these reasons were combated, destroyed, overthrown, by that
feeling of intimate pain which, on certain occasions, takes possession
of our being, and cries to us so as to be understood unmistakably that
some great misfortune is hanging over us.

Then d'Artagnan became almost wild. He ran along the high road, took the
path he had before taken, and reaching the ferry, interrogated the
boatman.

About seven o'clock in the evening, the boatman had taken over a young
woman, wrapped in a black mantle, who appeared to be very anxious not to
be recognized; but entirely on account of her precautions, the boatman
had paid more attention to her and discovered that she was young and
pretty.

There were then, as now, a crowd of young and pretty women who came to
St. Cloud, and who had reasons for not being seen, and yet d'Artagnan
did not for an instant doubt that it was Mme. Bonacieux whom the boatman
had noticed.

D'Artagnan took advantage of the lamp which burned in the cabin of the
ferryman to read the billet of Mme. Bonacieux once again, and satisfy
himself that he had not been mistaken, that the appointment was at St.
Cloud and not elsewhere, before the D'Estrees's pavilion and not in
another street. Everything conspired to prove to d'Artagnan that his
presentiments had not deceived him, and that a great misfortune had
happened.

He again ran back to the chateau. It appeared to him that something
might have happened at the pavilion in his absence, and that fresh
information awaited him. The lane was still deserted, and the same calm
soft light shone through the window.

D'Artagnan then thought of that cottage, silent and obscure, which had
no doubt seen all, and could tell its tale. The gate of the enclosure
was shut; but he leaped over the hedge, and in spite of the barking of a
chained-up dog, went up to the cabin.

No one answered to his first knocking. A silence of death reigned in the
cabin as in the pavilion; but as the cabin was his last resource, he
knocked again.

It soon appeared to him that he heard a slight noise within--a timid
noise which seemed to tremble lest it should be heard.

Then d'Artagnan ceased knocking, and prayed with an accent so full of
anxiety and promises, terror and cajolery, that his voice was of a
nature to reassure the most fearful. At length an old, worm-eaten
shutter was opened, or rather pushed ajar, but closed again as soon as
the light from a miserable lamp which burned in the corner had shone
upon the baldric, sword belt, and pistol pommels of d'Artagnan.
Nevertheless, rapid as the movement had been, d'Artagnan had had time to
get a glimpse of the head of an old man.

"In the name of heaven!" cried he, "listen to me; I have been waiting
for someone who has not come. I am dying with anxiety. Has anything
particular happened in the neighborhood? Speak!"

The window was again opened slowly, and the same face appeared, only it
was now still more pale than before.

D'Artagnan related his story simply, with the omission of names. He told
how he had a rendezvous with a young woman before that pavilion, and
how, not seeing her come, he had climbed the linden tree, and by the
light of the lamp had seen the disorder of the chamber.

The old man listened attentively, making a sign only that it was all so;
and then, when d'Artagnan had ended, he shook his head with an air that
announced nothing good.

"What do you mean?" cried d'Artagnan. "In the name of heaven, explain
yourself!"

"Oh! Monsieur," said the old man, "ask me nothing; for if I dared tell
you what I have seen, certainly no good would befall me."

"You have, then, seen something?" replied d'Artagnan. "In that case, in
the name of heaven," continued he, throwing him a pistole, "tell me what
you have seen, and I will pledge you the word of a gentleman that not
one of your words shall escape from my heart."

The old man read so much truth and so much grief in the face of the
young man that he made him a sign to listen, and repeated in a low
voice: "It was scarcely nine o'clock when I heard a noise in the street,
and was wondering what it could be, when on coming to my door, I found
that somebody was endeavoring to open it. As I am very poor and am not
afraid of being robbed, I went and opened the gate and saw three men at
a few paces from it. In the shadow was a carriage with two horses, and
some saddlehorses. These horses evidently belonged to the three men, who
were dressed as cavaliers. 'Ah, my worthy gentlemen,' cried I, 'what do
you want?' 'You must have a ladder?' said he who appeared to be the
leader of the party. 'Yes, monsieur, the one with which I gather my
fruit.' 'Lend it to us, and go into your house again; there is a crown
for the annoyance we have caused you. Only remember this--if you speak a
word of what you may see or what you may hear (for you will look and you
will listen, I am quite sure, however we may threaten you), you are
lost.' At these words he threw me a crown, which I picked up, and he
took the ladder. After shutting the gate behind them, I pretended to
return to the house, but I immediately went out a back door, and
stealing along in the shade of the hedge, I gained yonder clump of
elder, from which I could hear and see everything. The three men brought
the carriage up quietly, and took out of it a little man, stout, short,
elderly, and commonly dressed in clothes of a dark color, who ascended
the ladder very carefully, looked suspiciously in at the window of the
pavilion, came down as quietly as he had gone up, and whispered, 'It is
she!' Immediately, he who had spoken to me approached the door of the
pavilion, opened it with a key he had in his hand, closed the door and
disappeared, while at the same time the other two men ascended the
ladder. The little old man remained at the coach door; the coachman took
care of his horses, the lackey held the saddlehorses. All at once great
cries resounded in the pavilion, and a woman came to the window, and
opened it, as if to throw herself out of it; but as soon as she
perceived the other two men, she fell back and they went into the
chamber. Then I saw no more; but I heard the noise of breaking
furniture. The woman screamed, and cried for help; but her cries were
soon stifled. Two of the men appeared, bearing the woman in their arms,
and carried her to the carriage, into which the little old man got after
her. The leader closed the window, came out an instant after by the
door, and satisfied himself that the woman was in the carriage. His two
companions were already on horseback. He sprang into his saddle; the
lackey took his place by the coachman; the carriage went off at a quick
pace, escorted by the three horsemen, and all was over. From that moment
I have neither seen nor heard anything."

D'Artagnan, entirely overcome by this terrible story, remained
motionless and mute, while all the demons of anger and jealousy were
howling in his heart.

"But, my good gentleman," resumed the old man, upon whom this mute
despair certainly produced a greater effect than cries and tears would
have done, "do not take on so; they did not kill her, and that's a
comfort."

"Can you guess," said d'Artagnan, "who was the man who headed this
infernal expedition?"

"I don't know him."

"But as you spoke to him you must have seen him."

"Oh, it's a description you want?"

"Exactly so."

"A tall, dark man, with black mustaches, dark eyes, and the air of a
gentleman."

"That's the man!" cried d'Artagnan, "again he, forever he! He is my
demon, apparently. And the other?"

"Which?"

"The short one."

"Oh, he was not a gentleman, I'll answer for it; besides, he did not
wear a sword, and the others treated him with small consideration."

"Some lackey," murmured d'Artagnan. "Poor woman, poor woman, what have
they done with you?"

"You have promised to be secret, my good monsieur?" said the old man.

"And I renew my promise. Be easy, I am a gentleman. A gentleman has but
his word, and I have given you mine."

With a heavy heart, d'Artagnan again bent his way toward the ferry.
Sometimes he hoped it could not be Mme. Bonacieux, and that he should
find her next day at the Louvre; sometimes he feared she had had an
intrigue with another, who, in a jealous fit, had surprised her and
carried her off. His mind was torn by doubt, grief, and despair.

"Oh, if I had my three friends here," cried he, "I should have, at
least, some hopes of finding her; but who knows what has become of
them?"

It was past midnight; the next thing was to find Planchet. D'Artagnan
went successively into all the cabarets in which there was a light, but
could not find Planchet in any of them.

At the sixth he began to reflect that the search was rather dubious.
D'Artagnan had appointed six o'clock in the morning for his lackey, and
wherever he might be, he was right.

Besides, it came into the young man's mind that by remaining in the
environs of the spot on which this sad event had passed, he would,
perhaps, have some light thrown upon the mysterious affair. At the sixth
cabaret, then, as we said, d'Artagnan stopped, asked for a bottle of
wine of the best quality, and placing himself in the darkest corner of
the room, determined thus to wait till daylight; but this time again his
hopes were disappointed, and although he listened with all his ears, he
heard nothing, amid the oaths, coarse jokes, and abuse which passed
between the laborers, servants, and carters who comprised the honorable
society of which he formed a part, which could put him upon the least
track of her who had been stolen from him. He was compelled, then, after
having swallowed the contents of his bottle, to pass the time as well as
to evade suspicion, to fall into the easiest position in his corner and
to sleep, whether well or ill. D'Artagnan, be it remembered, was only
twenty years old, and at that age sleep has its imprescriptible rights
which it imperiously insists upon, even with the saddest hearts.

Toward six o'clock d'Artagnan awoke with that uncomfortable feeling
which generally accompanies the break of day after a bad night. He was
not long in making his toilet. He examined himself to see if advantage
had been taken of his sleep, and having found his diamond ring on his
finger, his purse in his pocket, and his pistols in his belt, he rose,
paid for his bottle, and went out to try if he could have any better
luck in his search after his lackey than he had had the night before.
The first thing he perceived through the damp gray mist was honest
Planchet, who, with the two horses in hand, awaited him at the door of a
little blind cabaret, before which d'Artagnan had passed without even a
suspicion of its existence.





