34 IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF


Since the four friends had been each in search of his equipments, there
had been no fixed meeting between them. They dined apart from one
another, wherever they might happen to be, or rather where they could.
Duty likewise on its part took a portion of that precious time which was
gliding away so rapidly--only they had agreed to meet once a week, about
one o'clock, at the residence of Athos, seeing that he, in agreement
with the vow he had formed, did not pass over the threshold of his door.

This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kitty came to find
d'Artagnan. Soon as Kitty left him, d'Artagnan directed his steps toward
the Rue Ferou.

He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing. Aramis had some slight
inclination to resume the cassock. Athos, according to his system,
neither encouraged nor dissuaded him. Athos believed that everyone
should be left to his own free will. He never gave advice but when it
was asked, and even then he required to be asked twice.

"People, in general," he said, "only ask advice not to follow it; or if
they do follow it, it is for the sake of having someone to blame for
having given it."

Porthos arrived a minute after d'Artagnan. The four friends were
reunited.

The four countenances expressed four different feelings: that of
Porthos, tranquillity; that of d'Artagnan, hope; that of Aramis,
uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.

At the end of a moment's conversation, in which Porthos hinted that a
lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his
embarrassment, Mousqueton entered. He came to request his master to
return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously
said.

"Is it my equipment?"

"Yes and no," replied Mousqueton.

"Well, but can't you speak?"

"Come, monsieur."

Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton. An instant
after, Bazin made his appearance at the door.

"What do you want with me, my friend?" said Aramis, with that mildness
of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were
directed toward the Church.

"A man wishes to see Monsieur at home," replied Bazin.

"A man! What man?"

"A mendicant."

"Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner."

"This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends that you will
be very glad to see him."

"Has he sent no particular message for me?"

"Yes. If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come," he said, "tell him I am
from Tours."

"From Tours!" cried Aramis. "A thousand pardons, gentlemen; but no doubt
this man brings me the news I expected." And rising also, he went off at
a quick pace. There remained Athos and d'Artagnan.

"I believe these fellows have managed their business. What do you think,
d'Artagnan?" said Athos.

"I know that Porthos was in a fair way," replied d'Artagnan; "and as to
Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never been seriously uneasy on his
account. But you, my dear Athos--you, who so generously distributed the
Englishman's pistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do you
mean to do?"

"I am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy, seeing that it
is blessed bread to kill an Englishman; but if I had pocketed his
pistoles, they would have weighed me down like a remorse."

"Go to, my dear Athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas."

"Let it pass. What do you think of Monsieur de Treville telling me, when
he did me the honor to call upon me yesterday, that you associated with
the suspected English, whom the cardinal protects?"

"That is to say, I visit an Englishwoman--the one I named."

"Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice, which
naturally you took care not to adopt."

"I gave you my reasons."

"Yes; you look there for your outfit, I think you said."

"Not at all. I have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was
concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux."

"Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you court another. It is the
longest road, but certainly the most amusing."

D'Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but one consideration
restrained him. Athos was a gentleman, punctilious in points of honor;
and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for Milady, he
was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this
Puritan. He was therefore silent; and as Athos was the least inquisitive
of any man on earth, d'Artagnan's confidence stopped there. We will
therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing important to say to
each other, and follow Aramis.

Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came from
Tours, we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed, or rather
went before, Bazin; he ran without stopping from the Rue Ferou to the
Rue de Vaugirard. On entering he found a man of short stature and
intelligent eyes, but covered with rags.

"You have asked for me?" said the Musketeer.

"I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis. Is that your name, monsieur?"

"My very own. You have brought me something?"

"Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief."

"Here it is," said Aramis, taking a small key from his breast and
opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pearl, "here it is.
Look."

"That is right," replied the mendicant; "dismiss your lackey."

In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could want with his
master, kept pace with him as well as he could, and arrived almost at
the same time he did; but his quickness was not of much use to him. At
the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he
was obliged to obey.

Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be
sure that nobody could either see or hear him, and opening his ragged
vest, badly held together by a leather strap, he began to rip the upper
part of his doublet, from which he drew a letter.

Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed the
superscription with an almost religious respect, and opened the epistle,
which contained what follows:

"My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still for some time
separated; but the delightful days of youth are not lost beyond return.
Perform your duty in camp; I will do mine elsewhere. Accept that which
the bearer brings you; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman,
and think of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes.

"Adieu; or rather, AU REVOIR."

The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew from amid his rags
a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles, which he laid down on the
table; then he opened the door, bowed, and went out before the young
man, stupefied by his letter, had ventured to address a word to him.

Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a postscript:

PS. You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count and a grandee
of Spain!

"Golden dreams!" cried Aramis. "Oh, beautiful life! Yes, we are young;
yes, we shall yet have happy days! My love, my blood, my life! all, all,
all, are thine, my adored mistress!"

And he kissed the letter with passion, without even vouchsafing a look
at the gold which sparkled on the table.

Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer any reason to
exclude him, he bade him come in.

Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot that he came to
announce d'Artagnan, who, curious to know who the mendicant could be,
came to Aramis on leaving Athos.

Now, as d'Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing that Bazin
forgot to announce him, he announced himself.

"The devil! my dear Aramis," said d'Artagnan, "if these are the prunes
that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you will make my compliments to
the gardener who gathers them."

"You are mistaken, friend d'Artagnan," said Aramis, always on his guard;
"this is from my publisher, who has just sent me the price of that poem
in one-syllable verse which I began yonder."

"Ah, indeed," said d'Artagnan. "Well, your publisher is very generous,
my dear Aramis, that's all I can say."

"How, monsieur?" cried Bazin, "a poem sell so dear as that! It is
incredible! Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you like; you may
become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and Monsieur de Benserade. I like
that. A poet is as good as an abbe. Ah! Monsieur Aramis, become a poet,
I beg of you."

"Bazin, my friend," said Aramis, "I believe you meddle with my
conversation."

Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.

"Ah!" said d'Artagnan with a smile, "you sell your productions at their
weight in gold. You are very fortunate, my friend; but take care or you
will lose that letter which is peeping from your doublet, and which also
comes, no doubt, from your publisher."

Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, and re-buttoned his
doublet.

"My dear d'Artagnan," said he, "if you please, we will join our friends;
as I am rich, we will today begin to dine together again, expecting that
you will be rich in your turn."

"My faith!" said d'Artagnan, with great pleasure. "It is long since we
have had a good dinner; and I, for my part, have a somewhat hazardous
expedition for this evening, and shall not be sorry, I confess, to
fortify myself with a few glasses of good old Burgundy."

"Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection to that," said
Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold had removed, as by magic, his
ideas of conversion.

And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer
the needs of the moment, he placed the others in the ebony box, inlaid
with mother of pearl, in which was the famous handkerchief which served
him as a talisman.

The two friends repaired to Athos's, and he, faithful to his vow of not
going out, took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them. As he
was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy, d'Artagnan and
Aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him.

They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bac met
Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving before him a mule
and a horse.

D'Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite free from joy.

"Ah, my yellow horse," cried he. "Aramis, look at that horse!"

"Oh, the frightful brute!" said Aramis.

"Ah, my dear," replied d'Artagnan, "upon that very horse I came to
Paris."

"What, does Monsieur know this horse?" said Mousqueton.

"It is of an original color," said Aramis; "I never saw one with such a
hide in my life."

"I can well believe it," replied d'Artagnan, "and that was why I got
three crowns for him. It must have been for his hide, for, CERTES, the
carcass is not worth eighteen livres. But how did this horse come into
your hands, Mousqueton?"

"Pray," said the lackey, "say nothing about it, monsieur; it is a
frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!"

"How is that, Mousqueton?"

"Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of
quality, the Duchesse de--but, your pardon; my master has commanded me
to be discreet. She had forced us to accept a little souvenir, a
magnificent Spanish GENET and an Andalusian mule, which were beautiful
to look upon. The husband heard of the affair; on their way he
confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, and
substituted these horrible animals."

"Which you are taking back to him?" said d'Artagnan.

"Exactly!" replied Mousqueton. "You may well believe that we will not
accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been
promised to us."

"No, PARDIEU; though I should like to have seen Porthos on my yellow
horse. That would give me an idea of how I looked when I arrived in
Paris. But don't let us hinder you, Mousqueton; go and perform your
master's orders. Is he at home?"

"Yes, monsieur," said Mousqueton, "but in a very ill humor. Get up!"

He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins, while the two
friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate Porthos. He, having
seen them crossing the yard, took care not to answer, and they rang in
vain.

Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the Pont Neuf,
still driving the two sorry animals before him, he reached the Rue aux
Ours. Arrived there, he fastened, according to the orders of his master,
both horse and mule to the knocker of the procurator's door; then,
without taking any thought for their future, he returned to Porthos, and
told him that his commission was completed.

In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had not eaten anything
since the morning, made such a noise in raising and letting fall the
knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in
the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged.

Mme. Coquenard recognized her present, and could not at first comprehend
this restitution; but the visit of Porthos soon enlightened her. The
anger which fired the eyes of the Musketeer, in spite of his efforts to
suppress it, terrified his sensitive inamorata. In fact, Mousqueton had
not concealed from his master that he had met d'Artagnan and Aramis, and
that d'Artagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the Bearnese pony
upon which he had come to Paris, and which he had sold for three crowns.

Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the procurator's
wife in the cloister of St. Magloire. The procurator, seeing he was
going, invited him to dinner--an invitation which the Musketeer refused
with a majestic air.

Mme. Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St. Magloire, for
she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there; but she was
fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.

All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fall in the
shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of a woman Porthos
let fall upon the bowed head of the procurator's wife.

"Alas," said she, "I did all for the best! One of our clients is a
horsedealer; he owes money to the office, and is backward in his pay. I
took the mule and the horse for what he owed us; he assured me that they
were two noble steeds."

"Well, madame," said Porthos, "if he owed you more than five crowns,
your horsedealer is a thief."

"There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur Porthos," said
the procurator's wife, seeking to excuse herself.

"No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy things cheap ought
to permit others to seek more generous friends." And Porthos, turning on
his heel, made a step to retire.

"Monsieur Porthos! Monsieur Porthos!" cried the procurator's wife. "I
have been wrong; I see it. I ought not to have driven a bargain when it
was to equip a cavalier like you."

Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step. The procurator's wife
fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud, all surrounded by duchesses
and marchionesses, who cast bags of money at his feet.

"Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!" cried she. "Stop, and
let us talk."

"Talking with you brings me misfortune," said Porthos.

"But, tell me, what do you ask?"

"Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I asked you for
something."

The procurator's wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and in the violence
of her grief she cried out, "Monsieur Porthos, I am ignorant of all such
matters! How should I know what a horse is? How should I know what horse
furniture is?"

"You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what they are;
but you wished to be frugal, and consequently to lend at usury."

"It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair that wrong, upon my
word of honor."

"How so?" asked the Musketeer.

"Listen. This evening M. Coquenard is going to the house of the Due de
Chaulnes, who has sent for him. It is for a consultation, which will
last three hours at least. Come! We shall be alone, and can make up our
accounts."

"In good time. Now you talk, my dear."

"You pardon me?"

"We shall see," said Porthos, majestically; and the two separated
saying, "Till this evening."

"The devil!" thought Porthos, as he walked away, "it appears I am
getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard's strongbox at last."





35 A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID


The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by d'Artagnan at
last arrived.

As was his custom, d'Artagnan presented himself at Milady's at about
nine o'clock. He found her in a charming humor. Never had he been so
well received. Our Gascon knew, by the first glance of his eye, that his
billet had been delivered, and that this billet had had its effect.

Kitty entered to bring some sherbet. Her mistress put on a charming
face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the poor girl was so sad
that she did not even notice Milady's condescension.

D'Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and was forced
to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature had made a mistake in
their formation. To the great lady she had given a heart vile and venal;
to the SOUBRETTE she had given the heart of a duchess.

At ten o'clock Milady began to appear restless. D'Artagnan knew what she
wanted. She looked at the clock, rose, reseated herself, smiled at
d'Artagnan with an air which said, "You are very amiable, no doubt, but
you would be charming if you would only depart."

D'Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand to kiss. The
young man felt her press his hand, and comprehended that this was a
sentiment, not of coquetry, but of gratitude because of his departure.

"She loves him devilishly," he murmured. Then he went out.

This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the antechamber,
nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great door. It was necessary that
d'Artagnan should find alone the staircase and the little chamber. She
heard him enter, but she did not raise her head. The young man went to
her and took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.

As d'Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady in a
delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by way of
recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the
commission, she had given Kitty a purse.

Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a corner,
where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet.
The poor girl, under the caresses of d'Artagnan, lifted her head.
D'Artagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance. She
joined her hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a
word. As little sensitive as was the heart of d'Artagnan, he was touched
by this mute sorrow; but he held too tenaciously to his projects, above
all to this one, to change the program which he had laid out in advance.
He did not therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch; only he
represented his action as one of simple vengeance.

For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady, doubtless to
conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered Kitty to extinguish all
the lights in the apartment, and even in the little chamber itself.
Before daybreak M. de Wardes must take his departure, still in
obscurity.

Presently they heard Milady retire to her room. D'Artagnan slipped into
the wardrobe. Hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded.
Kitty went to her mistress, and did not leave the door open; but the
partition was so thin that one could hear nearly all that passed between
the two women.

Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the smallest
details of the pretended interview of the soubrette with de Wardes when
he received the letter; how he had responded; what was the expression of
his face; if he seemed very amorous. And to all these questions poor
Kitty, forced to put on a pleasant face, responded in a stifled voice
whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark, solely
because happiness is egotistical.

Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count approached, Milady
had everything about her darkened, and ordered Kitty to return to her
own chamber, and introduce de Wardes whenever he presented himself.

Kitty's detention was not long. Hardly had d'Artagnan seen, through a
crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than
he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty
reclosed the door of communication.

"What is that noise?" demanded Milady.

"It is I," said d'Artagnan in a subdued voice, "I, the Comte de Wardes."

"Oh, my God, my God!" murmured Kitty, "he has not even waited for the
hour he himself named!"

"Well," said Milady, in a trembling voice, "why do you not enter? Count,
Count," added she, "you know that I wait for you."

At this appeal d'Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and slipped into the
chamber.

If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives
under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to his
happy rival. D'Artagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had not
foreseen. Jealousy gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much as
poor Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber.

"Yes, Count," said Milady, in her softest voice, and pressing his hand
in her own, "I am happy in the love which your looks and your words have
expressed to me every time we have met. I also--I love you. Oh,
tomorrow, tomorrow, I must have some pledge from you which will prove
that you think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!" and
she slipped a ring from her finger onto d'Artagnan's. D'Artagnan
remembered having seen this ring on the finger of Milady; it was a
magnificent sapphire, encircled with brilliants.

The first movement of d'Artagnan was to return it, but Milady added,
"No, no! Keep that ring for love of me. Besides, in accepting it," she
added, in a voice full of emotion, "you render me a much greater service
than you imagine."

"This woman is full of mysteries," murmured d'Artagnan to himself. At
that instant he felt himself ready to reveal all. He even opened his
mouth to tell Milady who he was, and with what a revengeful purpose he
had come; but she added, "Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon
barely failed to kill."

The monster was himself.

"Oh," continued Milady, "do your wounds still make you suffer?"

"Yes, much," said d'Artagnan, who did not well know how to answer.

"Be tranquil," murmured Milady; "I will avenge you--and cruelly!"

"PESTE!" said d'Artagnan to himself, "the moment for confidences has not
yet come."

It took some time for d'Artagnan to resume this little dialogue; but
then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had
completely vanished. This woman exercised over him an unaccountable
power; he hated and adored her at the same time. He would not have
believed that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same heart,
and by their union constitute a passion so strange, and as it were,
diabolical.

Presently it sounded one o'clock. It was necessary to separate.
D'Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt only the liveliest
regret at the parting; and as they addressed each other in a
reciprocally passionate adieu, another interview was arranged for the
following week.

Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to d'Artagnan when he passed
through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted him through the
darkness, and only quit him at the staircase.

The next morning d'Artagnan ran to find Athos. He was engaged in an
adventure so singular that he wished for counsel. He therefore told him
all.

"Your Milady," said he, "appears to be an infamous creature, but not the
less you have done wrong to deceive her. In one fashion or another you
have a terrible enemy on your hands."

While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with
diamonds which had taken, on d'Artagnan's finger, the place of the
queen's ring, carefully kept in a casket.

"You notice my ring?" said the Gascon, proud to display so rich a gift
in the eyes of his friends.

"Yes," said Athos, "it reminds me of a family jewel."

"It is beautiful, is it not?" said d'Artagnan.

"Yes," said Athos, "magnificent. I did not think two sapphires of such a
fine water existed. Have you traded it for your diamond?"

"No. It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather
Frenchwoman--for I am convinced she was born in France, though I have
not questioned her."

"That ring comes from Milady?" cried Athos, with a voice in which it was
easy to detect strong emotion.

"Her very self; she gave it me last night. Here it is," replied
d'Artagnan, taking it from his finger.

Athos examined it and became very pale. He tried it on his left hand; it
fit his finger as if made for it.

A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of
this gentleman.

"It is impossible it can be she," said he. "How could this ring come
into the hands of Milady Clarik? And yet it is difficult to suppose such
a resemblance should exist between two jewels."

"Do you know this ring?" said d'Artagnan.

"I thought I did," replied Athos; "but no doubt I was mistaken." And he
returned d'Artagnan the ring without, however, ceasing to look at it.

"Pray, d'Artagnan," said Athos, after a minute, "either take off that
ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such cruel recollections
that I shall have no head to converse with you. Don't ask me for
counsel; don't tell me you are perplexed what to do. But stop! let me
look at that sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its
faces scratched by accident."

D'Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.

Athos started. "Look," said he, "is it not strange?" and he pointed out
to d'Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.

"But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?"

"From my mother, who inherited it from her mother. As I told you, it is
an old family jewel."

"And you--sold it?" asked d'Artagnan, hesitatingly.

"No," replied Athos, with a singular smile. "I gave it away in a night
of love, as it has been given to you."

D'Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if there were
abysses in Milady's soul whose depths were dark and unknown. He took
back the ring, but put it in his pocket and not on his finger.

"d'Artagnan," said Athos, taking his hand, "you know I love you; if I
had a son I could not love him better. Take my advice, renounce this
woman. I do not know her, but a sort of intuition tells me she is a lost
creature, and that there is something fatal about her."

"You are right," said d'Artagnan; "I will have done with her. I own that
this woman terrifies me."

"Shall you have the courage?" said Athos.

"I shall," replied d'Artagnan, "and instantly."

"In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly," said the gentleman,
pressing the Gascon's hand with an affection almost paternal; "and God
grant that this woman, who has scarcely entered into your life, may not
leave a terrible trace in it!" And Athos bowed to d'Artagnan like a man
who wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left alone
with his thoughts.

On reaching home d'Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him. A month of
fever could not have changed her more than this one night of
sleeplessness and sorrow.

She was sent by her mistress to the false de Wardes. Her mistress was
mad with love, intoxicated with joy. She wished to know when her lover
would meet her a second night; and poor Kitty, pale and trembling,
awaited d'Artagnan's reply. The counsels of his friend, joined to the
cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and
his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again. As a reply, he wrote
the following letter:

Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting. Since my
convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that I am
forced to regulate them a little. When your turn comes, I shall have the
honor to inform you of it. I kiss your hands.

Comte de Wardes

Not a word about the sapphire. Was the Gascon determined to keep it as a
weapon against Milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve the
sapphire as a last resource for his outfit? It would be wrong to judge
the actions of one period from the point of view of another. That which
would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that time
quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the best
families were frequently supported by their mistresses. D'Artagnan gave
the open letter to Kitty, who at first was unable to comprehend it, but
who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time. She could
scarcely believe in her happiness; and d'Artagnan was forced to renew
with the living voice the assurances which he had written. And whatever
might be--considering the violent character of Milady--the danger which
the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her mistress, she ran
back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.

The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival.

Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty's in bringing it;
but at the first words she read she became livid. She crushed the paper
in her hand, and turning with flashing eyes upon Kitty, she cried, "What
is this letter?"

"The answer to Madame's," replied Kitty, all in a tremble.

"Impossible!" cried Milady. "It is impossible a gentleman could have
written such a letter to a woman." Then all at once, starting, she
cried, "My God! can he have--" and she stopped. She ground her teeth;
she was of the color of ashes. She tried to go toward the window for
air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, and
she sank into an armchair. Kitty, fearing she was ill, hastened toward
her and was beginning to open her dress; but Milady started up, pushing
her away. "What do you want with me?" said she, "and why do you place
your hand on me?"

"I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her help,"
responded the maid, frightened at the terrible expression which had come
over her mistress's face.

"I faint? I? I? Do you take me for half a woman? When I am insulted I do
not faint; I avenge myself!"

And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.





36 DREAM OF VENGEANCE


That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d'Artagnan came as usual,
he should be immediately admitted; but he did not come.

The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and related to him
all that had passed on the preceding evening. D'Artagnan smiled; this
jealous anger of Milady was his revenge.

That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the preceding
evening. She renewed the order relative to the Gascon; but as before she
expected him in vain.

The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at d'Artagnan's, she was
no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days; but on the
contrary sad as death.

D'Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her; but she, as
her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him.

This letter was in Milady's handwriting; only this time it was addressed
to M. d'Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.

He opened it and read as follows:

Dear M. d'Artagnan, It is wrong thus to neglect your friends,
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
time. My brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day
before, but in vain. Will it be the same this evening?

Your very grateful, Milady Clarik

"That's all very simple," said d'Artagnan; "I expected this letter. My
credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte de Wardes."

"And will you go?" asked Kitty.

"Listen to me, my dear girl," said the Gascon, who sought for an excuse
in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made Athos; "you must
understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive
invitation. Milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman
would go?"

"Oh, my God!" said Kitty, "you know how to represent things in such a
way that you are always in the right. You are going now to pay your
court to her again, and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in your
own name and with your own face, it will be much worse than before."

Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen. D'Artagnan
reassured her as well as he could, and promised to remain insensible to
the seductions of Milady.

He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be more grateful
for her kindnesses than he was, and that he would be obedient to her
orders. He did not dare to write for fear of not being able--to such
experienced eyes as those of Milady--to disguise his writing
sufficiently.

As nine o'clock sounded, d'Artagnan was at the Place Royale. It was
evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned, for
as soon as d'Artagnan appeared, before even he had asked if Milady were
visible, one of them ran to announce him.

"Show him in," said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing that
d'Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.

He was introduced.

"I am at home to nobody," said Milady; "observe, to nobody." The servant
went out.

D'Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady. She was pale, and looked
fatigued, either from tears or want of sleep. The number of lights had
been intentionally diminished, but the young woman could not conceal the
traces of the fever which had devoured her for two days.

D'Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry. She then made an
extraordinary effort to receive him, but never did a more distressed
countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile.

To the questions which d'Artagnan put concerning her health, she
replied, "Bad, very bad."

"Then," replied he, "my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt, stand in need
of repose, and I will withdraw."

"No, no!" said Milady. "On the contrary, stay, Monsieur d'Artagnan; your
agreeable company will divert me."

"Oh, oh!" thought d'Artagnan. "She has never been so kind before. On
guard!"

Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and conversed with more
than her usual brilliancy. At the same time the fever, which for an
instant abandoned her, returned to give luster to her eyes, color to her
cheeks, and vermillion to her lips. D'Artagnan was again in the presence
of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her enchantments. His
love, which he believed to be extinct but which was only asleep, awoke
again in his heart. Milady smiled, and d'Artagnan felt that he could
damn himself for that smile. There was a moment at which he felt
something like remorse.

By degrees, Milady became more communicative. She asked d'Artagnan if he
had a mistress.

"Alas!" said d'Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he could assume,
"can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me--to me, who, from
the moment I saw you, have only breathed and sighed through you and for
you?"

Milady smiled with a strange smile.

"Then you love me?" said she.

"Have I any need to tell you so? Have you not perceived it?"

"It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture, the more
difficult they are to be won."

"Oh, difficulties do not affright me," said d'Artagnan. "I shrink before
nothing but impossibilities."

"Nothing is impossible," replied Milady, "to true love."

"Nothing, madame?"

"Nothing," replied Milady.

"The devil!" thought d'Artagnan. "The note is changed. Is she going to
fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be
disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me
for de Wardes?"

D'Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady's.

"Well, now," she said, "let us see what you would do to prove this love
of which you speak."

"All that could be required of me. Order; I am ready."

"For everything?"

"For everything," cried d'Artagnan, who knew beforehand that he had not
much to risk in engaging himself thus.

"Well, now let us talk a little seriously," said Milady, in her turn
drawing her armchair nearer to d'Artagnan's chair.

"I am all attention, madame," said he.

Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then, as if
appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, "I have an enemy."

"You, madame!" said d'Artagnan, affecting surprise; "is that possible,
my God?--good and beautiful as you are!"

"A mortal enemy."

"Indeed!"

"An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is
war to the death. May I reckon on you as an auxiliary?"

D'Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature
wished to reach.

"You may, madame," said he, with emphasis. "My arm and my life belong to
you, like my love."

"Then," said Milady, "since you are as generous as you are loving--"

She stopped.

"Well?" demanded d'Artagnan.

"Well," replied Milady, after a moment of silence, "from the present
time, cease to talk of impossibilities."

"Do not overwhelm me with happiness," cried d'Artagnan, throwing himself
on his knees, and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to him.

"Avenge me of that infamous de Wardes," said Milady, between her teeth,
"and I shall soon know how to get rid of you--you double idiot, you
animated sword blade!"

"Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerous woman," said
d'Artagnan, likewise to himself, "after having abused me with such
effrontery, and afterward I will laugh at you with him whom you wish me
to kill."

D'Artagnan lifted up his head.

"I am ready," said he.

"You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan," said Milady.

"I could interpret one of your looks."

"Then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so
much renown?"

"Instantly!"

"But on my part," said Milady, "how should I repay such a service? I
know these lovers. They are men who do nothing for nothing."

"You know the only reply that I desire," said d'Artagnan, "the only one
worthy of you and of me!"

And he drew nearer to her.

She scarcely resisted.

"Interested man!" cried she, smiling.

"Ah," cried d'Artagnan, really carried away by the passion this woman
had the power to kindle in his heart, "ah, that is because my happiness
appears so impossible to me; and I have such fear that it should fly
away from me like a dream that I pant to make a reality of it."

"Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!"

"I am at your orders," said d'Artagnan.

"Quite certain?" said Milady, with a last doubt.

"Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your beautiful
eyes!"

"Who told you that I had been weeping?" said she.

"It appeared to me--"

"Such women as I never weep," said Milady.

"So much the better! Come, tell me his name!"

"Remember that his name is all my secret."

"Yet I must know his name."

"Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!"

"You overwhelm me with joy. What is his name?"

"You know him."

"Indeed."

"Yes."

"It is surely not one of my friends?" replied d'Artagnan, affecting
hesitation in order to make her believe him ignorant.

"If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?" cried Milady;
and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.

"Not if it were my own brother!" cried d'Artagnan, as if carried away by
his enthusiasm.

Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that was meant.

"I love your devotedness," said Milady.

"Alas, do you love nothing else in me?" asked d'Artagnan.

"I love you also, YOU!" said she, taking his hand.

The warm pressure made d'Artagnan tremble, as if by the touch that fever
which consumed Milady attacked himself.

"You love me, you!" cried he. "Oh, if that were so, I should lose my
reason!"

And he folded her in his arms. She made no effort to remove her lips
from his kisses; only she did not respond to them. Her lips were cold;
it appeared to d'Artagnan that he had embraced a statue.

He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by love. He almost
believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the crime of
de Wardes. If de Wardes had at that moment been under his hand, he would
have killed him.

Milady seized the occasion.

"His name is--" said she, in her turn.

"De Wardes; I know it," cried d'Artagnan.

"And how do you know it?" asked Milady, seizing both his hands, and
endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart.

D'Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away, and that he
had committed an error.

"Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say," repeated Milady, "how do you know
it?"

"How do I know it?" said d'Artagnan.

"Yes."

"I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon where I
was, showed a ring which he said he had received from you."

"Wretch!" cried Milady.

The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the very bottom
of d'Artagnan's heart.

"Well?" continued she.

"Well, I will avenge you of this wretch," replied d'Artagnan, giving
himself the airs of Don Japhet of Armenia.

"Thanks, my brave friend!" cried Milady; "and when shall I be avenged?"

"Tomorrow--immediately--when you please!"

Milady was about to cry out, "Immediately," but she reflected that such
precipitation would not be very gracious toward d'Artagnan.

Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand counsels to
give to her defender, in order that he might avoid explanations with the
count before witnesses. All this was answered by an expression of
d'Artagnan's. "Tomorrow," said he, "you will be avenged, or I shall be
dead."

"No," said she, "you will avenge me; but you will not be dead. He is a
coward."

"With women, perhaps; but not with men. I know something of him."

"But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in
your contest with him."

"Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn her back
tomorrow."

"Which means that you now hesitate?"

"No, I do not hesitate; God forbid! But would it be just to allow me to
go to a possible death without having given me at least something more
than hope?"

Milady answered by a glance which said, "Is that all?--speak, then." And
then accompanying the glance with explanatory words, "That is but too
just," said she, tenderly.

"Oh, you are an angel!" exclaimed the young man.

"Then all is agreed?" said she.

"Except that which I ask of you, dear love."

"But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?"

"I cannot wait till tomorrow."

"Silence! I hear my brother. It will be useless for him to find you
here."

She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.

"Go out this way," said she, opening a small private door, "and come
back at eleven o'clock; we will then terminate this conversation. Kitty
will conduct you to my chamber."

The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words.

"Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing there like a
statue? Do as I bid you: show the chevalier out; and this evening at
eleven o'clock--you have heard what I said."

"It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven o'clock,"
thought d'Artagnan; "that's a settled custom."

Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.

"But," said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from the reproaches
of Kitty, "I must not play the fool. This woman is certainly a great
liar. I must take care."





37 MILADY'S SECRET


D'Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to Kitty's
chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do--and that for two
reasons: the first, because by this means he should escape reproaches,
recriminations, and prayers; the second, because he was not sorry to
have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if
possible, to fathom those of this woman.

What was most clear in the matter was that d'Artagnan loved Milady like
a madman, and that she did not love him at all. In an instant d'Artagnan
perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home
and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he
and de Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same, and
that consequently he could not undertake, without committing suicide, to
kill the Comte de Wardes. But he also was spurred on by a ferocious
desire of vengeance. He wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and
as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it, he
could not make up his mind to renounce it.

He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning at every
ten steps to look at the light in Milady's apartment, which was to be
seen through the blinds. It was evident that this time the young woman
was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the
first.

At length the light disappeared. With this light was extinguished the
last irresolution in the heart of d'Artagnan. He recalled to his mind
the details of the first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on
fire he re-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty's chamber.

The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs, wished to
delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the watch, had heard the
noise d'Artagnan had made, and opening the door, said, "Come in."

All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous effrontery,
that d'Artagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what he heard. He
imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic intrigues one
meets in dreams. He, however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady,
yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises over
iron.

As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it. Jealousy, fury,
offended pride, all the passions in short that dispute the heart of an
outraged woman in love, urged her to make a revelation; but she
reflected that she would be totally lost if she confessed having
assisted in such a machination, and above all, that d'Artagnan would
also be lost to her forever. This last thought of love counseled her to
make this last sacrifice.

D'Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his wishes. It was
no longer a rival who was beloved; it was himself who was apparently
beloved. A secret voice whispered to him, at the bottom of his heart,
that he was but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressed
till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but madness silenced
this voice and stifled its murmurs. And then our Gascon, with that large
quantity of conceit which we know he possessed, compared himself with de
Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for
himself?

He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment. Milady was no
longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment
terrified him; she was an ardent, passionate mistress, abandoning
herself to love which she also seemed to feel. Two hours thus glided
away. When the transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who had
not the same motives for forgetfulness that d'Artagnan had, was the
first to return to reality, and asked the young man if the means which
were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and de Wardes
were already arranged in his mind.

But d'Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course, forgot
himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it was too late to
think about duels and sword thrusts.

This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind terrified
Milady, whose questions became more pressing.

Then d'Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this impossible
duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he could not succeed.
Milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her
irresistible spirit and her iron will.

D'Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady to
renounce, by pardoning de Wardes, the furious projects she had formed.

But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed in a sharp,
bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the darkness, "Are you
afraid, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan?"

"You cannot think so, dear love!" replied d'Artagnan; "but now, suppose
this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty than you think him?"

"At all events," said Milady, seriously, "he has deceived me, and from
the moment he deceived me, he merited death."

"He shall die, then, since you condemn him!" said d'Artagnan, in so firm
a tone that it appeared to Milady an undoubted proof of devotion. This
reassured her.

We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but d'Artagnan
believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through
the window blinds, and invaded the chamber with its paleness. Seeing
d'Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her
on the Comte de Wardes.

"I am quite ready," said d'Artagnan; "but in the first place I should
like to be certain of one thing."

"And what is that?" asked Milady.

"That is, whether you really love me?"

"I have given you proof of that, it seems to me."

"And I am yours, body and soul!"

"Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must,
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. Is it not so?"

"Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say," replied d'Artagnan,
"do you not entertain a little fear on my account?"

"What have I to fear?"

"Why, that I may be dangerously wounded--killed even."

"Impossible!" cried Milady, "you are such a valiant man, and such an
expert swordsman."

"You would not, then, prefer a method," resumed d'Artagnan, "which would
equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless?"

Milady looked at her lover in silence. The pale light of the first rays
of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.

"Really," said she, "I believe you now begin to hesitate."

"No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de Wardes,
since you have ceased to love him. I think that a man must be so
severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no
other chastisement."

"Who told you that I loved him?" asked Milady, sharply.

"At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity,
that you love another," said the young man, in a caressing tone, "and I
repeat that I am really interested for the count."

"You?" asked Milady.

"Yes, I."

"And why YOU?"

"Because I alone know--"

"What?"

"That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty toward you
as he appears."

"Indeed!" said Milady, in an anxious tone; "explain yourself, for I
really cannot tell what you mean."

And she looked at d'Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly, with eyes which
seemed to burn themselves away.

"Yes; I am a man of honor," said d'Artagnan, determined to come to an
end, "and since your love is mine, and I am satisfied I possess it--for
I do possess it, do I not?"

"Entirely; go on."

"Well, I feel as if transformed--a confession weighs on my mind."

"A confession!"

"If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it, but you love
me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?"

"Without doubt."

"Then if through excess of love I have rendered myself culpable toward
you, you will pardon me?"

"Perhaps."

D'Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips to Milady's,
but she evaded him.

"This confession," said she, growing paler, "what is this confession?"

"You gave de Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did
you not?"

"No, no! It is not true," said Milady, in a tone of voice so firm, and
with a countenance so unchanged, that if d'Artagnan had not been in such
perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.

"Do not lie, my angel," said d'Artagnan, smiling; "that would be
useless."

"What do you mean? Speak! you kill me."

"Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have already pardoned
you."

"What next? what next?"

"De Wardes cannot boast of anything."

"How is that? You told me yourself that that ring--"

"That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the d'Artagnan of
today are the same person."

The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame--a slight
storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely
deceived, and his error was not of long duration.

Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed d'Artagnan's attempted embrace by a
violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.

It was almost broad daylight.

D'Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India linen, to
implore her pardon; but she, with a strong movement, tried to escape.
Then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders; and on one of
those lovely shoulders, round and white, d'Artagnan recognized, with
inexpressible astonishment, the FLEUR-DE-LIS--that indelible mark which
the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted.

"Great God!" cried d'Artagnan, loosing his hold of her dress, and
remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.

But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror. He had doubtless
seen all. The young man now knew her secret, her terrible secret--the
secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of
which all the world was ignorant, except himself.

She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, but like a wounded
panther.

"Ah, wretch!" cried she, "you have basely betrayed me, and still more,
you have my secret! You shall die."

And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing
table, opened it with a feverish and trembling hand, drew from it a
small poniard, with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade, and then threw
herself with a bound upon d'Artagnan.

Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was terrified at that
wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and
those bleeding lips. He recoiled to the other side of the room as he
would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his
sword coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost
unconsciously from the scabbard. But without taking any heed of the
sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him, and did
not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat.

She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but d'Artagnan kept it
free from her grasp, and presenting the point, sometimes at her eyes,
sometimes at her breast, compelled her to glide behind the bedstead,
while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty's
apartment.

Milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury,
screaming in a formidable way.

As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel, d'Artagnan began
to recover himself little by little.

"Well, beautiful lady, very well," said he; "but, PARDIEU, if you don't
calm yourself, I will design a second FLEUR-DE-LIS upon one of those
pretty cheeks!"

"Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!" howled Milady.

But d'Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to Kitty's
door. At the noise they made, she in overturning the furniture in her
efforts to get at him, he in screening himself behind the furniture to
keep out of her reach, Kitty opened the door. D'Artagnan, who had
unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three
paces from it. With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into
that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the door, and
placed all his weight against it, while Kitty pushed the bolts.

Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a strength
apparently above that of a woman; but finding she could not accomplish
this, she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard, the point of
which repeatedly glittered through the wood. Every blow was accompanied
with terrible imprecations.

"Quick, Kitty, quick!" said d'Artagnan, in a low voice, as soon as the
bolts were fast, "let me get out of the hotel; for if we leave her time
to turn round, she will have me killed by the servants."

"But you can't go out so," said Kitty; "you are naked."

"That's true," said d'Artagnan, then first thinking of the costume he
found himself in, "that's true. But dress me as well as you are able,
only make haste; think, my dear girl, it's life and death!"

Kitty was but too well aware of that. In a turn of the hand she muffled
him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a cloak. She gave him some
slippers, in which he placed his naked feet, and then conducted him down
the stairs. It was time. Milady had already rung her bell, and roused
the whole hotel. The porter was drawing the cord at the moment Milady
cried from her window, "Don't open!"

The young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent
gesture. The moment she lost sight of him, Milady tumbled fainting into
her chamber.





38 HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT


D'Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of
what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed across half Paris, and
did not stop till he came to Athos's door. The confusion of his mind,
the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who
started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him
precipitate his course.

He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos's apartment, and
knocked at the door enough to break it down.

Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons,
and d'Artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to
overturn the astonished lackey.

In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his
speech.

"Holloa, there!" cried he; "what do you want, you strumpet? What's your
business here, you hussy?"

D'Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds
of the cloak. At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor
devil perceived he had to deal with a man. He then concluded it must be
an assassin.

"Help! murder! help!" cried he.

"Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!" said the young man; "I am
d'Artagnan; don't you know me? Where is your master?"

"You, Monsieur d'Artagnan!" cried Grimaud, "impossible."

"Grimaud," said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown,
"Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting yourself to speak?"

"Ah, monsieur, it is--"

"Silence!"

Grimaud contented himself with pointing d'Artagnan out to his master
with his finger.

Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a
laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his
eyes--petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and
mustaches stiff with agitation.

"Don't laugh, my friend!" cried d'Artagnan; "for heaven's sake, don't
laugh, for upon my soul, it's no laughing matter!"

And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a
real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying,
"Are you wounded, my friend? How pale you are!"

"No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure! Are you alone,
Athos?"

"PARBLEU! whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?"

"Well, well!" and d'Artagnan rushed into Athos's chamber.

"Come, speak!" said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that
they might not be disturbed. "Is the king dead? Have you killed the
cardinal? You are quite upset! Come, come, tell me; I am dying with
curiosity and uneasiness!"

"Athos," said d'Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and
appearing in his shirt, "prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an
unheard-of story."

"Well, but put on this dressing gown first," said the Musketeer to his
friend.

D'Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve
for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.

"Well?" said Athos.

"Well," replied d'Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos's ear, and
lowering his voice, "Milady is marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS upon her
shoulder!"

"Ah!" cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.

"Let us see," said d'Artagnan. "Are you SURE that the OTHER is dead?"

"THE OTHER?" said Athos, in so stifled a voice that d'Artagnan scarcely
heard him.

"Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens."

Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.

"This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years."

"Fair," said Athos, "is she not?"

"Very."

"Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?"

"Yes."

"Tall, well-made? She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?"

"Yes."

"The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had
been made to efface it by the application of poultices?"

"Yes."

"But you say she is English?"

"She is called Milady, but she may be French. Lord de Winter is only her
brother-in-law."

"I will see her, d'Artagnan!"

"Beware, Athos, beware. You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail."

"She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself."

"She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
furious?"

"No," said Athos.

"A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!"

D'Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady and her menaces
of death.

"You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a hair," said
Athos. "Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris. We are going
according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone--"

"She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
you. Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!"

"My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?" said Athos.
"Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?"

"There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this
woman is one of the cardinal's spies, I am sure of that."

"In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you in high
admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for
you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and as
hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it's a cardinal's hatred,
take care of yourself. If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat,
use every precaution. Mistrust everything, in short, even your own
shadow."

"Fortunately," said d'Artagnan, "all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I
hope, only men to dread."

"In the meantime," said Athos, "I renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, I will go with you. You must return to the Rue des
Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you."

"But however near it may be," replied d'Artagnan, "I cannot go thither
in this guise."

"That's true," said Athos, and he rang the bell.

Grimaud entered.

Athos made him a sign to go to d'Artagnan's residence, and bring back
some clothes. Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

"All this will not advance your outfit," said Athos; "for if I am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you. Fortunately,
you have the sapphire."

"The jewel is yours, my dear Athos! Did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?"

"Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
magnificent. My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of
keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch."

"Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much
value."

"I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that
infamous creature? Never; that ring is defiled, d'Artagnan."

"Sell it, then."

"Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should consider it a
profanation."

"Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and
when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back
cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the
hands of usurers."

Athos smiled.

"You are a capital companion, d'Artagnan," said be; "your never-failing
cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction. Well, let us pledge the
ring, but upon one condition."

"What?"

"That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred
crowns for me."

"Don't dream it, Athos. I don't need the quarter of such a sum--I who am
still only in the Guards--and by selling my saddles, I shall procure it.
What do I want? A horse for Planchet, that's all. Besides, you forget
that I have a ring likewise."

"To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least,
I have thought so."

"Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us
from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger. It is not only a
valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman."

"I don't at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine;
and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us."

"Well, I will take it, then," said d'Artagnan.

At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.

d'Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same. When the two were
ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs. Bonacieux was
standing at the door, and looked at d'Artagnan hatefully.

"Make haste, dear lodger," said he; "there is a very pretty girl waiting
for you upstairs; and you know women don't like to be kept waiting."

"That's Kitty!" said d'Artagnan to himself, and darted into the passage.

Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and crouching
against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a tremble. As soon as
she perceived him, she cried, "You have promised your protection; you
have promised to save me from her anger. Remember, it is you who have
ruined me!"

"Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty," said d'Artagnan; "be at ease, my girl.
But what happened after my departure?"

"How can I tell!" said Kitty. "The lackeys were brought by the cries she
made. She was mad with passion. There exist no imprecations she did not
pour out against you. Then I thought she would remember it was through
my chamber you had penetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I
was your accomplice; so I took what little money I had and the best of
my things, and I got away.

"Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you? I am going away the day
after tomorrow."

"Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier. Help me out of Paris; help me
out of France!"

"I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle," aid
d'Artagnan.

"No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of your
acquaintance--in your own country, for instance."

"My dear little love! In my country the ladies do without chambermaids.
But stop! I can manage your business for you. Planchet, go and find
Aramis. Request him to come here directly. We have something very
important to say to him."

"I understand," said Athos; "but why not Porthos? I should have thought
that his duchess--"

"Oh, Porthos's duchess is dressed by her husband's clerks," said
d'Artagnan, laughing. "Besides, Kitty would not like to live in the Rue
aux Ours. Isn't it so, Kitty?"

"I do not care where I live," said Kitty, "provided I am well concealed,
and nobody knows where I am."

"Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you are no longer
jealous of me--"

"Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near," said Kitty, "I shall always love
you."

"Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?" murmured Athos.

"And I, also," said d'Artagnan, "I also. I shall always love you; be
sure of that. But now answer me. I attach great importance to the
question I am about to put to you. Did you never hear talk of a young
woman who was carried off one night?"

"There, now! Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman still?"

"No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--Monsieur Athos, this
gentleman here."

"I?" cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is
about to tread upon an adder.

"You, to be sure!" said d'Artagnan, pressing Athos's hand. "You know the
interest we both take in this poor little Madame Bonacieux. Besides,
Kitty will tell nothing; will you, Kitty? You understand, my dear girl,"
continued d'Artagnan, "she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw
at the door as you came in."

"Oh, my God! You remind me of my fright! If he should have known me
again!"

"How? know you again? Did you ever see that man before?"

"He came twice to Milady's."

"That's it. About what time?"

"Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago."

"Exactly so."

"And yesterday evening he came again."

"Yesterday evening?"

"Yes, just before you came."

"My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies. And do you
believe he knew you again, Kitty?"

"I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it was too
late."

"Go down, Athos--he mistrusts you less than me--and see if he be still
at his door."

Athos went down and returned immediately.

"He has gone," said he, "and the house door is shut."

"He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the pigeons are at
this moment in the dovecot."

"Well, then, let us all fly," said Athos, "and leave nobody here but
Planchet to bring us news."

"A minute. Aramis, whom we have sent for!"

"That's true," said Athos; "we must wait for Aramis."

At that moment Aramis entered.

The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave him to
understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for
Kitty.

Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring, "Will it be
really rendering you a service, d'Artagnan?"

"I shall be grateful to you all my life."

"Very well. Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her friends who
resides in the provinces, I believe, for a trustworthy maid. If you can,
my dear d'Artagnan, answer for Mademoiselle-"

"Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted to the person
who will give me the means of quitting Paris."

"Then," said Aramis, "this falls out very well."

He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed
with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.

"And now, my dear girl," said d'Artagnan, "you know that it is not good
for any of us to be here. Therefore let us separate. We shall meet again
in better days."

"And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may be," said
Kitty, "you will find me loving you as I love you today."

"Dicers' oaths!" said Athos, while d'Artagnan went to conduct Kitty
downstairs.

An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing to meet
again at four o'clock with Athos, and leaving Planchet to guard the
house.

Aramis returned home, and Athos and d'Artagnan busied themselves about
pledging the sapphire.

As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three hundred pistoles
on the ring. Still further, the Jew told them that if they would sell it
to him, as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings, he would
give five hundred pistoles for it.

Athos and d'Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and the
knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three hours to purchase
the entire equipment of the Musketeer. Besides, Athos was very easy, and
a noble to his fingers' ends. When a thing suited him he paid the price
demanded, without thinking to ask for any abatement. D'Artagnan would
have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his shoulder,
with a smile, and d'Artagnan understood that it was all very well for
such a little Gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain, but not
for a man who had the bearing of a prince. The Musketeer met with a
superb Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean and
elegant, rising six years. He examined him, and found him sound and
without blemish. They asked a thousand livres for him.

He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while d'Artagnan was
discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money
on the table.

Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost three hundred livres.

But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased, Athos had not a
sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles. D'Artagnan offered his
friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.

But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.

"How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased
it?" said Athos.

"Five hundred pistoles."

"That is to say, two hundred more--a hundred pistoles for you and a
hundred pistoles for me. Well, now, that would be a real fortune to us,
my friend; let us go back to the Jew's again."

"What! will you--"

"This ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then we
shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that
we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain. Go and tell
him the ring is his, d'Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred pistoles
with you."

"Reflect, Athos!"

"Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
make sacrifices. Go, d'Artagnan, go; Grimaud will accompany you with his
musketoon."

A half hour afterward, d'Artagnan returned with the two thousand livres,
and without having met with any accident.

It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not expect.





