41 THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE


The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political events of the
reign of Louis XIII, and one of the great military enterprises of the
cardinal. It is, then, interesting and even necessary that we should say
a few words about it, particularly as many details of this siege are
connected in too important a manner with the story we have undertaken to
relate to allow us to pass it over in silence.

The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were
extensive. Let us unfold them first, and then pass on to the private
plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his Eminence than the
others.

Of the important cities given up by Henry IV to the Huguenots as places
of safety, there only remained La Rochelle. It became necessary,
therefore, to destroy this last bulwark of Calvinism--a dangerous leaven
with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly
mingling.

Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers of all
nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect, flocked at the first
summons under the standard of the Protestants, and organized themselves
like a vast association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts
of Europe.

La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the
other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of dissensions and
ambition. Moreover, its port was the last in the kingdom of France open
to the English, and by closing it against England, our eternal enemy,
the cardinal completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.

Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic--Protestant
by conviction and Catholic as commander of the order of the Holy Ghost;
Bassompierre, who was a German by birth and a Frenchman at heart--in
short, Bassompierre, who had a distinguished command at the siege of La
Rochelle, said, in charging at the head of several other Protestant
nobles like himself, "You will see, gentlemen, that we shall be fools
enough to take La Rochelle."

And Bassompierre was right. The cannonade of the Isle of Re presaged to
him the dragonnades of the Cevennes; the taking of La Rochelle was the
preface to the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

We have hinted that by the side of these views of the leveling and
simplifying minister, which belong to history, the chronicler is forced
to recognize the lesser motives of the amorous man and jealous rival.

Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen. Was this love a
simple political affair, or was it naturally one of those profound
passions which Anne of Austria inspired in those who approached her?
That we are not able to say; but at all events, we have seen, by the
anterior developments of this story, that Buckingham had the advantage
over him, and in two or three circumstances, particularly that of the
diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three Musketeers
and the courage and conduct of d'Artagnan, cruelly mystified him.

It was, then, Richelieu's object, not only to get rid of an enemy of
France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but this vengeance must be
grand and striking and worthy in every way of a man who held in his
hand, as his weapon for combat, the forces of a kingdom.

Richelieu knew that in combating England he combated Buckingham; that in
triumphing over England he triumphed over Buckingham--in short, that in
humiliating England in the eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham in
the eyes of the queen.

On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honor of England,
was moved by interests exactly like those of the cardinal. Buckingham
also was pursuing a private vengeance. Buckingham could not under any
pretense be admitted into France as an ambassador; he wished to enter it
as a conqueror.

It resulted from this that the real stake in this game, which two most
powerful kingdoms played for the good pleasure of two amorous men, was
simply a kind look from Anne of Austria.

The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham. Arriving unexpectedly
in sight of the Isle of Re with ninety vessels and nearly twenty
thousand men, he had surprised the Comte de Toiras, who commanded for
the king in the Isle, and he had, after a bloody conflict, effected his
landing.

Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished the Baron de
Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen
months old, and that this little girl was afterward Mme. de Sevigne.

The Comte de Toiras retired into the citadel St. Martin with his
garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fort called the fort of
La Pree.

This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; and till the
king and he could take the command of the siege of La Rochelle, which
was determined, he had sent Monsieur to direct the first operations, and
had ordered all the troops he could dispose of to march toward the
theater of war. It was of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our
friend d'Artagnan formed a part.

The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bed of Justice
had been held; but on rising from his Bed of Justice on the
twenty-eighth of June, he felt himself attacked by fever. He was,
notwithstanding, anxious to set out; but his illness becoming more
serious, he was forced to stop at Villeroy.

Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted. It followed that
d'Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simply in the Guards, found
himself, for the time at least, separated from his good friends--Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis. This separation, which was no more than an
unpleasant circumstance, would have certainly become a cause of serious
uneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknown dangers he was
surrounded.

He, however, arrived without accident in the camp established before La
Rochelle, on the tenth of the month of September of the year 1627.

Everything was in the same state. The Duke of Buckingham and his
English, masters of the Isle of Re, continued to besiege, but without
success, the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree; and hostilities
with La Rochelle had commenced, two or three days before, about a fort
which the Duc d'Angouleme had caused to be constructed near the city.

The Guards, under the command of M. Dessessart, took up their quarters
at the Minimes; but, as we know, d'Artagnan, possessed with ambition to
enter the Musketeers, had formed but few friendships among his comrades,
and he felt himself isolated and given up to his own reflections.

His reflections were not very cheerful. From the time of his arrival in
Paris, he had been mixed up with public affairs; but his own private
affairs had made no great progress, either in love or fortune. As to
love, the only woman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.
Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able to discover what had
become of her. As to fortune, he had made--he, humble as he was--an
enemy of the cardinal; that is to say, of a man before whom trembled the
greatest men of the kingdom, beginning with the king.

That man had the power to crush him, and yet he had not done so. For a
mind so perspicuous as that of d'Artagnan, this indulgence was a light
by which he caught a glimpse of a better future.

Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared, he thought;
but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not to be despised. This enemy
was Milady.

In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection and good will
of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an
additional cause of persecution, and her protection, as it was known,
protected badly--as witness Chalais and Mme. Bonacieux.

What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond, worth five or
six thousand livres, which he wore on his finger; and even this
diamond--supposing that d'Artagnan, in his projects of ambition, wished
to keep it, to make it someday a pledge for the gratitude of the
queen--had not in the meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more
value than the gravel he trod under his feet.

We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for d'Artagnan made these
reflections while walking solitarily along a pretty little road which
led from the camp to the village of Angoutin. Now, these reflections had
led him further than he intended, and the day was beginning to decline
when, by the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the barrel
of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.

D'Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding. He comprehended
that the musket had not come there of itself, and that he who bore it
had not concealed himself behind a hedge with any friendly intentions.
He determined, therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he
could when, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock, he
perceived the extremity of another musket.

This was evidently an ambuscade.

The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw, with a certain
degree of inquietude, that it was leveled in his direction; but as soon
as he perceived that the orifice of the barrel was motionless, he threw
himself upon the ground. At the same instant the gun was fired, and he
heard the whistling of a ball pass over his head.

No time was to be lost. D'Artagnan sprang up with a bound, and at the
same instant the ball from the other musket tore up the gravel on the
very spot on the road where he had thrown himself with his face to the
ground.

D'Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a ridiculous
death in order that it may be said of them that they did not retreat a
single step. Besides, courage was out of the question here; d'Artagnan
had fallen into an ambush.

"If there is a third shot," said he to himself, "I am a lost man."

He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran toward the camp,
with the swiftness of the young men of his country, so renowned for
their agility; but whatever might be his speed, the first who fired,
having had time to reload, fired a second shot, and this time so well
aimed that it struck his hat, and carried it ten paces from him.

As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as he ran, and
arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of breath. He sat down
without saying a word to anybody, and began to reflect.

This event might have three causes:

The first and the most natural was that it might be an ambuscade of the
Rochellais, who might not be sorry to kill one of his Majesty's Guards,
because it would be an enemy the less, and this enemy might have a
well-furnished purse in his pocket.

D'Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball, and shook
his head. The ball was not a musket ball--it was an arquebus ball. The
accuracy of the aim had first given him the idea that a special weapon
had been employed. This could not, then, be a military ambuscade, as the
ball was not of the regular caliber.

This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal. It may be
observed that at the very moment when, thanks to the ray of the sun, he
perceived the gun barrel, he was thinking with astonishment on the
forbearance of his Eminence with respect to him.

But d'Artagnan again shook his head. For people toward whom he had but
to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarely recourse to such means.

It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.

He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of the assassins; he had
escaped so rapidly that he had not had leisure to notice anything.

"Ah, my poor friends!" murmured d'Artagnan; "where are you? And that you
should fail me!"

D'Artagnan passed a very bad night. Three or four times he started up,
imagining that a man was approaching his bed for the purpose of stabbing
him. Nevertheless, day dawned without darkness having brought any
accident.

But d'Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferred was not
relinquished.

D'Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as a reason to
himself that the weather was bad.

At nine o'clock the next morning, the drums beat to arms. The Duc
d'Orleans visited the posts. The guards were under arms, and d'Artagnan
took his place in the midst of his comrades.

Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all the superior
officers approached him to pay their compliments, M. Dessessart, captain
of the Guards, as well as the others.

At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared to d'Artagnan that M.
Dessessart made him a sign to approach. He waited for a fresh gesture on
the part of his superior, for fear he might be mistaken; but this
gesture being repeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive
orders.

"Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for a dangerous
mission, but one which will do honor to those who shall accomplish it;
and I made you a sign in order that you might hold yourself in
readiness."

"Thanks, my captain!" replied d'Artagnan, who wished for nothing better
than an opportunity to distinguish himself under the eye of the
lieutenant general.

In fact the Rochellais had made a sortie during the night, and had
retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gained possession two days
before. The matter was to ascertain, by reconnoitering, how the enemy
guarded this bastion.

At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, and said, "I want
for this mission three or four volunteers, led by a man who can be
depended upon."

"As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under my hand, monsieur,"
said M. Dessessart, pointing to d'Artagnan; "and as to the four or five
volunteers, Monsieur has but to make his intentions known, and the men
will not be wanting."

"Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!" said
d'Artagnan, raising his sword.

Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang forward, and two
other soldiers having joined them, the number was deemed sufficient.
D'Artagnan declined all others, being unwilling to take the first chance
from those who had the priority.

It was not known whether, after the taking of the bastion, the
Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it; the object then
was to examine the place near enough to verify the reports.

D'Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followed the trench;
the two Guards marched abreast with him, and the two soldiers followed
behind.

They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench, till they came
within a hundred paces of the bastion. There, on turning round,
d'Artagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared.

He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayed behind, and he
continued to advance.

At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves within about
sixty paces of the bastion. They saw no one, and the bastion seemed
abandoned.

The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating whether they
should proceed any further, when all at once a circle of smoke enveloped
the giant of stone, and a dozen balls came whistling around d'Artagnan
and his companions.

They knew all they wished to know; the bastion was guarded. A longer
stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence.
D'Artagnan and his two companions turned their backs, and commenced a
retreat which resembled a flight.

On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve them as a
rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell. A ball had passed through his
breast. The other, who was safe and sound, continued his way toward the
camp.

D'Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus, and stooped to
raise him and assist him in regaining the lines; but at this moment two
shots were fired. One ball struck the head of the already-wounded guard,
and the other flattened itself against a rock, after having passed
within two inches of d'Artagnan.

The young man turned quickly round, for this attack could not have come
from the bastion, which was hidden by the angle of the trench. The idea
of the two soldiers who had abandoned him occurred to his mind, and with
them he remembered the assassins of two evenings before. He resolved
this time to know with whom he had to deal, and fell upon the body of
his comrade as if he were dead.

He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work within thirty
paces of him; they were the heads of the two soldiers. D'Artagnan had
not been deceived; these two men had only followed for the purpose of
assassinating him, hoping that the young man's death would be placed to
the account of the enemy.

As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime, they came up
to him with the purpose of making sure. Fortunately, deceived by
d'Artagnan's trick, they neglected to reload their guns.

When they were within ten paces of him, d'Artagnan, who in falling had
taken care not to let go his sword, sprang up close to them.

The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp without
having killed their man, they should be accused by him; therefore their
first idea was to join the enemy. One of them took his gun by the
barrel, and used it as he would a club. He aimed a terrible blow at
d'Artagnan, who avoided it by springing to one side; but by this
movement he left a passage free to the bandit, who darted off toward the
bastion. As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion were ignorant of the
intentions of the man they saw coming toward them, they fired upon him,
and he fell, struck by a ball which broke his shoulder.

Meantime d'Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier, attacking
him with his sword. The conflict was not long; the wretch had nothing to
defend himself with but his discharged arquebus. The sword of the
Guardsman slipped along the barrel of the now-useless weapon, and passed
through the thigh of the assassin, who fell.

D'Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his throat.

"Oh, do not kill me!" cried the bandit. "Pardon, pardon, my officer, and
I will tell you all."

"Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your life for it?"
asked the young man, withholding his arm.

"Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man of twenty, as you
are, and who may hope for everything, being handsome and brave, as you
are."

"Wretch," cried d'Artagnan, "speak quickly! Who employed you to
assassinate me?"

"A woman whom I don't know, but who is called Milady."

"But if you don't know this woman, how do you know her name?"

"My comrade knows her, and called her so. It was with him she agreed,
and not with me; he even has in his pocket a letter from that person,
who attaches great importance to you, as I have heard him say."

"But how did you become concerned in this villainous affair?"

"He proposed to me to undertake it with him, and I agreed."

"And how much did she give you for this fine enterprise?"

"A hundred louis."

"Well, come!" said the young man, laughing, "she thinks I am worth
something. A hundred louis? Well, that was a temptation for two wretches
like you. I understand why you accepted it, and I grant you my pardon;
but upon one condition."

"What is that?" said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving that all was not
over.

"That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has in his
pocket."

"But," cried the bandit, "that is only another way of killing me. How
can I go and fetch that letter under the fire of the bastion?"

"You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it, or I swear
you shall die by my hand."

"Pardon, monsieur; pity! In the name of that young lady you love, and
whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!" cried the bandit,
throwing himself upon his knees and leaning upon his hand--for he began
to lose his strength with his blood.

"And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, and that I
believed that woman dead?" asked d'Artagnan.

"By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket."

"You see, then," said d'Artagnan, "that I must have that letter. So no
more delay, no more hesitation; or else whatever may be my repugnance to
soiling my sword a second time with the blood of a wretch like you, I
swear by my faith as an honest man--" and at these words d'Artagnan made
so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up.

"Stop, stop!" cried he, regaining strength by force of terror. "I will
go--I will go!"

D'Artagnan took the soldier's arquebus, made him go on before him, and
urged him toward his companion by pricking him behind with his sword.

It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a long track of
blood on the ground he passed over, pale with approaching death, trying
to drag himself along without being seen to the body of his accomplice,
which lay twenty paces from him.

Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with a cold sweat,
that d'Artagnan took pity on him, and casting upon him a look of
contempt, "Stop," said he, "I will show you the difference between a man
of courage and such a coward as you. Stay where you are; I will go
myself."

And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing the movements of
the enemy and taking advantage of the accidents of the ground,
d'Artagnan succeeded in reaching the second soldier.

There were two means of gaining his object--to search him on the spot,
or to carry him away, making a buckler of his body, and search him in
the trench.

D'Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted the assassin onto his
shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.

A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls which penetrated the
flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony, proved to d'Artagnan that the
would-be assassin had saved his life.

D'Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse beside the wounded
man, who was as pale as death.

Then he began to search. A leather pocketbook, a purse, in which was
evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had received, with a dice
box and dice, completed the possessions of the dead man.

He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse to the wounded
man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.

Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter, that which
he had sought at the risk of his life:

"Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in safety in the
convent, which you should never have allowed her to reach, try, at
least, not to miss the man. If you do, you know that my hand stretches
far, and that you shall pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have
from me."

No signature. Nevertheless it was plain the letter came from Milady. He
consequently kept it as a piece of evidence, and being in safety behind
the angle of the trench, he began to interrogate the wounded man. He
confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade--the same who was
killed--to carry off a young woman who was to leave Paris by the
Barriere de La Villette; but having stopped to drink at a cabaret, they
had missed the carriage by ten minutes.

"But what were you to do with that woman?" asked d'Artagnan, with
anguish.

"We were to have conveyed her to a hotel in the Place Royale," said the
wounded man.

"Yes, yes!" murmured d'Artagnan; "that's the place--Milady's own
residence!"

Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible thirst for
vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, as well as all who loved
him, and how well she must be acquainted with the affairs of the court,
since she had discovered all. There could be no doubt she owed this
information to the cardinal.

But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy, that the
queen must have discovered the prison in which poor Mme. Bonacieux was
explaining her devotion, and that she had freed her from that prison;
and the letter he had received from the young woman, and her passage
along the road of Chaillot like an apparition, were now explained.

Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to find Mme.
Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.

This idea completely restored clemency to his heart. He turned toward
the wounded man, who had watched with intense anxiety all the various
expressions of his countenance, and holding out his arm to him, said,
"Come, I will not abandon you thus. Lean upon me, and let us return to
the camp."

"Yes," said the man, who could scarcely believe in such magnanimity,
"but is it not to have me hanged?"

"You have my word," said he; "for the second time I give you your life."

The wounded man sank upon his knees, to again kiss the feet of his
preserver; but d'Artagnan, who had no longer a motive for staying so
near the enemy, abridged the testimonials of his gratitude.

The Guardsman who had returned at the first discharge announced the
death of his four companions. They were therefore much astonished and
delighted in the regiment when they saw the young man come back safe and
sound.

D'Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a sortie which
he improvised. He described the death of the other soldier, and the
perils they had encountered. This recital was for him the occasion of
veritable triumph. The whole army talked of this expedition for a day,
and Monsieur paid him his compliments upon it. Besides this, as every
great action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploit of
d'Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility he had lost.
In fact, d'Artagnan believed that he might be tranquil, as one of his
two enemies was killed and the other devoted to his interests.

This tranquillity proved one thing--that d'Artagnan did not yet know
Milady.





42 THE ANJOU WINE


After the most disheartening news of the king's health, a report of his
convalescence began to prevail in the camp; and as he was very anxious
to be in person at the siege, it was said that as soon as he could mount
a horse he would set forward.

Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the other he might
expect to be removed from his command by the Duc d'Angouleme, by
Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were all eager for his post, did but
little, lost his days in wavering, and did not dare to attempt any great
enterprise to drive the English from the Isle of Re, where they still
besieged the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree, as on their
side the French were besieging La Rochelle.

D'Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, as always happens
after a past danger, particularly when the danger seems to have
vanished. He only felt one uneasiness, and that was at not hearing any
tidings from his friends.

But one morning at the commencement of the month of November everything
was explained to him by this letter, dated from Villeroy:

M d'Artagnan,

MM Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after having had an entertainment at my
house and enjoying themselves very much, created such a disturbance that
the provost of the castle, a rigid man, has ordered them to be confined
for some days; but I accomplish the order they have given me by
forwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou wine, with which they are
much pleased. They are desirous that you should drink to their health in
their favorite wine. I have done this, and am, monsieur, with great
respect,

Your very humble and obedient servant,

Godeau, Purveyor of the Musketeers

"That's all well!" cried d'Artagnan. "They think of me in their
pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles. Well, I will certainly
drink to their health with all my heart, but I will not drink alone."

And d'Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he had formed
greater intimacy than with the others, to invite them to enjoy with him
this present of delicious Anjou wine which had been sent him from
Villeroy.

One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, and another the next,
so the meeting was fixed for the day after that.

D'Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine to the
refreshment room of the Guards, with strict orders that great care
should be taken of it; and then, on the day appointed, as the dinner was
fixed for midday d'Artagnan sent Planchet at nine in the morning to
assist in preparing everything for the entertainment.

Planchet, very proud of being raised to the dignity of landlord, thought
he would make all ready, like an intelligent man; and with this view
called in the assistance of the lackey of one of his master's guests,
named Fourreau, and the false soldier who had tried to kill d'Artagnan
and who, belonging to no corps, had entered into the service of
d'Artagnan, or rather of Planchet, after d'Artagnan had saved his life.

The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived, took their
places, and the dishes were arranged on the table. Planchet waited,
towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the bottles; and Brisemont, which was
the name of the convalescent, poured the wine, which was a little shaken
by its journey, carefully into decanters. Of this wine, the first bottle
being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemont poured the lees into a
glass, and d'Artagnan desired him to drink it, for the poor devil had
not yet recovered his strength.

The guests having eaten the soup, were about to lift the first glass of
wine to their lips, when all at once the cannon sounded from Fort Louis
and Fort Neuf. The Guardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some
unexpected attack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang to
their swords. D'Artagnan, not less forward than they, did likewise, and
all ran out, in order to repair to their posts.

But scarcely were they out of the room before they were made aware of
the cause of this noise. Cries of "Live the king! Live the cardinal!"
resounded on every side, and the drums were beaten in all directions.

In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come by forced
marches, and had that moment arrived with all his household and a
reinforcement of ten thousand troops. His Musketeers proceeded and
followed him. D'Artagnan, placed in line with his company, saluted with
an expressive gesture his three friends, whose eyes soon discovered him,
and M. de Treville, who detected him at once.

The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soon in one
another's arms.

"Pardieu!" cried d'Artagnan, "you could not have arrived in better time;
the dinner cannot have had time to get cold! Can it, gentlemen?" added
the young man, turning to the two Guards, whom he introduced to his
friends.

"Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "it appears we are feasting!"

"I hope," said Aramis, "there are no women at your dinner."

"Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?" asked Athos.

"Well, pardieu! there is yours, my dear friend," replied d'Artagnan.

"Our wine!" said Athos, astonished.

"Yes, that you sent me."

"We sent you wine?"

"You know very well--the wine from the hills of Anjou."

"Yes, I know what brand you are talking about."

"The wine you prefer."

"Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you must content
yourselves with that."

"And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent you some Anjou
wine?" said Porthos.

"Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order."

"On our account?" said the three Musketeers.

"Did you send this wine, Aramis?" said Athos.

"No; and you, Porthos?"

"No; and you, Athos?"

"No!"

"If it was not you, it was your purveyor," said d'Artagnan.

"Our purveyor!"

"Yes, your purveyor, Godeau--the purveyor of the Musketeers."

"My faith! never mind where it comes from," said Porthos, "let us taste
it, and if it is good, let us drink it."

"No," said Athos; "don't let us drink wine which comes from an unknown
source."

"You are right, Athos," said d'Artagnan. "Did none of you charge your
purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?"

"No! And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?"

"Here is his letter," said d'Artagnan, and he presented the note to his
comrades.

"This is not his writing!" said Athos. "I am acquainted with it; before
we left Villeroy I settled the accounts of the regiment."

"A false letter altogether," said Porthos, "we have not been
disciplined."

"d'Artagnan," said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, "how could you believe
that we had made a disturbance?"

D'Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook all his limbs.

"Thou alarmest me!" said Athos, who never used thee and thou but upon
very particular occasions, "what has happened?"

"Look you, my friends!" cried d'Artagnan, "a horrible suspicion crosses
my mind! Can this be another vengeance of that woman?"

It was now Athos who turned pale.

D'Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the three Musketeers and
the two Guards following him.

The first object that met the eyes of d'Artagnan on entering the room
was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground and rolling in horrible
convulsions.

Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to give him succor;
but it was plain that all assistance was useless--all the features of
the dying man were distorted with agony.

"Ah!" cried he, on perceiving d'Artagnan, "ah! this is frightful! You
pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!"

"I!" cried d'Artagnan. "I, wretch? What do you say?"

"I say that it was you who gave me the wine; I say that it was you who
desired me to drink it. I say you wished to avenge yourself on me, and I
say that it is horrible!"

"Do not think so, Brisemont," said d'Artagnan; "do not think so. I swear
to you, I protest--"

"Oh, but God is above! God will punish you! My God, grant that he may
one day suffer what I suffer!"

"Upon the Gospel," said d'Artagnan, throwing himself down by the dying
man, "I swear to you that the wine was poisoned and that I was going to
drink of it as you did."

"I do not believe you," cried the soldier, and he expired amid horrible
tortures.

"Frightful! frightful!" murmured Athos, while Porthos broke the bottles
and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, that a confessor should be
sent for.

"Oh, my friends," said d'Artagnan, "you come once more to save my life,
not only mine but that of these gentlemen. Gentlemen," continued he,
addressing the Guardsmen, "I request you will be silent with regard to
this adventure. Great personages may have had a hand in what you have
seen, and if talked about, the evil would only recoil upon us."

"Ah, monsieur!" stammered Planchet, more dead than alive, "ah, monsieur,
what an escape I have had!"

"How, sirrah! you were going to drink my wine?"

"To the health of the king, monsieur; I was going to drink a small glass
of it if Fourreau had not told me I was called."

"Alas!" said Fourreau, whose teeth chattered with terror, "I wanted to
get him out of the way that I might drink myself."

"Gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, addressing the Guardsmen, "you may easily
comprehend that such a feast can only be very dull after what has taken
place; so accept my excuses, and put off the party till another day, I
beg of you."

The two Guardsmen courteously accepted d'Artagnan's excuses, and
perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone, retired.

When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers were without
witnesses, they looked at one another with an air which plainly
expressed that each of them perceived the gravity of their situation.

"In the first place," said Athos, "let us leave this chamber; the dead
are not agreeable company, particularly when they have died a violent
death."

"Planchet," said d'Artagnan, "I commit the corpse of this poor devil to
your care. Let him be interred in holy ground. He committed a crime, it
is true; but he repented of it."

And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet and Fourreau the
duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.

The host gave them another chamber, and served them with fresh eggs and
some water, which Athos went himself to draw at the fountain. In a few
words, Porthos and Aramis were posted as to the situation.

"Well," said d'Artagnan to Athos, "you see, my dear friend, that this is
war to the death."

Athos shook his head.

"Yes, yes," replied he, "I perceive that plainly; but do you really
believe it is she?"

"I am sure of it."

"Nevertheless, I confess I still doubt."

"But the fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?"

"She is some Englishwoman who has committed a crime in France, and has
been branded in consequence."

"Athos, she is your wife, I tell you," repeated d'Artagnan; "only
reflect how much the two descriptions resemble each other."

"Yes; but I should think the other must be dead, I hanged her so
effectually."

It was d'Artagnan who now shook his head in his turn.

"But in either case, what is to be done?" said the young man.

"The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hanging eternally
over his head," said Athos. "We must extricate ourselves from this
position."

"But how?"

"Listen! You must try to see her, and have an explanation with her. Say
to her: 'Peace or war! My word as a gentleman never to say anything of
you, never to do anything against you; on your side, a solemn oath to
remain neutral with respect to me. If not, I will apply to the
chancellor, I will apply to the king, I will apply to the hangman, I
will move the courts against you, I will denounce you as branded, I will
bring you to trial; and if you are acquitted, well, by the faith of a
gentleman, I will kill you at the corner of some wall, as I would a mad
dog.'"

"I like the means well enough," said d'Artagnan, "but where and how to
meet with her?"

"Time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity; opportunity is the
martingale of man. The more we have ventured the more we gain, when we
know how to wait."

"Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners."

"Bah!" said Athos. "God has preserved us hitherto, God will preserve us
still."

"Yes, we. Besides, we are men; and everything considered, it is our lot
to risk our lives; but she," asked he, in an undertone.

"What she?" asked Athos.

"Constance."

"Madame Bonacieux! Ah, that's true!" said Athos. "My poor friend, I had
forgotten you were in love."

"Well, but," said Aramis, "have you not learned by the letter you found
on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent? One may be very
comfortable in a convent; and as soon as the siege of La Rochelle is
terminated, I promise you on my part--"

"Good," cried Athos, "good! Yes, my dear Aramis, we all know that your
views have a religious tendency."

"I am only temporarily a Musketeer," said Aramis, humbly.

"It is some time since we heard from his mistress," said Athos, in a low
voice. "But take no notice; we know all about that."

"Well," said Porthos, "it appears to me that the means are very simple."

"What?" asked d'Artagnan.

"You say she is in a convent?" replied Porthos.

"Yes."

"Very well. As soon as the siege is over, we'll carry her off from that
convent."

"But we must first learn what convent she is in."

"That's true," said Porthos.

"But I think I have it," said Athos. "Don't you say, dear d'Artagnan,
that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her?"

"I believe so, at least."

"In that case Porthos will assist us."

"And how so, if you please?"

"Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess. She must have a
long arm."

"Hush!" said Porthos, placing a finger on his lips. "I believe her to be
a cardinalist; she must know nothing of the matter."

"Then," said Aramis, "I take upon myself to obtain intelligence of her."

"You, Aramis?" cried the three friends. "You! And how?"

"By the queen's almoner, to whom I am very intimately allied," said
Aramis, coloring.

And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finished their modest
repast, separated, with the promise of meeting again that evening.
D'Artagnan returned to less important affairs, and the three Musketeers
repaired to the king's quarters, where they had to prepare their
lodging.





