{"name": "Chapter 10- Chapter 12", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421073237/http://www.novelguide.com/emma/summaries/chap10-12", "summary": "It is the middle of December, and Emma and Harriet walk to a cottage to visit a sick family. On the way, Harriet wonders why Emma is not married, and she replies that she does not intend to marry, and that she is happy at Hartfield. They then talk of Miss Bates, who is an old maid, and of how she can do almost nothing but talk of her niece, Jane Fairfax. On their way back from the cottage they run into Mr. Elton, and he continues on their walk with them. Emma tries to get he and Harriet alone together by trying to fall behind and pretending to fix her shoe. She then says that her lace is broken so that they are invited into Elton's house, but all her efforts are for nothing, as Elton does not take advantage of his time alone with Harriet to talk to her of anything serious. Chapter 11: Emma must leave Mr. Elton and his affairs to himself for awhile, as the visit of her sister, her husband, their five children and their nursery-maids is drawing near. Isabella is an amiable, good-natured woman, and John Knightley is sometimes out of humor, which Emma does not like, as it means that he sometimes is not patient with Emma's father's eccentricities. Everyone is happy when they arrive. They talk of Miss Taylor's marriage, and John asks if Weston's son has come yet. Emma has to tell him no, but that he did send a nice letter. . Chapter 12: Mr. Knightley comes to dine with them, and it seems as if he and Emma get along better after their quarrel. He tells her that he knows more about the world since he is sixteen years older than her. He tells her that Mr. Martin is quite disappointed. The evening goes well, and Emma talks with Isabella about all of the people of Highbury, including the Bateses and Jane Fairfax. Mr. Woodhouse then goes on at length about how sorry he is that Isabella and her family decided to go to the sea in autumn, as it could not have been good for them. This makes everyone uncomfortable, but Mr. Knightley eventually changes the subject.", "analysis": ""}