{"name": "Chapter 36", "summary": "CHAPTER SUMMARY AND NOTES CHAPTER 36 Summary In this chapter, the state of England is described. Once the real thief is arrested everyone starts taking interest in Foggs wager once again. Betting is revived. A great crowd gathers near the Reform Club on Saturday evening. In the meantime Foggs five fellow club members and whist partners come together at the Club. They all discuss whether Fogg will be able to make it on time. They think that he wont be able to. As their tension grows, they start counting the seconds to the time of the wager. Barely a few seconds before Fogg makes his appearance in his usual calm way. Outside the club, a delirious crowd makes much noise. Notes This is a rare chapter in the book as in this chapter, the past is related and that too in a very curious way. The chapter begins with a description of the peoples sentiments in England. They had stopped betting on Fogg when they found out that he was a suspected looter. But when the real robber is arrested the interest in Foggs journey, around the world is revived. Betting starts once again and there is a lot of excitement centered on whether Fogg will be able to complete his journey in time or not. Foggs fellow whist players gather together at the Club and discuss the possibility of Fogg reaching in time. They try and convince themselves that he wont be able to make it, but they are wrong. Just before the clocks hand moves to 8.45 p.m. Fogg walks into the room, where the players had gathered. This comes as a surprise to the readers as well. We had read in the previous chapter, that Fogg has lost his bet. Now, we see that h e has made it to the Club in time. This is a mystery to us and one which is only solved in the next chapter. What is obvious in this chapter is that Fogg is a hero while the men who are his challengers are quite cowardly. They do not appear as calm and confidant, as our hero, Fogg always is.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820042551/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmAroundWorld75.asp"}