The private residence of Mr Pancks was in Pentonville, where he lodged
on the second-floor of a professional gentleman in an extremely small
way, who had an inner-door within the street door, poised on a spring
and starting open with a click like a trap; and who wrote up in the
fan-light, RUGG, GENERAL AGENT, ACCOUNTANT, DEBTS RECOVERED.

This scroll, majestic in its severe simplicity, illuminated a little
slip of front garden abutting on the thirsty high-road, where a few
of the dustiest of leaves hung their dismal heads and led a life of
choking. A professor of writing occupied the first-floor, and enlivened
the garden railings with glass-cases containing choice examples of what
his pupils had been before six lessons and while the whole of his young
family shook the table, and what they had become after six lessons
when the young family was under restraint. The tenancy of Mr Pancks was
limited to one airy bedroom; he covenanting and agreeing with Mr Rugg
his landlord, that in consideration of a certain scale of payments
accurately defined, and on certain verbal notice duly given, he should
be at liberty to elect to share the Sunday breakfast, dinner, tea, or
supper, or each or any or all of those repasts or meals of Mr and Miss
Rugg (his daughter) in the back-parlour.

Miss Rugg was a lady of a little property which she had acquired,
     together with much distinction in the neighbourhood, by having her
     heart severely lacerated and her feelings mangled by a middle-aged baker
     resident in the vicinity, against whom she had, by the agency of Mr
     Rugg, found it necessary to proceed at law to recover damages for a
     breach of promise of marriage. The baker having been, by the counsel for
     Miss Rugg, witheringly denounced on that occasion up to the full amount
     of twenty guineas, at the rate of about eighteen-pence an epithet, and
     having been cast in corresponding damages, still suffered occasional
     persecution from the youth of Pentonville. But Miss Rugg, environed by
     the majesty of the law, and having her damages invested in the public
     securities, was regarded with consideration.

     In the society of Mr Rugg, who had a round white visage, as if all his
     blushes had been drawn out of him long ago, and who had a ragged yellow
     head like a worn-out hearth broom; and in the society of Miss Rugg, who
     had little nankeen spots, like shirt buttons, all over her face, and
     whose own yellow tresses were rather scrubby than luxuriant; Mr Pancks
     had usually dined on Sundays for some few years, and had twice a week,
     or so, enjoyed an evening collation of bread, Dutch cheese, and porter.
     Mr Pancks was one of the very few marriageable men for whom Miss Rugg
     had no terrors, the argument with which he reassured himself being
     twofold; that is to say, firstly, 'that it wouldn't do twice,' and
     secondly, 'that he wasn't worth it.' Fortified within this double
     armour, Mr Pancks snorted at Miss Rugg on easy terms.

     Up to this time, Mr Pancks had transacted little or no business at his
     quarters in Pentonville, except in the sleeping line; but now that he
     had become a fortune-teller, he was often closeted after midnight
     with Mr Rugg in his little front-parlour office, and even after those
     untimely hours, burnt tallow in his bed-room. Though his duties as his
     proprietor's grubber were in no wise lessened; and though that service
     bore no greater resemblance to a bed of roses than was to be discovered
     in its many thorns; some new branch of industry made a constant demand
     upon him. When he cast off the Patriarch at night, it was only to take
     an anonymous craft in tow, and labour away afresh in other waters.

     The advance from a personal acquaintance with the elder Mr Chivery to
     an introduction to his amiable wife and disconsolate son, may have been
     easy; but easy or not, Mr Pancks soon made it. He nestled in the bosom
     of the tobacco business within a week or two after his first appearance
     in the College, and particularly addressed himself to the cultivation of
     a good understanding with Young John. In this endeavour he so prospered
     as to lure that pining shepherd forth from the groves, and tempt him
     to undertake mysterious missions; on which he began to disappear at
     uncertain intervals for as long a space as two or three days together.
     The prudent Mrs Chivery, who wondered greatly at this change, would have
     protested against it as detrimental to the Highland typification on the
     doorpost but for two forcible reasons; one, that her John was roused to
     take strong interest in the business which these starts were supposed
     to advance--and this she held to be good for his drooping spirits;
     the other, that Mr Pancks confidentially agreed to pay her, for the
     occupation of her son's time, at the handsome rate of seven and sixpence
     per day. The proposal originated with himself, and was couched in the
     pithy terms, 'If your John is weak enough, ma'am, not to take it,
     that is no reason why you should be, don't you see? So, quite between
     ourselves, ma'am, business being business, here it is!'

     What Mr Chivery thought of these things, or how much or how little he
     knew about them, was never gathered from himself. It has been already
     remarked that he was a man of few words; and it may be here observed
     that he had imbibed a professional habit of locking everything up. He
     locked himself up as carefully as he locked up the Marshalsea debtors.
     Even his custom of bolting his meals may have been a part of an uniform
     whole; but there is no question, that, as to all other purposes, he kept
     his mouth as he kept the Marshalsea door. He never opened it without
     occasion. When it was necessary to let anything out, he opened it a
     little way, held it open just as long as sufficed for the purpose, and
     locked it again. Even as he would be sparing of his trouble at the
     Marshalsea door, and would keep a visitor who wanted to go out, waiting
     for a few moments if he saw another visitor coming down the yard, so
     that one turn of the key should suffice for both, similarly he would
     often reserve a remark if he perceived another on its way to his lips,
     and would deliver himself of the two together. As to any key to his
     inner knowledge being to be found in his face, the Marshalsea key was as
     legible as an index to the individual characters and histories upon
     which it was turned.

     That Mr Pancks should be moved to invite any one to dinner at
     Pentonville, was an unprecedented fact in his calendar. But he invited
     Young John to dinner, and even brought him within range of the dangerous
     (because expensive) fascinations of Miss Rugg. The banquet was appointed
     for a Sunday, and Miss Rugg with her own hands stuffed a leg of mutton
     with oysters on the occasion, and sent it to the baker's--not _the_
     baker's but an opposition establishment. Provision of oranges, apples,
     and nuts was also made. And rum was brought home by Mr Pancks on
     Saturday night, to gladden the visitor's heart.

     The store of creature comforts was not the chief part of the visitor's
     reception. Its special feature was a foregone family confidence and
     sympathy. When Young John appeared at half-past one without the ivory
     hand and waistcoat of golden sprigs, the sun shorn of his beams by
     disastrous clouds, Mr Pancks presented him to the yellow-haired Ruggs as
     the young man he had so often mentioned who loved Miss Dorrit.

     'I am glad,' said Mr Rugg, challenging him specially in that character,
     'to have the distinguished gratification of making your acquaintance,
     sir. Your feelings do you honour. You are young; may you never outlive
     your feelings! If I was to outlive my own feelings, sir,' said Mr Rugg,
     who was a man of many words, and was considered to possess a remarkably
     good address; 'if I was to outlive my own feelings, I'd leave fifty
     pound in my will to the man who would put me out of existence.'

     Miss Rugg heaved a sigh.

     'My daughter, sir,' said Mr Rugg. 'Anastatia, you are no stranger to the
     state of this young man's affections. My daughter has had her trials,
     sir'--Mr Rugg might have used the word more pointedly in the singular
     number--'and she can feel for you.'

     Young John, almost overwhelmed by the touching nature of this greeting,
     professed himself to that effect.

     'What I envy you, sir, is,' said Mr Rugg, 'allow me to take your hat--we
     are rather short of pegs--I'll put it in the corner, nobody will tread
     on it there--What I envy you, sir, is the luxury of your own feelings. I
     belong to a profession in which that luxury is sometimes denied us.'

     Young John replied, with acknowledgments, that he only hoped he did what
     was right, and what showed how entirely he was devoted to Miss Dorrit.
     He wished to be unselfish; and he hoped he was. He wished to do anything
     as laid in his power to serve Miss Dorrit, altogether putting himself
     out of sight; and he hoped he did. It was but little that he could do,
     but he hoped he did it.

     'Sir,' said Mr Rugg, taking him by the hand, 'you are a young man that
     it does one good to come across. You are a young man that I should
     like to put in the witness-box, to humanise the minds of the legal
     profession. I hope you have brought your appetite with you, and intend
     to play a good knife and fork?'

     'Thank you, sir,' returned Young John, 'I don't eat much at present.'

     Mr Rugg drew him a little apart. 'My daughter's case, sir,' said he, 'at
     the time when, in vindication of her outraged feelings and her sex, she
     became the plaintiff in Rugg and Bawkins. I suppose I could have put it
     in evidence, Mr Chivery, if I had thought it worth my while, that the
     amount of solid sustenance my daughter consumed at that period did not
     exceed ten ounces per week.'

     'I think I go a little beyond that, sir,' returned the other,
     hesitating, as if he confessed it with some shame.

     'But in your case there's no fiend in human form,' said Mr Rugg, with
     argumentative smile and action of hand. 'Observe, Mr Chivery!
     No fiend in human form!'

     'No, sir, certainly,' Young John added with simplicity, 'I should be
     very sorry if there was.'

     'The sentiment,' said Mr Rugg, 'is what I should have expected from your
     known principles. It would affect my daughter greatly, sir, if she heard
     it. As I perceive the mutton, I am glad she didn't hear it. Mr Pancks,
     on this occasion, pray face me. My dear, face Mr Chivery. For what we
     are going to receive, may we (and Miss Dorrit) be truly thankful!'

     But for a grave waggishness in Mr Rugg's manner of delivering this
     introduction to the feast, it might have appeared that Miss Dorrit was
     expected to be one of the company. Pancks recognised the sally in
     his usual way, and took in his provender in his usual way. Miss Rugg,
     perhaps making up some of her arrears, likewise took very kindly to
     the mutton, and it rapidly diminished to the bone. A bread-and-butter
     pudding entirely disappeared, and a considerable amount of cheese and
     radishes vanished by the same means. Then came the dessert.

     Then also, and before the broaching of the rum and water, came Mr
     Pancks's note-book. The ensuing business proceedings were brief but
     curious, and rather in the nature of a conspiracy. Mr Pancks looked over
     his note-book, which was now getting full, studiously; and picked out
     little extracts, which he wrote on separate slips of paper on the table;
     Mr Rugg, in the meanwhile, looking at him with close attention, and
     Young John losing his uncollected eye in mists of meditation. When Mr
     Pancks, who supported the character of chief conspirator, had completed
     his extracts, he looked them over, corrected them, put up his note-book,
     and held them like a hand at cards.

     'Now, there's a churchyard in Bedfordshire,' said Pancks. 'Who takes
     it?'

     'I'll take it, sir,' returned Mr Rugg, 'if no one bids.'

     Mr Pancks dealt him his card, and looked at his hand again.

     'Now, there's an Enquiry in York,' said Pancks. 'Who takes it?'

     'I'm not good for York,' said Mr Rugg.

     'Then perhaps,' pursued Pancks, 'you'll be so obliging, John Chivery?'

     Young John assenting, Pancks dealt him his card, and consulted his hand
     again.

     'There's a Church in London; I may as well take that. And a Family
     Bible; I may as well take that, too. That's two to me. Two to me,'
     repeated Pancks, breathing hard over his cards. 'Here's a Clerk at
     Durham for you, John, and an old seafaring gentleman at Dunstable for
     you, Mr Rugg. Two to me, was it? Yes, two to me. Here's a Stone; three
     to me. And a Still-born Baby; four to me. And all, for the present,
     told.'

     When he had thus disposed of his cards, all being done very quietly and
     in a suppressed tone, Mr Pancks puffed his way into his own
     breast-pocket and tugged out a canvas bag; from which, with a sparing
     hand, he told forth money for travelling expenses in two little
     portions. 'Cash goes out fast,' he said anxiously, as he pushed a
     portion to each of his male companions, 'very fast.'

     'I can only assure you, Mr Pancks,' said Young John, 'that I deeply
     regret my circumstances being such that I can't afford to pay my own
     charges, or that it's not advisable to allow me the time necessary for
     my doing the distances on foot; because nothing would give me greater
     satisfaction than to walk myself off my legs without fee or reward.'

     This young man's disinterestedness appeared so very ludicrous in
     the eyes of Miss Rugg, that she was obliged to effect a precipitate
     retirement from the company, and to sit upon the stairs until she had
     had her laugh out. Meanwhile Mr Pancks, looking, not without some pity,
     at Young John, slowly and thoughtfully twisted up his canvas bag as if
     he were wringing its neck. The lady, returning as he restored it to his
     pocket, mixed rum and water for the party, not forgetting her fair self,
     and handed to every one his glass. When all were supplied, Mr Rugg rose,
     and silently holding out his glass at arm's length above the centre of
     the table, by that gesture invited the other three to add theirs, and to
     unite in a general conspiratorial clink. The ceremony was effective up
     to a certain point, and would have been wholly so throughout, if Miss
     Rugg, as she raised her glass to her lips in completion of it, had not
     happened to look at Young John; when she was again so overcome by the
     contemptible comicality of his disinterestedness as to splutter some
     ambrosial drops of rum and water around, and withdraw in confusion.

     Such was the dinner without precedent, given by Pancks at Pentonville;
     and such was the busy and strange life Pancks led. The only waking
     moments at which he appeared to relax from his cares, and to recreate
     himself by going anywhere or saying anything without a pervading object,
     were when he showed a dawning interest in the lame foreigner with the
     stick, down Bleeding Heart Yard.

     The foreigner, by name John Baptist Cavalletto--they called him Mr
     Baptist in the Yard--was such a chirping, easy, hopeful little fellow,
     that his attraction for Pancks was probably in the force of contrast.
     Solitary, weak, and scantily acquainted with the most necessary words
     of the only language in which he could communicate with the people about
     him, he went with the stream of his fortunes, in a brisk way that was
     new in those parts. With little to eat, and less to drink, and nothing
     to wear but what he wore upon him, or had brought tied up in one of the
     smallest bundles that ever were seen, he put as bright a face upon it as
     if he were in the most flourishing circumstances when he first hobbled
     up and down the Yard, humbly propitiating the general good-will with his
     white teeth.

     It was uphill work for a foreigner, lame or sound, to make his way with
     the Bleeding Hearts. In the first place, they were vaguely persuaded
     that every foreigner had a knife about him; in the second, they held it
     to be a sound constitutional national axiom that he ought to go home to
     his own country. They never thought of inquiring how many of their own
     countrymen would be returned upon their hands from divers parts of the
     world, if the principle were generally recognised; they considered it
     particularly and peculiarly British. In the third place, they had a
     notion that it was a sort of Divine visitation upon a foreigner that he
     was not an Englishman, and that all kinds of calamities happened to
     his country because it did things that England did not, and did not do
     things that England did. In this belief, to be sure, they had long been
     carefully trained by the Barnacles and Stiltstalkings, who were always
     proclaiming to them, officially, that no country which failed to submit
     itself to those two large families could possibly hope to be under the
     protection of Providence; and who, when they believed it, disparaged
     them in private as the most prejudiced people under the sun.

     This, therefore, might be called a political position of the Bleeding
     Hearts; but they entertained other objections to having foreigners
     in the Yard. They believed that foreigners were always badly off; and
     though they were as ill off themselves as they could desire to be,
     that did not diminish the force of the objection. They believed that
     foreigners were dragooned and bayoneted; and though they certainly got
     their own skulls promptly fractured if they showed any ill-humour, still
     it was with a blunt instrument, and that didn't count. They believed
     that foreigners were always immoral; and though they had an occasional
     assize at home, and now and then a divorce case or so, that had nothing
     to do with it. They believed that foreigners had no independent spirit,
     as never being escorted to the poll in droves by Lord Decimus Tite
     Barnacle, with colours flying and the tune of Rule Britannia playing.
     Not to be tedious, they had many other beliefs of a similar kind.

     Against these obstacles, the lame foreigner with the stick had to make
     head as well as he could; not absolutely single-handed, because Mr
     Arthur Clennam had recommended him to the Plornishes (he lived at the
             top of the same house), but still at heavy odds. However, the Bleeding
     Hearts were kind hearts; and when they saw the little fellow cheerily
     limping about with a good-humoured face, doing no harm, drawing no
     knives, committing no outrageous immoralities, living chiefly on
     farinaceous and milk diet, and playing with Mrs Plornish's children of
     an evening, they began to think that although he could never hope to be
     an Englishman, still it would be hard to visit that affliction on his
     head. They began to accommodate themselves to his level, calling him 'Mr
     Baptist,' but treating him like a baby, and laughing immoderately at his
     lively gestures and his childish English--more, because he didn't mind
     it, and laughed too. They spoke to him in very loud voices as if he
     were stone deaf. They constructed sentences, by way of teaching him the
     language in its purity, such as were addressed by the savages to Captain
     Cook, or by Friday to Robinson Crusoe. Mrs Plornish was particularly
     ingenious in this art; and attained so much celebrity for saying 'Me ope
     you leg well soon,' that it was considered in the Yard but a very short
     remove indeed from speaking Italian. Even Mrs Plornish herself began to
     think that she had a natural call towards that language. As he became
     more popular, household objects were brought into requisition for his
     instruction in a copious vocabulary; and whenever he appeared in the
     Yard ladies would fly out at their doors crying 'Mr Baptist--tea-pot!'
     'Mr Baptist--dust-pan!' 'Mr Baptist--flour-dredger!' 'Mr
     Baptist--coffee-biggin!' At the same time exhibiting those articles,
     and penetrating him with a sense of the appalling difficulties of the
     Anglo-Saxon tongue.

     It was in this stage of his progress, and in about the third week of his
     occupation, that Mr Pancks's fancy became attracted by the little man.
     Mounting to his attic, attended by Mrs Plornish as interpreter, he found
     Mr Baptist with no furniture but his bed on the ground, a table, and a
     chair, carving with the aid of a few simple tools, in the blithest way
     possible.

     'Now, old chap,' said Mr Pancks, 'pay up!'

     He had his money ready, folded in a scrap of paper, and laughingly
     handed it in; then with a free action, threw out as many fingers of his
     right hand as there were shillings, and made a cut crosswise in the air
     for an odd sixpence.

     'Oh!' said Mr Pancks, watching him, wonderingly. 'That's it, is it?
     You're a quick customer. It's all right. I didn't expect to receive it,
     though.'

     Mrs Plornish here interposed with great condescension, and explained to
     Mr Baptist. 'E please. E glad get money.'

     The little man smiled and nodded. His bright face seemed uncommonly
     attractive to Mr Pancks. 'How's he getting on in his limb?' he asked Mrs
     Plornish.

     'Oh, he's a deal better, sir,' said Mrs Plornish. 'We expect next week
     he'll be able to leave off his stick entirely.' (The opportunity
             being too favourable to be lost, Mrs Plornish displayed her great
             accomplishment by explaining with pardonable pride to Mr Baptist, 'E ope
             you leg well soon.')

     'He's a merry fellow, too,' said Mr Pancks, admiring him as if he were a
     mechanical toy. 'How does he live?'

     'Why, sir,' rejoined Mrs Plornish, 'he turns out to have quite a power
     of carving them flowers that you see him at now.' (Mr Baptist, watching
             their faces as they spoke, held up his work. Mrs Plornish interpreted in
             her Italian manner, on behalf of Mr Pancks, 'E please. Double good!')

     'Can he live by that?' asked Mr Pancks.

     'He can live on very little, sir, and it is expected as he will be able,
     in time, to make a very good living. Mr Clennam got it him to do, and
     gives him odd jobs besides in at the Works next door--makes 'em for him,
     in short, when he knows he wants 'em.'

     'And what does he do with himself, now, when he ain't hard at it?' said
     Mr Pancks.

     'Why, not much as yet, sir, on accounts I suppose of not being able to
     walk much; but he goes about the Yard, and he chats without particular
     understanding or being understood, and he plays with the children,
     and he sits in the sun--he'll sit down anywhere, as if it was an
     arm-chair--and he'll sing, and he'll laugh!'

     'Laugh!' echoed Mr Pancks. 'He looks to me as if every tooth in his head
     was always laughing.'

     'But whenever he gets to the top of the steps at t'other end of the
     Yard,' said Mrs Plornish, 'he'll peep out in the curiousest way! So that
     some of us thinks he's peeping out towards where his own country is, and
     some of us thinks he's looking for somebody he don't want to see, and
     some of us don't know what to think.'

     Mr Baptist seemed to have a general understanding of what she said; or
     perhaps his quickness caught and applied her slight action of peeping.
     In any case he closed his eyes and tossed his head with the air of a man
     who had sufficient reasons for what he did, and said in his own tongue,
     it didn't matter. Altro!

     'What's Altro?' said Pancks.

     'Hem! It's a sort of a general kind of expression, sir,' said Mrs
     Plornish.

     'Is it?' said Pancks. 'Why, then Altro to you, old chap. Good afternoon.
     Altro!'

     Mr Baptist in his vivacious way repeating the word several times, Mr
     Pancks in his duller way gave it him back once. From that time it became
     a frequent custom with Pancks the gipsy, as he went home jaded at night,
     to pass round by Bleeding Heart Yard, go quietly up the stairs, look in
     at Mr Baptist's door, and, finding him in his room, to say, 'Hallo, old
     chap! Altro!' To which Mr Baptist would reply with innumerable bright
     nods and smiles, 'Altro, signore, altro, altro, altro!' After this
     highly condensed conversation, Mr Pancks would go his way with an
     appearance of being lightened and refreshed.




If Arthur Clennam had not arrived at that wise decision firmly to
restrain himself from loving Pet, he would have lived on in a state of
much perplexity, involving difficult struggles with his own heart. Not
the least of these would have been a contention, always waging within
it, between a tendency to dislike Mr Henry Gowan, if not to regard
him with positive repugnance, and a whisper that the inclination was
unworthy. A generous nature is not prone to strong aversions, and is
slow to admit them even dispassionately; but when it finds ill-will
gaining upon it, and can discern between-whiles that its origin is not
dispassionate, such a nature becomes distressed.

Therefore Mr Henry Gowan would have clouded Clennam's mind, and would
have been far oftener present to it than more agreeable persons and
subjects but for the great prudence of his decision aforesaid. As it
was, Mr Gowan seemed transferred to Daniel Doyce's mind; at all events,
    it so happened that it usually fell to Mr Doyce's turn, rather than
    to Clennam's, to speak of him in the friendly conversations they held
    together. These were of frequent occurrence now; as the two partners
    shared a portion of a roomy house in one of the grave old-fashioned City
    streets, lying not far from the Bank of England, by London Wall.

    Mr Doyce had been to Twickenham to pass the day. Clennam had excused
    himself. Mr Doyce was just come home. He put in his head at the door of
    Clennam's sitting-room to say Good night.

    'Come in, come in!' said Clennam.

    'I saw you were reading,' returned Doyce, as he entered, 'and thought
    you might not care to be disturbed.'

    But for the notable resolution he had made, Clennam really might not
    have known what he had been reading; really might not have had his eyes
    upon the book for an hour past, though it lay open before him. He shut
    it up, rather quickly.

    'Are they well?' he asked.

    'Yes,' said Doyce; 'they are well. They are all well.'

    Daniel had an old workmanlike habit of carrying his pocket-handkerchief
    in his hat. He took it out and wiped his forehead with it, slowly
    repeating, 'They are all well. Miss Minnie looking particularly well, I
    thought.'

    'Any company at the cottage?'

    'No, no company.'

    'And how did you get on, you four?' asked Clennam gaily.

    'There were five of us,' returned his partner. 'There was
    What's-his-name. He was there.'

    'Who is he?' said Clennam.

    'Mr Henry Gowan.'

    'Ah, to be sure!' cried Clennam with unusual vivacity, 'Yes!--I forgot
    him.'

    'As I mentioned, you may remember,' said Daniel Doyce, 'he is always
    there on Sunday.'

    'Yes, yes,' returned Clennam; 'I remember now.'

    Daniel Doyce, still wiping his forehead, ploddingly repeated. 'Yes. He
    was there, he was there. Oh yes, he was there. And his dog. _He_ was
    there too.'

    'Miss Meagles is quite attached to--the--dog,' observed Clennam.

    'Quite so,' assented his partner. 'More attached to the dog than I am to
    the man.'

    'You mean Mr--?'

    'I mean Mr Gowan, most decidedly,' said Daniel Doyce.

    There was a gap in the conversation, which Clennam devoted to winding up
    his watch.

    'Perhaps you are a little hasty in your judgment,' he said. 'Our
    judgments--I am supposing a general case--'

    'Of course,' said Doyce.

    'Are so liable to be influenced by many considerations, which, almost
    without our knowing it, are unfair, that it is necessary to keep a guard
    upon them. For instance, Mr--'

    'Gowan,' quietly said Doyce, upon whom the utterance of the name almost
    always devolved.

    'Is young and handsome, easy and quick, has talent, and has seen a
    good deal of various kinds of life. It might be difficult to give an
    unselfish reason for being prepossessed against him.'

    'Not difficult for me, I think, Clennam,' returned his partner. 'I see
    him bringing present anxiety, and, I fear, future sorrow, into my old
    friend's house. I see him wearing deeper lines into my old friend's
    face, the nearer he draws to, and the oftener he looks at, the face
    of his daughter. In short, I see him with a net about the pretty and
    affectionate creature whom he will never make happy.'

    'We don't know,' said Clennam, almost in the tone of a man in pain,
    'that he will not make her happy.'

    'We don't know,' returned his partner, 'that the earth will last another
    hundred years, but we think it highly probable.'

    'Well, well!' said Clennam, 'we must be hopeful, and we must at least
    try to be, if not generous (which, in this case, we have no opportunity
            of being), just. We will not disparage this gentleman, because he is
    successful in his addresses to the beautiful object of his ambition; and
    we will not question her natural right to bestow her love on one whom
    she finds worthy of it.'

    'Maybe, my friend,' said Doyce. 'Maybe also, that she is too young and
    petted, too confiding and inexperienced, to discriminate well.'

    'That,' said Clennam, 'would be far beyond our power of correction.'

    Daniel Doyce shook his head gravely, and rejoined, 'I fear so.'

    'Therefore, in a word,' said Clennam, 'we should make up our minds that
    it is not worthy of us to say any ill of Mr Gowan. It would be a poor
    thing to gratify a prejudice against him. And I resolve, for my part,
    not to depreciate him.'

    'I am not quite so sure of myself, and therefore I reserve my privilege
    of objecting to him,' returned the other. 'But, if I am not sure of
    myself, I am sure of you, Clennam, and I know what an upright man you
    are, and how much to be respected. Good night, _my_ friend and partner!'
    He shook his hand in saying this, as if there had been something serious
    at the bottom of their conversation; and they separated.

    By this time they had visited the family on several occasions, and had
    always observed that even a passing allusion to Mr Henry Gowan when
    he was not among them, brought back the cloud which had obscured Mr
    Meagles's sunshine on the morning of the chance encounter at the Ferry.
    If Clennam had ever admitted the forbidden passion into his breast,
    this period might have been a period of real trial; under the actual
    circumstances, doubtless it was nothing--nothing.

    Equally, if his heart had given entertainment to that prohibited guest,
    his silent fighting of his way through the mental condition of this
    period might have been a little meritorious. In the constant effort not
    to be betrayed into a new phase of the besetting sin of his experience,
    the pursuit of selfish objects by low and small means, and to hold
    instead to some high principle of honour and generosity, there might
    have been a little merit. In the resolution not even to avoid Mr
    Meagles's house, lest, in the selfish sparing of himself, he should
    bring any slight distress upon the daughter through making her the cause
    of an estrangement which he believed the father would regret, there
    might have been a little merit. In the modest truthfulness of always
    keeping in view the greater equality of Mr Gowan's years and the greater
    attractions of his person and manner, there might have been a little
    merit. In doing all this and much more, in a perfectly unaffected way
    and with a manful and composed constancy, while the pain within him
    (peculiar as his life and history) was very sharp, there might have been
    some quiet strength of character. But, after the resolution he had made,
    of course he could have no such merits as these; and such a state of
    mind was nobody's--nobody's.

    Mr Gowan made it no concern of his whether it was nobody's or
    somebody's. He preserved his perfect serenity of manner on all
    occasions, as if the possibility of Clennam's presuming to have debated
    the great question were too distant and ridiculous to be imagined. He
    had always an affability to bestow on Clennam and an ease to treat
    him with, which might of itself (in the supposititious case of his
            not having taken that sagacious course) have been a very uncomfortable
    element in his state of mind.

    'I quite regret you were not with us yesterday,' said Mr Henry Gowan,
    calling on Clennam the next morning. 'We had an agreeable day up the
    river there.'

    So he had heard, Arthur said.

    'From your partner?' returned Henry Gowan. 'What a dear old fellow he
    is!'

    'I have a great regard for him.'

    'By Jove, he is the finest creature!' said Gowan. 'So fresh, so green,
    trusts in such wonderful things!'

    Here was one of the many little rough points that had a tendency to
    grate on Clennam's hearing. He put it aside by merely repeating that he
    had a high regard for Mr Doyce.

    'He is charming! To see him mooning along to that time of life,
    laying down nothing by the way and picking up nothing by the way, is
    delightful. It warms a man. So unspoilt, so simple, such a good soul!
    Upon my life Mr Clennam, one feels desperately worldly and wicked in
    comparison with such an innocent creature. I speak for myself, let me
    add, without including you. You are genuine also.'

    'Thank you for the compliment,' said Clennam, ill at ease; 'you are too,
    I hope?'

    'So so,' rejoined the other. 'To be candid with you, tolerably. I am
    not a great impostor. Buy one of my pictures, and I assure you,
    in confidence, it will not be worth the money. Buy one of another
    man's--any great professor who beats me hollow--and the chances are that
    the more you give him, the more he'll impose upon you. They all do it.'

    'All painters?'

    'Painters, writers, patriots, all the rest who have stands in the
    market. Give almost any man I know ten pounds, and he will impose upon
    you to a corresponding extent; a thousand pounds--to a corresponding
    extent; ten thousand pounds--to a corresponding extent. So great the
    success, so great the imposition. But what a capital world it is!' cried
    Gowan with warm enthusiasm. 'What a jolly, excellent, lovable world it
    is!'

    'I had rather thought,' said Clennam, 'that the principle you mention
    was chiefly acted on by--'

    'By the Barnacles?' interrupted Gowan, laughing.

    'By the political gentlemen who condescend to keep the Circumlocution
    Office.'

    'Ah! Don't be hard upon the Barnacles,' said Gowan, laughing afresh,
    'they are darling fellows! Even poor little Clarence, the born idiot of
    the family, is the most agreeable and most endearing blockhead! And by
    Jupiter, with a kind of cleverness in him too that would astonish you!'

    'It would. Very much,' said Clennam, drily.

    'And after all,' cried Gowan, with that characteristic balancing of his
    which reduced everything in the wide world to the same light weight,
    'though I can't deny that the Circumlocution Office may ultimately
    shipwreck everybody and everything, still, that will probably not be in
    our time--and it's a school for gentlemen.'

    'It's a very dangerous, unsatisfactory, and expensive school to the
    people who pay to keep the pupils there, I am afraid,' said Clennam,
    shaking his head.

    'Ah! You are a terrible fellow,' returned Gowan, airily. 'I can
    understand how you have frightened that little donkey, Clarence, the
    most estimable of moon-calves (I really love him) nearly out of his
    wits. But enough of him, and of all the rest of them. I want to present
    you to my mother, Mr Clennam. Pray do me the favour to give me the
    opportunity.'

    In nobody's state of mind, there was nothing Clennam would have desired
    less, or would have been more at a loss how to avoid.

    'My mother lives in a most primitive manner down in that dreary
    red-brick dungeon at Hampton Court,' said Gowan. 'If you would make
    your own appointment, suggest your own day for permitting me to take
    you there to dinner, you would be bored and she would be charmed. Really
    that's the state of the case.'

    What could Clennam say after this? His retiring character included a
    great deal that was simple in the best sense, because unpractised and
    unused; and in his simplicity and modesty, he could only say that he was
    happy to place himself at Mr Gowan's disposal. Accordingly he said it,
    and the day was fixed. And a dreaded day it was on his part, and a very
    unwelcome day when it came and they went down to Hampton Court together.

    The venerable inhabitants of that venerable pile seemed, in those times,
    to be encamped there like a sort of civilised gipsies. There was a
    temporary air about their establishments, as if they were going away the
    moment they could get anything better; there was also a dissatisfied air
    about themselves, as if they took it very ill that they had not already
    got something much better. Genteel blinds and makeshifts were more or
    less observable as soon as their doors were opened; screens not half
    high enough, which made dining-rooms out of arched passages, and warded
    off obscure corners where footboys slept at nights with their heads
    among the knives and forks; curtains which called upon you to believe
    that they didn't hide anything; panes of glass which requested you
    not to see them; many objects of various forms, feigning to have no
    connection with their guilty secret, a bed; disguised traps in walls,
    which were clearly coal-cellars; affectations of no thoroughfares, which
    were evidently doors to little kitchens. Mental reservations and artful
    mysteries grew out of these things. Callers looking steadily into the
    eyes of their receivers, pretended not to smell cooking three feet off;
    people, confronting closets accidentally left open, pretended not to see
    bottles; visitors with their heads against a partition of thin canvas,
    and a page and a young female at high words on the other side, made
    believe to be sitting in a primeval silence. There was no end to the
    small social accommodation-bills of this nature which the gipsies of
    gentility were constantly drawing upon, and accepting for, one another.

    Some of these Bohemians were of an irritable temperament, as constantly
    soured and vexed by two mental trials: the first, the consciousness
    that they had never got enough out of the public; the second, the
    consciousness that the public were admitted into the building. Under the
    latter great wrong, a few suffered dreadfully--particularly on Sundays,
    when they had for some time expected the earth to open and swallow
    the public up; but which desirable event had not yet occurred, in
    consequence of some reprehensible laxity in the arrangements of the
    Universe.

    Mrs Gowan's door was attended by a family servant of several years'
    standing, who had his own crow to pluck with the public concerning a
    situation in the Post-Office which he had been for some time expecting,
    and to which he was not yet appointed. He perfectly knew that the public
    could never have got him in, but he grimly gratified himself with the
    idea that the public kept him out. Under the influence of this injury
    (and perhaps of some little straitness and irregularity in the matter
     of wages), he had grown neglectful of his person and morose in mind;
    and now beholding in Clennam one of the degraded body of his oppressors,
    received him with ignominy.

    Mrs Gowan, however, received him with condescension. He found her a
    courtly old lady, formerly a Beauty, and still sufficiently
    well-favoured to have dispensed with the powder on her nose and a
    certain impossible bloom under each eye. She was a little lofty with
    him; so was another old lady, dark-browed and high-nosed, and who must
    have had something real about her or she could not have existed, but it
    was certainly not her hair or her teeth or her figure or her complexion;
    so was a grey old gentleman of dignified and sullen appearance; both of
    whom had come to dinner. But, as they had all been in the British
    Embassy way in sundry parts of the earth, and as a British Embassy
    cannot better establish a character with the Circumlocution Office than
    by treating its compatriots with illimitable contempt (else it would
            become like the Embassies of other countries), Clennam felt that on the
    whole they let him off lightly.

    The dignified old gentleman turned out to be Lord Lancaster
    Stiltstalking, who had been maintained by the Circumlocution Office for
    many years as a representative of the Britannic Majesty abroad.
    This noble Refrigerator had iced several European courts in his time,
    and had done it with such complete success that the very name of
    Englishman yet struck cold to the stomachs of foreigners who had the
    distinguished honour of remembering him at a distance of a quarter of a
    century.

    He was now in retirement, and hence (in a ponderous white cravat, like
            a stiff snow-drift) was so obliging as to shade the dinner. There was a
    whisper of the pervading Bohemian character in the nomadic nature of
    the service and its curious races of plates and dishes; but the noble
    Refrigerator, infinitely better than plate or porcelain, made it superb.
    He shaded the dinner, cooled the wines, chilled the gravy, and blighted
    the vegetables.

    There was only one other person in the room: a microscopically small
    footboy, who waited on the malevolent man who hadn't got into the
    Post-Office. Even this youth, if his jacket could have been unbuttoned
    and his heart laid bare, would have been seen, as a distant adherent of
    the Barnacle family, already to aspire to a situation under Government.

    Mrs Gowan with a gentle melancholy upon her, occasioned by her son's
    being reduced to court the swinish public as a follower of the low Arts,
    instead of asserting his birthright and putting a ring through its nose
    as an acknowledged Barnacle, headed the conversation at dinner on the
    evil days. It was then that Clennam learned for the first time what
    little pivots this great world goes round upon.

    'If John Barnacle,' said Mrs Gowan, after the degeneracy of the times
    had been fully ascertained, 'if John Barnacle had but abandoned his most
    unfortunate idea of conciliating the mob, all would have been well, and
    I think the country would have been preserved.'

    The old lady with the high nose assented; but added that if Augustus
    Stiltstalking had in a general way ordered the cavalry out with
    instructions to charge, she thought the country would have been
    preserved.

    The noble Refrigerator assented; but added that if William Barnacle and
    Tudor Stiltstalking, when they came over to one another and formed
    their ever-memorable coalition, had boldly muzzled the newspapers,
    and rendered it penal for any Editor-person to presume to discuss the
    conduct of any appointed authority abroad or at home, he thought the
    country would have been preserved.

    It was agreed that the country (another word for the Barnacles and
            Stiltstalkings) wanted preserving, but how it came to want preserving
    was not so clear. It was only clear that the question was all about
    John Barnacle, Augustus Stiltstalking, William Barnacle and Tudor
    Stiltstalking, Tom, Dick, or Harry Barnacle or Stiltstalking, because
    there was nobody else but mob. And this was the feature of the
    conversation which impressed Clennam, as a man not used to it, very
    disagreeably: making him doubt if it were quite right to sit there,
    silently hearing a great nation narrowed to such little bounds.
    Remembering, however, that in the Parliamentary debates, whether on the
    life of that nation's body or the life of its soul, the question was
    usually all about and between John Barnacle, Augustus Stiltstalking,
    William Barnacle and Tudor Stiltstalking, Tom, Dick, or Harry Barnacle
    or Stiltstalking, and nobody else; he said nothing on the part of mob,
    bethinking himself that mob was used to it.

    Mr Henry Gowan seemed to have a malicious pleasure in playing off the
    three talkers against each other, and in seeing Clennam startled by what
    they said. Having as supreme a contempt for the class that had thrown
    him off as for the class that had not taken him on, he had no personal
    disquiet in anything that passed. His healthy state of mind appeared
    even to derive a gratification from Clennam's position of embarrassment
    and isolation among the good company; and if Clennam had been in that
    condition with which Nobody was incessantly contending, he would have
    suspected it, and would have struggled with the suspicion as a meanness,
    even while he sat at the table.

    In the course of a couple of hours the noble Refrigerator, at no time
    less than a hundred years behind the period, got about five centuries
    in arrears, and delivered solemn political oracles appropriate to that
    epoch. He finished by freezing a cup of tea for his own drinking,
    and retiring at his lowest temperature.

    Then Mrs Gowan, who had been accustomed in her days of a vacant
    arm-chair beside her to which to summon state to retain her devoted
    slaves, one by one, for short audiences as marks of her especial favour,
    invited Clennam with a turn of her fan to approach the presence. He
    obeyed, and took the tripod recently vacated by Lord Lancaster
    Stiltstalking.

    'Mr Clennam,' said Mrs Gowan, 'apart from the happiness I have in
    becoming known to you, though in this odiously inconvenient place--a
    mere barrack--there is a subject on which I am dying to speak to you. It
    is the subject in connection with which my son first had, I believe, the
    pleasure of cultivating your acquaintance.'

    Clennam inclined his head, as a generally suitable reply to what he did
    not yet quite understand.

    'First,' said Mrs Gowan, 'now, is she really pretty?'

    In nobody's difficulties, he would have found it very difficult to
    answer; very difficult indeed to smile, and say 'Who?'

    'Oh! You know!' she returned. 'This flame of Henry's. This unfortunate
    fancy. There! If it is a point of honour that I should originate the
    name--Miss Mickles--Miggles.'

    'Miss Meagles,' said Clennam, 'is very beautiful.'

    'Men are so often mistaken on those points,' returned Mrs Gowan, shaking
    her head, 'that I candidly confess to you I feel anything but sure of
    it, even now; though it is something to have Henry corroborated with so
    much gravity and emphasis. He picked the people up at Rome, I think?'

    The phrase would have given nobody mortal offence. Clennam replied,
    'Excuse me, I doubt if I understand your expression.'

    'Picked the people up,' said Mrs Gowan, tapping the sticks of her closed
    fan (a large green one, which she used as a hand-screen) on her little
    table. 'Came upon them. Found them out. Stumbled against them.'

    'The people?'

    'Yes. The Miggles people.'

    'I really cannot say,' said Clennam, 'where my friend Mr Meagles first
    presented Mr Henry Gowan to his daughter.'

    'I am pretty sure he picked her up at Rome; but never mind
    where--somewhere. Now (this is entirely between ourselves), is she very
    plebeian?'

    'Really, ma'am,' returned Clennam, 'I am so undoubtedly plebeian myself,
    that I do not feel qualified to judge.'

    'Very neat!' said Mrs Gowan, coolly unfurling her screen. 'Very happy!
    From which I infer that you secretly think her manner equal to her
    looks?'

    Clennam, after a moment's stiffness, bowed.

    'That's comforting, and I hope you may be right. Did Henry tell me you
    had travelled with them?'

    'I travelled with my friend Mr Meagles, and his wife and daughter,
    during some months.' (Nobody's heart might have been wrung by the
            remembrance.)

    'Really comforting, because you must have had a large experience of
    them. You see, Mr Clennam, this thing has been going on for a long time,
    and I find no improvement in it. Therefore to have the opportunity of
    speaking to one so well informed about it as yourself, is an immense
    relief to me. Quite a boon. Quite a blessing, I am sure.'

    'Pardon me,' returned Clennam, 'but I am not in Mr Henry Gowan's
    confidence. I am far from being so well informed as you suppose me to
    be. Your mistake makes my position a very delicate one. No word on this
    topic has ever passed between Mr Henry Gowan and myself.'

    Mrs Gowan glanced at the other end of the room, where her son was
    playing ecarte on a sofa, with the old lady who was for a charge of
    cavalry.

    'Not in his confidence? No,' said Mrs Gowan. 'No word has passed between
    you? No. That I can imagine. But there are unexpressed confidences, Mr
    Clennam; and as you have been together intimately among these people, I
    cannot doubt that a confidence of that sort exists in the present case.
    Perhaps you have heard that I have suffered the keenest distress of
    mind from Henry's having taken to a pursuit which--well!' shrugging her
    shoulders, 'a very respectable pursuit, I dare say, and some artists
    are, as artists, quite superior persons; still, we never yet in our
    family have gone beyond an Amateur, and it is a pardonable weakness to
    feel a little--'

    As Mrs Gowan broke off to heave a sigh, Clennam, however resolute to
    be magnanimous, could not keep down the thought that there was mighty
    little danger of the family's ever going beyond an Amateur, even as it
    was.

    'Henry,' the mother resumed, 'is self-willed and resolute; and as these
    people naturally strain every nerve to catch him, I can entertain very
    little hope, Mr Clennam, that the thing will be broken off. I apprehend
    the girl's fortune will be very small; Henry might have done much
    better; there is scarcely anything to compensate for the connection:
    still, he acts for himself; and if I find no improvement within a short
    time, I see no other course than to resign myself and make the best of
    these people. I am infinitely obliged to you for what you have told
    me.'

    As she shrugged her shoulders, Clennam stiffly bowed again. With an
    uneasy flush upon his face, and hesitation in his manner, he then said
    in a still lower tone than he had adopted yet:

    'Mrs Gowan, I scarcely know how to acquit myself of what I feel to be a
    duty, and yet I must ask you for your kind consideration in
    attempting to discharge it. A misconception on your part, a very great
    misconception if I may venture to call it so, seems to require setting
    right. You have supposed Mr Meagles and his family to strain every
    nerve, I think you said--'

    'Every nerve,' repeated Mrs Gowan, looking at him in calm obstinacy,
    with her green fan between her face and the fire.

    'To secure Mr Henry Gowan?'

    The lady placidly assented.

    'Now that is so far,' said Arthur, 'from being the case, that I know
    Mr Meagles to be unhappy in this matter; and to have interposed all
    reasonable obstacles with the hope of putting an end to it.'

    Mrs Gowan shut up her great green fan, tapped him on the arm with it,
    and tapped her smiling lips. 'Why, of course,' said she. 'Just what I
    mean.'

    Arthur watched her face for some explanation of what she did mean.

    'Are you really serious, Mr Clennam? Don't you see?'

    Arthur did not see; and said so.

    'Why, don't I know my son, and don't I know that this is exactly the way
    to hold him?' said Mrs Gowan, contemptuously; 'and do not these Miggles
    people know it, at least as well as I? Oh, shrewd people, Mr Clennam:
    evidently people of business! I believe Miggles belonged to a Bank. It
    ought to have been a very profitable Bank, if he had much to do with its
    management. This is very well done, indeed.'

    'I beg and entreat you, ma'am--' Arthur interposed.

    'Oh, Mr Clennam, can you really be so credulous?'

    It made such a painful impression upon him to hear her talking in this
    haughty tone, and to see her patting her contemptuous lips with her
    fan, that he said very earnestly, 'Believe me, ma'am, this is unjust, a
    perfectly groundless suspicion.'

    'Suspicion?' repeated Mrs Gowan. 'Not suspicion, Mr Clennam, Certainty.
    It is very knowingly done indeed, and seems to have taken _you_ in
    completely.' She laughed; and again sat tapping her lips with her fan,
    and tossing her head, as if she added, 'Don't tell me. I know such
    people will do anything for the honour of such an alliance.'

    At this opportune moment, the cards were thrown up, and Mr Henry Gowan
    came across the room saying, 'Mother, if you can spare Mr Clennam for
    this time, we have a long way to go, and it's getting late.' Mr Clennam
    thereupon rose, as he had no choice but to do; and Mrs Gowan showed him,
    to the last, the same look and the same tapped contemptuous lips.

    'You have had a portentously long audience of my mother,' said Gowan, as
    the door closed upon them. 'I fervently hope she has not bored you?'

    'Not at all,' said Clennam.

    They had a little open phaeton for the journey, and were soon in it on
    the road home. Gowan, driving, lighted a cigar; Clennam declined one. Do
    what he would, he fell into such a mood of abstraction that Gowan said
    again, 'I am very much afraid my mother has bored you?' To which he
    roused himself to answer, 'Not at all!' and soon relapsed again.

    In that state of mind which rendered nobody uneasy, his thoughtfulness
    would have turned principally on the man at his side. He would have
    thought of the morning when he first saw him rooting out the stones with
    his heel, and would have asked himself, 'Does he jerk me out of the
    path in the same careless, cruel way?' He would have thought, had this
    introduction to his mother been brought about by him because he knew
    what she would say, and that he could thus place his position before
    a rival and loftily warn him off, without himself reposing a word of
    confidence in him? He would have thought, even if there were no such
    design as that, had he brought him there to play with his repressed
    emotions, and torment him? The current of these meditations would have
    been stayed sometimes by a rush of shame, bearing a remonstrance to
    himself from his own open nature, representing that to shelter such
    suspicions, even for the passing moment, was not to hold the high,
    unenvious course he had resolved to keep. At those times, the striving
    within him would have been hardest; and looking up and catching Gowan's
    eyes, he would have started as if he had done him an injury.

    Then, looking at the dark road and its uncertain objects, he would have
    gradually trailed off again into thinking, 'Where are we driving, he
    and I, I wonder, on the darker road of life? How will it be with us, and
    with her, in the obscure distance?' Thinking of her, he would have been
    troubled anew with a reproachful misgiving that it was not even loyal to
    her to dislike him, and that in being so easily prejudiced against him
    he was less deserving of her than at first.

    'You are evidently out of spirits,' said Gowan; 'I am very much afraid
    my mother must have bored you dreadfully.'

    'Believe me, not at all,' said Clennam. 'It's nothing--nothing!'




A frequently recurring doubt, whether Mr Pancks's desire to collect
information relative to the Dorrit family could have any possible
bearing on the misgivings he had imparted to his mother on his return
from his long exile, caused Arthur Clennam much uneasiness at this
period. What Mr Pancks already knew about the Dorrit family, what more
he really wanted to find out, and why he should trouble his busy head
about them at all, were questions that often perplexed him. Mr Pancks
was not a man to waste his time and trouble in researches prompted by
idle curiosity. That he had a specific object Clennam could not doubt.
And whether the attainment of that object by Mr Pancks's industry might
bring to light, in some untimely way, secret reasons which had induced
his mother to take Little Dorrit by the hand, was a serious speculation.

Not that he ever wavered either in his desire or his determination to
repair a wrong that had been done in his father's time, should a
wrong come to light, and be reparable. The shadow of a supposed act
of injustice, which had hung over him since his father's death, was
so vague and formless that it might be the result of a reality widely
remote from his idea of it. But, if his apprehensions should prove to
be well founded, he was ready at any moment to lay down all he had, and
begin the world anew. As the fierce dark teaching of his childhood had
never sunk into his heart, so that first article in his code of morals
was, that he must begin, in practical humility, with looking well to
his feet on Earth, and that he could never mount on wings of words to
Heaven. Duty on earth, restitution on earth, action on earth; these
first, as the first steep steps upward. Strait was the gate and narrow
was the way; far straiter and narrower than the broad high road paved
with vain professions and vain repetitions, motes from other men's eyes
and liberal delivery of others to the judgment--all cheap materials
costing absolutely nothing.

No. It was not a selfish fear or hesitation that rendered him
uneasy, but a mistrust lest Pancks might not observe his part of the
understanding between them, and, making any discovery, might take some
course upon it without imparting it to him. On the other hand, when he
recalled his conversation with Pancks, and the little reason he had to
suppose that there was any likelihood of that strange personage being
on that track at all, there were times when he wondered that he made so
much of it. Labouring in this sea, as all barks labour in cross seas, he
tossed about and came to no haven.

The removal of Little Dorrit herself from their customary association,
    did not mend the matter. She was so much out, and so much in her own
    room, that he began to miss her and to find a blank in her place. He had
    written to her to inquire if she were better, and she had written
    back, very gratefully and earnestly telling him not to be uneasy on her
    behalf, for she was quite well; but he had not seen her, for what, in
    their intercourse, was a long time.

    He returned home one evening from an interview with her father, who had
    mentioned that she was out visiting--which was what he always said
    when she was hard at work to buy his supper--and found Mr Meagles in an
    excited state walking up and down his room. On his opening the door, Mr
    Meagles stopped, faced round, and said:

    'Clennam!--Tattycoram!'

    'What's the matter?'

    'Lost!'

    'Why, bless my heart alive!' cried Clennam in amazement. 'What do you
    mean?'

    'Wouldn't count five-and-twenty, sir; couldn't be got to do it; stopped
    at eight, and took herself off.'

    'Left your house?'

    'Never to come back,' said Mr Meagles, shaking his head. 'You don't know
    that girl's passionate and proud character. A team of horses couldn't
    draw her back now; the bolts and bars of the old Bastille couldn't keep
    her.'

    'How did it happen? Pray sit down and tell me.'

    'As to how it happened, it's not so easy to relate: because you must
    have the unfortunate temperament of the poor impetuous girl herself,
    before you can fully understand it. But it came about in this way. Pet
    and Mother and I have been having a good deal of talk together of late.
    I'll not disguise from you, Clennam, that those conversations have not
    been of as bright a kind as I could wish; they have referred to our
    going away again. In proposing to do which, I have had, in fact, an
    object.'

    Nobody's heart beat quickly.

    'An object,' said Mr Meagles, after a moment's pause, 'that I will not
    disguise from you, either, Clennam. There's an inclination on the part
    of my dear child which I am sorry for. Perhaps you guess the person.
    Henry Gowan.'

    'I was not unprepared to hear it.'

    'Well!' said Mr Meagles, with a heavy sigh, 'I wish to God you had never
    had to hear it. However, so it is. Mother and I have done all we could
    to get the better of it, Clennam. We have tried tender advice, we
    have tried time, we have tried absence. As yet, of no use. Our late
    conversations have been upon the subject of going away for another year
    at least, in order that there might be an entire separation and breaking
    off for that term. Upon that question, Pet has been unhappy, and
    therefore Mother and I have been unhappy.'

    Clennam said that he could easily believe it.

    'Well!' continued Mr Meagles in an apologetic way, 'I admit as a
    practical man, and I am sure Mother would admit as a practical woman,
    that we do, in families, magnify our troubles and make mountains of our
    molehills in a way that is calculated to be rather trying to people who
    look on--to mere outsiders, you know, Clennam. Still, Pet's happiness
    or unhappiness is quite a life or death question with us; and we may be
    excused, I hope, for making much of it. At all events, it might have
    been borne by Tattycoram. Now, don't you think so?'

    'I do indeed think so,' returned Clennam, in most emphatic recognition
    of this very moderate expectation.

    'No, sir,' said Mr Meagles, shaking his head ruefully. 'She couldn't
    stand it. The chafing and firing of that girl, the wearing and tearing
    of that girl within her own breast, has been such that I have
    softly said to her again and again in passing her, "Five-and-twenty,
    Tattycoram, five-and-twenty!" I heartily wish she could have gone
    on counting five-and-twenty day and night, and then it wouldn't have
    happened.'

    Mr Meagles with a despondent countenance in which the goodness of his
    heart was even more expressed than in his times of cheerfulness and
    gaiety, stroked his face down from his forehead to his chin, and shook
    his head again.

    'I said to Mother (not that it was necessary, for she would have thought
            it all for herself), we are practical people, my dear, and we know her
    story; we see in this unhappy girl some reflection of what was raging in
    her mother's heart before ever such a creature as this poor thing was
    in the world; we'll gloss her temper over, Mother, we won't notice it at
    present, my dear, we'll take advantage of some better disposition in her
    another time. So we said nothing. But, do what we would, it seems as if
    it was to be; she broke out violently one night.'

    'How, and why?'

    'If you ask me Why,' said Mr Meagles, a little disturbed by the
    question, for he was far more intent on softening her case than the
    family's, 'I can only refer you to what I have just repeated as having
    been pretty near my words to Mother. As to How, we had said Good night
    to Pet in her presence (very affectionately, I must allow), and she
    had attended Pet up-stairs--you remember she was her maid. Perhaps Pet,
    having been out of sorts, may have been a little more inconsiderate than
    usual in requiring services of her: but I don't know that I have any
    right to say so; she was always thoughtful and gentle.'

    'The gentlest mistress in the world.'

    'Thank you, Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, shaking him by the hand; 'you
    have often seen them together. Well! We presently heard this unfortunate
    Tattycoram loud and angry, and before we could ask what was the matter,
    Pet came back in a tremble, saying she was frightened of her. Close
    after her came Tattycoram in a flaming rage. "I hate you all three,"
    says she, stamping her foot at us. "I am bursting with hate of the whole
    house."'

    'Upon which you--?'

    'I?' said Mr Meagles, with a plain good faith that might have commanded
    the belief of Mrs Gowan herself. 'I said, count five-and-twenty,
    Tattycoram.'

    Mr Meagles again stroked his face and shook his head, with an air of
    profound regret.

    'She was so used to do it, Clennam, that even then, such a picture of
    passion as you never saw, she stopped short, looked me full in the face,
    and counted (as I made out) to eight. But she couldn't control herself
    to go any further. There she broke down, poor thing, and gave the other
    seventeen to the four winds. Then it all burst out. She detested us, she
    was miserable with us, she couldn't bear it, she wouldn't bear it, she
    was determined to go away. She was younger than her young mistress, and
    would she remain to see her always held up as the only creature who was
    young and interesting, and to be cherished and loved? No. She wouldn't,
    she wouldn't, she wouldn't! What did we think she, Tattycoram, might
    have been if she had been caressed and cared for in her childhood, like
    her young mistress? As good as her? Ah! Perhaps fifty times as good.
    When we pretended to be so fond of one another, we exulted over her;
    that was what we did; we exulted over her and shamed her. And all in
    the house did the same. They talked about their fathers and mothers, and
    brothers and sisters; they liked to drag them up before her face. There
    was Mrs Tickit, only yesterday, when her little grandchild was with her,
    had been amused by the child's trying to call her (Tattycoram) by the
    wretched name we gave her; and had laughed at the name. Why, who didn't;
    and who were we that we should have a right to name her like a dog or a
    cat? But she didn't care. She would take no more benefits from us; she
    would fling us her name back again, and she would go. She would leave
    us that minute, nobody should stop her, and we should never hear of her
    again.'

    Mr Meagles had recited all this with such a vivid remembrance of his
    original, that he was almost as flushed and hot by this time as he
    described her to have been.

    'Ah, well!' he said, wiping his face. 'It was of no use trying reason
    then, with that vehement panting creature (Heaven knows what her
            mother's story must have been); so I quietly told her that she should
    not go at that late hour of night, and I gave her my hand and took her
    to her room, and locked the house doors. But she was gone this morning.'

    'And you know no more of her?'

    'No more,' returned Mr Meagles. 'I have been hunting about all day. She
    must have gone very early and very silently. I have found no trace of
    her down about us.'

    'Stay! You want,' said Clennam, after a moment's reflection, 'to see
    her? I assume that?'

    'Yes, assuredly; I want to give her another chance; Mother and Pet
    want to give her another chance; come! You yourself,' said Mr Meagles,
    persuasively, as if the provocation to be angry were not his own at all,
    'want to give the poor passionate girl another chance, I know, Clennam.'

    'It would be strange and hard indeed if I did not,' said Clennam, 'when
    you are all so forgiving. What I was going to ask you was, have you
    thought of that Miss Wade?'

    'I have. I did not think of her until I had pervaded the whole of our
    neighbourhood, and I don't know that I should have done so then but
    for finding Mother and Pet, when I went home, full of the idea that
    Tattycoram must have gone to her. Then, of course, I recalled what she
    said that day at dinner when you were first with us.'

    'Have you any idea where Miss Wade is to be found?'

    'To tell you the truth,' returned Mr Meagles, 'it's because I have an
    addled jumble of a notion on that subject that you found me waiting
    here. There is one of those odd impressions in my house, which do
    mysteriously get into houses sometimes, which nobody seems to have
    picked up in a distinct form from anybody, and yet which everybody seems
    to have got hold of loosely from somebody and let go again, that she
    lives, or was living, thereabouts.' Mr Meagles handed him a slip of
    paper, on which was written the name of one of the dull by-streets in
    the Grosvenor region, near Park Lane.

    'Here is no number,' said Arthur looking over it.

    'No number, my dear Clennam?' returned his friend. 'No anything! The
    very name of the street may have been floating in the air; for, as I
    tell you, none of my people can say where they got it from. However,
    it's worth an inquiry; and as I would rather make it in company than
    alone, and as you too were a fellow-traveller of that immovable woman's,
    I thought perhaps--' Clennam finished the sentence for him by taking up
    his hat again, and saying he was ready.

    It was now summer-time; a grey, hot, dusty evening. They rode to the top
    of Oxford Street, and there alighting, dived in among the great streets
    of melancholy stateliness, and the little streets that try to be as
    stately and succeed in being more melancholy, of which there is a
    labyrinth near Park Lane. Wildernesses of corner houses, with barbarous
    old porticoes and appurtenances; horrors that came into existence under
    some wrong-headed person in some wrong-headed time, still demanding
    the blind admiration of all ensuing generations and determined to do
    so until they tumbled down; frowned upon the twilight. Parasite little
    tenements, with the cramp in their whole frame, from the dwarf hall-door
    on the giant model of His Grace's in the Square to the squeezed window
    of the boudoir commanding the dunghills in the Mews, made the evening
    doleful. Rickety dwellings of undoubted fashion, but of a capacity to
    hold nothing comfortably except a dismal smell, looked like the last
    result of the great mansions' breeding in-and-in; and, where their
    little supplementary bows and balconies were supported on thin iron
    columns, seemed to be scrofulously resting upon crutches. Here and
    there a Hatchment, with the whole science of Heraldry in it, loomed down
    upon the street, like an Archbishop discoursing on Vanity. The shops,
    few in number, made no show; for popular opinion was as nothing to them.
    The pastrycook knew who was on his books, and in that knowledge could be
    calm, with a few glass cylinders of dowager peppermint-drops in his
    window, and half-a-dozen ancient specimens of currant-jelly. A few
    oranges formed the greengrocer's whole concession to the vulgar mind. A
    single basket made of moss, once containing plovers' eggs, held all that
    the poulterer had to say to the rabble. Everybody in those streets
    seemed (which is always the case at that hour and season) to be gone out
    to dinner, and nobody seemed to be giving the dinners they had gone to.
    On the doorsteps there were lounging footmen with bright parti-coloured
    plumage and white polls, like an extinct race of monstrous birds; and
    butlers, solitary men of recluse demeanour, each of whom appeared
    distrustful of all other butlers. The roll of carriages in the Park was
    done for the day; the street lamps were lighting; and wicked little
    grooms in the tightest fitting garments, with twists in their legs
    answering to the twists in their minds, hung about in pairs, chewing
    straws and exchanging fraudulent secrets. The spotted dogs who went out
    with the carriages, and who were so associated with splendid equipages
    that it looked like a condescension in those animals to come out without
    them, accompanied helpers to and fro on messages. Here and there was a
    retiring public-house which did not require to be supported on the
    shoulders of the people, and where gentlemen out of livery were not much
    wanted.

    This last discovery was made by the two friends in pursuing their
    inquiries. Nothing was there, or anywhere, known of such a person as
    Miss Wade, in connection with the street they sought. It was one of the
    parasite streets; long, regular, narrow, dull and gloomy; like a brick
    and mortar funeral. They inquired at several little area gates, where
    a dejected youth stood spiking his chin on the summit of a precipitous
    little shoot of wooden steps, but could gain no information. They walked
    up the street on one side of the way, and down it on the other, what
    time two vociferous news-sellers, announcing an extraordinary event that
    had never happened and never would happen, pitched their hoarse voices
    into the secret chambers; but nothing came of it. At length they stood
    at the corner from which they had begun, and it had fallen quite dark,
    and they were no wiser.

    It happened that in the street they had several times passed a dingy
    house, apparently empty, with bills in the windows, announcing that it
    was to let. The bills, as a variety in the funeral procession, almost
    amounted to a decoration. Perhaps because they kept the house separated
    in his mind, or perhaps because Mr Meagles and himself had twice agreed
    in passing, 'It is clear she don't live there,' Clennam now proposed
    that they should go back and try that house before finally going away.
    Mr Meagles agreed, and back they went.

    They knocked once, and they rang once, without any response. 'Empty,'
    said Mr Meagles, listening. 'Once more,' said Clennam, and knocked
    again. After that knock they heard a movement below, and somebody
    shuffling up towards the door.

    The confined entrance was so dark that it was impossible to make out
    distinctly what kind of person opened the door; but it appeared to be an
    old woman. 'Excuse our troubling you,' said Clennam. 'Pray can you
    tell us where Miss Wade lives?' The voice in the darkness unexpectedly
    replied, 'Lives here.'

    'Is she at home?'

    No answer coming, Mr Meagles asked again. 'Pray is she at home?'

    After another delay, 'I suppose she is,' said the voice abruptly; 'you
    had better come in, and I'll ask.'

    They were summarily shut into the close black house; and the figure
    rustling away, and speaking from a higher level, said, 'Come up, if you
    please; you can't tumble over anything.' They groped their way up-stairs
    towards a faint light, which proved to be the light of the street
    shining through a window; and the figure left them shut in an airless
    room.

    'This is odd, Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, softly.

    'Odd enough,' assented Clennam in the same tone, 'but we have succeeded;
    that's the main point. Here's a light coming!'

    The light was a lamp, and the bearer was an old woman: very dirty, very
    wrinkled and dry. 'She's at home,' she said (and the voice was the same
            that had spoken before); 'she'll come directly.' Having set the lamp
    down on the table, the old woman dusted her hands on her apron, which
    she might have done for ever without cleaning them, looked at the
    visitors with a dim pair of eyes, and backed out.

    The lady whom they had come to see, if she were the present occupant
    of the house, appeared to have taken up her quarters there as she might
    have established herself in an Eastern caravanserai. A small square
    of carpet in the middle of the room, a few articles of furniture that
    evidently did not belong to the room, and a disorder of trunks and
    travelling articles, formed the whole of her surroundings. Under some
    former regular inhabitant, the stifling little apartment had broken out
    into a pier-glass and a gilt table; but the gilding was as faded as last
    year's flowers, and the glass was so clouded that it seemed to hold in
    magic preservation all the fogs and bad weather it had ever reflected.
    The visitors had had a minute or two to look about them, when the door
    opened and Miss Wade came in.

    She was exactly the same as when they had parted, just as handsome, just
    as scornful, just as repressed. She manifested no surprise in seeing
    them, nor any other emotion. She requested them to be seated; and
    declining to take a seat herself, at once anticipated any introduction
    of their business.

    'I apprehend,' she said, 'that I know the cause of your favouring me
    with this visit. We may come to it at once.'

    'The cause then, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'is Tattycoram.'

    'So I supposed.'

    'Miss Wade,' said Mr Meagles, 'will you be so kind as to say whether you
    know anything of her?'

    'Surely. I know she is here with me.'

    'Then, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'allow me to make known to you that I
    shall be happy to have her back, and that my wife and daughter will
    be happy to have her back. She has been with us a long time: we don't
    forget her claims upon us, and I hope we know how to make allowances.'

    'You hope to know how to make allowances?' she returned, in a level,
    measured voice. 'For what?'

    'I think my friend would say, Miss Wade,' Arthur Clennam interposed,
    seeing Mr Meagles rather at a loss, 'for the passionate sense that
    sometimes comes upon the poor girl, of being at a disadvantage. Which
    occasionally gets the better of better remembrances.'

    The lady broke into a smile as she turned her eyes upon him. 'Indeed?'
    was all she answered.

    She stood by the table so perfectly composed and still after this
    acknowledgment of his remark that Mr Meagles stared at her under a sort
    of fascination, and could not even look to Clennam to make another move.
    After waiting, awkwardly enough, for some moments, Arthur said:

    'Perhaps it would be well if Mr Meagles could see her, Miss Wade?'

    'That is easily done,' said she. 'Come here, child.' She had opened a
    door while saying this, and now led the girl in by the hand. It was
    very curious to see them standing together: the girl with her disengaged
    fingers plaiting the bosom of her dress, half irresolutely, half
    passionately; Miss Wade with her composed face attentively regarding
    her, and suggesting to an observer, with extraordinary force, in her
    composure itself (as a veil will suggest the form it covers), the
    unquenchable passion of her own nature.

    'See here,' she said, in the same level way as before. 'Here is your
    patron, your master. He is willing to take you back, my dear, if you are
    sensible of the favour and choose to go. You can be, again, a foil to
    his pretty daughter, a slave to her pleasant wilfulness, and a toy in
    the house showing the goodness of the family. You can have your droll
    name again, playfully pointing you out and setting you apart, as it is
    right that you should be pointed out and set apart. (Your birth, you
            know; you must not forget your birth.) You can again be shown to this
    gentleman's daughter, Harriet, and kept before her, as a living reminder
    of her own superiority and her gracious condescension. You can recover
    all these advantages and many more of the same kind which I dare say
    start up in your memory while I speak, and which you lose in taking
    refuge with me--you can recover them all by telling these gentlemen how
    humbled and penitent you are, and by going back to them to be forgiven.
    What do you say, Harriet? Will you go?'

    The girl who, under the influence of these words, had gradually risen
    in anger and heightened in colour, answered, raising her lustrous black
    eyes for the moment, and clenching her hand upon the folds it had been
    puckering up, 'I'd die sooner!'

    Miss Wade, still standing at her side holding her hand, looked quietly
    round and said with a smile, 'Gentlemen! What do you do upon that?'

    Poor Mr Meagles's inexpressible consternation in hearing his motives and
    actions so perverted, had prevented him from interposing any word until
    now; but now he regained the power of speech.

    'Tattycoram,' said he, 'for I'll call you by that name still, my good
    girl, conscious that I meant nothing but kindness when I gave it to you,
    and conscious that you know it--'

    'I don't!' said she, looking up again, and almost rending herself with
    the same busy hand.

    'No, not now, perhaps,' said Mr Meagles; 'not with that lady's eyes so
    intent upon you, Tattycoram,' she glanced at them for a moment, 'and
    that power over you, which we see she exercises; not now, perhaps, but
    at another time. Tattycoram, I'll not ask that lady whether she believes
    what she has said, even in the anger and ill blood in which I and my
    friend here equally know she has spoken, though she subdues herself,
    with a determination that any one who has once seen her is not likely
    to forget. I'll not ask you, with your remembrance of my house and all
    belonging to it, whether you believe it. I'll only say that you have
    no profession to make to me or mine, and no forgiveness to entreat;
    and that all in the world that I ask you to do, is, to count
    five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

    She looked at him for an instant, and then said frowningly, 'I won't.
    Miss Wade, take me away, please.'

    The contention that raged within her had no softening in it now; it
    was wholly between passionate defiance and stubborn defiance. Her rich
    colour, her quick blood, her rapid breath, were all setting themselves
    against the opportunity of retracing their steps. 'I won't. I won't.
    I won't!' she repeated in a low, thick voice. 'I'd be torn to pieces
    first. I'd tear myself to pieces first!'

    Miss Wade, who had released her hold, laid her hand protectingly on the
    girl's neck for a moment, and then said, looking round with her former
    smile and speaking exactly in her former tone, 'Gentlemen! What do you
    do upon that?'

    'Oh, Tattycoram, Tattycoram!' cried Mr Meagles, adjuring her besides
    with an earnest hand. 'Hear that lady's voice, look at that lady's face,
    consider what is in that lady's heart, and think what a future lies
    before you. My child, whatever you may think, that lady's influence
    over you--astonishing to us, and I should hardly go too far in saying
    terrible to us to see--is founded in passion fiercer than yours, and
    temper more violent than yours. What can you two be together? What can
    come of it?'

    'I am alone here, gentlemen,' observed Miss Wade, with no change of
    voice or manner. 'Say anything you will.'

    'Politeness must yield to this misguided girl, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles,
    'at her present pass; though I hope not altogether to dismiss it,
    even with the injury you do her so strongly before me. Excuse me for
    reminding you in her hearing--I must say it--that you were a mystery
    to all of us, and had nothing in common with any of us when she
    unfortunately fell in your way. I don't know what you are, but you don't
    hide, can't hide, what a dark spirit you have within you. If it should
    happen that you are a woman, who, from whatever cause, has a perverted
    delight in making a sister-woman as wretched as she is (I am old enough
            to have heard of such), I warn her against you, and I warn you against
    yourself.'

    'Gentlemen!' said Miss Wade, calmly. 'When you have concluded--Mr
    Clennam, perhaps you will induce your friend--'

    'Not without another effort,' said Mr Meagles, stoutly. 'Tattycoram,
    my poor dear girl, count five-and-twenty.'

    'Do not reject the hope, the certainty, this kind man offers you,' said
    Clennam in a low emphatic voice. 'Turn to the friends you have not
    forgotten. Think once more!'

    'I won't! Miss Wade,' said the girl, with her bosom swelling high, and
    speaking with her hand held to her throat, 'take me away!'

    'Tattycoram,' said Mr Meagles. 'Once more yet! The only thing I ask of
    you in the world, my child! Count five-and-twenty!'

    She put her hands tightly over her ears, confusedly tumbling down her
    bright black hair in the vehemence of the action, and turned her face
    resolutely to the wall. Miss Wade, who had watched her under this final
    appeal with that strange attentive smile, and that repressing hand
    upon her own bosom with which she had watched her in her struggle at
    Marseilles, then put her arm about her waist as if she took possession
    of her for evermore.

    And there was a visible triumph in her face when she turned it to
    dismiss the visitors.

    'As it is the last time I shall have the honour,' she said, 'and as you
    have spoken of not knowing what I am, and also of the foundation of my
    influence here, you may now know that it is founded in a common cause.
    What your broken plaything is as to birth, I am. She has no name, I have
    no name. Her wrong is my wrong. I have nothing more to say to you.'

    This was addressed to Mr Meagles, who sorrowfully went out. As Clennam
    followed, she said to him, with the same external composure and in the
    same level voice, but with a smile that is only seen on cruel faces: a
    very faint smile, lifting the nostril, scarcely touching the lips, and
    not breaking away gradually, but instantly dismissed when done with:

    'I hope the wife of your dear friend Mr Gowan, may be happy in the
    contrast of her extraction to this girl's and mine, and in the high good
    fortune that awaits her.'




Not resting satisfied with the endeavours he had made to recover his
lost charge, Mr Meagles addressed a letter of remonstrance, breathing
nothing but goodwill, not only to her, but to Miss Wade too. No answer
coming to these epistles, or to another written to the stubborn girl
by the hand of her late young mistress, which might have melted her
if anything could (all three letters were returned weeks afterwards as
        having been refused at the house-door), he deputed Mrs Meagles to make
the experiment of a personal interview. That worthy lady being unable to
obtain one, and being steadfastly denied admission, Mr Meagles besought
Arthur to essay once more what he could do. All that came of his
compliance was, his discovery that the empty house was left in charge
of the old woman, that Miss Wade was gone, that the waifs and strays of
furniture were gone, and that the old woman would accept any number of
half-crowns and thank the donor kindly, but had no information whatever
to exchange for those coins, beyond constantly offering for perusal a
memorandum relative to fixtures, which the house-agent's young man had
left in the hall.

Unwilling, even under this discomfiture, to resign the ingrate and leave
her hopeless, in case of her better dispositions obtaining the mastery
over the darker side of her character, Mr Meagles, for six successive
days, published a discreetly covert advertisement in the morning papers,
    to the effect that if a certain young person who had lately left
    home without reflection, would at any time apply to his address at
    Twickenham, everything would be as it had been before, and no reproaches
    need be apprehended. The unexpected consequences of this notification
    suggested to the dismayed Mr Meagles for the first time that some
    hundreds of young persons must be leaving their homes without reflection
    every day; for shoals of wrong young people came down to Twickenham,
    who, not finding themselves received with enthusiasm, generally demanded
    compensation by way of damages, in addition to coach-hire there and
    back. Nor were these the only uninvited clients whom the advertisement
    produced. The swarm of begging-letter writers, who would seem to be
    always watching eagerly for any hook, however small, to hang a letter
    upon, wrote to say that having seen the advertisement, they were induced
    to apply with confidence for various sums, ranging from ten shillings to
    fifty pounds: not because they knew anything about the young person,
    but because they felt that to part with those donations would greatly
    relieve the advertiser's mind. Several projectors, likewise, availed
    themselves of the same opportunity to correspond with Mr Meagles; as,
    for example, to apprise him that their attention having been called to
    the advertisement by a friend, they begged to state that if they should
    ever hear anything of the young person, they would not fail to make it
    known to him immediately, and that in the meantime if he would oblige
    them with the funds necessary for bringing to perfection a certain
    entirely novel description of Pump, the happiest results would ensue to
    mankind.

    Mr Meagles and his family, under these combined discouragements, had
    begun reluctantly to give up Tattycoram as irrecoverable, when the new
    and active firm of Doyce and Clennam, in their private capacities,
    went down on a Saturday to stay at the cottage until Monday. The senior
    partner took the coach, and the junior partner took his walking-stick.

    A tranquil summer sunset shone upon him as he approached the end of
    his walk, and passed through the meadows by the river side. He had
    that sense of peace, and of being lightened of a weight of care, which
    country quiet awakens in the breasts of dwellers in towns. Everything
    within his view was lovely and placid. The rich foliage of the trees,
    the luxuriant grass diversified with wild flowers, the little green
    islands in the river, the beds of rushes, the water-lilies floating on
    the surface of the stream, the distant voices in boats borne musically
    towards him on the ripple of the water and the evening air, were all
    expressive of rest. In the occasional leap of a fish, or dip of an oar,
    or twittering of a bird not yet at roost, or distant barking of a dog,
    or lowing of a cow--in all such sounds, there was the prevailing breath
    of rest, which seemed to encompass him in every scent that sweetened
    the fragrant air. The long lines of red and gold in the sky, and the
    glorious track of the descending sun, were all divinely calm. Upon the
    purple tree-tops far away, and on the green height near at hand up which
    the shades were slowly creeping, there was an equal hush. Between the
    real landscape and its shadow in the water, there was no division; both
    were so untroubled and clear, and, while so fraught with solemn mystery
    of life and death, so hopefully reassuring to the gazer's soothed heart,
    because so tenderly and mercifully beautiful.

    Clennam had stopped, not for the first time by many times, to look about
    him and suffer what he saw to sink into his soul, as the shadows, looked
    at, seemed to sink deeper and deeper into the water. He was slowly
    resuming his way, when he saw a figure in the path before him which he
    had, perhaps, already associated with the evening and its impressions.

    Minnie was there, alone. She had some roses in her hand, and seemed to
    have stood still on seeing him, waiting for him. Her face was towards
    him, and she appeared to have been coming from the opposite direction.
    There was a flutter in her manner, which Clennam had never seen in it
    before; and as he came near her, it entered his mind all at once that
    she was there of a set purpose to speak to him.

    She gave him her hand, and said, 'You wonder to see me here by myself?
    But the evening is so lovely, I have strolled further than I meant
    at first. I thought it likely I might meet you, and that made me more
    confident. You always come this way, do you not?'

    As Clennam said that it was his favourite way, he felt her hand falter
    on his arm, and saw the roses shake.

    'Will you let me give you one, Mr Clennam? I gathered them as I came out
    of the garden. Indeed, I almost gathered them for you, thinking it so
    likely I might meet you. Mr Doyce arrived more than an hour ago, and
    told us you were walking down.'

    His own hand shook, as he accepted a rose or two from hers and thanked
    her. They were now by an avenue of trees. Whether they turned into it on
    his movement or on hers matters little. He never knew how that was.

    'It is very grave here,' said Clennam, 'but very pleasant at this hour.
    Passing along this deep shade, and out at that arch of light at the
    other end, we come upon the ferry and the cottage by the best approach,
    I think.'

    In her simple garden-hat and her light summer dress, with her rich brown
    hair naturally clustering about her, and her wonderful eyes raised to
    his for a moment with a look in which regard for him and trustfulness in
    him were strikingly blended with a kind of timid sorrow for him, she was
    so beautiful that it was well for his peace--or ill for his peace, he
    did not quite know which--that he had made that vigorous resolution he
    had so often thought about.

    She broke a momentary silence by inquiring if he knew that papa had been
    thinking of another tour abroad? He said he had heard it mentioned. She
    broke another momentary silence by adding, with some hesitation, that
    papa had abandoned the idea.

    At this, he thought directly, 'they are to be married.'

    'Mr Clennam,' she said, hesitating more timidly yet, and speaking so low
    that he bent his head to hear her. 'I should very much like to give you
    my confidence, if you would not mind having the goodness to receive
    it. I should have very much liked to have given it to you long ago,
    because--I felt that you were becoming so much our friend.'

    'How can I be otherwise than proud of it at any time! Pray give it to
    me. Pray trust me.'

    'I could never have been afraid of trusting you,' she returned, raising
    her eyes frankly to his face. 'I think I would have done so some time
    ago, if I had known how. But I scarcely know how, even now.'

    'Mr Gowan,' said Arthur Clennam, 'has reason to be very happy. God bless
    his wife and him!'

    She wept, as she tried to thank him. He reassured her, took her hand
    as it lay with the trembling roses in it on his arm, took the remaining
    roses from it, and put it to his lips. At that time, it seemed to him,
    he first finally resigned the dying hope that had flickered in nobody's
    heart so much to its pain and trouble; and from that time he became in
    his own eyes, as to any similar hope or prospect, a very much older man
    who had done with that part of life.

    He put the roses in his breast and they walked on for a little while,
    slowly and silently, under the umbrageous trees. Then he asked her, in
    a voice of cheerful kindness, was there anything else that she would
    say to him as her friend and her father's friend, many years older than
    herself; was there any trust she would repose in him, any service she
    would ask of him, any little aid to her happiness that she could give
    him the lasting gratification of believing it was in his power to
    render?

    She was going to answer, when she was so touched by some little hidden
    sorrow or sympathy--what could it have been?--that she said, bursting
    into tears again: 'O Mr Clennam! Good, generous, Mr Clennam, pray tell
    me you do not blame me.'

    'I blame you?' said Clennam. 'My dearest girl! I blame you? No!'

    After clasping both her hands upon his arm, and looking confidentially
    up into his face, with some hurried words to the effect that she thanked
    him from her heart (as she did, if it be the source of earnestness), she
    gradually composed herself, with now and then a word of encouragement
    from him, as they walked on slowly and almost silently under the
    darkening trees.

    'And, now, Minnie Gowan,' at length said Clennam, smiling; 'will you ask
    me nothing?'

    'Oh! I have very much to ask of you.'

    'That's well! I hope so; I am not disappointed.'

    'You know how I am loved at home, and how I love home. You can hardly
    think it perhaps, dear Mr Clennam,' she spoke with great agitation,
    'seeing me going from it of my own free will and choice, but I do so
    dearly love it!'

    'I am sure of that,' said Clennam. 'Can you suppose I doubt it?'

    'No, no. But it is strange, even to me, that loving it so much and
    being so much beloved in it, I can bear to cast it away. It seems so
    neglectful of it, so unthankful.'

    'My dear girl,' said Clennam, 'it is in the natural progress and change
    of time. All homes are left so.'

    'Yes, I know; but all homes are not left with such a blank in them as
    there will be in mine when I am gone. Not that there is any scarcity of
    far better and more endearing and more accomplished girls than I am; not
    that I am much, but that they have made so much of me!'

    Pet's affectionate heart was overcharged, and she sobbed while she
    pictured what would happen.

    'I know what a change papa will feel at first, and I know that at first
    I cannot be to him anything like what I have been these many years.
    And it is then, Mr Clennam, then more than at any time, that I beg and
    entreat you to remember him, and sometimes to keep him company when you
    can spare a little while; and to tell him that you know I was fonder
    of him when I left him, than I ever was in all my life. For there is
    nobody--he told me so himself when he talked to me this very day--there
    is nobody he likes so well as you, or trusts so much.'

    A clue to what had passed between the father and daughter dropped like
    a heavy stone into the well of Clennam's heart, and swelled the water
    to his eyes. He said, cheerily, but not quite so cheerily as he tried to
    say, that it should be done--that he gave her his faithful promise.

    'If I do not speak of mama,' said Pet, more moved by, and more pretty
    in, her innocent grief, than Clennam could trust himself even to
    consider--for which reason he counted the trees between them and the
    fading light as they slowly diminished in number--'it is because mama
    will understand me better in this action, and will feel my loss in a
    different way, and will look forward in a different manner. But you know
    what a dear, devoted mother she is, and you will remember her too; will
    you not?'

    Let Minnie trust him, Clennam said, let Minnie trust him to do all she
    wished.

    'And, dear Mr Clennam,' said Minnie, 'because papa and one whom I need
    not name, do not fully appreciate and understand one another yet, as
    they will by-and-by; and because it will be the duty, and the pride,
    and pleasure of my new life, to draw them to a better knowledge of one
    another, and to be a happiness to one another, and to be proud of one
    another, and to love one another, both loving me so dearly; oh, as you
    are a kind, true man! when I am first separated from home (I am going a
            long distance away), try to reconcile papa to him a little more, and use
    your great influence to keep him before papa's mind free from
    prejudice and in his real form. Will you do this for me, as you are a
    noble-hearted friend?'

    Poor Pet! Self-deceived, mistaken child! When were such changes
    ever made in men's natural relations to one another: when was such
    reconcilement of ingrain differences ever effected! It has been tried
    many times by other daughters, Minnie; it has never succeeded; nothing
    has ever come of it but failure.

    So Clennam thought. So he did not say; it was too late. He bound himself
    to do all she asked, and she knew full well that he would do it.

    They were now at the last tree in the avenue. She stopped, and withdrew
    her arm. Speaking to him with her eyes lifted up to his, and with the
    hand that had lately rested on his sleeve trembling by touching one of
    the roses in his breast as an additional appeal to him, she said:

    'Dear Mr Clennam, in my happiness--for I am happy, though you have seen
    me crying--I cannot bear to leave any cloud between us. If you have
    anything to forgive me (not anything that I have wilfully done, but any
            trouble I may have caused you without meaning it, or having it in my
            power to help it), forgive me to-night out of your noble heart!'

    He stooped to meet the guileless face that met his without shrinking. He
    kissed it, and answered, Heaven knew that he had nothing to forgive.
    As he stooped to meet the innocent face once again, she whispered,
    'Good-bye!' and he repeated it. It was taking leave of all his old
    hopes--all nobody's old restless doubts. They came out of the avenue
    next moment, arm-in-arm as they had entered it: and the trees seemed to
    close up behind them in the darkness, like their own perspective of the
    past.

    The voices of Mr and Mrs Meagles and Doyce were audible directly,
    speaking near the garden gate. Hearing Pet's name among them, Clennam
    called out, 'She is here, with me.' There was some little wondering and
    laughing until they came up; but as soon as they had all come together,
    it ceased, and Pet glided away.

    Mr Meagles, Doyce, and Clennam, without speaking, walked up and down
    on the brink of the river, in the light of the rising moon, for a few
    minutes; and then Doyce lingered behind, and went into the house. Mr
    Meagles and Clennam walked up and down together for a few minutes more
    without speaking, until at length the former broke silence.

    'Arthur,' said he, using that familiar address for the first time in
    their communication, 'do you remember my telling you, as we walked up
    and down one hot morning, looking over the harbour at Marseilles, that
    Pet's baby sister who was dead seemed to Mother and me to have grown as
    she had grown, and changed as she had changed?'

    'Very well.'

    'You remember my saying that our thoughts had never been able to
    separate those twin sisters, and that, in our fancy, whatever Pet was,
    the other was?'

    'Yes, very well.'

    'Arthur,' said Mr Meagles, much subdued, 'I carry that fancy further
    to-night. I feel to-night, my dear fellow, as if you had loved my dead
    child very tenderly, and had lost her when she was like what Pet is
    now.'

    'Thank you!' murmured Clennam, 'thank you!' And pressed his hand.

    'Will you come in?' said Mr Meagles, presently.

    'In a little while.'

    Mr Meagles fell away, and he was left alone. When he had walked on the
    river's brink in the peaceful moonlight for some half an hour, he put
    his hand in his breast and tenderly took out the handful of roses.
    Perhaps he put them to his heart, perhaps he put them to his lips, but
    certainly he bent down on the shore and gently launched them on the
    flowing river. Pale and unreal in the moonlight, the river floated them
    away.

    The lights were bright within doors when he entered, and the faces on
    which they shone, his own face not excepted, were soon quietly cheerful.
    They talked of many subjects (his partner never had had such a ready
            store to draw upon for the beguiling of the time), and so to bed, and to
    sleep. While the flowers, pale and unreal in the moonlight, floated away
    upon the river; and thus do greater things that once were in our
    breasts, and near our hearts, flow from us to the eternal seas.




The house in the city preserved its heavy dulness through all these
transactions, and the invalid within it turned the same unvarying
round of life. Morning, noon, and night, morning, noon, and night, each
recurring with its accompanying monotony, always the same reluctant
return of the same sequences of machinery, like a dragging piece of
clockwork.

The wheeled chair had its associated remembrances and reveries, one may
suppose, as every place that is made the station of a human being has.
Pictures of demolished streets and altered houses, as they formerly were
when the occupant of the chair was familiar with them, images of people
as they too used to be, with little or no allowance made for the lapse
of time since they were seen; of these, there must have been many in the
long routine of gloomy days. To stop the clock of busy existence at the
hour when we were personally sequestered from it, to suppose mankind
stricken motionless when we were brought to a stand-still, to be unable
to measure the changes beyond our view by any larger standard than
the shrunken one of our own uniform and contracted existence, is the
infirmity of many invalids, and the mental unhealthiness of almost all
recluses.

What scenes and actors the stern woman most reviewed, as she sat
from season to season in her one dark room, none knew but herself. Mr
Flintwinch, with his wry presence brought to bear upon her daily like
some eccentric mechanical force, would perhaps have screwed it out of
her, if there had been less resistance in her; but she was too strong
for him. So far as Mistress Affery was concerned, to regard her
liege-lord and her disabled mistress with a face of blank wonder, to
go about the house after dark with her apron over her head, always to
listen for the strange noises and sometimes to hear them, and never
to emerge from her ghostly, dreamy, sleep-waking state, was occupation
enough for her.

There was a fair stroke of business doing, as Mistress Affery made out,
      for her husband had abundant occupation in his little office, and saw
      more people than had been used to come there for some years. This might
      easily be, the house having been long deserted; but he did receive
      letters, and comers, and keep books, and correspond. Moreover, he went
      about to other counting-houses, and to wharves, and docks, and to the
      Custom House, and to Garraway's Coffee House, and the Jerusalem Coffee
      House, and on 'Change; so that he was much in and out. He began, too,
      sometimes of an evening, when Mrs Clennam expressed no particular wish
      for his society, to resort to a tavern in the neighbourhood to look at
      the shipping news and closing prices in the evening paper, and even to
      exchange small socialities with mercantile Sea Captains who frequented
      that establishment. At some period of every day, he and Mrs Clennam held
      a council on matters of business; and it appeared to Affery, who was
      always groping about, listening and watching, that the two clever ones
      were making money.

      The state of mind into which Mr Flintwinch's dazed lady had fallen, had
      now begun to be so expressed in all her looks and actions that she was
      held in very low account by the two clever ones, as a person, never
      of strong intellect, who was becoming foolish. Perhaps because her
      appearance was not of a commercial cast, or perhaps because it occurred
      to him that his having taken her to wife might expose his judgment to
      doubt in the minds of customers, Mr Flintwinch laid his commands upon
      her that she should hold her peace on the subject of her conjugal
      relations, and should no longer call him Jeremiah out of the domestic
      trio. Her frequent forgetfulness of this admonition intensified her
      startled manner, since Mr Flintwinch's habit of avenging himself on her
      remissness by making springs after her on the staircase, and shaking
      her, occasioned her to be always nervously uncertain when she might be
      thus waylaid next.

      Little Dorrit had finished a long day's work in Mrs Clennam's room, and
      was neatly gathering up her shreds and odds and ends before going home.
      Mr Pancks, whom Affery had just shown in, was addressing an inquiry to
      Mrs Clennam on the subject of her health, coupled with the remark that,
      'happening to find himself in that direction,' he had looked in to
      inquire, on behalf of his proprietor, how she found herself. Mrs
      Clennam, with a deep contraction of her brows, was looking at him.

      'Mr Casby knows,' said she, 'that I am not subject to changes. The
      change that I await here is the great change.'

      'Indeed, ma'am?' returned Mr Pancks, with a wandering eye towards the
      figure of the little seamstress on her knee picking threads and fraying
      of her work from the carpet. 'You look nicely, ma'am.'

      'I bear what I have to bear,' she answered. 'Do you what you have to
      do.'

      'Thank you, ma'am,' said Mr Pancks, 'such is my endeavour.'

      'You are often in this direction, are you not?' asked Mrs Clennam.

      'Why, yes, ma'am,' said Pancks, 'rather so lately; I have lately been
      round this way a good deal, owing to one thing and another.'

      'Beg Mr Casby and his daughter not to trouble themselves, by deputy,
      about me. When they wish to see me, they know I am here to see them.
      They have no need to trouble themselves to send. You have no need to
      trouble yourself to come.'

      'Not the least trouble, ma'am,' said Mr Pancks. 'You really are looking
      uncommonly nicely, ma'am.'

      'Thank you. Good evening.'

      The dismissal, and its accompanying finger pointed straight at the door,
      was so curt and direct that Mr Pancks did not see his way to prolong his
      visit. He stirred up his hair with his sprightliest expression, glanced
      at the little figure again, said 'Good evening, ma 'am; don't come down,
      Mrs Affery, I know the road to the door,' and steamed out. Mrs Clennam,
      her chin resting on her hand, followed him with attentive and darkly
      distrustful eyes; and Affery stood looking at her as if she were
      spell-bound.

      Slowly and thoughtfully, Mrs Clennam's eyes turned from the door by
      which Pancks had gone out, to Little Dorrit, rising from the carpet.
      With her chin drooping more heavily on her hand, and her eyes vigilant
      and lowering, the sick woman sat looking at her until she attracted her
      attention. Little Dorrit coloured under such a gaze, and looked down.
      Mrs Clennam still sat intent.

      'Little Dorrit,' she said, when she at last broke silence, 'what do you
      know of that man?'

      'I don't know anything of him, ma'am, except that I have seen him about,
      and that he has spoken to me.'

      'What has he said to you?'

      'I don't understand what he has said, he is so strange. But nothing
      rough or disagreeable.'

      'Why does he come here to see you?'

      'I don't know, ma'am,' said Little Dorrit, with perfect frankness.

      'You know that he does come here to see you?'

      'I have fancied so,' said Little Dorrit. 'But why he should come here or
      anywhere for that, ma'am, I can't think.'

      Mrs Clennam cast her eyes towards the ground, and with her strong, set
      face, as intent upon a subject in her mind as it had lately been upon
      the form that seemed to pass out of her view, sat absorbed. Some minutes
      elapsed before she came out of this thoughtfulness, and resumed her hard
      composure.

      Little Dorrit in the meanwhile had been waiting to go, but afraid to
      disturb her by moving. She now ventured to leave the spot where she
      had been standing since she had risen, and to pass gently round by the
      wheeled chair. She stopped at its side to say 'Good night, ma'am.'

      Mrs Clennam put out her hand, and laid it on her arm. Little Dorrit,
      confused under the touch, stood faltering. Perhaps some momentary
      recollection of the story of the Princess may have been in her mind.

      'Tell me, Little Dorrit,' said Mrs Clennam, 'have you many friends now?'

      'Very few, ma'am. Besides you, only Miss Flora and--one more.'

      'Meaning,' said Mrs Clennam, with her unbent finger again pointing to
      the door, 'that man?'

      'Oh no, ma'am!'

      'Some friend of his, perhaps?'

      'No ma'am.' Little Dorrit earnestly shook her head. 'Oh no! No one at
      all like him, or belonging to him.'

      'Well!' said Mrs Clennam, almost smiling. 'It is no affair of mine. I
      ask, because I take an interest in you; and because I believe I was your
      friend when you had no other who could serve you. Is that so?'

      'Yes, ma'am; indeed it is. I have been here many a time when, but for
      you and the work you gave me, we should have wanted everything.'

      'We,' repeated Mrs Clennam, looking towards the watch, once her dead
      husband's, which always lay upon her table. 'Are there many of you?'

      'Only father and I, now. I mean, only father and I to keep regularly out
      of what we get.'

      'Have you undergone many privations? You and your father and who else
      there may be of you?' asked Mrs Clennam, speaking deliberately, and
      meditatively turning the watch over and over.

      'Sometimes it has been rather hard to live,' said Little Dorrit, in her
      soft voice, and timid uncomplaining way; 'but I think not harder--as to
      that--than many people find it.'

      'That's well said!' Mrs Clennam quickly returned. 'That's the truth!
      You are a good, thoughtful girl. You are a grateful girl too, or I much
      mistake you.'

      'It is only natural to be that. There is no merit in being that,' said
      Little Dorrit. 'I am indeed.'

      Mrs Clennam, with a gentleness of which the dreaming Affery had never
      dreamed her to be capable, drew down the face of her little seamstress,
      and kissed her on the forehead.

      'Now go, Little Dorrit,' said she,'or you will be late, poor child!'

      In all the dreams Mistress Affery had been piling up since she first
      became devoted to the pursuit, she had dreamed nothing more astonishing
      than this. Her head ached with the idea that she would find the other
      clever one kissing Little Dorrit next, and then the two clever ones
      embracing each other and dissolving into tears of tenderness for all
      mankind. The idea quite stunned her, as she attended the light footsteps
      down the stairs, that the house door might be safely shut.

      On opening it to let Little Dorrit out, she found Mr Pancks, instead
      of having gone his way, as in any less wonderful place and among less
      wonderful phenomena he might have been reasonably expected to do,
      fluttering up and down the court outside the house. The moment he saw
      Little Dorrit, he passed her briskly, said with his finger to his nose
      (as Mrs Affery distinctly heard), 'Pancks the gipsy, fortune-telling,'
      and went away. 'Lord save us, here's a gipsy and a fortune-teller in it
      now!' cried Mistress Affery. 'What next!'

      She stood at the open door, staggering herself with this enigma, on a
      rainy, thundery evening. The clouds were flying fast, and the wind was
      coming up in gusts, banging some neighbouring shutters that had broken
      loose, twirling the rusty chimney-cowls and weather-cocks, and rushing
      round and round a confined adjacent churchyard as if it had a mind to
      blow the dead citizens out of their graves. The low thunder, muttering
      in all quarters of the sky at once, seemed to threaten vengeance for
      this attempted desecration, and to mutter, 'Let them rest! Let them
      rest!'

      Mistress Affery, whose fear of thunder and lightning was only to
      be equalled by her dread of the haunted house with a premature and
      preternatural darkness in it, stood undecided whether to go in or not,
      until the question was settled for her by the door blowing upon her in
      a violent gust of wind and shutting her out. 'What's to be done now,
      what's to be done now!' cried Mistress Affery, wringing her hands in
      this last uneasy dream of all; 'when she's all alone by herself
      inside, and can no more come down to open it than the churchyard dead
      themselves!'

      In this dilemma, Mistress Affery, with her apron as a hood to keep the
      rain off, ran crying up and down the solitary paved enclosure several
      times. Why she should then stoop down and look in at the keyhole of the
      door as if an eye would open it, it would be difficult to say; but it
      is none the less what most people would have done in the same situation,
      and it is what she did.

      From this posture she started up suddenly, with a half scream, feeling
      something on her shoulder. It was the touch of a hand; of a man's hand.

      The man was dressed like a traveller, in a foraging cap with fur about
      it, and a heap of cloak. He looked like a foreigner. He had a quantity
      of hair and moustache--jet black, except at the shaggy ends, where
      it had a tinge of red--and a high hook nose. He laughed at Mistress
      Affery's start and cry; and as he laughed, his moustache went up under
      his nose, and his nose came down over his moustache.

      'What's the matter?' he asked in plain English. 'What are you frightened
      at?'

      'At you,' panted Affery.

      'Me, madam?'

      'And the dismal evening, and--and everything,' said Affery. 'And here!
      The wind has been and blown the door to, and I can't get in.'

      'Hah!' said the gentleman, who took that very coolly. 'Indeed! Do you
      know such a name as Clennam about here?'

      'Lord bless us, I should think I did, I should think I did!' cried
      Affery, exasperated into a new wringing of hands by the inquiry.

      'Where about here?'

      'Where!' cried Affery, goaded into another inspection of the keyhole.
      'Where but here in this house? And she's all alone in her room, and lost
      the use of her limbs and can't stir to help herself or me, and t'other
      clever one's out, and Lord forgive me!' cried Affery, driven into a
      frantic dance by these accumulated considerations, 'if I ain't a-going
      headlong out of my mind!'

      Taking a warmer view of the matter now that it concerned himself, the
      gentleman stepped back to glance at the house, and his eye soon rested
      on the long narrow window of the little room near the hall-door.

      'Where may the lady be who has lost the use of her limbs, madam?' he
      inquired, with that peculiar smile which Mistress Affery could not
      choose but keep her eyes upon.

      'Up there!' said Affery. 'Them two windows.'

      'Hah! I am of a fair size, but could not have the honour of presenting
      myself in that room without a ladder. Now, madam, frankly--frankness is
      a part of my character--shall I open the door for you?'

      'Yes, bless you, sir, for a dear creetur, and do it at once,' cried
      Affery, 'for she may be a-calling to me at this very present minute, or
      may be setting herself a fire and burning herself to death, or there's
      no knowing what may be happening to her, and me a-going out of my mind
      at thinking of it!'

      'Stay, my good madam!' He restrained her impatience with a smooth white
      hand. 'Business-hours, I apprehend, are over for the day?'

      'Yes, yes, yes,' cried Affery. 'Long ago.'

      'Let me make, then, a fair proposal. Fairness is a part of my character.
      I am just landed from the packet-boat, as you may see.' He showed her
      that his cloak was very wet, and that his boots were saturated with
      water; she had previously observed that he was dishevelled and sallow,
      as if from a rough voyage, and so chilled that he could not keep his
      teeth from chattering. 'I am just landed from the packet-boat, madam,
      and have been delayed by the weather: the infernal weather! In
      consequence of this, madam, some necessary business that I should
      otherwise have transacted here within the regular hours (necessary
              business because money-business), still remains to be done. Now, if you
      will fetch any authorised neighbouring somebody to do it in return for
      my opening the door, I'll open the door. If this arrangement should be
      objectionable, I'll--' and with the same smile he made a significant
      feint of backing away.

      Mistress Affery, heartily glad to effect the proposed compromise, gave
      in her willing adhesion to it. The gentleman at once requested her to
      do him the favour of holding his cloak, took a short run at the narrow
      window, made a leap at the sill, clung his way up the bricks, and in
      a moment had his hand at the sash, raising it. His eyes looked so very
      sinister, as he put his leg into the room and glanced round at Mistress
      Affery, that she thought with a sudden coldness, if he were to go
      straight up-stairs to murder the invalid, what could she do to prevent
      him?

      Happily he had no such purpose; for he reappeared, in a moment, at the
      house door. 'Now, my dear madam,' he said, as he took back his cloak and
      threw it on, 'if you have the goodness to--what the Devil's that!'

      The strangest of sounds. Evidently close at hand from the peculiar
      shock it communicated to the air, yet subdued as if it were far off. A
      tremble, a rumble, and a fall of some light dry matter.

      'What the Devil is it?'

      'I don't know what it is, but I've heard the like of it over and over
      again,' said Affery, who had caught his arm.

      He could hardly be a very brave man, even she thought in her dreamy
      start and fright, for his trembling lips had turned colourless. After
      listening a few moments, he made light of it.

      'Bah! Nothing! Now, my dear madam, I think you spoke of some clever
      personage. Will you be so good as to confront me with that genius?' He
      held the door in his hand, as though he were quite ready to shut her out
      again if she failed.

      'Don't you say anything about the door and me, then,' whispered Affery.

      'Not a word.'

      'And don't you stir from here, or speak if she calls, while I run round
      the corner.'

      'Madam, I am a statue.'

      Affery had so vivid a fear of his going stealthily up-stairs the moment
      her back was turned, that after hurrying out of sight, she returned to
      the gateway to peep at him. Seeing him still on the threshold, more out
      of the house than in it, as if he had no love for darkness and no
      desire to probe its mysteries, she flew into the next street, and sent a
      message into the tavern to Mr Flintwinch, who came out directly. The
      two returning together--the lady in advance, and Mr Flintwinch coming up
      briskly behind, animated with the hope of shaking her before she could
      get housed--saw the gentleman standing in the same place in the dark,
      and heard the strong voice of Mrs Clennam calling from her room, 'Who is
      it? What is it? Why does no one answer? Who _is_ that, down there?'




When Mr and Mrs Flintwinch panted up to the door of the old house in the
twilight, Jeremiah within a second of Affery, the stranger started back.
'Death of my soul!' he exclaimed. 'Why, how did you get here?'

Mr Flintwinch, to whom these words were spoken, repaid the stranger's
wonder in full. He gazed at him with blank astonishment; he looked over
his own shoulder, as expecting to see some one he had not been aware of
standing behind him; he gazed at the stranger again, speechlessly, at
a loss to know what he meant; he looked to his wife for explanation;
receiving none, he pounced upon her, and shook her with such heartiness
that he shook her cap off her head, saying between his teeth, with grim
raillery, as he did it, 'Affery, my woman, you must have a dose, my
woman! This is some of your tricks! You have been dreaming again,
    mistress. What's it about? Who is it? What does it mean! Speak out or be
    choked! It's the only choice I'll give you.'

    Supposing Mistress Affery to have any power of election at the moment,
    her choice was decidedly to be choked; for she answered not a syllable
    to this adjuration, but, with her bare head wagging violently backwards
    and forwards, resigned herself to her punishment. The stranger, however,
    picking up her cap with an air of gallantry, interposed.

    'Permit me,' said he, laying his hand on the shoulder of Jeremiah, who
    stopped and released his victim. 'Thank you. Excuse me. Husband and
    wife I know, from this playfulness. Haha! Always agreeable to see that
    relation playfully maintained. Listen! May I suggest that somebody
    up-stairs, in the dark, is becoming energetically curious to know what
    is going on here?'

    This reference to Mrs Clennam's voice reminded Mr Flintwinch to step
    into the hall and call up the staircase. 'It's all right, I am here,
    Affery is coming with your light.' Then he said to the latter
    flustered woman, who was putting her cap on, 'Get out with you, and get
    up-stairs!' and then turned to the stranger and said to him, 'Now, sir,
    what might you please to want?'

    'I am afraid,' said the stranger, 'I must be so troublesome as to
    propose a candle.'

    'True,' assented Jeremiah. 'I was going to do so. Please to stand where
    you are while I get one.'

    The visitor was standing in the doorway, but turned a little into the
    gloom of the house as Mr Flintwinch turned, and pursued him with his
    eyes into the little room, where he groped about for a phosphorus box.
    When he found it, it was damp, or otherwise out of order; and match
    after match that he struck into it lighted sufficiently to throw a dull
    glare about his groping face, and to sprinkle his hands with pale little
    spots of fire, but not sufficiently to light the candle. The stranger,
    taking advantage of this fitful illumination of his visage, looked
    intently and wonderingly at him. Jeremiah, when he at last lighted
    the candle, knew he had been doing this, by seeing the last shade of
    a lowering watchfulness clear away from his face, as it broke into the
    doubtful smile that was a large ingredient in its expression.

    'Be so good,' said Jeremiah, closing the house door, and taking a pretty
    sharp survey of the smiling visitor in his turn, 'as to step into my
    counting-house.--It's all right, I tell you!' petulantly breaking off to
    answer the voice up-stairs, still unsatisfied, though Affery was there,
    speaking in persuasive tones. 'Don't I tell you it's all right? Preserve
    the woman, has she no reason at all in her!'

    'Timorous,' remarked the stranger.

    'Timorous?' said Mr Flintwinch, turning his head to retort, as he went
    before with the candle. 'More courageous than ninety men in a hundred,
    sir, let me tell you.'

    'Though an invalid?'

    'Many years an invalid. Mrs Clennam. The only one of that name left
    in the House now. My partner.'

    Saying something apologetically as he crossed the hall, to the effect
    that at that time of night they were not in the habit of receiving any
    one, and were always shut up, Mr Flintwinch led the way into his own
    office, which presented a sufficiently business-like appearance. Here he
    put the light on his desk, and said to the stranger, with his wryest
    twist upon him, 'Your commands.'

    'My name is Blandois.'

    'Blandois. I don't know it,' said Jeremiah.

    'I thought it possible,' resumed the other, 'that you might have been
    advised from Paris--'

    'We have had no advice from Paris respecting anybody of the name of
    Blandois,' said Jeremiah.

    'No?'

    'No.'

    Jeremiah stood in his favourite attitude. The smiling Mr Blandois,
    opening his cloak to get his hand to a breast-pocket, paused to say,
    with a laugh in his glittering eyes, which it occurred to Mr Flintwinch
    were too near together:

    'You are so like a friend of mine! Not so identically the same as I
    supposed when I really did for the moment take you to be the same in the
    dusk--for which I ought to apologise; permit me to do so; a readiness
    to confess my errors is, I hope, a part of the frankness of my
    character--still, however, uncommonly like.'

    'Indeed?' said Jeremiah, perversely. 'But I have not received any letter
    of advice from anywhere respecting anybody of the name of Blandois.'

    'Just so,' said the stranger.

    '_Just_ so,' said Jeremiah.

    Mr Blandois, not at all put out by this omission on the part of the
    correspondents of the house of Clennam and Co., took his pocket-book
    from his breast-pocket, selected a letter from that receptacle, and
    handed it to Mr Flintwinch. 'No doubt you are well acquainted with the
    writing. Perhaps the letter speaks for itself, and requires no advice.
    You are a far more competent judge of such affairs than I am. It is my
    misfortune to be, not so much a man of business, as what the world calls
    (arbitrarily) a gentleman.'

    Mr Flintwinch took the letter, and read, under date of Paris, 'We have
    to present to you, on behalf of a highly esteemed correspondent of our
    Firm, M. Blandois, of this city,' &c. &c. 'Such facilities as he may
    require and such attentions as may lie in your power,' &c. &c. 'Also
    have to add that if you will honour M. Blandois' drafts at sight to the
    extent of, say Fifty Pounds sterling (50_l_.),' &c. &c.

    'Very good, sir,' said Mr Flintwinch. 'Take a chair. To the extent of
    anything that our House can do--we are in a retired, old-fashioned,
    steady way of business, sir--we shall be happy to render you our best
    assistance. I observe, from the date of this, that we could not yet be
    advised of it. Probably you came over with the delayed mail that brings
    the advice.'

    'That I came over with the delayed mail, sir,' returned Mr Blandois,
    passing his white hand down his high-hooked nose, 'I know to the cost
    of my head and stomach: the detestable and intolerable weather having
    racked them both. You see me in the plight in which I came out of the
    packet within this half-hour. I ought to have been here hours ago,
    and then I should not have to apologise--permit me to apologise--for
    presenting myself so unreasonably, and frightening--no, by-the-bye, you
    said not frightening; permit me to apologise again--the esteemed lady,
    Mrs Clennam, in her invalid chamber above stairs.'

    Swagger and an air of authorised condescension do so much, that
    Mr Flintwinch had already begun to think this a highly gentlemanly
    personage. Not the less unyielding with him on that account, he scraped
    his chin and said, what could he have the honour of doing for Mr
    Blandois to-night, out of business hours?

    'Faith!' returned that gentleman, shrugging his cloaked shoulders,
    'I must change, and eat and drink, and be lodged somewhere. Have the
    kindness to advise me, a total stranger, where, and money is a matter of
    perfect indifference until to-morrow. The nearer the place, the better.
    Next door, if that's all.'

    Mr Flintwinch was slowly beginning, 'For a gentleman of your habits,
    there is not in this immediate neighbourhood any hotel--' when Mr
    Blandois took him up.

    'So much for my habits! my dear sir,' snapping his fingers. 'A citizen
    of the world has no habits. That I am, in my poor way, a gentleman,
    by Heaven! I will not deny, but I have no unaccommodating prejudiced
    habits. A clean room, a hot dish for dinner, and a bottle of not
    absolutely poisonous wine, are all I want tonight. But I want that much
    without the trouble of going one unnecessary inch to get it.'

    'There is,' said Mr Flintwinch, with more than his usual deliberation,
    as he met, for a moment, Mr Blandois' shining eyes, which were restless;
'there is a coffee-house and tavern close here, which, so far, I can
recommend; but there's no style about it.'

'I dispense with style!' said Mr Blandois, waving his hand. 'Do me the
honour to show me the house, and introduce me there (if I am not too
        troublesome), and I shall be infinitely obliged.'

Mr Flintwinch, upon this, looked up his hat, and lighted Mr Blandois
across the hall again. As he put the candle on a bracket, where the
dark old panelling almost served as an extinguisher for it, he bethought
himself of going up to tell the invalid that he would not be absent five
minutes.

'Oblige me,' said the visitor, on his saying so, 'by presenting my card
of visit. Do me the favour to add that I shall be happy to wait on Mrs
Clennam, to offer my personal compliments, and to apologise for having
occasioned any agitation in this tranquil corner, if it should suit her
convenience to endure the presence of a stranger for a few minutes,
            after he shall have changed his wet clothes and fortified himself with
            something to eat and drink.'

            Jeremiah made all despatch, and said, on his return, 'She'll be glad
            to see you, sir; but, being conscious that her sick room has no
            attractions, wishes me to say that she won't hold you to your offer, in
            case you should think better of it.'

            'To think better of it,' returned the gallant Blandois, 'would be to
            slight a lady; to slight a lady would be to be deficient in chivalry
            towards the sex; and chivalry towards the sex is a part of my
            character!' Thus expressing himself, he threw the draggled skirt of his
            cloak over his shoulder, and accompanied Mr Flintwinch to the tavern;
            taking up on the road a porter who was waiting with his portmanteau on
            the outer side of the gateway.

            The house was kept in a homely manner, and the condescension of Mr
            Blandois was infinite. It seemed to fill to inconvenience the little bar
            in which the widow landlady and her two daughters received him; it was
            much too big for the narrow wainscoted room with a bagatelle-board in
            it, that was first proposed for his reception; it perfectly swamped the
            little private holiday sitting-room of the family, which was finally
            given up to him. Here, in dry clothes and scented linen, with sleeked
            hair, a great ring on each forefinger and a massive show of watch-chain,
            Mr Blandois waiting for his dinner, lolling on a window-seat with his
            knees drawn up, looked (for all the difference in the setting of the
                    jewel) fearfully and wonderfully like a certain Monsieur Rigaud who had
            once so waited for his breakfast, lying on the stone ledge of the iron
            grating of a cell in a villainous dungeon at Marseilles.

            His greed at dinner, too, was closely in keeping with the greed of
            Monsieur Rigaud at breakfast. His avaricious manner of collecting all
            the eatables about him, and devouring some with his eyes while devouring
            others with his jaws, was the same manner. His utter disregard of
            other people, as shown in his way of tossing the little womanly toys
            of furniture about, flinging favourite cushions under his boots for a
            softer rest, and crushing delicate coverings with his big body and his
            great black head, had the same brute selfishness at the bottom of it.
            The softly moving hands that were so busy among the dishes had the old
            wicked facility of the hands that had clung to the bars. And when he
            could eat no more, and sat sucking his delicate fingers one by one and
            wiping them on a cloth, there wanted nothing but the substitution of
            vine-leaves to finish the picture.

            On this man, with his moustache going up and his nose coming down in
            that most evil of smiles, and with his surface eyes looking as if they
            belonged to his dyed hair, and had had their natural power of reflecting
            light stopped by some similar process, Nature, always true, and never
            working in vain, had set the mark, Beware! It was not her fault, if the
            warning were fruitless. She is never to blame in any such instance.

            Mr Blandois, having finished his repast and cleaned his fingers, took
            a cigar from his pocket, and, lying on the window-seat again, smoked it
            out at his leisure, occasionally apostrophising the smoke as it parted
            from his thin lips in a thin stream:

            'Blandois, you shall turn the tables on society, my little child. Haha!
            Holy blue, you have begun well, Blandois! At a pinch, an excellent
            master in English or French; a man for the bosom of families! You have
            a quick perception, you have humour, you have ease, you have insinuating
            manners, you have a good appearance; in effect, you are a gentleman! A
            gentleman you shall live, my small boy, and a gentleman you shall die.
            You shall win, however the game goes. They shall all confess your merit,
            Blandois. You shall subdue the society which has grievously wronged
            you, to your own high spirit. Death of my soul! You are high spirited by
            right and by nature, my Blandois!'

            To such soothing murmurs did this gentleman smoke out his cigar and
            drink out his bottle of wine. Both being finished, he shook himself into
            a sitting attitude; and with the concluding serious apostrophe, 'Hold,
            then! Blandois, you ingenious one, have all your wits about you!' arose
            and went back to the house of Clennam and Co.

            He was received at the door by Mistress Affery, who, under instructions
            from her lord, had lighted up two candles in the hall and a third on the
            staircase, and who conducted him to Mrs Clennam's room. Tea was prepared
            there, and such little company arrangements had been made as usually
            attended the reception of expected visitors. They were slight on the
            greatest occasion, never extending beyond the production of the China
            tea-service, and the covering of the bed with a sober and sad drapery.
            For the rest, there was the bier-like sofa with the block upon it, and
            the figure in the widow's dress, as if attired for execution; the fire
            topped by the mound of damped ashes; the grate with its second little
            mound of ashes; the kettle and the smell of black dye; all as they had
            been for fifteen years.

            Mr Flintwinch presented the gentleman commended to the consideration of
            Clennam and Co. Mrs Clennam, who had the letter lying before her, bent
            her head and requested him to sit. They looked very closely at one
            another. That was but natural curiosity.

            'I thank you, sir, for thinking of a disabled woman like me. Few who
            come here on business have any remembrance to bestow on one so removed
            from observation. It would be idle to expect that they should have. Out
            of sight, out of mind. While I am grateful for the exception, I don't
            complain of the rule.'

            Mr Blandois, in his most gentlemanly manner, was afraid he had disturbed
            her by unhappily presenting himself at such an unconscionable time. For
            which he had already offered his best apologies to Mr--he begged
            pardon--but by name had not the distinguished honour--

            'Mr Flintwinch has been connected with the House many years.'

            Mr Blandois was Mr Flintwinch's most obedient humble servant. He
            entreated Mr Flintwinch to receive the assurance of his profoundest
            consideration.

            'My husband being dead,' said Mrs Clennam, 'and my son preferring
            another pursuit, our old House has no other representative in these days
            than Mr Flintwinch.'

            'What do you call yourself?' was the surly demand of that gentleman.
            'You have the head of two men.'

            'My sex disqualifies me,' she proceeded with merely a slight turn of
            her eyes in Jeremiah's direction, 'from taking a responsible part in
            the business, even if I had the ability; and therefore Mr Flintwinch
            combines my interest with his own, and conducts it. It is not what it
            used to be; but some of our old friends (principally the writers of this
                    letter) have the kindness not to forget us, and we retain the power
            of doing what they entrust to us as efficiently as we ever did. This
            however is not interesting to you. You are English, sir?'

            'Faith, madam, no; I am neither born nor bred in England. In effect, I
            am of no country,' said Mr Blandois, stretching out his leg and smiting
            it: 'I descend from half-a-dozen countries.'

            'You have been much about the world?'

            'It is true. By Heaven, madam, I have been here and there and
            everywhere!'

            'You have no ties, probably. Are not married?'

            'Madam,' said Mr Blandois, with an ugly fall of his eyebrows, 'I adore
            your sex, but I am not married--never was.'

            Mistress Affery, who stood at the table near him, pouring out the tea,
            happened in her dreamy state to look at him as he said these words, and
            to fancy that she caught an expression in his eyes which attracted her
            own eyes so that she could not get them away. The effect of this fancy
            was to keep her staring at him with the tea-pot in her hand, not only to
            her own great uneasiness, but manifestly to his, too; and, through them
            both, to Mrs Clennam's and Mr Flintwinch's. Thus a few ghostly moments
            supervened, when they were all confusedly staring without knowing why.

            'Affery,' her mistress was the first to say, 'what is the matter with
            you?'

            'I don't know,' said Mistress Affery, with her disengaged left hand
            extended towards the visitor. 'It ain't me. It's him!'

            'What does this good woman mean?' cried Mr Blandois, turning white, hot,
            and slowly rising with a look of such deadly wrath that it contrasted
            surprisingly with the slight force of his words. 'How is it possible to
            understand this good creature?'

            'It's _not_ possible,' said Mr Flintwinch, screwing himself rapidly
            in that direction. 'She don't know what she means. She's an idiot, a
            wanderer in her mind. She shall have a dose, she shall have such a dose!
            Get along with you, my woman,' he added in her ear, 'get along with you,
            while you know you're Affery, and before you're shaken to yeast.'

            Mistress Affery, sensible of the danger in which her identity stood,
            relinquished the tea-pot as her husband seized it, put her apron over
            her head, and in a twinkling vanished. The visitor gradually broke into
            a smile, and sat down again.

            'You'll excuse her, Mr Blandois,' said Jeremiah, pouring out the tea
            himself, 'she's failing and breaking up; that's what she's about. Do you
            take sugar, sir?'

            'Thank you, no tea for me.--Pardon my observing it, but that's a very
            remarkable watch!'

            The tea-table was drawn up near the sofa, with a small interval between
            it and Mrs Clennam's own particular table. Mr Blandois in his gallantry
            had risen to hand that lady her tea (her dish of toast was already
                    there), and it was in placing the cup conveniently within her reach that
            the watch, lying before her as it always did, attracted his attention.
            Mrs Clennam looked suddenly up at him.

            'May I be permitted? Thank you. A fine old-fashioned watch,' he said,
            taking it in his hand. 'Heavy for use, but massive and genuine. I have
            a partiality for everything genuine. Such as I am, I am genuine myself.
            Hah! A gentleman's watch with two cases in the old fashion. May I remove
            it from the outer case? Thank you. Aye? An old silk watch-lining, worked
            with beads! I have often seen these among old Dutch people and Belgians.
            Quaint things!'

            'They are old-fashioned, too,' said Mrs Clennam.

            'Very. But this is not so old as the watch, I think?'

            'I think not.'

            'Extraordinary how they used to complicate these cyphers!' remarked Mr
            Blandois, glancing up with his own smile again. 'Now is this D. N. F.?
            It might be almost anything.'

            'Those are the letters.'

            Mr Flintwinch, who had been observantly pausing all this time with a cup
            of tea in his hand, and his mouth open ready to swallow the contents,
            began to do so: always entirely filling his mouth before he emptied it
            at a gulp; and always deliberating again before he refilled it.

            'D. N. F. was some tender, lovely, fascinating fair-creature, I make no
            doubt,' observed Mr Blandois, as he snapped on the case again. 'I adore
            her memory on the assumption. Unfortunately for my peace of mind,
            I adore but too readily. It may be a vice, it may be a virtue, but
            adoration of female beauty and merit constitutes three parts of my
            character, madam.'

            Mr Flintwinch had by this time poured himself out another cup of tea,
            which he was swallowing in gulps as before, with his eyes directed to
            the invalid.

            'You may be heart-free here, sir,' she returned to Mr Blandois. 'Those
            letters are not intended, I believe, for the initials of any name.'

            'Of a motto, perhaps,' said Mr Blandois, casually.

            'Of a sentence. They have always stood, I believe, for Do Not Forget!'

            'And naturally,' said Mr Blandois, replacing the watch and stepping
            backward to his former chair, 'you do _not_ forget.'

            Mr Flintwinch, finishing his tea, not only took a longer gulp than he
            had taken yet, but made his succeeding pause under new circumstances:
            that is to say, with his head thrown back and his cup held still at his
            lips, while his eyes were still directed at the invalid. She had that
            force of face, and that concentrated air of collecting her firmness or
            obstinacy, which represented in her case what would have been gesture
            and action in another, as she replied with her deliberate strength of
            speech:

            'No, sir, I do not forget. To lead a life as monotonous as mine has been
            during many years, is not the way to forget. To lead a life of
            self-correction is not the way to forget. To be sensible of having (as
                    we all have, every one of us, all the children of Adam!) offences
            to expiate and peace to make, does not justify the desire to forget.
            Therefore I have long dismissed it, and I neither forget nor wish to
            forget.'

            Mr Flintwinch, who had latterly been shaking the sediment at the bottom
            of his tea-cup, round and round, here gulped it down, and putting the
            cup in the tea-tray, as done with, turned his eyes upon Mr Blandois as
            if to ask him what he thought of that?

            'All expressed, madam,' said Mr Blandois, with his smoothest bow and his
            white hand on his breast, 'by the word "naturally," which I am proud
            to have had sufficient apprehension and appreciation (but without
                    appreciation I could not be Blandois) to employ.'

            'Pardon me, sir,' she returned, 'if I doubt the likelihood of a
            gentleman of pleasure, and change, and politeness, accustomed to court
            and to be courted--'

            'Oh madam! By Heaven!'

            '--If I doubt the likelihood of such a character quite comprehending
            what belongs to mine in my circumstances. Not to obtrude doctrine upon
            you,' she looked at the rigid pile of hard pale books before her, '(for
                    you go your own way, and the consequences are on your own head), I will
            say this much: that I shape my course by pilots, strictly by proved and
            tried pilots, under whom I cannot be shipwrecked--can not be--and that
            if I were unmindful of the admonition conveyed in those three letters, I
            should not be half as chastened as I am.'

            It was curious how she seized the occasion to argue with some invisible
            opponent. Perhaps with her own better sense, always turning upon herself
            and her own deception.

            'If I forgot my ignorances in my life of health and freedom, I might
            complain of the life to which I am now condemned. I never do; I never
            have done. If I forgot that this scene, the Earth, is expressly meant to
            be a scene of gloom, and hardship, and dark trial, for the creatures who
            are made out of its dust, I might have some tenderness for its vanities.
            But I have no such tenderness. If I did not know that we are, every one,
            the subject (most justly the subject) of a wrath that must be satisfied,
            and against which mere actions are nothing, I might repine at the
            difference between me, imprisoned here, and the people who pass that
            gateway yonder. But I take it as a grace and favour to be elected to
            make the satisfaction I am making here, to know what I know for certain
            here, and to work out what I have worked out here. My affliction might
            otherwise have had no meaning to me. Hence I would forget, and I do
            forget, nothing. Hence I am contented, and say it is better with me
            than with millions.'

            As she spoke these words, she put her hand upon the watch, and restored
            it to the precise spot on her little table which it always occupied.
            With her touch lingering upon it, she sat for some moments afterwards,
            looking at it steadily and half-defiantly.

            Mr Blandois, during this exposition, had been strictly attentive,
            keeping his eyes fastened on the lady, and thoughtfully stroking his
            moustache with his two hands. Mr Flintwinch had been a little fidgety,
            and now struck in.

            'There, there, there!' said he. 'That is quite understood, Mrs Clennam,
            and you have spoken piously and well. Mr Blandois, I suspect, is not
            of a pious cast.'

            'On the contrary, sir!' that gentleman protested, snapping his fingers.
            'Your pardon! It's a part of my character. I am sensitive, ardent,
            conscientious, and imaginative. A sensitive, ardent, conscientious, and
            imaginative man, Mr Flintwinch, must be that, or nothing!'

            There was an inkling of suspicion in Mr Flintwinch's face that he might
            be nothing, as he swaggered out of his chair (it was characteristic of
                    this man, as it is of all men similarly marked, that whatever he did,
                    he overdid, though it were sometimes by only a hairsbreadth), and
            approached to take his leave of Mrs Clennam.

            'With what will appear to you the egotism of a sick old woman, sir,' she
            then said, 'though really through your accidental allusion, I have
            been led away into the subject of myself and my infirmities. Being so
            considerate as to visit me, I hope you will be likewise so considerate
            as to overlook that. Don't compliment me, if you please.' For he was
            evidently going to do it. 'Mr Flintwinch will be happy to render you any
            service, and I hope your stay in this city may prove agreeable.'

            Mr Blandois thanked her, and kissed his hand several times. 'This is an
            old room,' he remarked, with a sudden sprightliness of manner, looking
            round when he got near the door, 'I have been so interested that I have
            not observed it. But it's a genuine old room.'

            'It is a genuine old house,' said Mrs Clennam, with her frozen smile. 'A
            place of no pretensions, but a piece of antiquity.'

            'Faith!' cried the visitor. 'If Mr Flintwinch would do me the favour to
            take me through the rooms on my way out, he could hardly oblige me more.
            An old house is a weakness with me. I have many weaknesses, but none
            greater. I love and study the picturesque in all its varieties. I have
            been called picturesque myself. It is no merit to be picturesque--I
            have greater merits, perhaps--but I may be, by an accident. Sympathy,
            sympathy!'

            'I tell you beforehand, Mr Blandois, that you'll find it very dingy and
            very bare,' said Jeremiah, taking up the candle. 'It's not worth your
            looking at.'But Mr Blandois, smiting him in a friendly manner on the
            back, only laughed; so the said Blandois kissed his hand again to Mrs
            Clennam, and they went out of the room together.

            'You don't care to go up-stairs?' said Jeremiah, on the landing.

            'On the contrary, Mr Flintwinch; if not tiresome to you, I shall be
            ravished!'

            Mr Flintwinch, therefore, wormed himself up the staircase, and Mr
            Blandois followed close. They ascended to the great garret bed-room
            which Arthur had occupied on the night of his return. 'There, Mr
            Blandois!' said Jeremiah, showing it, 'I hope you may think that worth
            coming so high to see. I confess I don't.'

            Mr Blandois being enraptured, they walked through other garrets and
            passages, and came down the staircase again. By this time Mr Flintwinch
            had remarked that he never found the visitor looking at any room, after
            throwing one quick glance around, but always found the visitor looking
            at him, Mr Flintwinch. With this discovery in his thoughts, he turned
            about on the staircase for another experiment. He met his eyes directly;
            and on the instant of their fixing one another, the visitor, with
            that ugly play of nose and moustache, laughed (as he had done at every
                    similar moment since they left Mrs Clennam's chamber) a diabolically
            silent laugh.

            As a much shorter man than the visitor, Mr Flintwinch was at the
            physical disadvantage of being thus disagreeably leered at from a
            height; and as he went first down the staircase, and was usually a
            step or two lower than the other, this disadvantage was at the time
            increased. He postponed looking at Mr Blandois again until this
            accidental inequality was removed by their having entered the late Mr
            Clennam's room. But, then twisting himself suddenly round upon him, he
            found his look unchanged.

            'A most admirable old house,' smiled Mr Blandois. 'So mysterious. Do you
            never hear any haunted noises here?'

            'Noises,' returned Mr Flintwinch. 'No.'

            'Nor see any devils?'

            'Not,' said Mr Flintwinch, grimly screwing himself at his questioner,
            'not any that introduce themselves under that name and in that
            capacity.'

            'Haha! A portrait here, I see.'

(Still looking at Mr Flintwinch, as if he were the portrait.)

    'It's a portrait, sir, as you observe.'

    'May I ask the subject, Mr Flintwinch?'

    'Mr Clennam, deceased. Her husband.'

    'Former owner of the remarkable watch, perhaps?' said the visitor.

    Mr Flintwinch, who had cast his eyes towards the portrait, twisted
    himself about again, and again found himself the subject of the same
    look and smile. 'Yes, Mr Blandois,' he replied tartly. 'It was his, and
    his uncle's before him, and Lord knows who before him; and that's all I
    can tell you of its pedigree.'

    'That's a strongly marked character, Mr Flintwinch, our friend
    up-stairs.'

    'Yes, sir,' said Jeremiah, twisting himself at the visitor again, as he
    did during the whole of this dialogue, like some screw-machine that
    fell short of its grip; for the other never changed, and he always
    felt obliged to retreat a little. 'She is a remarkable woman. Great
    fortitude--great strength of mind.'

    'They must have been very happy,' said Blandois.

    'Who?' demanded Mr Flintwinch, with another screw at him.

    Mr Blandois shook his right forefinger towards the sick room, and his
    left forefinger towards the portrait, and then, putting his arms akimbo
    and striding his legs wide apart, stood smiling down at Mr Flintwinch
    with the advancing nose and the retreating moustache.

    'As happy as most other married people, I suppose,' returned Mr
    Flintwinch. 'I can't say. I don't know. There are secrets in all
    families.'

    'Secrets!' cried Mr Blandois, quickly. 'Say it again, my son.'

    'I say,' replied Mr Flintwinch, upon whom he had swelled himself so
    suddenly that Mr Flintwinch found his face almost brushed by the dilated
    chest. 'I say there are secrets in all families.'

    'So there are,' cried the other, clapping him on both shoulders, and
    rolling him backwards and forwards. 'Haha! you are right. So there are!
    Secrets! Holy Blue! There are the devil's own secrets in some families,
    Mr Flintwinch!' With that, after clapping Mr Flintwinch on both
    shoulders several times, as if in a friendly and humorous way he were
    rallying him on a joke he had made, he threw up his arms, threw back
    his head, hooked his hands together behind it, and burst into a roar of
    laughter. It was in vain for Mr Flintwinch to try another screw at him.
    He had his laugh out.

    'But, favour me with the candle a moment,' he said, when he had done.
    'Let us have a look at the husband of the remarkable lady. Hah!' holding
    up the light at arm's length. 'A decided expression of face here too,
    though not of the same character. Looks as if he were saying, what is
    it--Do Not Forget--does he not, Mr Flintwinch? By Heaven, sir, he does!'

    As he returned the candle, he looked at him once more; and then,
    leisurely strolling out with him into the hall, declared it to be a
    charming old house indeed, and one which had so greatly pleased him that
    he would not have missed inspecting it for a hundred pounds.

    Throughout these singular freedoms on the part of Mr Blandois, which
    involved a general alteration in his demeanour, making it much coarser
    and rougher, much more violent and audacious than before, Mr Flintwinch,
    whose leathern face was not liable to many changes, preserved its
    immobility intact. Beyond now appearing perhaps, to have been left
    hanging a trifle too long before that friendly operation of cutting
    down, he outwardly maintained an equable composure. They had brought
    their survey to a close in the little room at the side of the hall, and
    he stood there, eyeing Mr Blandois.

    'I am glad you are so well satisfied, sir,' was his calm remark. 'I
    didn't expect it. You seem to be quite in good spirits.'

    'In admirable spirits,' returned Blandois. 'Word of honour! never more
    refreshed in spirits. Do you ever have presentiments, Mr Flintwinch?'

    'I am not sure that I know what you mean by the term, sir,' replied that
    gentleman.

    'Say, in this case, Mr Flintwinch, undefined anticipations of pleasure
    to come.'

    'I can't say I'm sensible of such a sensation at present,' returned Mr
    Flintwinch with the utmost gravity. 'If I should find it coming on, I'll
    mention it.'

    'Now I,' said Blandois, 'I, my son, have a presentiment to-night that we
    shall be well acquainted. Do you find it coming on?'

    'N-no,' returned Mr Flintwinch, deliberately inquiring of himself. 'I
    can't say I do.'

    'I have a strong presentiment that we shall become intimately
    acquainted.--You have no feeling of that sort yet?'

    'Not yet,' said Mr Flintwinch.

    Mr Blandois, taking him by both shoulders again, rolled him about a
    little in his former merry way, then drew his arm through his own, and
    invited him to come off and drink a bottle of wine like a dear deep old
    dog as he was.

    Without a moment's indecision, Mr Flintwinch accepted the invitation,
    and they went out to the quarters where the traveller was lodged,
    through a heavy rain which had rattled on the windows, roofs, and
    pavements, ever since nightfall. The thunder and lightning had long ago
    passed over, but the rain was furious. On their arrival at Mr Blandois'
    room, a bottle of port wine was ordered by that gallant gentleman; who
    (crushing every pretty thing he could collect, in the soft disposition
     of his dainty figure) coiled himself upon the window-seat, while Mr
    Flintwinch took a chair opposite to him, with the table between them. Mr
    Blandois proposed having the largest glasses in the house, to which Mr
    Flintwinch assented. The bumpers filled, Mr Blandois, with a roystering
    gaiety, clinked the top of his glass against the bottom of Mr
    Flintwinch's, and the bottom of his glass against the top of Mr
    Flintwinch's, and drank to the intimate acquaintance he foresaw.
    Mr Flintwinch gravely pledged him, and drank all the wine he could get,
    and said nothing. As often as Mr Blandois clinked glasses (which was
            at every replenishment), Mr Flintwinch stolidly did his part of the
    clinking, and would have stolidly done his companion's part of the wine
    as well as his own: being, except in the article of palate, a mere cask.

    In short, Mr Blandois found that to pour port wine into the reticent
    Flintwinch was, not to open him but to shut him up. Moreover, he had
    the appearance of a perfect ability to go on all night; or, if occasion
    were, all next day and all next night; whereas Mr Blandois soon grew
    indistinctly conscious of swaggering too fiercely and boastfully. He
    therefore terminated the entertainment at the end of the third bottle.

    'You will draw upon us to-morrow, sir,' said Mr Flintwinch, with a
    business-like face at parting.

    'My Cabbage,' returned the other, taking him by the collar with both
    hands, 'I'll draw upon you; have no fear. Adieu, my Flintwinch. Receive
    at parting;' here he gave him a southern embrace, and kissed him soundly
    on both cheeks; 'the word of a gentleman! By a thousand Thunders, you
    shall see me again!'

    He did not present himself next day, though the letter of advice came
    duly to hand. Inquiring after him at night, Mr Flintwinch found, with
    surprise, that he had paid his bill and gone back to the Continent by
    way of Calais. Nevertheless, Jeremiah scraped out of his cogitating
    face a lively conviction that Mr Blandois would keep his word on this
    occasion, and would be seen again.




Anybody may pass, any day, in the thronged thoroughfares of the
metropolis, some meagre, wrinkled, yellow old man (who might be supposed
        to have dropped from the stars, if there were any star in the Heavens
        dull enough to be suspected of casting off so feeble a spark), creeping
along with a scared air, as though bewildered and a little frightened
by the noise and bustle. This old man is always a little old man. If he
were ever a big old man, he has shrunk into a little old man; if he were
always a little old man, he has dwindled into a less old man. His coat
is a colour, and cut, that never was the mode anywhere, at any period.
Clearly, it was not made for him, or for any individual mortal. Some
wholesale contractor measured Fate for five thousand coats of such
quality, and Fate has lent this old coat to this old man, as one of a
long unfinished line of many old men. It has always large dull metal
buttons, similar to no other buttons. This old man wears a hat, a
thumbed and napless and yet an obdurate hat, which has never adapted
itself to the shape of his poor head. His coarse shirt and his coarse
neckcloth have no more individuality than his coat and hat; they have
the same character of not being his--of not being anybody's. Yet this
old man wears these clothes with a certain unaccustomed air of being
dressed and elaborated for the public ways; as though he passed the
greater part of his time in a nightcap and gown. And so, like the
country mouse in the second year of a famine, come to see the town
mouse, and timidly threading his way to the town-mouse's lodging through
a city of cats, this old man passes in the streets.

Sometimes, on holidays towards evening, he will be seen to walk with a
slightly increased infirmity, and his old eyes will glimmer with a moist
and marshy light. Then the little old man is drunk. A very small
measure will overset him; he may be bowled off his unsteady legs with
a half-pint pot. Some pitying acquaintance--chance acquaintance
very often--has warmed up his weakness with a treat of beer, and the
consequence will be the lapse of a longer time than usual before he
shall pass again. For the little old man is going home to the Workhouse;
and on his good behaviour they do not let him out often (though methinks
        they might, considering the few years he has before him to go out in,
        under the sun); and on his bad behaviour they shut him up closer than
ever in a grove of two score and nineteen more old men, every one of
whom smells of all the others.

Mrs Plornish's father,--a poor little reedy piping old gentleman, like
a worn-out bird; who had been in what he called the music-binding
business, and met with great misfortunes, and who had seldom been able
to make his way, or to see it or to pay it, or to do anything at all
with it but find it no thoroughfare,--had retired of his own accord to
the Workhouse which was appointed by law to be the Good Samaritan of his
district (without the twopence, which was bad political economy), on
the settlement of that execution which had carried Mr Plornish to the
Marshalsea College. Previous to his son-in-law's difficulties coming to
that head, Old Nandy (he was always so called in his legal Retreat, but
        he was Old Mr Nandy among the Bleeding Hearts) had sat in a corner of
the Plornish fireside, and taken his bite and sup out of the Plornish
cupboard. He still hoped to resume that domestic position when Fortune
should smile upon his son-in-law; in the meantime, while she preserved
an immovable countenance, he was, and resolved to remain, one of these
little old men in a grove of little old men with a community of flavour.

But no poverty in him, and no coat on him that never was the mode, and
no Old Men's Ward for his dwelling-place, could quench his daughter's
admiration. Mrs Plornish was as proud of her father's talents as she
could possibly have been if they had made him Lord Chancellor. She had
as firm a belief in the sweetness and propriety of his manners as she
could possibly have had if he had been Lord Chamberlain. The poor little
old man knew some pale and vapid little songs, long out of date, about
Chloe, and Phyllis, and Strephon being wounded by the son of Venus;
and for Mrs Plornish there was no such music at the Opera as the small
internal flutterings and chirpings wherein he would discharge himself
of these ditties, like a weak, little, broken barrel-organ, ground by
a baby. On his 'days out,' those flecks of light in his flat vista of
pollard old men,' it was at once Mrs Plornish's delight and sorrow,
        when he was strong with meat, and had taken his full halfpenny-worth of
        porter, to say, 'Sing us a song, Father.' Then he would give them Chloe,
        and if he were in pretty good spirits, Phyllis also--Strephon he had
        hardly been up to since he went into retirement--and then would Mrs
        Plornish declare she did believe there never was such a singer as
        Father, and wipe her eyes.

        If he had come from Court on these occasions, nay, if he had been the
        noble Refrigerator come home triumphantly from a foreign court to be
        presented and promoted on his last tremendous failure, Mrs Plornish
        could not have handed him with greater elevation about Bleeding Heart
        Yard. 'Here's Father,' she would say, presenting him to a neighbour.
        'Father will soon be home with us for good, now. Ain't Father looking
        well? Father's a sweeter singer than ever; you'd never have forgotten
        it, if you'd aheard him just now.' As to Mr Plornish, he had married
        these articles of belief in marrying Mr Nandy's daughter, and only
        wondered how it was that so gifted an old gentleman had not made a
        fortune. This he attributed, after much reflection, to his musical
        genius not having been scientifically developed in his youth. 'For why,'
        argued Mr Plornish, 'why go a-binding music when you've got it in
        yourself? That's where it is, I consider.'

        Old Nandy had a patron: one patron. He had a patron who in a certain
        sumptuous way--an apologetic way, as if he constantly took an admiring
        audience to witness that he really could not help being more free
        with this old fellow than they might have expected, on account of his
        simplicity and poverty--was mightily good to him. Old Nandy had
        been several times to the Marshalsea College, communicating with his
        son-in-law during his short durance there; and had happily acquired to
        himself, and had by degrees and in course of time much improved, the
        patronage of the Father of that national institution.

        Mr Dorrit was in the habit of receiving this old man as if the old man
        held of him in vassalage under some feudal tenure. He made little treats
        and teas for him, as if he came in with his homage from some outlying
        district where the tenantry were in a primitive state. It seemed as if
        there were moments when he could by no means have sworn but that the old
        man was an ancient retainer of his, who had been meritoriously faithful.
        When he mentioned him, he spoke of him casually as his old pensioner. He
        had a wonderful satisfaction in seeing him, and in commenting on his
        decayed condition after he was gone. It appeared to him amazing that he
        could hold up his head at all, poor creature. 'In the Workhouse, sir,
        the Union; no privacy, no visitors, no station, no respect, no
        speciality. Most deplorable!'

        It was Old Nandy's birthday, and they let him out. He said nothing about
        its being his birthday, or they might have kept him in; for such old
        men should not be born. He passed along the streets as usual to Bleeding
        Heart Yard, and had his dinner with his daughter and son-in-law, and
        gave them Phyllis. He had hardly concluded, when Little Dorrit looked in
        to see how they all were.

        'Miss Dorrit,' said Mrs Plornish, 'here's Father! Ain't he looking nice?
        And such voice he's in!'

        Little Dorrit gave him her hand, and smilingly said she had not seen him
        this long time.

        'No, they're rather hard on poor Father,' said Mrs Plornish with a
        lengthening face, 'and don't let him have half as much change and fresh
        air as would benefit him. But he'll soon be home for good, now. Won't
        you, Father?'

        'Yes, my dear, I hope so. In good time, please God.'

        Here Mr Plornish delivered himself of an oration which he invariably
        made, word for word the same, on all such opportunities. It was couched
        in the following terms:

        'John Edward Nandy. Sir. While there's a ounce of wittles or drink of
        any sort in this present roof, you're fully welcome to your share on
        it. While there's a handful of fire or a mouthful of bed in this present
        roof, you're fully welcome to your share on it. If so be as there should
        be nothing in this present roof, you should be as welcome to your share
        on it as if it was something, much or little. And this is what I mean
        and so I don't deceive you, and consequently which is to stand out is to
        entreat of you, and therefore why not do it?'

        To this lucid address, which Mr Plornish always delivered as if he had
        composed it (as no doubt he had) with enormous labour, Mrs Plornish's
        father pipingly replied:

        'I thank you kindly, Thomas, and I know your intentions well, which is
        the same I thank you kindly for. But no, Thomas. Until such times as
        it's not to take it out of your children's mouths, which take it is, and
        call it by what name you will it do remain and equally deprive, though
        may they come, and too soon they can not come, no Thomas, no!'

        Mrs Plornish, who had been turning her face a little away with a corner
        of her apron in her hand, brought herself back to the conversation again
        by telling Miss Dorrit that Father was going over the water to pay his
        respects, unless she knew of any reason why it might not be agreeable.

        Her answer was, 'I am going straight home, and if he will come with me
        I shall be so glad to take care of him--so glad,' said Little Dorrit,
        always thoughtful of the feelings of the weak, 'of his company.'

        'There, Father!' cried Mrs Plornish. 'Ain't you a gay young man to
        be going for a walk along with Miss Dorrit! Let me tie your
        neck-handkerchief into a regular good bow, for you're a regular beau
        yourself, Father, if ever there was one.'

        With this filial joke his daughter smartened him up, and gave him a
        loving hug, and stood at the door with her weak child in her arms, and
        her strong child tumbling down the steps, looking after her little old
        father as he toddled away with his arm under Little Dorrit's.

        They walked at a slow pace, and Little Dorrit took him by the Iron
        Bridge and sat him down there for a rest, and they looked over at the
        water and talked about the shipping, and the old man mentioned what he
        would do if he had a ship full of gold coming home to him (his plan was
                to take a noble lodging for the Plornishes and himself at a Tea Gardens,
                and live there all the rest of their lives, attended on by the waiter),
        and it was a special birthday of the old man. They were within five
        minutes of their destination, when, at the corner of her own street,
        they came upon Fanny in her new bonnet bound for the same port.

        'Why, good gracious me, Amy!' cried that young lady starting. 'You never
        mean it!'

        'Mean what, Fanny dear?'

        'Well! I could have believed a great deal of you,' returned the young
        lady with burning indignation, 'but I don't think even I could have
        believed this, of even you!'

        'Fanny!' cried Little Dorrit, wounded and astonished.

        'Oh! Don't Fanny me, you mean little thing, don't! The idea of coming
        along the open streets, in the broad light of day, with a Pauper!'
        (firing off the last word as if it were a ball from an air-gun).

        'O Fanny!'

        'I tell you not to Fanny me, for I'll not submit to it! I never knew
        such a thing. The way in which you are resolved and determined to
        disgrace us on all occasions, is really infamous. You bad little thing!'

        'Does it disgrace anybody,' said Little Dorrit, very gently, 'to take
        care of this poor old man?'

        'Yes, miss,' returned her sister, 'and you ought to know it does.
        And you do know it does, and you do it because you know it does. The
        principal pleasure of your life is to remind your family of their
        misfortunes. And the next great pleasure of your existence is to keep
        low company. But, however, if you have no sense of decency, I
        have. You'll please to allow me to go on the other side of the way,
        unmolested.'

        With this, she bounced across to the opposite pavement. The old
        disgrace, who had been deferentially bowing a pace or two off (for
                Little Dorrit had let his arm go in her wonder, when Fanny began), and
        who had been hustled and cursed by impatient passengers for stopping the
        way, rejoined his companion, rather giddy, and said, 'I hope nothing's
        wrong with your honoured father, Miss? I hope there's nothing the matter
        in the honoured family?'

        'No, no,' returned Little Dorrit. 'No, thank you. Give me your arm
        again, Mr Nandy. We shall soon be there now.'

        So she talked to him as she had talked before, and they came to the
        Lodge and found Mr Chivery on the lock, and went in. Now, it happened
        that the Father of the Marshalsea was sauntering towards the Lodge at
        the moment when they were coming out of it, entering the prison arm in
        arm. As the spectacle of their approach met his view, he displayed the
        utmost agitation and despondency of mind; and--altogether regardless of
        Old Nandy, who, making his reverence, stood with his hat in his hand, as
        he always did in that gracious presence--turned about, and hurried in at
        his own doorway and up the staircase.

        Leaving the old unfortunate, whom in an evil hour she had taken under
        her protection, with a hurried promise to return to him directly, Little
        Dorrit hastened after her father, and, on the staircase, found Fanny
        following her, and flouncing up with offended dignity. The three came
        into the room almost together; and the Father sat down in his chair,
        buried his face in his hands, and uttered a groan.

        'Of course,' said Fanny. 'Very proper. Poor, afflicted Pa! Now, I hope
        you believe me, Miss?'

        'What is it, father?' cried Little Dorrit, bending over him. 'Have I
        made you unhappy, father? Not I, I hope!'

        'You hope, indeed! I dare say! Oh, you'--Fanny paused for a sufficiently
        strong expression--'you Common-minded little Amy! You complete
        prison-child!'

        He stopped these angry reproaches with a wave of his hand, and sobbed
        out, raising his face and shaking his melancholy head at his younger
        daughter, 'Amy, I know that you are innocent in intention. But you
        have cut me to the soul.'

        'Innocent in intention!' the implacable Fanny struck in. 'Stuff in
        intention! Low in intention! Lowering of the family in intention!'

        'Father!' cried Little Dorrit, pale and trembling. 'I am very sorry.
        Pray forgive me. Tell me how it is, that I may not do it again!'

        'How it is, you prevaricating little piece of goods!' cried Fanny. 'You
        know how it is. I have told you already, so don't fly in the face of
        Providence by attempting to deny it!'

        'Hush! Amy,' said the father, passing his pocket-handkerchief several
        times across his face, and then grasping it convulsively in the hand
        that dropped across his knee, 'I have done what I could to keep you
        select here; I have done what I could to retain you a position here. I
        may have succeeded; I may not. You may know it; you may not. I give no
        opinion. I have endured everything here but humiliation. That I have
        happily been spared--until this day.'

        Here his convulsive grasp unclosed itself, and he put his
        pocket-handkerchief to his eyes again. Little Dorrit, on the ground
        beside him, with her imploring hand upon his arm, watched him
        remorsefully. Coming out of his fit of grief, he clenched his
        pocket-handkerchief once more.

        'Humiliation I have happily been spared until this day. Through all
        my troubles there has been that--Spirit in myself, and that--that
        submission to it, if I may use the term, in those about me, which has
        spared me--ha--humiliation. But this day, this minute, I have keenly
        felt it.'

        'Of course! How could it be otherwise?' exclaimed the irrepressible
        Fanny. 'Careering and prancing about with a Pauper!' (air-gun again).

        'But, dear father,' cried Little Dorrit, 'I don't justify myself for
        having wounded your dear heart--no! Heaven knows I don't!' She clasped
        her hands in quite an agony of distress. 'I do nothing but beg and pray
        you to be comforted and overlook it. But if I had not known that you
        were kind to the old man yourself, and took much notice of him, and were
        always glad to see him, I would not have come here with him, father, I
        would not, indeed. What I have been so unhappy as to do, I have done
        in mistake. I would not wilfully bring a tear to your eyes, dear love!'
        said Little Dorrit, her heart well-nigh broken, 'for anything the world
        could give me, or anything it could take away.'

        Fanny, with a partly angry and partly repentant sob, began to cry
        herself, and to say--as this young lady always said when she was half in
        passion and half out of it, half spiteful with herself and half spiteful
        with everybody else--that she wished she were dead.

        The Father of the Marshalsea in the meantime took his younger daughter
        to his breast, and patted her head.

        'There, there! Say no more, Amy, say no more, my child. I will forget it
        as soon as I can. I,' with hysterical cheerfulness, 'I--shall soon be
        able to dismiss it. It is perfectly true, my dear, that I am always glad
        to see my old pensioner--as such, as such--and that I do--ha--extend as
        much protection and kindness to the--hum--the bruised reed--I trust I
        may so call him without impropriety--as in my circumstances, I can. It
        is quite true that this is the case, my dear child. At the same
        time, I preserve in doing this, if I may--ha--if I may use the
        expression--Spirit. Becoming Spirit. And there are some things which
        are,' he stopped to sob, 'irreconcilable with that, and wound
        that--wound it deeply. It is not that I have seen my good Amy
        attentive, and--ha--condescending to my old pensioner--it is not _that_
        that hurts me. It is, if I am to close the painful subject by being
        explicit, that I have seen my child, my own child, my own daughter,
        coming into this College out of the public streets--smiling!
        smiling!--arm in arm with--O my God, a livery!'

        This reference to the coat of no cut and no time, the unfortunate
        gentleman gasped forth, in a scarcely audible voice, and with his
        clenched pocket-handkerchief raised in the air. His excited feelings
        might have found some further painful utterance, but for a knock at the
        door, which had been already twice repeated, and to which Fanny (still
                wishing herself dead, and indeed now going so far as to add, buried)
        cried 'Come in!'

        'Ah, Young John!' said the Father, in an altered and calmed voice. 'What
        is it, Young John?'

        'A letter for you, sir, being left in the Lodge just this minute, and a
        message with it, I thought, happening to be there myself, sir, I would
        bring it to your room.' The speaker's attention was much distracted by
        the piteous spectacle of Little Dorrit at her father's feet, with her
        head turned away.

        'Indeed, John? Thank you.'

        'The letter is from Mr Clennam, sir--it's the answer--and the message
        was, sir, that Mr Clennam also sent his compliments, and word that he
        would do himself the pleasure of calling this afternoon, hoping to see
        you, and likewise,' attention more distracted than before, 'Miss Amy.'

        'Oh!' As the Father glanced into the letter (there was a bank-note in
                it), he reddened a little, and patted Amy on the head afresh. 'Thank
        you, Young John. Quite right. Much obliged to you for your attention. No
        one waiting?'

        'No, sir, no one waiting.'

        'Thank you, John. How is your mother, Young John?'

        'Thank you, sir, she's not quite as well as we could wish--in fact, we
        none of us are, except father--but she's pretty well, sir.'

        'Say we sent our remembrances, will you? Say kind remembrances, if you
        please, Young John.'

        'Thank you, sir, I will.' And Mr Chivery junior went his way, having
        spontaneously composed on the spot an entirely new epitaph for himself,
        to the effect that Here lay the body of John Chivery, Who, Having
        at such a date, Beheld the idol of his life, In grief and tears, And
        feeling unable to bear the harrowing spectacle, Immediately repaired to
        the abode of his inconsolable parents, And terminated his existence by
        his own rash act.

        'There, there, Amy!' said the Father, when Young John had closed the
        door, 'let us say no more about it.' The last few minutes had improved
        his spirits remarkably, and he was quite lightsome. 'Where is my old
        pensioner all this while? We must not leave him by himself any longer,
        or he will begin to suppose he is not welcome, and that would pain me.
        Will you fetch him, my child, or shall I?'

        'If you wouldn't mind, father,' said Little Dorrit, trying to bring her
        sobbing to a close.

        'Certainly I will go, my dear. I forgot; your eyes are rather red.
        There! Cheer up, Amy. Don't be uneasy about me. I am quite myself again,
        my love, quite myself. Go to your room, Amy, and make yourself look
        comfortable and pleasant to receive Mr Clennam.'

        'I would rather stay in my own room, Father,' returned Little Dorrit,
        finding it more difficult than before to regain her composure. 'I would
        far rather not see Mr Clennam.'

        'Oh, fie, fie, my dear, that's folly. Mr Clennam is a very gentlemanly
        man--very gentlemanly. A little reserved at times; but I will say
        extremely gentlemanly. I couldn't think of your not being here to
        receive Mr Clennam, my dear, especially this afternoon. So go and
        freshen yourself up, Amy; go and freshen yourself up, like a good girl.'

        Thus directed, Little Dorrit dutifully rose and obeyed: only pausing
        for a moment as she went out of the room, to give her sister a kiss of
        reconciliation. Upon which, that young lady, feeling much harassed
        in her mind, and having for the time worn out the wish with which she
        generally relieved it, conceived and executed the brilliant idea of
        wishing Old Nandy dead, rather than that he should come bothering there
        like a disgusting, tiresome, wicked wretch, and making mischief between
        two sisters.

        The Father of the Marshalsea, even humming a tune, and wearing his black
        velvet cap a little on one side, so much improved were his spirits, went
        down into the yard, and found his old pensioner standing there hat in
        hand just within the gate, as he had stood all this time. 'Come, Nandy!'
        said he, with great suavity. 'Come up-stairs, Nandy; you know the way;
        why don't you come up-stairs?' He went the length, on this occasion,
        of giving him his hand and saying, 'How are you, Nandy? Are you pretty
        well?' To which that vocalist returned, 'I thank you, honoured sir, I am
        all the better for seeing your honour.' As they went along the yard, the
        Father of the Marshalsea presented him to a Collegian of recent date.
        'An old acquaintance of mine, sir, an old pensioner.' And then said, 'Be
        covered, my good Nandy; put your hat on,' with great consideration.

        His patronage did not stop here; for he charged Maggy to get the tea
        ready, and instructed her to buy certain tea-cakes, fresh butter,
        eggs, cold ham, and shrimps: to purchase which collation he gave her a
        bank-note for ten pounds, laying strict injunctions on her to be careful
        of the change. These preparations were in an advanced stage of progress,
        and his daughter Amy had come back with her work, when Clennam presented
        himself; whom he most graciously received, and besought to join their
        meal.

        'Amy, my love, you know Mr Clennam even better than I have the happiness
        of doing. Fanny, my dear, you are acquainted with Mr Clennam.' Fanny
        acknowledged him haughtily; the position she tacitly took up in all such
        cases being that there was a vast conspiracy to insult the family by not
        understanding it, or sufficiently deferring to it, and here was one of
        the conspirators. 'This, Mr Clennam, you must know, is an old pensioner
        of mine, Old Nandy, a very faithful old man.' (He always spoke of him as
                an object of great antiquity, but he was two or three years younger than
                himself.) 'Let me see. You know Plornish, I think? I think my daughter
        Amy has mentioned to me that you know poor Plornish?'

        'O yes!' said Arthur Clennam.

        'Well, sir, this is Mrs Plornish's father.'

        'Indeed? I am glad to see him.'

        'You would be more glad if you knew his many good qualities, Mr
        Clennam.'

        'I hope I shall come to know them through knowing him,' said Arthur,
        secretly pitying the bowed and submissive figure.

        'It is a holiday with him, and he comes to see his old friends, who are
        always glad to see him,' observed the Father of the Marshalsea. Then he
        added behind his hand, ('Union, poor old fellow. Out for the day.')

        By this time Maggy, quietly assisted by her Little Mother, had spread
        the board, and the repast was ready. It being hot weather and the prison
        very close, the window was as wide open as it could be pushed. 'If Maggy
        will spread that newspaper on the window-sill, my dear,' remarked the
        Father complacently and in a half whisper to Little Dorrit, 'my old
        pensioner can have his tea there, while we are having ours.'

        So, with a gulf between him and the good company of about a foot in
        width, standard measure, Mrs Plornish's father was handsomely regaled.
        Clennam had never seen anything like his magnanimous protection by that
        other Father, he of the Marshalsea; and was lost in the contemplation of
        its many wonders.

        The most striking of these was perhaps the relishing manner in which he
        remarked on the pensioner's infirmities and failings, as if he were
        a gracious Keeper making a running commentary on the decline of the
        harmless animal he exhibited.

        'Not ready for more ham yet, Nandy? Why, how slow you are! (His last
                teeth,' he explained to the company, 'are going, poor old boy.')

        At another time, he said, 'No shrimps, Nandy?' and on his not instantly
        replying, observed, ('His hearing is becoming very defective. He'll be
                deaf directly.')

        At another time he asked him, 'Do you walk much, Nandy, about the yard
        within the walls of that place of yours?'

        'No, sir; no. I haven't any great liking for that.'

        'No, to be sure,' he assented. 'Very natural.' Then he privately
        informed the circle ('Legs going.')

        Once he asked the pensioner, in that general clemency which asked him
        anything to keep him afloat, how old his younger grandchild was?

        'John Edward,' said the pensioner, slowly laying down his knife and fork
        to consider. 'How old, sir? Let me think now.'

        The Father of the Marshalsea tapped his forehead ('Memory weak.')

        'John Edward, sir? Well, I really forget. I couldn't say at this minute,
        sir, whether it's two and two months, or whether it's two and five
        months. It's one or the other.'

        'Don't distress yourself by worrying your mind about it,' he returned,
        with infinite forbearance. ('Faculties evidently decaying--old man rusts
                in the life he leads!')

        The more of these discoveries that he persuaded himself he made in the
        pensioner, the better he appeared to like him; and when he got out of
        his chair after tea to bid the pensioner good-bye, on his intimating
        that he feared, honoured sir, his time was running out, he made himself
        look as erect and strong as possible.

        'We don't call this a shilling, Nandy, you know,' he said, putting one
        in his hand. 'We call it tobacco.'

        'Honoured sir, I thank you. It shall buy tobacco. My thanks and duty to
        Miss Amy and Miss Fanny. I wish you good night, Mr Clennam.'

        'And mind you don't forget us, you know, Nandy,' said the Father. 'You
        must come again, mind, whenever you have an afternoon. You must not come
        out without seeing us, or we shall be jealous. Good night, Nandy. Be
        very careful how you descend the stairs, Nandy; they are rather uneven
        and worn.' With that he stood on the landing, watching the old man down:
        and when he came into the room again, said, with a solemn satisfaction
        on him, 'A melancholy sight that, Mr Clennam, though one has the
        consolation of knowing that he doesn't feel it himself. The poor old
        fellow is a dismal wreck. Spirit broken and gone--pulverised--crushed
        out of him, sir, completely!'

        As Clennam had a purpose in remaining, he said what he could responsive
        to these sentiments, and stood at the window with their enunciator,
        while Maggy and her Little Mother washed the tea-service and cleared it
        away. He noticed that his companion stood at the window with the air of
        an affable and accessible Sovereign, and that, when any of his people in
        the yard below looked up, his recognition of their salutes just stopped
        short of a blessing.

        When Little Dorrit had her work on the table, and Maggy hers on the
        bedstead, Fanny fell to tying her bonnet as a preliminary to her
        departure. Arthur, still having his purpose, still remained. At this
        time the door opened, without any notice, and Mr Tip came in. He kissed
        Amy as she started up to meet him, nodded to Fanny, nodded to his
        father, gloomed on the visitor without further recognition, and sat
        down.

        'Tip, dear,' said Little Dorrit, mildly, shocked by this, 'don't you
        see--'

        'Yes, I see, Amy. If you refer to the presence of any visitor you have
        here--I say, if you refer to that,' answered Tip, jerking his head with
        emphasis towards his shoulder nearest Clennam, 'I see!'

        'Is that all you say?'

        'That's all I say. And I suppose,' added the lofty young man, after a
        moment's pause, 'that visitor will understand me, when I say that's all
        I say. In short, I suppose the visitor will understand that he hasn't
        used me like a gentleman.'

        'I do not understand that,' observed the obnoxious personage referred to
        with tranquillity.

        'No? Why, then, to make it clearer to you, sir, I beg to let you know
        that when I address what I call a properly-worded appeal, and an urgent
        appeal, and a delicate appeal, to an individual, for a small temporary
        accommodation, easily within his power--easily within his power,
        mind!--and when that individual writes back word to me that he begs to
        be excused, I consider that he doesn't treat me like a gentleman.'

        The Father of the Marshalsea, who had surveyed his son in silence, no
        sooner heard this sentiment, than he began in angry voice:--

        'How dare you--' But his son stopped him.

        'Now, don't ask me how I dare, father, because that's bosh. As to the
        fact of the line of conduct I choose to adopt towards the individual
        present, you ought to be proud of my showing a proper spirit.'

        'I should think so!' cried Fanny.

        'A proper spirit?' said the Father. 'Yes, a proper spirit; a becoming
        spirit. Is it come to this that my son teaches me--_me_--spirit!'

        'Now, don't let us bother about it, father, or have any row on the
        subject. I have fully made up my mind that the individual present has
        not treated me like a gentleman. And there's an end of it.'

        'But there is not an end of it, sir,' returned the Father. 'But there
        shall not be an end of it. You have made up your mind? You have made up
        your mind?'

        'Yes, _I_ have. What's the good of keeping on like that?'

        'Because,' returned the Father, in a great heat, 'you had no right to
        make up your mind to what is monstrous, to what is--ha--immoral, to what
        is--hum--parricidal. No, Mr Clennam, I beg, sir. Don't ask me to desist;
        there is a--hum--a general principle involved here, which rises even
        above considerations of--ha--hospitality. I object to the assertion made
        by my son. I--ha--I personally repel it.'

        'Why, what is it to you, father?' returned the son, over his shoulder.

        'What is it to me, sir? I have a--hum--a spirit, sir, that will not
        endure it. I,' he took out his pocket-handkerchief again and dabbed his
        face. 'I am outraged and insulted by it. Let me suppose the case that I
        myself may at a certain time--ha--or times, have made a--hum--an appeal,
        and a properly-worded appeal, and a delicate appeal, and an urgent
        appeal to some individual for a small temporary accommodation. Let me
        suppose that that accommodation could have been easily extended, and was
        not extended, and that that individual informed me that he begged to
        be excused. Am I to be told by my own son, that I therefore received
        treatment not due to a gentleman, and that I--ha--I submitted to it?'

        His daughter Amy gently tried to calm him, but he would not on any
        account be calmed. He said his spirit was up, and wouldn't endure this.

        Was he to be told that, he wished to know again, by his own son on his
        own hearth, to his own face? Was that humiliation to be put upon him by
        his own blood?

        'You are putting it on yourself, father, and getting into all this
        injury of your own accord!' said the young gentleman morosely. 'What I
        have made up my mind about has nothing to do with you. What I said had
        nothing to do with you. Why need you go trying on other people's hats?'

        'I reply it has everything to do with me,' returned the Father. 'I point
        out to you, sir, with indignation, that--hum--the--ha--delicacy and
        peculiarity of your father's position should strike you dumb, sir, if
        nothing else should, in laying down such--ha--such unnatural principles.
        Besides; if you are not filial, sir, if you discard that duty, you
        are at least--hum--not a Christian? Are you--ha--an Atheist? And is it
        Christian, let me ask you, to stigmatise and denounce an individual
        for begging to be excused this time, when the same individual
        may--ha--respond with the required accommodation next time? Is it the
        part of a Christian not to--hum--not to try him again?' He had worked
        himself into quite a religious glow and fervour.

        'I see precious well,' said Mr Tip, rising, 'that I shall get no
        sensible or fair argument here to-night, and so the best thing I can do
        is to cut. Good night, Amy. Don't be vexed. I am very sorry it happens
        here, and you here, upon my soul I am; but I can't altogether part with
        my spirit, even for your sake, old girl.'

        With those words he put on his hat and went out, accompanied by Miss
        Fanny; who did not consider it spirited on her part to take leave of
        Clennam with any less opposing demonstration than a stare, importing
        that she had always known him for one of the large body of conspirators.

        When they were gone, the Father of the Marshalsea was at first inclined
        to sink into despondency again, and would have done so, but that a
        gentleman opportunely came up within a minute or two to attend him to
        the Snuggery. It was the gentleman Clennam had seen on the night of his
        own accidental detention there, who had that impalpable grievance about
        the misappropriated Fund on which the Marshal was supposed to batten.
        He presented himself as deputation to escort the Father to the Chair, it
        being an occasion on which he had promised to preside over the assembled
        Collegians in the enjoyment of a little Harmony.

        'Such, you see, Mr Clennam,' said the Father, 'are the incongruities
        of my position here. But a public duty! No man, I am sure, would more
        readily recognise a public duty than yourself.'

        Clennam besought him not to delay a moment.

        'Amy, my dear, if you can persuade Mr Clennam to stay longer, I can
        leave the honours of our poor apology for an establishment with
        confidence in your hands, and perhaps you may do something towards
        erasing from Mr Clennam's mind the--ha--untoward and unpleasant
        circumstance which has occurred since tea-time.'

        Clennam assured him that it had made no impression on his mind, and
        therefore required no erasure.

        'My dear sir,' said the Father, with a removal of his black cap and a
        grasp of Clennam's hand, combining to express the safe receipt of his
        note and enclosure that afternoon, 'Heaven ever bless you!'

        So, at last, Clennam's purpose in remaining was attained, and he could
        speak to Little Dorrit with nobody by. Maggy counted as nobody, and she
        was by.




Maggy sat at her work in her great white cap with its quantity of opaque
frilling hiding what profile she had (she had none to spare), and her
serviceable eye brought to bear upon her occupation, on the window side
of the room. What with her flapping cap, and what with her unserviceable
eye, she was quite partitioned off from her Little Mother, whose seat
was opposite the window. The tread and shuffle of feet on the pavement
of the yard had much diminished since the taking of the Chair, the tide
of Collegians having set strongly in the direction of Harmony. Some few
who had no music in their souls, or no money in their pockets, dawdled
about; and the old spectacle of the visitor-wife and the depressed
unseasoned prisoner still lingered in corners, as broken cobwebs and
such unsightly discomforts draggle in corners of other places. It was
the quietest time the College knew, saving the night hours when the
Collegians took the benefit of the act of sleep. The occasional rattle
of applause upon the tables of the Snuggery, denoted the successful
termination of a morsel of Harmony; or the responsive acceptance, by
the united children, of some toast or sentiment offered to them by their
Father. Occasionally, a vocal strain more sonorous than the generality
informed the listener that some boastful bass was in blue water, or in
the hunting field, or with the reindeer, or on the mountain, or among
the heather; but the Marshal of the Marshalsea knew better, and had got
him hard and fast.

As Arthur Clennam moved to sit down by the side of Little Dorrit, she
trembled so that she had much ado to hold her needle. Clennam gently
put his hand upon her work, and said, 'Dear Little Dorrit, let me lay it
down.'

She yielded it to him, and he put it aside. Her hands were then
nervously clasping together, but he took one of them.

'How seldom I have seen you lately, Little Dorrit!'

'I have been busy, sir.'

'But I heard only to-day,' said Clennam, 'by mere accident, of your
having been with those good people close by me. Why not come to me,
       then?'

       'I--I don't know. Or rather, I thought you might be busy too. You
       generally are now, are you not?'

       He saw her trembling little form and her downcast face, and the eyes
       that drooped the moment they were raised to his--he saw them almost with
       as much concern as tenderness.

       'My child, your manner is so changed!'

       The trembling was now quite beyond her control. Softly withdrawing her
       hand, and laying it in her other hand, she sat before him with her head
       bent and her whole form trembling.

       'My own Little Dorrit,' said Clennam, compassionately.

       She burst into tears. Maggy looked round of a sudden, and stared for at
       least a minute; but did not interpose. Clennam waited some little while
       before he spoke again.

       'I cannot bear,' he said then, 'to see you weep; but I hope this is a
       relief to an overcharged heart.'

       'Yes it is, sir. Nothing but that.'

       'Well, well! I feared you would think too much of what passed here just
       now. It is of no moment; not the least. I am only unfortunate to have
       come in the way. Let it go by with these tears. It is not worth one of
       them. One of them? Such an idle thing should be repeated, with my glad
       consent, fifty times a day, to save you a moment's heart-ache, Little
       Dorrit.'

       She had taken courage now, and answered, far more in her usual manner,
       'You are so good! But even if there was nothing else in it to be sorry
       for and ashamed of, it is such a bad return to you--'

       'Hush!' said Clennam, smiling and touching her lips with his hand.
       'Forgetfulness in you who remember so many and so much, would be new
       indeed. Shall I remind you that I am not, and that I never was, anything
       but the friend whom you agreed to trust? No. You remember it, don't
       you?'

       'I try to do so, or I should have broken the promise just now, when my
       mistaken brother was here. You will consider his bringing-up in this
       place, and will not judge him hardly, poor fellow, I know!' In raising
       her eyes with these words, she observed his face more nearly than she
       had done yet, and said, with a quick change of tone, 'You have not been
       ill, Mr Clennam?'

       'No.'

       'Nor tried? Nor hurt?' she asked him, anxiously.

       It fell to Clennam now, to be not quite certain how to answer. He said
       in reply:

       'To speak the truth, I have been a little troubled, but it is over.
       Do I show it so plainly? I ought to have more fortitude and self-command
       than that. I thought I had. I must learn them of you. Who could teach me
       better!'

       He never thought that she saw in him what no one else could see. He
       never thought that in the whole world there were no other eyes that
       looked upon him with the same light and strength as hers.

       'But it brings me to something that I wish to say,' he continued, 'and
       therefore I will not quarrel even with my own face for telling tales
       and being unfaithful to me. Besides, it is a privilege and pleasure to
       confide in my Little Dorrit. Let me confess then, that, forgetting how
       grave I was, and how old I was, and how the time for such things had
       gone by me with the many years of sameness and little happiness that
       made up my long life far away, without marking it--that, forgetting all
       this, I fancied I loved some one.'

       'Do I know her, sir?' asked Little Dorrit.

       'No, my child.'

       'Not the lady who has been kind to me for your sake?'

       'Flora. No, no. Do you think--'

       'I never quite thought so,' said Little Dorrit, more to herself than
       him. 'I did wonder at it a little.'

       'Well!' said Clennam, abiding by the feeling that had fallen on him in
       the avenue on the night of the roses, the feeling that he was an
       older man, who had done with that tender part of life, 'I found out my
       mistake, and I thought about it a little--in short, a good deal--and got
       wiser. Being wiser, I counted up my years and considered what I am, and
       looked back, and looked forward, and found that I should soon be grey. I
       found that I had climbed the hill, and passed the level ground upon the
       top, and was descending quickly.'

       If he had known the sharpness of the pain he caused the patient heart,
       in speaking thus! While doing it, too, with the purpose of easing and
       serving her.

       'I found that the day when any such thing would have been graceful in
       me, or good in me, or hopeful or happy for me or any one in connection
       with me, was gone, and would never shine again.'

       O! If he had known, if he had known! If he could have seen the dagger in
       his hand, and the cruel wounds it struck in the faithful bleeding breast
       of his Little Dorrit!

       'All that is over, and I have turned my face from it. Why do I speak of
       this to Little Dorrit? Why do I show you, my child, the space of years
       that there is between us, and recall to you that I have passed, by the
       amount of your whole life, the time that is present to you?'

       'Because you trust me, I hope. Because you know that nothing can touch
       you without touching me; that nothing can make you happy or unhappy, but
       it must make me, who am so grateful to you, the same.'

       He heard the thrill in her voice, he saw her earnest face, he saw her
       clear true eyes, he saw the quickened bosom that would have joyfully
       thrown itself before him to receive a mortal wound directed at his
       breast, with the dying cry, 'I love him!' and the remotest suspicion
       of the truth never dawned upon his mind. No. He saw the devoted little
       creature with her worn shoes, in her common dress, in her jail-home; a
       slender child in body, a strong heroine in soul; and the light of her
       domestic story made all else dark to him.

       'For those reasons assuredly, Little Dorrit, but for another too. So
       far removed, so different, and so much older, I am the better fitted for
       your friend and adviser. I mean, I am the more easily to be trusted;
       and any little constraint that you might feel with another, may vanish
       before me. Why have you kept so retired from me? Tell me.'

       'I am better here. My place and use are here. I am much better here,'
       said Little Dorrit, faintly.

       'So you said that day upon the bridge. I thought of it much afterwards.
       Have you no secret you could entrust to me, with hope and comfort, if
       you would!'

       'Secret? No, I have no secret,' said Little Dorrit in some trouble.

       They had been speaking in low voices; more because it was natural to
       what they said to adopt that tone, than with any care to reserve it from
       Maggy at her work. All of a sudden Maggy stared again, and this time
       spoke:

       'I say! Little Mother!'

       'Yes, Maggy.'

       'If you an't got no secret of your own to tell him, tell him that about
       the Princess. _She_ had a secret, you know.'

       'The Princess had a secret?' said Clennam, in some surprise. 'What
       Princess was that, Maggy?'

       'Lor! How you do go and bother a gal of ten,' said Maggy, 'catching the
       poor thing up in that way. Whoever said the Princess had a secret? _I_
       never said so.'

       'I beg your pardon. I thought you did.'

       'No, I didn't. How could I, when it was her as wanted to find it out? It
       was the little woman as had the secret, and she was always a spinning at
       her wheel. And so she says to her, why do you keep it there? And so the
       t'other one says to her, no I don't; and so the t'other one says to her,
       yes you do; and then they both goes to the cupboard, and there it is.
       And she wouldn't go into the Hospital, and so she died. _You_ know, Little
       Mother; tell him that. For it was a reg'lar good secret, that was!' cried
       Maggy, hugging herself.

       Arthur looked at Little Dorrit for help to comprehend this, and was
       struck by seeing her so timid and red. But, when she told him that it
       was only a Fairy Tale she had one day made up for Maggy, and that there
       was nothing in it which she wouldn't be ashamed to tell again to anybody
       else, even if she could remember it, he left the subject where it was.

       However, he returned to his own subject by first entreating her to see
       him oftener, and to remember that it was impossible to have a stronger
       interest in her welfare than he had, or to be more set upon promoting it
       than he was. When she answered fervently, she well knew that, she never
       forgot it, he touched upon his second and more delicate point--the
       suspicion he had formed.

       'Little Dorrit,' he said, taking her hand again, and speaking lower than
       he had spoken yet, so that even Maggy in the small room could not hear
       him, 'another word. I have wanted very much to say this to you; I have
       tried for opportunities. Don't mind me, who, for the matter of years,
       might be your father or your uncle. Always think of me as quite an
       old man. I know that all your devotion centres in this room, and
       that nothing to the last will ever tempt you away from the duties you
       discharge here. If I were not sure of it, I should, before now, have
       implored you, and implored your father, to let me make some provision
       for you in a more suitable place. But you may have an interest--I will
       not say, now, though even that might be--may have, at another time,
       an interest in some one else; an interest not incompatible with your
       affection here.'

       She was very, very pale, and silently shook her head.

       'It may be, dear Little Dorrit.'

       'No. No. No.' She shook her head, after each slow repetition of
       the word, with an air of quiet desolation that he remembered long
       afterwards. The time came when he remembered it well, long afterwards,
       within those prison walls; within that very room.

       'But, if it ever should be, tell me so, my dear child. Entrust the truth
       to me, point out the object of such an interest to me, and I will try
       with all the zeal, and honour, and friendship and respect that I feel
       for you, good Little Dorrit of my heart, to do you a lasting service.'

       'O thank you, thank you! But, O no, O no, O no!' She said this, looking
       at him with her work-worn hands folded together, and in the same
       resigned accents as before.

       'I press for no confidence now. I only ask you to repose unhesitating
       trust in me.'

       'Can I do less than that, when you are so good!'

       'Then you will trust me fully? Will have no secret unhappiness, or
       anxiety, concealed from me?'

       'Almost none.'

       'And you have none now?'

       She shook her head. But she was very pale.

       'When I lie down to-night, and my thoughts come back--as they will, for
       they do every night, even when I have not seen you--to this sad place, I
       may believe that there is no grief beyond this room, now, and its usual
       occupants, which preys on Little Dorrit's mind?'

       She seemed to catch at these words--that he remembered, too, long
       afterwards--and said, more brightly, 'Yes, Mr Clennam; yes, you may!'

       The crazy staircase, usually not slow to give notice when any one was
       coming up or down, here creaked under a quick tread, and a further sound
       was heard upon it, as if a little steam-engine with more steam than it
       knew what to do with, were working towards the room. As it approached,
       which it did very rapidly, it laboured with increased energy; and,
       after knocking at the door, it sounded as if it were stooping down and
       snorting in at the keyhole.

       Before Maggy could open the door, Mr Pancks, opening it from without,
       stood without a hat and with his bare head in the wildest condition,
       looking at Clennam and Little Dorrit, over her shoulder. He had a
       lighted cigar in his hand, and brought with him airs of ale and tobacco
       smoke.

       'Pancks the gipsy,' he observed out of breath, 'fortune-telling.'

       He stood dingily smiling, and breathing hard at them, with a most
       curious air; as if, instead of being his proprietor's grubber, he were
       the triumphant proprietor of the Marshalsea, the Marshal, all the
       turnkeys, and all the Collegians. In his great self-satisfaction he put
       his cigar to his lips (being evidently no smoker), and took such a pull
       at it, with his right eye shut up tight for the purpose, that he
       underwent a convulsion of shuddering and choking. But even in the midst
       of that paroxysm, he still essayed to repeat his favourite introduction
       of himself, 'Pa-ancks the gi-ipsy, fortune-telling.'

       'I am spending the evening with the rest of 'em,' said Pancks. 'I've
       been singing. I've been taking a part in White sand and grey sand.
       _I_ don't know anything about it. Never mind. I'll take any part in
       anything. It's all the same, if you're loud enough.'

       At first Clennam supposed him to be intoxicated. But he soon perceived
       that though he might be a little the worse (or better) for ale, the
       staple of his excitement was not brewed from malt, or distilled from any
       grain or berry.

       'How d'ye do, Miss Dorrit?' said Pancks. 'I thought you wouldn't mind my
       running round, and looking in for a moment. Mr Clennam I heard was here,
       from Mr Dorrit. How are you, Sir?'

       Clennam thanked him, and said he was glad to see him so gay.

       'Gay!' said Pancks. 'I'm in wonderful feather, sir. I can't stop a
       minute, or I shall be missed, and I don't want 'em to miss me.--Eh, Miss
       Dorrit?'

       He seemed to have an insatiate delight in appealing to her and looking
       at her; excitedly sticking his hair up at the same moment, like a dark
       species of cockatoo.

       'I haven't been here half an hour. I knew Mr Dorrit was in the chair,
       and I said, "I'll go and support him!" I ought to be down in Bleeding
       Heart Yard by rights; but I can worry them to-morrow.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

       His little black eyes sparkled electrically. His very hair seemed to
       sparkle as he roughened it. He was in that highly-charged state that one
       might have expected to draw sparks and snaps from him by presenting a
       knuckle to any part of his figure.

       'Capital company here,' said Pancks.--'Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

       She was half afraid of him, and irresolute what to say. He laughed, with
       a nod towards Clennam.

       'Don't mind him, Miss Dorrit. He's one of us. We agreed that you
       shouldn't take on to mind me before people, but we didn't mean Mr
       Clennam. He's one of us. He's in it. An't you, Mr Clennam?--Eh, Miss
       Dorrit?'

       The excitement of this strange creature was fast communicating itself to
       Clennam. Little Dorrit with amazement, saw this, and observed that they
       exchanged quick looks.

       'I was making a remark,' said Pancks, 'but I declare I forget what
       it was. Oh, I know! Capital company here. I've been treating 'em all
       round.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

       'Very generous of you,' she returned, noticing another of the quick
       looks between the two.

       'Not at all,' said Pancks. 'Don't mention it. I'm coming into my
       property, that's the fact. I can afford to be liberal. I think I'll give
       'em a treat here. Tables laid in the yard. Bread in stacks. Pipes in
       faggots. Tobacco in hayloads. Roast beef and plum-pudding for every one.
       Quart of double stout a head. Pint of wine too, if they like it, and the
       authorities give permission.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

       She was thrown into such a confusion by his manner, or rather by
       Clennam's growing understanding of his manner (for she looked to him
               after every fresh appeal and cockatoo demonstration on the part of Mr
               Pancks), that she only moved her lips in answer, without forming any
       word.

       'And oh, by-the-bye!' said Pancks, 'you were to live to know what was
       behind us on that little hand of yours. And so you shall, you shall, my
       darling.--Eh, Miss Dorrit?'

       He had suddenly checked himself. Where he got all the additional black
       prongs from, that now flew up all over his head like the myriads of
       points that break out in the large change of a great firework, was a
       wonderful mystery.

       'But I shall be missed;' he came back to that; 'and I don't want 'em to
       miss me. Mr Clennam, you and I made a bargain. I said you should find me
       stick to it. You shall find me stick to it now, sir, if you'll step out
       of the room a moment. Miss Dorrit, I wish you good night. Miss Dorrit, I
       wish you good fortune.'

       He rapidly shook her by both hands, and puffed down stairs. Arthur
       followed him with such a hurried step, that he had very nearly tumbled
       over him on the last landing, and rolled him down into the yard.

       'What is it, for Heaven's sake!' Arthur demanded, when they burst out
       there both together.

       'Stop a moment, sir. Mr Rugg. Let me introduce him.'

       With those words he presented another man without a hat, and also with a
       cigar, and also surrounded with a halo of ale and tobacco smoke, which
       man, though not so excited as himself, was in a state which would have
       been akin to lunacy but for its fading into sober method when compared
       with the rampancy of Mr Pancks.

       'Mr Clennam, Mr Rugg,' said Pancks. 'Stop a moment. Come to the pump.'

       They adjourned to the pump. Mr Pancks, instantly putting his head under
       the spout, requested Mr Rugg to take a good strong turn at the handle.
       Mr Rugg complying to the letter, Mr Pancks came forth snorting and
       blowing to some purpose, and dried himself on his handkerchief.

       'I am the clearer for that,' he gasped to Clennam standing astonished.
       'But upon my soul, to hear her father making speeches in that chair,
       knowing what we know, and to see her up in that room in that dress,
       knowing what we know, is enough to--give me a back, Mr Rugg--a little
       higher, sir,--that'll do!'

       Then and there, on that Marshalsea pavement, in the shades of evening,
       did Mr Pancks, of all mankind, fly over the head and shoulders of Mr
       Rugg of Pentonville, General Agent, Accountant, and Recoverer of Debts.
       Alighting on his feet, he took Clennam by the button-hole, led him
       behind the pump, and pantingly produced from his pocket a bundle of
       papers.

       Mr Rugg, also, pantingly produced from his pocket a bundle of papers.

       'Stay!' said Clennam in a whisper.'You have made a discovery.'

       Mr Pancks answered, with an unction which there is no language to
       convey, 'We rather think so.'

       'Does it implicate any one?'

       'How implicate, sir?'

       'In any suppression or wrong dealing of any kind?'

       'Not a bit of it.'

       'Thank God!' said Clennam to himself. 'Now show me.'

       'You are to understand'--snorted Pancks, feverishly unfolding papers,
       and speaking in short high-pressure blasts of sentences, 'Where's the
       Pedigree? Where's Schedule number four, Mr Rugg? Oh! all right! Here we
       are.--You are to understand that we are this very day virtually
       complete. We shan't be legally for a day or two. Call it at the outside
       a week. We've been at it night and day for I don't know how long. Mr
       Rugg, you know how long? Never mind. Don't say. You'll only confuse me.
       You shall tell her, Mr Clennam. Not till we give you leave. Where's that
       rough total, Mr Rugg? Oh! Here we are! There sir! That's what you'll
       have to break to her. That man's your Father of the Marshalsea!'




Resigning herself to inevitable fate by making the best of those people,
          the Miggleses, and submitting her philosophy to the draught upon it, of
          which she had foreseen the likelihood in her interview with Arthur,
          Mrs Gowan handsomely resolved not to oppose her son's marriage. In her
          progress to, and happy arrival at, this resolution, she was possibly
          influenced, not only by her maternal affections but by three politic
          considerations.

          Of these, the first may have been that her son had never signified the
          smallest intention to ask her consent, or any mistrust of his ability
          to dispense with it; the second, that the pension bestowed upon her by a
          grateful country (and a Barnacle) would be freed from any little filial
          inroads, when her Henry should be married to the darling only child of
          a man in very easy circumstances; the third, that Henry's debts must
          clearly be paid down upon the altar-railing by his father-in-law. When,
          to these three-fold points of prudence there is added the fact that
          Mrs Gowan yielded her consent the moment she knew of Mr Meagles having
          yielded his, and that Mr Meagles's objection to the marriage had
          been the sole obstacle in its way all along, it becomes the height of
          probability that the relict of the deceased Commissioner of nothing
          particular, turned these ideas in her sagacious mind.

          Among her connections and acquaintances, however, she maintained her
          individual dignity and the dignity of the blood of the Barnacles, by
          diligently nursing the pretence that it was a most unfortunate business;
          that she was sadly cut up by it; that this was a perfect fascination
          under which Henry laboured; that she had opposed it for a long time,
          but what could a mother do; and the like. She had already called Arthur
          Clennam to bear witness to this fable, as a friend of the Meagles
          family; and she followed up the move by now impounding the family itself
          for the same purpose. In the first interview she accorded to Mr Meagles,
          she slided herself into the position of disconsolately but gracefully
          yielding to irresistible pressure. With the utmost politeness and
          good-breeding, she feigned that it was she--not he--who had made the
          difficulty, and who at length gave way; and that the sacrifice was
          hers--not his. The same feint, with the same polite dexterity, she
          foisted on Mrs Meagles, as a conjuror might have forced a card on that
          innocent lady; and, when her future daughter-in-law was presented to her
          by her son, she said on embracing her, 'My dear, what have you done to
          Henry that has bewitched him so!' at the same time allowing a few tears
          to carry before them, in little pills, the cosmetic powder on her nose;
          as a delicate but touching signal that she suffered much inwardly for
          the show of composure with which she bore her misfortune.

          Among the friends of Mrs Gowan (who piqued herself at once on being
                  Society, and on maintaining intimate and easy relations with that
                  Power), Mrs Merdle occupied a front row. True, the Hampton Court
          Bohemians, without exception, turned up their noses at Merdle as an
          upstart; but they turned them down again, by falling flat on their faces
          to worship his wealth. In which compensating adjustment of their noses,
          they were pretty much like Treasury, Bar, and Bishop, and all the rest
          of them.

          To Mrs Merdle, Mrs Gowan repaired on a visit of self-condolence, after
          having given the gracious consent aforesaid. She drove into town for the
          purpose in a one-horse carriage irreverently called at that period of
          English history, a pill-box. It belonged to a job-master in a small way,
          who drove it himself, and who jobbed it by the day, or hour, to most of
          the old ladies in Hampton Court Palace; but it was a point of ceremony,
          in that encampment, that the whole equipage should be tacitly regarded
          as the private property of the jobber for the time being, and that the
          job-master should betray personal knowledge of nobody but the jobber
          in possession. So the Circumlocution Barnacles, who were the largest
          job-masters in the universe, always pretended to know of no other job
          but the job immediately in hand.

          Mrs Merdle was at home, and was in her nest of crimson and gold, with
          the parrot on a neighbouring stem watching her with his head on one
          side, as if he took her for another splendid parrot of a larger species.
          To whom entered Mrs Gowan, with her favourite green fan, which softened
          the light on the spots of bloom.

          'My dear soul,' said Mrs Gowan, tapping the back of her friend's hand
          with this fan after a little indifferent conversation, 'you are my only
          comfort. That affair of Henry's that I told you of, is to take place.
          Now, how does it strike you? I am dying to know, because you represent
          and express Society so well.'

          Mrs Merdle reviewed the bosom which Society was accustomed to review;
          and having ascertained that show-window of Mr Merdle's and the London
          jewellers' to be in good order, replied:

          'As to marriage on the part of a man, my dear, Society requires that
          he should retrieve his fortunes by marriage. Society requires that
          he should gain by marriage. Society requires that he should found a
          handsome establishment by marriage. Society does not see, otherwise,
          what he has to do with marriage. Bird, be quiet!'

          For the parrot on his cage above them, presiding over the conference as
          if he were a judge (and indeed he looked rather like one), had wound up
          the exposition with a shriek.

          'Cases there are,' said Mrs Merdle, delicately crooking the little
          finger of her favourite hand, and making her remarks neater by that neat
          action; 'cases there are where a man is not young or elegant, and is
          rich, and has a handsome establishment already. Those are of a different
          kind. In such cases--'

          Mrs Merdle shrugged her snowy shoulders and put her hand upon the
          jewel-stand, checking a little cough, as though to add, 'why, a man
          looks out for this sort of thing, my dear.' Then the parrot shrieked
          again, and she put up her glass to look at him, and said, 'Bird! Do be
          quiet!'

          'But, young men,' resumed Mrs Merdle, 'and by young men you know
          what I mean, my love--I mean people's sons who have the world before
          them--they must place themselves in a better position towards Society by
          marriage, or Society really will not have any patience with their making
          fools of themselves. Dreadfully worldly all this sounds,' said Mrs
          Merdle, leaning back in her nest and putting up her glass again, 'does
          it not?'

          'But it is true,' said Mrs Gowan, with a highly moral air.

          'My dear, it is not to be disputed for a moment,' returned Mrs Merdle;
          'because Society has made up its mind on the subject, and there is
          nothing more to be said. If we were in a more primitive state, if we
          lived under roofs of leaves, and kept cows and sheep and creatures
          instead of banker's accounts (which would be delicious; my dear, I am
                  pastoral to a degree, by nature), well and good. But we don't live
          under leaves, and keep cows and sheep and creatures. I perfectly exhaust
          myself sometimes, in pointing out the distinction to Edmund Sparkler.'

          Mrs Gowan, looking over her green fan when this young gentleman's name
          was mentioned, replied as follows:

          'My love, you know the wretched state of the country--those unfortunate
          concessions of John Barnacle's!--and you therefore know the reasons for
          my being as poor as Thingummy.'

          'A church mouse?' Mrs Merdle suggested with a smile.

          'I was thinking of the other proverbial church person--Job,' said Mrs
          Gowan. 'Either will do. It would be idle to disguise, consequently, that
          there is a wide difference between the position of your son and mine. I
          may add, too, that Henry has talent--'

          'Which Edmund certainly has not,' said Mrs Merdle, with the greatest
          suavity.

          '--and that his talent, combined with disappointment,' Mrs Gowan went
          on, 'has led him into a pursuit which--ah dear me! You know, my dear.
          Such being Henry's different position, the question is what is the most
          inferior class of marriage to which I can reconcile myself.'

          Mrs Merdle was so much engaged with the contemplation of her arms
          (beautiful-formed arms, and the very thing for bracelets), that she
          omitted to reply for a while. Roused at length by the silence, she
          folded the arms, and with admirable presence of mind looked her friend
          full in the face, and said interrogatively, 'Ye-es? And then?'

          'And then, my dear,' said Mrs Gowan not quite so sweetly as before, 'I
          should be glad to hear what you have to say to it.'

          Here the parrot, who had been standing on one leg since he screamed
          last, burst into a fit of laughter, bobbed himself derisively up and
          down on both legs, and finished by standing on one leg again, and
          pausing for a reply, with his head as much awry as he could possibly
          twist it.

          'Sounds mercenary to ask what the gentleman is to get with the lady,'
          said Mrs Merdle; 'but Society is perhaps a little mercenary, you know,
          my dear.'

          'From what I can make out,' said Mrs Gowan, 'I believe I may say that
          Henry will be relieved from debt--'

          'Much in debt?' asked Mrs Merdle through her eyeglass.

          'Why tolerably, I should think,' said Mrs Gowan.

          'Meaning the usual thing; I understand; just so,' Mrs Merdle observed in
          a comfortable sort of way.

          'And that the father will make them an allowance of three hundred
          a-year, or perhaps altogether something more, which, in Italy-'

          'Oh! Going to Italy?' said Mrs Merdle.

          'For Henry to study. You need be at no loss to guess why, my dear.
          That dreadful Art--'

          True. Mrs Merdle hastened to spare the feelings of her afflicted friend.
          She understood. Say no more!

          'And that,' said Mrs Gowan, shaking her despondent head, 'that's all.
          That,' repeated Mrs Gowan, furling her green fan for the moment, and
          tapping her chin with it (it was on the way to being a double chin;
                  might be called a chin and a half at present), 'that's all! On the death
          of the old people, I suppose there will be more to come; but how it may
          be restricted or locked up, I don't know. And as to that, they may live
          for ever. My dear, they are just the kind of people to do it.'

          Now, Mrs Merdle, who really knew her friend Society pretty well, and who
          knew what Society's mothers were, and what Society's daughters were, and
          what Society's matrimonial market was, and how prices ruled in it, and
          what scheming and counter-scheming took place for the high buyers, and
          what bargaining and huckstering went on, thought in the depths of
          her capacious bosom that this was a sufficiently good catch. Knowing,
          however, what was expected of her, and perceiving the exact nature of
          the fiction to be nursed, she took it delicately in her arms, and put
          her required contribution of gloss upon it.

          'And that is all, my dear?' said she, heaving a friendly sigh. 'Well,
          well! The fault is not yours. You have nothing to reproach yourself
          with. You must exercise the strength of mind for which you are renowned,
          and make the best of it.'

          'The girl's family have made,' said Mrs Gowan, 'of course, the most
          strenuous endeavours to--as the lawyers say--to have and to hold Henry.'

          'Of course they have, my dear,' said Mrs Merdle.

          'I have persisted in every possible objection, and have worried
          myself morning, noon, and night, for means to detach Henry from the
          connection.'

          'No doubt you have, my dear,' said Mrs Merdle.

          'And all of no use. All has broken down beneath me. Now tell me, my
          love. Am I justified in at last yielding my most reluctant consent to
          Henry's marrying among people not in Society; or, have I acted with
          inexcusable weakness?'

          In answer to this direct appeal, Mrs Merdle assured Mrs Gowan (speaking
                  as a Priestess of Society) that she was highly to be commended, that
          she was much to be sympathised with, that she had taken the highest of
          parts, and had come out of the furnace refined. And Mrs Gowan, who of
          course saw through her own threadbare blind perfectly, and who knew that
          Mrs Merdle saw through it perfectly, and who knew that Society would see
          through it perfectly, came out of this form, notwithstanding, as she had
          gone into it, with immense complacency and gravity.

          The conference was held at four or five o'clock in the afternoon, when
          all the region of Harley Street, Cavendish Square, was resonant of
          carriage-wheels and double-knocks. It had reached this point when Mr
          Merdle came home from his daily occupation of causing the British
          name to be more and more respected in all parts of the civilised globe
          capable of the appreciation of world-wide commercial enterprise and
          gigantic combinations of skill and capital. For, though nobody knew with
          the least precision what Mr Merdle's business was, except that it was
          to coin money, these were the terms in which everybody defined it on all
          ceremonious occasions, and which it was the last new polite reading of
          the parable of the camel and the needle's eye to accept without inquiry.

          For a gentleman who had this splendid work cut out for him, Mr Merdle
          looked a little common, and rather as if, in the course of his vast
          transactions, he had accidentally made an interchange of heads with
          some inferior spirit. He presented himself before the two ladies in the
          course of a dismal stroll through his mansion, which had no apparent
          object but escape from the presence of the chief butler.

          'I beg your pardon,' he said, stopping short in confusion; 'I didn't
          know there was anybody here but the parrot.'

          However, as Mrs Merdle said, 'You can come in!' and as Mrs Gowan said
          she was just going, and had already risen to take her leave, he came in,
          and stood looking out at a distant window, with his hands crossed under
          his uneasy coat-cuffs, clasping his wrists as if he were taking himself
          into custody. In this attitude he fell directly into a reverie from
          which he was only aroused by his wife's calling to him from her ottoman,
          when they had been for some quarter of an hour alone.

          'Eh? Yes?' said Mr Merdle, turning towards her. 'What is it?'

          'What is it?' repeated Mrs Merdle. 'It is, I suppose, that you have not
          heard a word of my complaint.'

          'Your complaint, Mrs Merdle?' said Mr Merdle. 'I didn't know that you
          were suffering from a complaint. What complaint?'

          'A complaint of you,' said Mrs Merdle.

          'Oh! A complaint of me,' said Mr Merdle. 'What is the--what have I--what
          may you have to complain of in me, Mrs Merdle?'

          In his withdrawing, abstracted, pondering way, it took him some time to
          shape this question. As a kind of faint attempt to convince himself
          that he was the master of the house, he concluded by presenting his
          forefinger to the parrot, who expressed his opinion on that subject by
          instantly driving his bill into it.

          'You were saying, Mrs Merdle,' said Mr Merdle, with his wounded finger
          in his mouth, 'that you had a complaint against me?'

          'A complaint which I could scarcely show the justice of more
          emphatically, than by having to repeat it,' said Mrs Merdle. 'I might as
          well have stated it to the wall. I had far better have stated it to the
          bird. He would at least have screamed.'

          'You don't want me to scream, Mrs Merdle, I suppose,' said Mr Merdle,
          taking a chair.

          'Indeed I don't know,' retorted Mrs Merdle, 'but that you had better do
          that, than be so moody and distraught. One would at least know that you
          were sensible of what was going on around you.'

          'A man might scream, and yet not be that, Mrs Merdle,' said Mr Merdle,
          heavily.

          'And might be dogged, as you are at present, without screaming,'
          returned Mrs Merdle. 'That's very true. If you wish to know the
          complaint I make against you, it is, in so many plain words, that you
          really ought not to go into Society unless you can accommodate yourself
          to Society.'

          Mr Merdle, so twisting his hands into what hair he had upon his head
          that he seemed to lift himself up by it as he started out of his chair,
          cried:

          'Why, in the name of all the infernal powers, Mrs Merdle, who
          does more for Society than I do? Do you see these premises, Mrs Merdle?
          Do you see this furniture, Mrs Merdle? Do you look in the glass and see
          yourself, Mrs Merdle? Do you know the cost of all this, and who it's
          all provided for? And yet will you tell me that I oughtn't to go into
          Society? I, who shower money upon it in this way? I, who might always be
          said--to--to--to harness myself to a watering-cart full of money, and go
          about saturating Society every day of my life.'

          'Pray, don't be violent, Mr Merdle,' said Mrs Merdle.

          'Violent?' said Mr Merdle. 'You are enough to make me desperate. You
          don't know half of what I do to accommodate Society. You don't know
          anything of the sacrifices I make for it.'

          'I know,' returned Mrs Merdle, 'that you receive the best in the land. I
          know that you move in the whole Society of the country. And I believe
          I know (indeed, not to make any ridiculous pretence about it, I know I
                  know) who sustains you in it, Mr Merdle.'

          'Mrs Merdle,' retorted that gentleman, wiping his dull red and yellow
          face, 'I know that as well as you do. If you were not an ornament to
          Society, and if I was not a benefactor to Society, you and I would never
          have come together. When I say a benefactor to it, I mean a person who
          provides it with all sorts of expensive things to eat and drink and look
          at. But, to tell me that I am not fit for it after all I have done
          for it--after all I have done for it,' repeated Mr Merdle, with a wild
          emphasis that made his wife lift up her eyelids, 'after all--all!--to
          tell me I have no right to mix with it after all, is a pretty reward.'

          'I say,' answered Mrs Merdle composedly, 'that you ought to make
          yourself fit for it by being more degage, and less preoccupied. There is
          a positive vulgarity in carrying your business affairs about with you as
          you do.'

          'How do I carry them about, Mrs Merdle?' asked Mr Merdle.

          'How do you carry them about?' said Mrs Merdle. 'Look at yourself in the
          glass.'

          Mr Merdle involuntarily turned his eyes in the direction of the nearest
          mirror, and asked, with a slow determination of his turbid blood to his
          temples, whether a man was to be called to account for his digestion?

          'You have a physician,' said Mrs Merdle.

          'He does me no good,' said Mr Merdle.

          Mrs Merdle changed her ground.

          'Besides,' said she, 'your digestion is nonsense. I don't speak of your
          digestion. I speak of your manner.'

          'Mrs Merdle,' returned her husband, 'I look to you for that. You supply
          manner, and I supply money.'

          'I don't expect you,' said Mrs Merdle, reposing easily among her
          cushions, 'to captivate people. I don't want you to take any trouble
          upon yourself, or to try to be fascinating. I simply request you to care
          about nothing--or seem to care about nothing--as everybody else does.'

          'Do I ever say I care about anything?' asked Mr Merdle.

          'Say? No! Nobody would attend to you if you did. But you show it.'

          'Show what? What do I show?' demanded Mr Merdle hurriedly.

          'I have already told you. You show that you carry your business cares
          an projects about, instead of leaving them in the City, or wherever else
          they belong to,' said Mrs Merdle. 'Or seeming to. Seeming would be quite
          enough: I ask no more. Whereas you couldn't be more occupied with your
          day's calculations and combinations than you habitually show yourself to
          be, if you were a carpenter.'

          'A carpenter!' repeated Mr Merdle, checking something like a groan.
          'I shouldn't so much mind being a carpenter, Mrs Merdle.'

          'And my complaint is,' pursued the lady, disregarding the low remark,
          'that it is not the tone of Society, and that you ought to correct
          it, Mr Merdle. If you have any doubt of my judgment, ask even Edmund
          Sparkler.' The door of the room had opened, and Mrs Merdle now surveyed
          the head of her son through her glass. 'Edmund; we want you here.'

          Mr Sparkler, who had merely put in his head and looked round the room
          without entering (as if he were searching the house for that young lady
                  with no nonsense about her), upon this followed up his head with his
          body, and stood before them. To whom, in a few easy words adapted to his
          capacity, Mrs Merdle stated the question at issue.

          The young gentleman, after anxiously feeling his shirt-collar as if it
          were his pulse and he were hypochondriacal, observed, 'That he had heard
          it noticed by fellers.'

          'Edmund Sparkler has heard it noticed,' said Mrs Merdle, with languid
          triumph. 'Why, no doubt everybody has heard it noticed!' Which in truth
          was no unreasonable inference; seeing that Mr Sparkler would probably be
          the last person, in any assemblage of the human species, to receive an
          impression from anything that passed in his presence.

          'And Edmund Sparkler will tell you, I dare say,' said Mrs Merdle, waving
          her favourite hand towards her husband, 'how he has heard it noticed.'

          'I couldn't,' said Mr Sparkler, after feeling his pulse as before,
          'couldn't undertake to say what led to it--'cause memory desperate
          loose. But being in company with the brother of a doosed fine gal--well
          educated too--with no biggodd nonsense about her--at the period alluded
          to--'

          'There! Never mind the sister,' remarked Mrs Merdle, a little
          impatiently. 'What did the brother say?'

          'Didn't say a word, ma'am,' answered Mr Sparkler. 'As silent a feller as
          myself. Equally hard up for a remark.'

          'Somebody said something,' returned Mrs Merdle. 'Never mind who it was.'

          ('Assure you I don't in the least,' said Mr Sparkler.)

          'But tell us what it was.'

          Mr Sparkler referred to his pulse again, and put himself through some
          severe mental discipline before he replied:

          'Fellers referring to my Governor--expression not my own--occasionally
          compliment my Governor in a very handsome way on being immensely rich
          and knowing--perfect phenomenon of Buyer and Banker and that--but say
          the Shop sits heavily on him. Say he carried the Shop about, on his back
          rather--like Jew clothesmen with too much business.'

          'Which,' said Mrs Merdle, rising, with her floating drapery about her,
          'is exactly my complaint. Edmund, give me your arm up-stairs.'

          Mr Merdle, left alone to meditate on a better conformation of himself to
          Society, looked out of nine windows in succession, and appeared to
          see nine wastes of space. When he had thus entertained himself he went
          down-stairs, and looked intently at all the carpets on the ground-floor;
          and then came up-stairs again, and looked intently at all the carpets
          on the first-floor; as if they were gloomy depths, in unison with his
          oppressed soul. Through all the rooms he wandered, as he always did,
          like the last person on earth who had any business to approach them. Let
          Mrs Merdle announce, with all her might, that she was at Home ever
          so many nights in a season, she could not announce more widely and
          unmistakably than Mr Merdle did that he was never at home.

          At last he met the chief butler, the sight of which splendid retainer
          always finished him. Extinguished by this great creature, he sneaked
          to his dressing-room, and there remained shut up until he rode out to
          dinner, with Mrs Merdle, in her own handsome chariot. At dinner, he was
          envied and flattered as a being of might, was Treasuried, Barred, and
          Bishoped, as much as he would; and an hour after midnight came home
          alone, and being instantly put out again in his own hall, like a
          rushlight, by the chief butler, went sighing to bed.




Mr Henry Gowan and the dog were established frequenters of the cottage,
   and the day was fixed for the wedding. There was to be a convocation of
   Barnacles on the occasion, in order that that very high and very large
   family might shed as much lustre on the marriage as so dim an event was
   capable of receiving.

   To have got the whole Barnacle family together would have been
   impossible for two reasons. Firstly, because no building could have held
   all the members and connections of that illustrious house. Secondly,
   because wherever there was a square yard of ground in British occupation
   under the sun or moon, with a public post upon it, sticking to that post
   was a Barnacle. No intrepid navigator could plant a flag-staff upon any
   spot of earth, and take possession of it in the British name, but
   to that spot of earth, so soon as the discovery was known, the
   Circumlocution Office sent out a Barnacle and a despatch-box. Thus the
   Barnacles were all over the world, in every direction--despatch-boxing
   the compass.

   But, while the so-potent art of Prospero himself would have failed in
   summoning the Barnacles from every speck of ocean and dry land on
   which there was nothing (except mischief) to be done and anything to be
   pocketed, it was perfectly feasible to assemble a good many Barnacles.
   This Mrs Gowan applied herself to do; calling on Mr Meagles frequently
    with new additions to the list, and holding conferences with that
gentleman when he was not engaged (as he generally was at this period)
    in examining and paying the debts of his future son-in-law, in the
    apartment of scales and scoop.

    One marriage guest there was, in reference to whose presence Mr Meagles
    felt a nearer interest and concern than in the attendance of the most
    elevated Barnacle expected; though he was far from insensible of the
    honour of having such company. This guest was Clennam. But Clennam had
    made a promise he held sacred, among the trees that summer night, and,
    in the chivalry of his heart, regarded it as binding him to many implied
    obligations. In forgetfulness of himself, and delicate service to her on
    all occasions, he was never to fail; to begin it, he answered Mr Meagles
    cheerfully, 'I shall come, of course.'

    His partner, Daniel Doyce, was something of a stumbling-block in Mr
    Meagles's way, the worthy gentleman being not at all clear in his own
    anxious mind but that the mingling of Daniel with official Barnacleism
    might produce some explosive combination, even at a marriage breakfast.
    The national offender, however, lightened him of his uneasiness by
    coming down to Twickenham to represent that he begged, with the freedom
    of an old friend, and as a favour to one, that he might not be invited.
    'For,' said he, 'as my business with this set of gentlemen was to do a
    public duty and a public service, and as their business with me was to
    prevent it by wearing my soul out, I think we had better not eat and
    drink together with a show of being of one mind.' Mr Meagles was much
    amused by his friend's oddity; and patronised him with a more protecting
    air of allowance than usual, when he rejoined: 'Well, well, Dan, you
    shall have your own crotchety way.'

    To Mr Henry Gowan, as the time approached, Clennam tried to convey
    by all quiet and unpretending means, that he was frankly and
    disinterestedly desirous of tendering him any friendship he would
    accept. Mr Gowan treated him in return with his usual ease, and with his
    usual show of confidence, which was no confidence at all.

    'You see, Clennam,' he happened to remark in the course of conversation
    one day, when they were walking near the Cottage within a week of the
    marriage, 'I am a disappointed man. That you know already.'

    'Upon my word,' said Clennam, a little embarrassed, 'I scarcely know
    how.'

    'Why,' returned Gowan, 'I belong to a clan, or a clique, or a family, or
    a connection, or whatever you like to call it, that might have provided
    for me in any one of fifty ways, and that took it into its head not to
    do it at all. So here I am, a poor devil of an artist.'

    Clennam was beginning, 'But on the other hand--' when Gowan took him up.

    'Yes, yes, I know. I have the good fortune of being beloved by a
    beautiful and charming girl whom I love with all my heart.'

    ('Is there much of it?' Clennam thought. And as he thought it, felt
     ashamed of himself.)

    'And of finding a father-in-law who is a capital fellow and a liberal
    good old boy. Still, I had other prospects washed and combed into my
    childish head when it was washed and combed for me, and I took them to
    a public school when I washed and combed it for myself, and I am here
    without them, and thus I am a disappointed man.'

    Clennam thought (and as he thought it, again felt ashamed of himself),
    was this notion of being disappointed in life, an assertion of station
    which the bridegroom brought into the family as his property, having
    already carried it detrimentally into his pursuit? And was it a hopeful
    or a promising thing anywhere?

    'Not bitterly disappointed, I think,' he said aloud.

    'Hang it, no; not bitterly,' laughed Gowan. 'My people are not worth
    that--though they are charming fellows, and I have the greatest
    affection for them. Besides, it's pleasant to show them that I can do
    without them, and that they may all go to the Devil. And besides, again,
    most men are disappointed in life, somehow or other, and influenced by
    their disappointment. But it's a dear good world, and I love it!'

    'It lies fair before you now,' said Arthur.

    'Fair as this summer river,' cried the other, with enthusiasm, 'and by
    Jove I glow with admiration of it, and with ardour to run a race in it.
    It's the best of old worlds! And my calling! The best of old callings,
    isn't it?'

    'Full of interest and ambition, I conceive,' said Clennam.

    'And imposition,' added Gowan, laughing; 'we won't leave out the
    imposition. I hope I may not break down in that; but there, my being
    a disappointed man may show itself. I may not be able to face it out
    gravely enough. Between you and me, I think there is some danger of my
    being just enough soured not to be able to do that.'

    'To do what?' asked Clennam.

    'To keep it up. To help myself in my turn, as the man before me helps
    himself in his, and pass the bottle of smoke. To keep up the pretence
    as to labour, and study, and patience, and being devoted to my art, and
    giving up many solitary days to it, and abandoning many pleasures for
    it, and living in it, and all the rest of it--in short, to pass the
    bottle of smoke according to rule.'

    'But it is well for a man to respect his own vocation, whatever it is;
    and to think himself bound to uphold it, and to claim for it the respect
    it deserves; is it not?' Arthur reasoned. 'And your vocation, Gowan,
    may really demand this suit and service. I confess I should have thought
    that all Art did.'

    'What a good fellow you are, Clennam!' exclaimed the other, stopping
    to look at him, as if with irrepressible admiration. 'What a capital
    fellow! _You_ have never been disappointed. That's easy to see.'

    It would have been so cruel if he had meant it, that Clennam firmly
    resolved to believe he did not mean it. Gowan, without pausing, laid his
    hand upon his shoulder, and laughingly and lightly went on:

    'Clennam, I don't like to dispel your generous visions, and I would give
    any money (if I had any), to live in such a rose-coloured mist. But what
    I do in my trade, I do to sell. What all we fellows do, we do to
    sell. If we didn't want to sell it for the most we can get for it, we
    shouldn't do it. Being work, it has to be done; but it's easily enough
    done. All the rest is hocus-pocus. Now here's one of the advantages, or
    disadvantages, of knowing a disappointed man. You hear the truth.'

    Whatever he had heard, and whether it deserved that name or another, it
    sank into Clennam's mind. It so took root there, that he began to fear
    Henry Gowan would always be a trouble to him, and that so far he had
    gained little or nothing from the dismissal of Nobody, with all his
    inconsistencies, anxieties, and contradictions. He found a contest still
    always going on in his breast between his promise to keep Gowan in
    none but good aspects before the mind of Mr Meagles, and his enforced
    observation of Gowan in aspects that had no good in them. Nor could he
    quite support his own conscientious nature against misgivings that he
    distorted and discoloured himself, by reminding himself that he never
    sought those discoveries, and that he would have avoided them with
    willingness and great relief. For he never could forget what he had
    been; and he knew that he had once disliked Gowan for no better reason
    than that he had come in his way.

    Harassed by these thoughts, he now began to wish the marriage over,
    Gowan and his young wife gone, and himself left to fulfil his promise,
    and discharge the generous function he had accepted. This last week was,
    in truth, an uneasy interval for the whole house. Before Pet, or before
    Gowan, Mr Meagles was radiant; but Clennam had more than once found him
    alone, with his view of the scales and scoop much blurred, and had often
    seen him look after the lovers, in the garden or elsewhere when he was
    not seen by them, with the old clouded face on which Gowan had fallen
    like a shadow. In the arrangement of the house for the great occasion,
    many little reminders of the old travels of the father and mother
    and daughter had to be disturbed and passed from hand to hand; and
    sometimes, in the midst of these mute witnesses, to the life they had
    had together, even Pet herself would yield to lamenting and weeping.
    Mrs Meagles, the blithest and busiest of mothers, went about singing
    and cheering everybody; but she, honest soul, had her flights into store
    rooms, where she would cry until her eyes were red, and would then
    come out, attributing that appearance to pickled onions and pepper, and
    singing clearer than ever. Mrs Tickit, finding no balsam for a wounded
    mind in Buchan's Domestic Medicine, suffered greatly from low spirits,
    and from moving recollections of Minnie's infancy. When the latter was
    powerful with her, she usually sent up secret messages importing
    that she was not in parlour condition as to her attire, and that she
    solicited a sight of 'her child' in the kitchen; there, she would bless
    her child's face, and bless her child's heart, and hug her child, in a
    medley of tears and congratulations, chopping-boards, rolling-pins, and
    pie-crust, with the tenderness of an old attached servant, which is a
    very pretty tenderness indeed.

    But all days come that are to be; and the marriage-day was to be, and it
    came; and with it came all the Barnacles who were bidden to the feast.

    There was Mr Tite Barnacle, from the Circumlocution Office, and Mews
    Street, Grosvenor Square, with the expensive Mrs Tite Barnacle _nee_
    Stiltstalking, who made the Quarter Days so long in coming, and the
    three expensive Miss Tite Barnacles, double-loaded with accomplishments
    and ready to go off, and yet not going off with the sharpness of flash
    and bang that might have been expected, but rather hanging fire. There
    was Barnacle junior, also from the Circumlocution Office, leaving the
    Tonnage of the country, which he was somehow supposed to take under
    his protection, to look after itself, and, sooth to say, not at all
    impairing the efficiency of its protection by leaving it alone. There
    was the engaging Young Barnacle, deriving from the sprightly side of the
    family, also from the Circumlocution Office, gaily and agreeably helping
    the occasion along, and treating it, in his sparkling way, as one of the
    official forms and fees of the Church Department of How not to do it.
    There were three other Young Barnacles from three other offices, insipid
    to all the senses, and terribly in want of seasoning, doing the marriage
    as they would have 'done' the Nile, Old Rome, the new singer, or
    Jerusalem.

    But there was greater game than this. There was Lord Decimus Tite
    Barnacle himself, in the odour of Circumlocution--with the very smell of
    Despatch-Boxes upon him. Yes, there was Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle, who
    had risen to official heights on the wings of one indignant idea, and
    that was, My Lords, that I am yet to be told that it behoves a Minister
    of this free country to set bounds to the philanthropy, to cramp the
    charity, to fetter the public spirit, to contract the enterprise, to
    damp the independent self-reliance, of its people. That was, in other
    words, that this great statesman was always yet to be told that it
    behoved the Pilot of the ship to do anything but prosper in the private
    loaf and fish trade ashore, the crew being able, by dint of hard
    pumping, to keep the ship above water without him. On this sublime
    discovery in the great art How not to do it, Lord Decimus had long
    sustained the highest glory of the Barnacle family; and let any
    ill-advised member of either House but try How to do it by bringing in
    a Bill to do it, that Bill was as good as dead and buried when Lord
    Decimus Tite Barnacle rose up in his place and solemnly said, soaring
    into indignant majesty as the Circumlocution cheering soared around
    him, that he was yet to be told, My Lords, that it behoved him as the
    Minister of this free country, to set bounds to the philanthropy,
    to cramp the charity, to fetter the public spirit, to contract the
    enterprise, to damp the independent self-reliance, of its people. The
    discovery of this Behoving Machine was the discovery of the political
    perpetual motion. It never wore out, though it was always going round
    and round in all the State Departments.

    And there, with his noble friend and relative Lord Decimus, was
    William Barnacle, who had made the ever-famous coalition with Tudor
    Stiltstalking, and who always kept ready his own particular recipe for
    How not to do it; sometimes tapping the Speaker, and drawing it fresh
    out of him, with a 'First, I will beg you, sir, to inform the House what
    Precedent we have for the course into which the honourable gentleman
    would precipitate us;' sometimes asking the honourable gentleman to
    favour him with his own version of the Precedent; sometimes telling
    the honourable gentleman that he (William Barnacle) would search for a
    Precedent; and oftentimes crushing the honourable gentleman flat on
    the spot by telling him there was no Precedent. But Precedent and
    Precipitate were, under all circumstances, the well-matched pair of
    battle-horses of this able Circumlocutionist. No matter that the unhappy
    honourable gentleman had been trying in vain, for twenty-five years, to
    precipitate William Barnacle into this--William Barnacle still put it to
    the House, and (at second-hand or so) to the country, whether he was to
    be precipitated into this. No matter that it was utterly irreconcilable
    with the nature of things and course of events that the wretched
    honourable gentleman could possibly produce a Precedent for
    this--William Barnacle would nevertheless thank the honourable gentleman
    for that ironical cheer, and would close with him upon that issue, and
    would tell him to his teeth that there Was NO Precedent for this. It
    might perhaps have been objected that the William Barnacle wisdom was
    not high wisdom or the earth it bamboozled would never have been made,
    or, if made in a rash mistake, would have remained blank mud. But
    Precedent and Precipitate together frightened all objection out of most
    people.

    And there, too, was another Barnacle, a lively one, who had leaped
    through twenty places in quick succession, and was always in two or
    three at once, and who was the much-respected inventor of an art
    which he practised with great success and admiration in all Barnacle
    Governments. This was, when he was asked a Parliamentary question on
    any one topic, to return an answer on any other. It had done immense
    service, and brought him into high esteem with the Circumlocution
    Office.

    And there, too, was a sprinkling of less distinguished Parliamentary
    Barnacles, who had not as yet got anything snug, and were going through
    their probation to prove their worthiness. These Barnacles perched upon
    staircases and hid in passages, waiting their orders to make houses
    or not to make houses; and they did all their hearing, and ohing, and
    cheering, and barking, under directions from the heads of the family;
    and they put dummy motions on the paper in the way of other men's
    motions; and they stalled disagreeable subjects off until late in the
    night and late in the session, and then with virtuous patriotism cried
    out that it was too late; and they went down into the country, whenever
    they were sent, and swore that Lord Decimus had revived trade from a
    swoon, and commerce from a fit, and had doubled the harvest of corn,
    quadrupled the harvest of hay, and prevented no end of gold from flying
    out of the Bank. Also these Barnacles were dealt, by the heads of the
    family, like so many cards below the court-cards, to public meetings and
    dinners; where they bore testimony to all sorts of services on the part
    of their noble and honourable relatives, and buttered the Barnacles on
    all sorts of toasts. And they stood, under similar orders, at all sorts
    of elections; and they turned out of their own seats, on the shortest
    notice and the most unreasonable terms, to let in other men; and they
    fetched and carried, and toadied and jobbed, and corrupted, and ate
    heaps of dirt, and were indefatigable in the public service. And there
    was not a list, in all the Circumlocution Office, of places that might
    fall vacant anywhere within half a century, from a lord of the Treasury
    to a Chinese consul, and up again to a governor-general of India, but as
    applicants for such places, the names of some or of every one of these
    hungry and adhesive Barnacles were down.

    It was necessarily but a sprinkling of any class of Barnacles that
    attended the marriage, for there were not two score in all, and what
    is that subtracted from Legion! But the sprinkling was a swarm in the
Twickenham cottage, and filled it. A Barnacle (assisted by a Barnacle)
    married the happy pair, and it behoved Lord Decimus Tite Barnacle
    himself to conduct Mrs Meagles to breakfast.

    The entertainment was not as agreeable and natural as it might have
    been. Mr Meagles, hove down by his good company while he highly
    appreciated it, was not himself. Mrs Gowan was herself, and that did not
    improve him. The fiction that it was not Mr Meagles who had stood in the
    way, but that it was the Family greatness, and that the Family greatness
    had made a concession, and there was now a soothing unanimity, pervaded
    the affair, though it was never openly expressed. Then the Barnacles
    felt that they for their parts would have done with the Meagleses when
    the present patronising occasion was over; and the Meagleses felt the
    same for their parts. Then Gowan asserting his rights as a disappointed
    man who had his grudge against the family, and who, perhaps, had allowed
    his mother to have them there, as much in the hope it might give them
    some annoyance as with any other benevolent object, aired his pencil and
    his poverty ostentatiously before them, and told them he hoped in time
    to settle a crust of bread and cheese on his wife, and that he begged
    such of them as (more fortunate than himself) came in for any good
    thing, and could buy a picture, to please to remember the poor painter.
    Then Lord Decimus, who was a wonder on his own Parliamentary pedestal,
    turned out to be the windiest creature here: proposing happiness to the
    bride and bridegroom in a series of platitudes that would have made the
    hair of any sincere disciple and believer stand on end; and trotting,
    with the complacency of an idiotic elephant, among howling labyrinths of
    sentences which he seemed to take for high roads, and never so much
    as wanted to get out of. Then Mr Tite Barnacle could not but feel that
    there was a person in company, who would have disturbed his life-long
    sitting to Sir Thomas Lawrence in full official character, if such
    disturbance had been possible: while Barnacle junior did, with
    indignation, communicate to two vapid gentlemen, his relatives, that
    there was a feller here, look here, who had come to our Department
    without an appointment and said he wanted to know, you know; and that,
    look here, if he was to break out now, as he might you know (for you
            never could tell what an ungentlemanly Radical of that sort would be up
            to next), and was to say, look here, that he wanted to know this moment,
    you know, that would be jolly; wouldn't it?

    The pleasantest part of the occasion by far, to Clennam, was the
    painfullest. When Mr and Mrs Meagles at last hung about Pet in the room
    with the two pictures (where the company were not), before going with
    her to the threshold which she could never recross to be the old Pet and
    the old delight, nothing could be more natural and simple than the three
    were. Gowan himself was touched, and answered Mr Meagles's 'O Gowan,
    take care of her, take care of her!' with an earnest 'Don't be so
    broken-hearted, sir. By Heaven I will!'

    And so, with the last sobs and last loving words, and a last look to
    Clennam of confidence in his promise, Pet fell back in the carriage,
    and her husband waved his hand, and they were away for Dover; though not
    until the faithful Mrs Tickit, in her silk gown and jet black curls, had
    rushed out from some hiding-place, and thrown both her shoes after
    the carriage: an apparition which occasioned great surprise to the
    distinguished company at the windows.

    The said company being now relieved from further attendance, and the
    chief Barnacles being rather hurried (for they had it in hand just
            then to send a mail or two which was in danger of going straight to its
            destination, beating about the seas like the Flying Dutchman, and to
            arrange with complexity for the stoppage of a good deal of important
            business otherwise in peril of being done), went their several ways;
    with all affability conveying to Mr and Mrs Meagles that general
    assurance that what they had been doing there, they had been doing at a
    sacrifice for Mr and Mrs Meagles's good, which they always conveyed to
    Mr John Bull in their official condescension to that most unfortunate
    creature.

    A miserable blank remained in the house and in the hearts of the father
    and mother and Clennam. Mr Meagles called only one remembrance to his
    aid, that really did him good.

    'It's very gratifying, Arthur,' he said, 'after all, to look back upon.'

    'The past?' said Clennam.

    'Yes--but I mean the company.'

    It had made him much more low and unhappy at the time, but now it really
    did him good. 'It's very gratifying,' he said, often repeating the
    remark in the course of the evening. 'Such high company!'




It was at this time that Mr Pancks, in discharge of his compact with
Clennam, revealed to him the whole of his gipsy story, and told him
Little Dorrit's fortune. Her father was heir-at-law to a great estate
that had long lain unknown of, unclaimed, and accumulating. His right
was now clear, nothing interposed in his way, the Marshalsea gates stood
open, the Marshalsea walls were down, a few flourishes of his pen, and
he was extremely rich.

In his tracking out of the claim to its complete establishment, Mr
Pancks had shown a sagacity that nothing could baffle, and a patience
and secrecy that nothing could tire. 'I little thought, sir,' said
Pancks, 'when you and I crossed Smithfield that night, and I told you
what sort of a Collector I was, that this would come of it. I little
thought, sir, when I told you you were not of the Clennams of
Cornwall, that I was ever going to tell you who were of the Dorrits of
Dorsetshire.' He then went on to detail. How, having that name recorded
in his note-book, he was first attracted by the name alone. How, having
often found two exactly similar names, even belonging to the same place,
      to involve no traceable consanguinity, near or distant, he did not at
      first give much heed to this, except in the way of speculation as to
      what a surprising change would be made in the condition of a little
      seamstress, if she could be shown to have any interest in so large a
      property. How he rather supposed himself to have pursued the idea into
      its next degree, because there was something uncommon in the quiet
      little seamstress, which pleased him and provoked his curiosity.
      How he had felt his way inch by inch, and 'Moled it out, sir' (that was
              Mr Pancks's expression), grain by grain. How, in the beginning of
      the labour described by this new verb, and to render which the more
      expressive Mr Pancks shut his eyes in pronouncing it and shook his hair
      over them, he had alternated from sudden lights and hopes to sudden
      darkness and no hopes, and back again, and back again. How he had made
      acquaintances in the Prison, expressly that he might come and go there
      as all other comers and goers did; and how his first ray of light was
      unconsciously given him by Mr Dorrit himself and by his son; to both of
      whom he easily became known; with both of whom he talked much, casually
      ('but always Moleing you'll observe,' said Mr Pancks): and from whom he
                                                             derived, without being at all suspected, two or three little points of
                                                             family history which, as he began to hold clues of his own, suggested
                                                             others. How it had at length become plain to Mr Pancks that he had made
                                                             a real discovery of the heir-at-law to a great fortune, and that his
                                                             discovery had but to be ripened to legal fulness and perfection. How
                                                             he had, thereupon, sworn his landlord, Mr Rugg, to secrecy in a solemn
                                                             manner, and taken him into Moleing partnership. How they had employed
                                                             John Chivery as their sole clerk and agent, seeing to whom he was
                                                             devoted. And how, until the present hour, when authorities mighty in the
                                                             Bank and learned in the law declared their successful labours ended,
                                                             they had confided in no other human being.

                                                             'So if the whole thing had broken down, sir,' concluded Pancks, 'at the
                                                             very last, say the day before the other day when I showed you our papers
                                                             in the Prison yard, or say that very day, nobody but ourselves would
                                                             have been cruelly disappointed, or a penny the worse.'

                                                             Clennam, who had been almost incessantly shaking hands with him
                                                             throughout the narrative, was reminded by this to say, in an amazement
                                                             which even the preparation he had had for the main disclosure smoothed
                                                             down, 'My dear Mr Pancks, this must have cost you a great sum of money.'

                                                             'Pretty well, sir,' said the triumphant Pancks. 'No trifle, though we
                                                             did it as cheap as it could be done. And the outlay was a difficulty,
                                                             let me tell you.'

                                                             'A difficulty!' repeated Clennam. 'But the difficulties you have so
                                                             wonderfully conquered in the whole business!' shaking his hand again.

                                                             'I'll tell you how I did it,' said the delighted Pancks, putting his
                                                             hair into a condition as elevated as himself. 'First, I spent all I had
                                                             of my own. That wasn't much.'

                                                             'I am sorry for it,' said Clennam: 'not that it matters now, though.
                                                             Then, what did you do?'

                                                             'Then,' answered Pancks, 'I borrowed a sum of my proprietor.'

                                                             'Of Mr Casby?' said Clennam. 'He's a fine old fellow.'

                                                             'Noble old boy; an't he?' said Mr Pancks, entering on a series of the
                                                             dryest snorts. 'Generous old buck. Confiding old boy. Philanthropic old
                                                             buck. Benevolent old boy! Twenty per cent. I engaged to pay him, sir.
                                                             But we never do business for less at our shop.'

                                                             Arthur felt an awkward consciousness of having, in his exultant
                                                             condition, been a little premature.

                                                             'I said to that boiling-over old Christian,' Mr Pancks pursued,
                                                             appearing greatly to relish this descriptive epithet, 'that I had got a
                                                             little project on hand; a hopeful one; I told him a hopeful one; which
                                                             wanted a certain small capital. I proposed to him to lend me the
                                                             money on my note. Which he did, at twenty; sticking the twenty on in a
                                                             business-like way, and putting it into the note, to look like a part of
                                                             the principal. If I had broken down after that, I should have been his
                                                             grubber for the next seven years at half wages and double grind. But
                                                             he's a perfect Patriarch; and it would do a man good to serve him on
                                                             such terms--on any terms.'

                                                             Arthur for his life could not have said with confidence whether Pancks
                                                             really thought so or not.

                                                             'When that was gone, sir,' resumed Pancks, 'and it did go, though I
                                                             dribbled it out like so much blood, I had taken Mr Rugg into the secret.
                                                             I proposed to borrow of Mr Rugg (or of Miss Rugg; it's the same thing;
                                                                     she made a little money by a speculation in the Common Pleas once). He
                                                             lent it at ten, and thought that pretty high. But Mr Rugg's a red-haired
                                                             man, sir, and gets his hair cut. And as to the crown of his hat, it's
                                                             high. And as to the brim of his hat, it's narrow. And there's no more
                                                             benevolence bubbling out of him, than out of a ninepin.'

                                                             'Your own recompense for all this, Mr Pancks,' said Clennam, 'ought to
                                                             be a large one.'

                                                             'I don't mistrust getting it, sir,' said Pancks. 'I have made no
                                                             bargain. I owed you one on that score; now I have paid it. Money out of
                                                             pocket made good, time fairly allowed for, and Mr Rugg's bill settled,
                                                             a thousand pounds would be a fortune to me. That matter I place in your
                                                             hands. I authorize you now to break all this to the family in any way
                                                             you think best. Miss Amy Dorrit will be with Mrs Finching this morning.
                                                             The sooner done the better. Can't be done too soon.'

                                                             This conversation took place in Clennam's bed-room, while he was yet in
                                                             bed. For Mr Pancks had knocked up the house and made his way in, very
                                                             early in the morning; and, without once sitting down or standing still,
                                                             had delivered himself of the whole of his details (illustrated with a
                                                                     variety of documents) at the bedside. He now said he would 'go and look
                                                             up Mr Rugg', from whom his excited state of mind appeared to require
                                                             another back; and bundling up his papers, and exchanging one more hearty
                                                             shake of the hand with Clennam, he went at full speed down-stairs, and
                                                             steamed off.

                                                             Clennam, of course, resolved to go direct to Mr Casby's. He dressed
                                                             and got out so quickly that he found himself at the corner of the
                                                             patriarchal street nearly an hour before her time; but he was not sorry
                                                             to have the opportunity of calming himself with a leisurely walk.

                                                             When he returned to the street, and had knocked at the bright brass
                                                             knocker, he was informed that she had come, and was shown up-stairs to
                                                             Flora's breakfast-room. Little Dorrit was not there herself, but Flora
                                                             was, and testified the greatest amazement at seeing him.

                                                             'Good gracious, Arthur--Doyce and Clennam!' cried that lady, 'who would
                                                             have ever thought of seeing such a sight as this and pray excuse a
                                                             wrapper for upon my word I really never and a faded check too which
                                                             is worse but our little friend is making me, not that I need mind
                                                             mentioning it to you for you must know that there are such things a
                                                             skirt, and having arranged that a trying on should take place after
                                                             breakfast is the reason though I wish not so badly starched.'

                                                             'I ought to make an apology,' said Arthur, 'for so early and abrupt a
                                                             visit; but you will excuse it when I tell you the cause.'

                                                             'In times for ever fled Arthur,' returned Mrs Finching, 'pray excuse
                                                             me Doyce and Clennam infinitely more correct and though unquestionably
                                                             distant still 'tis distance lends enchantment to the view, at least I
                                                             don't mean that and if I did I suppose it would depend considerably on
                                                             the nature of the view, but I'm running on again and you put it all out
                                                             of my head.'

                                                             She glanced at him tenderly, and resumed:

                                                             'In times for ever fled I was going to say it would have sounded
                                                             strange indeed for Arthur Clennam--Doyce and Clennam naturally quite
                                                             different--to make apologies for coming here at any time, but that is
                                                             past and what is past can never be recalled except in his own case as
                                                             poor Mr F. said when he was in spirits Cucumber and therefore never ate
                                                             it.'

                                                             She was making the tea when Arthur came in, and now hastily finished
                                                             that operation.

                                                             'Papa,' she said, all mystery and whisper, as she shut down the tea-pot
                                                             lid, 'is sitting prosingly breaking his new laid egg in the back parlour
                                                             over the City article exactly like the Woodpecker Tapping and need never
                                                             know that you are here, and our little friend you are well aware may be
                                                             fully trusted when she comes down from cutting out on the large table
                                                             overhead.'

                                                             Arthur then told her, in the fewest words, that it was their little
                                                             friend he came to see; and what he had to announce to their little
                                                             friend. At which astounding intelligence, Flora clasped her hands,
                                                             fell into a tremble, and shed tears of sympathy and pleasure, like the
                                                             good-natured creature she really was.

                                                             'For gracious sake let me get out of the way first,' said Flora, putting
                                                             her hands to her ears and moving towards the door, 'or I know I shall
                                                             go off dead and screaming and make everybody worse, and the dear little
                                                             thing only this morning looking so nice and neat and good and yet so
                                                             poor and now a fortune is she really and deserves it too! and might I
                                                             mention it to Mr F.'s Aunt Arthur not Doyce and Clennam for this once or
                                                             if objectionable not on any account.'

                                                             Arthur nodded his free permission, since Flora shut out all verbal
                                                             communication. Flora nodded in return to thank him, and hurried out of
                                                             the room.

                                                             Little Dorrit's step was already on the stairs, and in another moment
                                                             she was at the door. Do what he could to compose his face, he could not
                                                             convey so much of an ordinary expression into it, but that the moment
                                                             she saw it she dropped her work, and cried, 'Mr Clennam! What's the
                                                             matter?'

                                                             'Nothing, nothing. That is, no misfortune has happened. I have come
                                                             to tell you something, but it is a piece of great good-fortune.'

                                                             'Good-fortune?'

                                                             'Wonderful fortune!'

                                                             They stood in a window, and her eyes, full of light, were fixed upon his
                                                             face. He put an arm about her, seeing her likely to sink down. She put
                                                             a hand upon that arm, partly to rest upon it, and partly so to preserve
                                                             their relative positions as that her intent look at him should be shaken
                                                             by no change of attitude in either of them. Her lips seemed to repeat
                                                             'Wonderful fortune?' He repeated it again, aloud.

                                                             'Dear Little Dorrit! Your father.'

                                                             The ice of the pale face broke at the word, and little lights and shoots
                                                             of expression passed all over it. They were all expressions of pain. Her
                                                             breath was faint and hurried. Her heart beat fast. He would have clasped
                                                             the little figure closer, but he saw that the eyes appealed to him not
                                                             to be moved.

                                                             'Your father can be free within this week. He does not know it; we must
                                                             go to him from here, to tell him of it. Your father will be free within
                                                             a few days. Your father will be free within a few hours. Remember we
                                                             must go to him from here, to tell him of it!'

                                                             That brought her back. Her eyes were closing, but they opened again.

                                                             'This is not all the good-fortune. This is not all the wonderful
                                                             good-fortune, my dear Little Dorrit. Shall I tell you more?'

                                                             Her lips shaped 'Yes.'

                                                             'Your father will be no beggar when he is free. He will want for
                                                             nothing. Shall I tell you more? Remember! He knows nothing of it; we
                                                             must go to him, from here, to tell him of it!'

                                                             She seemed to entreat him for a little time. He held her in his arm,
                                                             and, after a pause, bent down his ear to listen.

                                                             'Did you ask me to go on?'

                                                             'Yes.'

                                                             'He will be a rich man. He is a rich man. A great sum of money
                                                             is waiting to be paid over to him as his inheritance; you are all
                                                             henceforth very wealthy. Bravest and best of children, I thank Heaven
                                                             that you are rewarded!'

                                                             As he kissed her, she turned her head towards his shoulder, and raised
                                                             her arm towards his neck; cried out 'Father! Father! Father!' and
                                                             swooned away.

                                                             Upon which Flora returned to take care of her, and hovered about her on
                                                             a sofa, intermingling kind offices and incoherent scraps of conversation
                                                             in a manner so confounding, that whether she pressed the Marshalsea to
                                                             take a spoonful of unclaimed dividends, for it would do her good;
                                                             or whether she congratulated Little Dorrit's father on coming into
                                                             possession of a hundred thousand smelling-bottles; or whether she
                                                             explained that she put seventy-five thousand drops of spirits of
                                                             lavender on fifty thousand pounds of lump sugar, and that she entreated
                                                             Little Dorrit to take that gentle restorative; or whether she bathed the
                                                             foreheads of Doyce and Clennam in vinegar, and gave the late Mr F. more
                                                             air; no one with any sense of responsibility could have undertaken to
                                                             decide. A tributary stream of confusion, moreover, poured in from an
                                                             adjoining bedroom, where Mr F.'s Aunt appeared, from the sound of her
                                                             voice, to be in a horizontal posture, awaiting her breakfast; and from
                                                             which bower that inexorable lady snapped off short taunts, whenever she
                                                             could get a hearing, as, 'Don't believe it's his doing!' and 'He needn't
                                                             take no credit to himself for it!' and 'It'll be long enough, I expect,
                                                             afore he'll give up any of his own money!' all designed to disparage
                                                             Clennam's share in the discovery, and to relieve those inveterate
                                                             feelings with which Mr F.'s Aunt regarded him.

                                                             But Little Dorrit's solicitude to get to her father, and to carry the
                                                             joyful tidings to him, and not to leave him in his jail a moment with
                                                             this happiness in store for him and still unknown to him, did more for
                                                             her speedy restoration than all the skill and attention on earth could
                                                             have done. 'Come with me to my dear father. Pray come and tell my dear
                                                             father!' were the first words she said. Her father, her father. She
                                                             spoke of nothing but him, thought of nothing but him. Kneeling down and
                                                             pouring out her thankfulness with uplifted hands, her thanks were for
                                                             her father.

                                                             Flora's tenderness was quite overcome by this, and she launched out
                                                             among the cups and saucers into a wonderful flow of tears and speech.

                                                             'I declare,' she sobbed, 'I never was so cut up since your mama and my
                                                             papa not Doyce and Clennam for this once but give the precious little
                                                             thing a cup of tea and make her put it to her lips at least pray Arthur
                                                             do, not even Mr F.'s last illness for that was of another kind and gout
                                                             is not a child's affection though very painful for all parties and Mr
                                                             F. a martyr with his leg upon a rest and the wine trade in itself
                                                             inflammatory for they will do it more or less among themselves and who
                                                             can wonder, it seems like a dream I am sure to think of nothing at all
                                                             this morning and now Mines of money is it really, but you must know my
                                                             darling love because you never will be strong enough to tell him all
                                                             about it upon teaspoons, mightn't it be even best to try the directions
                                                             of my own medical man for though the flavour is anything but agreeable
                                                             still I force myself to do it as a prescription and find the benefit,
                                                             you'd rather not why no my dear I'd rather not but still I do it as a
                                                             duty, everybody will congratulate you some in earnest and some not and
                                                             many will congratulate you with all their hearts but none more so I
                                                             do assure you from the bottom of my own I do myself though sensible of
                                                             blundering and being stupid, and will be judged by Arthur not Doyce and
                                                             Clennam for this once so good-bye darling and God bless you and may you
                                                             be very happy and excuse the liberty, vowing that the dress shall never
                                                             be finished by anybody else but shall be laid by for a keepsake just
                                                             as it is and called Little Dorrit though why that strangest of
                                                             denominations at any time I never did myself and now I never shall!'



                                                             Thus Flora, in taking leave of her favourite. Little Dorrit thanked her,
                                                             and embraced her, over and over again; and finally came out of the house
                                                             with Clennam, and took coach for the Marshalsea.

                                                             It was a strangely unreal ride through the old squalid streets, with a
                                                             sensation of being raised out of them into an airy world of wealth
                                                             and grandeur. When Arthur told her that she would soon ride in her
                                                             own carriage through very different scenes, when all the familiar
                                                             experiences would have vanished away, she looked frightened. But when
                                                             he substituted her father for herself, and told her how he would ride in
                                                             his carriage, and how great and grand he would be, her tears of joy
                                                             and innocent pride fell fast. Seeing that the happiness her mind could
                                                             realise was all shining upon him, Arthur kept that single figure before
                                                             her; and so they rode brightly through the poor streets in the prison
                                                             neighbourhood to carry him the great news.

                                                             When Mr Chivery, who was on duty, admitted them into the Lodge, he saw
                                                             something in their faces which filled him with astonishment. He stood
                                                             looking after them, when they hurried into the prison, as though he
                                                             perceived that they had come back accompanied by a ghost a-piece. Two or
                                                             three Collegians whom they passed, looked after them too, and presently
                                                             joining Mr Chivery, formed a little group on the Lodge steps, in the
                                                             midst of which there spontaneously originated a whisper that the Father
                                                             was going to get his discharge. Within a few minutes, it was heard in
                                                             the remotest room in the College.

                                                             Little Dorrit opened the door from without, and they both entered. He
                                                             was sitting in his old grey gown and his old black cap, in the sunlight
                                                             by the window, reading his newspaper. His glasses were in his hand, and
                                                             he had just looked round; surprised at first, no doubt, by her step upon
                                                             the stairs, not expecting her until night; surprised again, by seeing
                                                             Arthur Clennam in her company. As they came in, the same unwonted look
                                                             in both of them which had already caught attention in the yard below,
                                                             struck him. He did not rise or speak, but laid down his glasses and his
                                                             newspaper on the table beside him, and looked at them with his mouth
                                                             a little open and his lips trembling. When Arthur put out his hand,
                                                             he touched it, but not with his usual state; and then he turned to his
                                                             daughter, who had sat down close beside him with her hands upon his
                                                             shoulder, and looked attentively in her face.

                                                             'Father! I have been made so happy this morning!'

                                                             'You have been made so happy, my dear?'

                                                             'By Mr Clennam, father. He brought me such joyful and wonderful
                                                             intelligence about you! If he had not with his great kindness and
                                                             gentleness, prepared me for it, father--prepared me for it, father--I
                                                             think I could not have borne it.'

                                                             Her agitation was exceedingly great, and the tears rolled down her face.
                                                             He put his hand suddenly to his heart, and looked at Clennam.

                                                             'Compose yourself, sir,' said Clennam, 'and take a little time to think.
                                                             To think of the brightest and most fortunate accidents of life. We have
                                                             all heard of great surprises of joy. They are not at an end, sir. They
                                                             are rare, but not at an end.'

                                                             'Mr Clennam? Not at an end? Not at an end for--' He touched himself upon
                                                             the breast, instead of saying 'me.'

                                                             'No,' returned Clennam.

                                                             'What surprise,' he asked, keeping his left hand over his heart, and
                                                             there stopping in his speech, while with his right hand he put his
                                                             glasses exactly level on the table: 'what such surprise can be in store
                                                             for me?'

                                                             'Let me answer with another question. Tell me, Mr Dorrit, what surprise
                                                             would be the most unlooked for and the most acceptable to you. Do not be
                                                             afraid to imagine it, or to say what it would be.'

                                                             He looked steadfastly at Clennam, and, so looking at him, seemed to
                                                             change into a very old haggard man. The sun was bright upon the wall
                                                             beyond the window, and on the spikes at top. He slowly stretched out the
                                                             hand that had been upon his heart, and pointed at the wall.

                                                             'It is down,' said Clennam. 'Gone!'

                                                             He remained in the same attitude, looking steadfastly at him.

                                                             'And in its place,' said Clennam, slowly and distinctly, 'are the means
                                                             to possess and enjoy the utmost that they have so long shut out. Mr
                                                             Dorrit, there is not the smallest doubt that within a few days you will
                                                             be free, and highly prosperous. I congratulate you with all my soul on
                                                             this change of fortune, and on the happy future into which you are soon
                                                             to carry the treasure you have been blest with here--the best of all the
                                                             riches you can have elsewhere--the treasure at your side.'

                                                             With those words, he pressed his hand and released it; and his daughter,
                                                             laying her face against his, encircled him in the hour of his prosperity
                                                             with her arms, as she had in the long years of his adversity encircled
                                                             him with her love and toil and truth; and poured out her full heart in
                                                             gratitude, hope, joy, blissful ecstasy, and all for him.

                                                             'I shall see him as I never saw him yet. I shall see my dear love, with
                                                             the dark cloud cleared away. I shall see him, as my poor mother saw him
                                                             long ago. O my dear, my dear! O father, father! O thank God, thank God!'

                                                             He yielded himself to her kisses and caresses, but did not return them,
                                                             except that he put an arm about her. Neither did he say one word. His
                                                             steadfast look was now divided between her and Clennam, and he began to
                                                             shake as if he were very cold. Explaining to Little Dorrit that he would
                                                             run to the coffee-house for a bottle of wine, Arthur fetched it with all
                                                             the haste he could use. While it was being brought from the cellar to
                                                             the bar, a number of excited people asked him what had happened; when he
                                                             hurriedly informed them that Mr Dorrit had succeeded to a fortune.

                                                             On coming back with the wine in his hand, he found that she had placed
                                                             her father in his easy chair, and had loosened his shirt and neckcloth.
                                                             They filled a tumbler with wine, and held it to his lips. When he had
                                                             swallowed a little, he took the glass himself and emptied it. Soon
                                                             after that, he leaned back in his chair and cried, with his handkerchief
                                                             before his face.

                                                             After this had lasted a while Clennam thought it a good season for
                                                             diverting his attention from the main surprise, by relating its details.
                                                             Slowly, therefore, and in a quiet tone of voice, he explained them as
                                                             best he could, and enlarged on the nature of Pancks's service.

                                                             'He shall be--ha--he shall be handsomely recompensed, sir,' said
                                                             the Father, starting up and moving hurriedly about the room. 'Assure
                                                             yourself, Mr Clennam, that everybody concerned shall be--ha--shall
                                                             be nobly rewarded. No one, my dear sir, shall say that he has an
                                                             unsatisfied claim against me. I shall repay the--hum--the advances I
                                                             have had from you, sir, with peculiar pleasure. I beg to be informed at
                                                             your earliest convenience, what advances you have made my son.'

                                                             He had no purpose in going about the room, but he was not still a
                                                             moment.

                                                             'Everybody,' he said, 'shall be remembered. I will not go away from
                                                             here in anybody's debt. All the people who have been--ha--well behaved
                                                             towards myself and my family, shall be rewarded. Chivery shall be
                                                             rewarded. Young John shall be rewarded. I particularly wish, and intend,
                                                             to act munificently, Mr Clennam.'

                                                             'Will you allow me,' said Arthur, laying his purse on the table, 'to
                                                             supply any present contingencies, Mr Dorrit? I thought it best to bring
                                                             a sum of money for the purpose.'

                                                             'Thank you, sir, thank you. I accept with readiness, at the present
                                                             moment, what I could not an hour ago have conscientiously taken. I am
                                                             obliged to you for the temporary accommodation. Exceedingly temporary,
                                                             but well timed--well timed.' His hand had closed upon the money, and
                                                             he carried it about with him. 'Be so kind, sir, as to add the amount to
                                                             those former advances to which I have already referred; being careful,
                                                             if you please, not to omit advances made to my son. A mere verbal
                                                             statement of the gross amount is all I shall--ha--all I shall require.'

                                                             His eye fell upon his daughter at this point, and he stopped for a
                                                             moment to kiss her, and to pat her head.

                                                             'It will be necessary to find a milliner, my love, and to make a speedy
                                                             and complete change in your very plain dress. Something must be done
                                                             with Maggy too, who at present is--ha--barely respectable, barely
                                                             respectable. And your sister, Amy, and your brother. And _my_ brother,
                                                             your uncle--poor soul, I trust this will rouse him--messengers must be
                                                             despatched to fetch them. They must be informed of this. We must break
                                                             it to them cautiously, but they must be informed directly. We owe it
                                                             as a duty to them and to ourselves, from this moment, not to let
                                                             them--hum--not to let them do anything.'

                                                             This was the first intimation he had ever given, that he was privy to
                                                             the fact that they did something for a livelihood.

                                                             He was still jogging about the room, with the purse clutched in his
                                                             hand, when a great cheering arose in the yard. 'The news has spread
                                                             already,' said Clennam, looking down from the window. 'Will you show
                                                             yourself to them, Mr Dorrit? They are very earnest, and they evidently
                                                             wish it.'

                                                             'I--hum--ha--I confess I could have desired, Amy my dear,' he said,
                                                             jogging about in a more feverish flutter than before, 'to have made some
                                                             change in my dress first, and to have bought a--hum--a watch and chain.
                                                             But if it must be done as it is, it--ha--it must be done. Fasten the
                                                             collar of my shirt, my dear. Mr Clennam, would you oblige me--hum--with
                                                             a blue neckcloth you will find in that drawer at your elbow. Button
                                                             my coat across at the chest, my love. It looks--ha--it looks broader,
                                                             buttoned.'

                                                             With his trembling hand he pushed his grey hair up, and then, taking
                                                             Clennam and his daughter for supporters, appeared at the window leaning
                                                             on an arm of each. The Collegians cheered him very heartily, and he
                                                             kissed his hand to them with great urbanity and protection. When he
                                                             withdrew into the room again, he said 'Poor creatures!' in a tone of
                                                             much pity for their miserable condition.

                                                             Little Dorrit was deeply anxious that he should lie down to compose
                                                             himself. On Arthur's speaking to her of his going to inform Pancks that
                                                             he might now appear as soon as he would, and pursue the joyful business
                                                             to its close, she entreated him in a whisper to stay with her until her
                                                             father should be quite calm and at rest. He needed no second entreaty;
                                                             and she prepared her father's bed, and begged him to lie down. For
                                                             another half-hour or more he would be persuaded to do nothing but
                                                             go about the room, discussing with himself the probabilities for and
                                                             against the Marshal's allowing the whole of the prisoners to go to the
                                                             windows of the official residence which commanded the street, to see
                                                             himself and family depart for ever in a carriage--which, he said, he
                                                             thought would be a Sight for them. But gradually he began to droop and
                                                             tire, and at last stretched himself upon the bed.

                                                             She took her faithful place beside him, fanning him and cooling his
                                                             forehead; and he seemed to be falling asleep (always with the money in
                                                                     his hand), when he unexpectedly sat up and said:

                                                             'Mr Clennam, I beg your pardon. Am I to understand, my dear sir, that I
                                                             could--ha--could pass through the Lodge at this moment, and--hum--take a
                                                             walk?'

                                                             'I think not, Mr Dorrit,' was the unwilling reply. 'There are certain
                                                             forms to be completed; and although your detention here is now in itself
                                                             a form, I fear it is one that for a little longer has to be observed
                                                             too.'

                                                             At this he shed tears again.

                                                             'It is but a few hours, sir,' Clennam cheerfully urged upon him.

                                                             'A few hours, sir,' he returned in a sudden passion. 'You talk very
                                                             easily of hours, sir! How long do you suppose, sir, that an hour is to a
                                                             man who is choking for want of air?'

                                                             It was his last demonstration for that time; as, after shedding some
                                                             more tears and querulously complaining that he couldn't breathe, he
                                                             slowly fell into a slumber. Clennam had abundant occupation for his
                                                             thoughts, as he sat in the quiet room watching the father on his bed,
                                                             and the daughter fanning his face.

                                                             Little Dorrit had been thinking too. After softly putting his grey hair
                                                             aside, and touching his forehead with her lips, she looked towards
                                                             Arthur, who came nearer to her, and pursued in a low whisper the subject
                                                             of her thoughts.

                                                             'Mr Clennam, will he pay all his debts before he leaves here?'

                                                             'No doubt. All.'

                                                             'All the debts for which he had been imprisoned here, all my life and
                                                             longer?'

                                                             'No doubt.'

                                                             There was something of uncertainty and remonstrance in her look;
                                                             something that was not all satisfaction. He wondered to detect it, and
                                                             said:

                                                             'You are glad that he should do so?'

                                                             'Are you?' asked Little Dorrit, wistfully.

                                                             'Am I? Most heartily glad!'

                                                             'Then I know I ought to be.'

                                                             'And are you not?'

                                                             'It seems to me hard,' said Little Dorrit, 'that he should have lost so
                                                             many years and suffered so much, and at last pay all the debts as well.
                                                             It seems to me hard that he should pay in life and money both.'

                                                             'My dear child--' Clennam was beginning.

                                                             'Yes, I know I am wrong,' she pleaded timidly, 'don't think any worse of
                                                             me; it has grown up with me here.'

                                                             The prison, which could spoil so many things, had tainted Little
                                                             Dorrit's mind no more than this. Engendered as the confusion was, in
                                                             compassion for the poor prisoner, her father, it was the first speck
                                                             Clennam had ever seen, it was the last speck Clennam ever saw, of the
                                                             prison atmosphere upon her.

                                                             He thought this, and forbore to say another word. With the thought, her
                                                             purity and goodness came before him in their brightest light. The little
                                                             spot made them the more beautiful.

                                                             Worn out with her own emotions, and yielding to the silence of the room,
                                                             her hand slowly slackened and failed in its fanning movement, and her
                                                             head dropped down on the pillow at her father's side. Clennam rose
                                                             softly, opened and closed the door without a sound, and passed from the
                                                             prison, carrying the quiet with him into the turbulent streets.




And now the day arrived when Mr Dorrit and his family were to leave the
prison for ever, and the stones of its much-trodden pavement were to
know them no more.

The interval had been short, but he had greatly complained of its
length, and had been imperious with Mr Rugg touching the delay. He had
been high with Mr Rugg, and had threatened to employ some one else. He
had requested Mr Rugg not to presume upon the place in which he found
him, but to do his duty, sir, and to do it with promptitude. He had told
Mr Rugg that he knew what lawyers and agents were, and that he would not
submit to imposition. On that gentleman's humbly representing that
he exerted himself to the utmost, Miss Fanny was very short with him;
desiring to know what less he could do, when he had been told a dozen
times that money was no object, and expressing her suspicion that he
forgot whom he talked to.

Towards the Marshal, who was a Marshal of many years' standing, and
with whom he had never had any previous difference, Mr Dorrit comported
himself with severity. That officer, on personally tendering his
congratulations, offered the free use of two rooms in his house for Mr
Dorrit's occupation until his departure. Mr Dorrit thanked him at the
moment, and replied that he would think of it; but the Marshal was no
sooner gone than he sat down and wrote him a cutting note, in which
he remarked that he had never on any former occasion had the honour of
receiving his congratulations (which was true, though indeed there had
        not been anything particular to congratulate him upon), and that he
begged, on behalf of himself and family, to repudiate the Marshal's
offer, with all those thanks which its disinterested character and its
perfect independence of all worldly considerations demanded.

Although his brother showed so dim a glimmering of interest in their
altered fortunes that it was very doubtful whether he understood them,
        Mr Dorrit caused him to be measured for new raiment by the hosiers,
        tailors, hatters, and bootmakers whom he called in for himself; and
        ordered that his old clothes should be taken from him and burned. Miss
        Fanny and Mr Tip required no direction in making an appearance of great
        fashion and elegance; and the three passed this interval together at the
        best hotel in the neighbourhood--though truly, as Miss Fanny said, the
        best was very indifferent. In connection with that establishment, Mr
        Tip hired a cabriolet, horse, and groom, a very neat turn out, which
        was usually to be observed for two or three hours at a time gracing the
        Borough High Street, outside the Marshalsea court-yard. A modest
        little hired chariot and pair was also frequently to be seen there;
        in alighting from and entering which vehicle, Miss Fanny fluttered the
        Marshal's daughters by the display of inaccessible bonnets.

        A great deal of business was transacted in this short period. Among
        other items, Messrs Peddle and Pool, solicitors, of Monument Yard, were
        instructed by their client Edward Dorrit, Esquire, to address a letter
        to Mr Arthur Clennam, enclosing the sum of twenty-four pounds nine
        shillings and eightpence, being the amount of principal and interest
        computed at the rate of five per cent. per annum, in which their
        client believed himself to be indebted to Mr Clennam. In making this
        communication and remittance, Messrs Peddle and Pool were further
        instructed by their client to remind Mr Clennam that the favour of the
        advance now repaid (including gate-fees) had not been asked of him, and
        to inform him that it would not have been accepted if it had been openly
        proffered in his name. With which they requested a stamped receipt, and
        remained his obedient servants. A great deal of business had likewise to
        be done, within the so-soon-to-be-orphaned Marshalsea, by Mr Dorrit
        so long its Father, chiefly arising out of applications made to him
        by Collegians for small sums of money. To these he responded with the
        greatest liberality, and with no lack of formality; always first writing
        to appoint a time at which the applicant might wait upon him in his
        room, and then receiving him in the midst of a vast accumulation of
        documents, and accompanying his donation (for he said in every such
                case, 'it is a donation, not a loan') with a great deal of good counsel:
        to the effect that he, the expiring Father of the Marshalsea, hoped to
        be long remembered, as an example that a man might preserve his own and
        the general respect even there.

        The Collegians were not envious. Besides that they had a personal and
        traditional regard for a Collegian of so many years' standing, the event
        was creditable to the College, and made it famous in the newspapers.
        Perhaps more of them thought, too, than were quite aware of it, that the
        thing might in the lottery of chances have happened to themselves, or
        that something of the sort might yet happen to themselves some day or
        other. They took it very well. A few were low at the thought of being
        left behind, and being left poor; but even these did not grudge the
        family their brilliant reverse. There might have been much more envy in
        politer places. It seems probable that mediocrity of fortune would have
        been disposed to be less magnanimous than the Collegians, who lived from
        hand to mouth--from the pawnbroker's hand to the day's dinner.

        They got up an address to him, which they presented in a neat frame and
        glass (though it was not afterwards displayed in the family mansion or
                preserved among the family papers); and to which he returned a gracious
        answer. In that document he assured them, in a Royal manner, that he
        received the profession of their attachment with a full conviction
        of its sincerity; and again generally exhorted them to follow his
        example--which, at least in so far as coming into a great property was
        concerned, there is no doubt they would have gladly imitated. He took
        the same occasion of inviting them to a comprehensive entertainment, to
        be given to the whole College in the yard, and at which he signified
        he would have the honour of taking a parting glass to the health and
        happiness of all those whom he was about to leave behind.

        He did not in person dine at this public repast (it took place at two in
                the afternoon, and his dinners now came in from the hotel at six), but
        his son was so good as to take the head of the principal table, and to
        be very free and engaging. He himself went about among the company, and
        took notice of individuals, and saw that the viands were of the quality
        he had ordered, and that all were served. On the whole, he was like a
        baron of the olden time in a rare good humour. At the conclusion of the
        repast, he pledged his guests in a bumper of old Madeira; and told them
        that he hoped they had enjoyed themselves, and what was more, that they
        would enjoy themselves for the rest of the evening; that he wished them
        well; and that he bade them welcome. His health being drunk with
        acclamations, he was not so baronial after all but that in trying to
        return thanks he broke down, in the manner of a mere serf with a heart
        in his breast, and wept before them all. After this great success, which
        he supposed to be a failure, he gave them 'Mr Chivery and his brother
        officers;' whom he had beforehand presented with ten pounds each, and
        who were all in attendance. Mr Chivery spoke to the toast, saying, What
        you undertake to lock up, lock up; but remember that you are, in the
        words of the fettered African, a man and a brother ever. The list of
        toasts disposed of, Mr Dorrit urbanely went through the motions of
        playing a game of skittles with the Collegian who was the next oldest
        inhabitant to himself; and left the tenantry to their diversions.

        But all these occurrences preceded the final day. And now the day
        arrived when he and his family were to leave the prison for ever, and
        when the stones of its much-trodden pavement were to know them no more.

        Noon was the hour appointed for the departure. As it approached, there
        was not a Collegian within doors, nor a turnkey absent. The latter class
        of gentlemen appeared in their Sunday clothes, and the greater part of
        the Collegians were brightened up as much as circumstances allowed. Two
        or three flags were even displayed, and the children put on odds and
        ends of ribbon. Mr Dorrit himself, at this trying time, preserved a
        serious but graceful dignity. Much of his great attention was given to
        his brother, as to whose bearing on the great occasion he felt anxious.

        'My dear Frederick,' said he, 'if you will give me your arm we will pass
        among our friends together. I think it is right that we should go out
        arm in arm, my dear Frederick.'

        'Hah!' said Frederick. 'Yes, yes, yes, yes.'

        'And if, my dear Frederick--if you could, without putting any great
        constraint upon yourself, throw a little (pray excuse me, Frederick), a
        little polish into your usual demeanour--'

        'William, William,' said the other, shaking his head, 'it's for you to
        do all that. I don't know how. All forgotten, forgotten!'

        'But, my dear fellow,' returned William, 'for that very reason, if
        for no other, you must positively try to rouse yourself. What you
        have forgotten you must now begin to recall, my dear Frederick. Your
        position--'

        'Eh?' said Frederick.

        'Your position, my dear Frederick.'

        'Mine?' He looked first at his own figure, and then at his brother's,
        and then, drawing a long breath, cried, 'Hah, to be sure! Yes, yes,
        yes.'

        'Your position, my dear Frederick, is now a fine one. Your position, as
        my brother, is a very fine one. And I know that it belongs to your
        conscientious nature to try to become worthy of it, my dear Frederick,
        and to try to adorn it. To be no discredit to it, but to adorn it.'

        'William,' said the other weakly, and with a sigh, 'I will do anything
        you wish, my brother, provided it lies in my power. Pray be so kind as
        to recollect what a limited power mine is. What would you wish me to do
        to-day, brother? Say what it is, only say what it is.'

        'My dearest Frederick, nothing. It is not worth troubling so good a
        heart as yours with.'

        'Pray trouble it,' returned the other. 'It finds it no trouble, William,
        to do anything it can for you.'

        William passed his hand across his eyes, and murmured with august
        satisfaction, 'Blessings on your attachment, my poor dear fellow!' Then
        he said aloud, 'Well, my dear Frederick, if you will only try, as we
        walk out, to show that you are alive to the occasion--that you think
        about it--'

        'What would you advise me to think about it?' returned his submissive
        brother.

        'Oh! my dear Frederick, how can I answer you? I can only say what, in
        leaving these good people, I think myself.'

        'That's it!' cried his brother. 'That will help me.'

        'I find that I think, my dear Frederick, and with mixed emotions in
        which a softened compassion predominates, What will they do without me!'

        'True,' returned his brother. 'Yes, yes, yes, yes. I'll think that as we
        go, What will they do without my brother! Poor things! What will they do
        without him!'

        Twelve o'clock having just struck, and the carriage being reported ready
        in the outer court-yard, the brothers proceeded down-stairs arm-in-arm.
        Edward Dorrit, Esquire (once Tip), and his sister Fanny followed,
        also arm-in-arm; Mr Plornish and Maggy, to whom had been entrusted the
        removal of such of the family effects as were considered worth removing,
        followed, bearing bundles and burdens to be packed in a cart.

        In the yard, were the Collegians and turnkeys. In the yard, were Mr
        Pancks and Mr Rugg, come to see the last touch given to their work.
        In the yard, was Young John making a new epitaph for himself, on
        the occasion of his dying of a broken heart. In the yard, was the
        Patriarchal Casby, looking so tremendously benevolent that many
        enthusiastic Collegians grasped him fervently by the hand, and the wives
        and female relatives of many more Collegians kissed his hand, nothing
        doubting that he had done it all. In the yard, was the man with the
        shadowy grievance respecting the Fund which the Marshal embezzled, who
        had got up at five in the morning to complete the copying of a perfectly
        unintelligible history of that transaction, which he had committed to Mr
        Dorrit's care, as a document of the last importance, calculated to stun
        the Government and effect the Marshal's downfall. In the yard, was the
        insolvent whose utmost energies were always set on getting into debt,
        who broke into prison with as much pains as other men have broken out
        of it, and who was always being cleared and complimented; while the
        insolvent at his elbow--a mere little, snivelling, striving tradesman,
        half dead of anxious efforts to keep out of debt--found it a hard
        matter, indeed, to get a Commissioner to release him with much reproof
        and reproach. In the yard, was the man of many children and many
        burdens, whose failure astonished everybody; in the yard, was the man of
        no children and large resources, whose failure astonished nobody. There,
        were the people who were always going out to-morrow, and always putting
        it off; there, were the people who had come in yesterday, and who
        were much more jealous and resentful of this freak of fortune than
        the seasoned birds. There, were some who, in pure meanness of spirit,
        cringed and bowed before the enriched Collegian and his family; there,
        were others who did so really because their eyes, accustomed to the
        gloom of their imprisonment and poverty, could not support the light of
        such bright sunshine. There, were many whose shillings had gone into his
        pocket to buy him meat and drink; but none who were now obtrusively Hail
        fellow well met! with him, on the strength of that assistance. It was
        rather to be remarked of the caged birds, that they were a little shy
        of the bird about to be so grandly free, and that they had a tendency to
        withdraw themselves towards the bars, and seem a little fluttered as he
        passed.

        Through these spectators the little procession, headed by the two
        brothers, moved slowly to the gate. Mr Dorrit, yielding to the vast
        speculation how the poor creatures were to get on without him, was
        great, and sad, but not absorbed. He patted children on the head
        like Sir Roger de Coverley going to church, he spoke to people in the
        background by their Christian names, he condescended to all present, and
        seemed for their consolation to walk encircled by the legend in golden
        characters, 'Be comforted, my people! Bear it!'

        At last three honest cheers announced that he had passed the gate, and
        that the Marshalsea was an orphan. Before they had ceased to ring in the
        echoes of the prison walls, the family had got into their carriage, and
        the attendant had the steps in his hand.

        Then, and not before, 'Good Gracious!' cried Miss Fanny all at once,
        'Where's Amy!'

        Her father had thought she was with her sister. Her sister had thought
        she was 'somewhere or other.' They had all trusted to finding her, as
        they had always done, quietly in the right place at the right moment.
        This going away was perhaps the very first action of their joint lives
        that they had got through without her.

        A minute might have been consumed in the ascertaining of these points,
        when Miss Fanny, who, from her seat in the carriage, commanded the long
        narrow passage leading to the Lodge, flushed indignantly.

        'Now I do say, Pa,' cried she, 'that this is disgraceful!'

        'What is disgraceful, Fanny?'

        'I do say,' she repeated, 'this is perfectly infamous! Really almost
        enough, even at such a time as this, to make one wish one was dead!
        Here is that child Amy, in her ugly old shabby dress, which she was so
        obstinate about, Pa, which I over and over again begged and prayed her
        to change, and which she over and over again objected to, and promised
        to change to-day, saying she wished to wear it as long as ever she
        remained in there with you--which was absolutely romantic nonsense of
        the lowest kind--here is that child Amy disgracing us to the last moment
        and at the last moment, by being carried out in that dress after all.
        And by that Mr Clennam too!'

        The offence was proved, as she delivered the indictment. Clennam
        appeared at the carriage-door, bearing the little insensible figure in
        his arms.

        'She has been forgotten,' he said, in a tone of pity not free from
        reproach. 'I ran up to her room (which Mr Chivery showed me) and found
        the door open, and that she had fainted on the floor, dear child.
        She appeared to have gone to change her dress, and to have sunk down
        overpowered. It may have been the cheering, or it may have happened
        sooner. Take care of this poor cold hand, Miss Dorrit. Don't let it
        fall.'

        'Thank you, sir,' returned Miss Dorrit, bursting into tears. 'I believe
        I know what to do, if you will give me leave. Dear Amy, open your eyes,
        that's a love! Oh, Amy, Amy, I really am so vexed and ashamed! Do rouse
        yourself, darling! Oh, why are they not driving on! Pray, Pa, do drive
        on!'

        The attendant, getting between Clennam and the carriage-door, with a
        sharp 'By your leave, sir!' bundled up the steps, and they drove away.
