That illustrious man and great national ornament, Mr Merdle, continued
his shining course. It began to be widely understood that one who had
done society the admirable service of making so much money out of it,
     could not be suffered to remain a commoner. A baronetcy was spoken of
     with confidence; a peerage was frequently mentioned. Rumour had it
     that Mr Merdle had set his golden face against a baronetcy; that he had
     plainly intimated to Lord Decimus that a baronetcy was not enough
     for him; that he had said, 'No--a Peerage, or plain Merdle.' This was
     reported to have plunged Lord Decimus as nigh to his noble chin in a
     slough of doubts as so lofty a person could be sunk. For the Barnacles,
     as a group of themselves in creation, had an idea that such distinctions
     belonged to them; and that when a soldier, sailor, or lawyer became
    ennobled, they let him in, as it were, by an act of condescension, at
the family door, and immediately shut it again. Not only (said Rumour)
    had the troubled Decimus his own hereditary part in this impression, but
    he also knew of several Barnacle claims already on the file, which came
    into collision with that of the master spirit. Right or wrong, Rumour
    was very busy; and Lord Decimus, while he was, or was supposed to be, in
    stately excogitation of the difficulty, lent her some countenance by
    taking, on several public occasions, one of those elephantine trots of
    his through a jungle of overgrown sentences, waving Mr Merdle about on
    his trunk as Gigantic Enterprise, The Wealth of England, Elasticity,
    Credit, Capital, Prosperity, and all manner of blessings.

    So quietly did the mowing of the old scythe go on, that fully three
    months had passed unnoticed since the two English brothers had been laid
    in one tomb in the strangers' cemetery at Rome. Mr and Mrs Sparkler were
    established in their own house: a little mansion, rather of the Tite
    Barnacle class, quite a triumph of inconvenience, with a perpetual smell
    in it of the day before yesterday's soup and coach-horses, but extremely
    dear, as being exactly in the centre of the habitable globe. In this
    enviable abode (and envied it really was by many people), Mrs Sparkler
    had intended to proceed at once to the demolition of the Bosom, when
    active hostilities had been suspended by the arrival of the Courier with
    his tidings of death. Mrs Sparkler, who was not unfeeling, had received
    them with a violent burst of grief, which had lasted twelve hours;
    after which, she had arisen to see about her mourning, and to take every
    precaution that could ensure its being as becoming as Mrs Merdle's. A
    gloom was then cast over more than one distinguished family (according
            to the politest sources of intelligence), and the Courier went back
    again.

    Mr and Mrs Sparkler had been dining alone, with their gloom cast over
    them, and Mrs Sparkler reclined on a drawing-room sofa. It was a hot
    summer Sunday evening. The residence in the centre of the habitable
    globe, at all times stuffed and close as if it had an incurable cold in
    its head, was that evening particularly stifling. The bells of the
    churches had done their worst in the way of clanging among the
    unmelodious echoes of the streets, and the lighted windows of the
    churches had ceased to be yellow in the grey dusk, and had died out
    opaque black. Mrs Sparkler, lying on her sofa, looking through an open
    window at the opposite side of a narrow street over boxes of mignonette
    and flowers, was tired of the view. Mrs Sparkler, looking at another
    window where her husband stood in the balcony, was tired of that view.
    Mrs Sparkler, looking at herself in her mourning, was even tired of that
    view: though, naturally, not so tired of that as of the other two.

    'It's like lying in a well,' said Mrs Sparkler, changing her position
    fretfully. 'Dear me, Edmund, if you have anything to say, why don't you
    say it?'

    Mr Sparkler might have replied with ingenuousness, 'My life, I have
    nothing to say.' But, as the repartee did not occur to him, he contented
    himself with coming in from the balcony and standing at the side of his
    wife's couch.

    'Good gracious, Edmund!' said Mrs Sparkler more fretfully still, 'you are
    absolutely putting mignonette up your nose! Pray don't!'

    Mr Sparkler, in absence of mind--perhaps in a more literal absence of
    mind than is usually understood by the phrase--had smelt so hard at a
    sprig in his hand as to be on the verge of the offence in question. He
    smiled, said, 'I ask your pardon, my dear,' and threw it out of window.

    'You make my head ache by remaining in that position, Edmund,' said Mrs
    Sparkler, raising her eyes to him after another minute; 'you look so
    aggravatingly large by this light. Do sit down.'

    'Certainly, my dear,' said Mr Sparkler, and took a chair on the same
    spot.

    'If I didn't know that the longest day was past,' said Fanny, yawning in
    a dreary manner, 'I should have felt certain this was the longest day. I
    never did experience such a day.'

    'Is that your fan, my love?' asked Mr Sparkler, picking up one and
    presenting it.

    'Edmund,' returned his wife, more wearily yet, 'don't ask weak
    questions, I entreat you not. Whose can it be but mine?'

    'Yes, I thought it was yours,' said Mr Sparkler.

    'Then you shouldn't ask,' retorted Fanny. After a little while she
    turned on her sofa and exclaimed, 'Dear me, dear me, there never was
    such a long day as this!' After another little while, she got up slowly,
    walked about, and came back again.

    'My dear,' said Mr Sparkler, flashing with an original conception, 'I
    think you must have got the fidgets.'

    'Oh, Fidgets!' repeated Mrs Sparkler. 'Don't.'

    'My adorable girl,' urged Mr Sparkler, 'try your aromatic vinegar. I
    have often seen my mother try it, and it seemingly refreshed her.

    And she is, as I believe you are aware, a remarkably fine woman, with no
    non--'

    'Good Gracious!' exclaimed Fanny, starting up again. 'It's beyond all
    patience! This is the most wearisome day that ever did dawn upon the
    world, I am certain.'

    Mr Sparkler looked meekly after her as she lounged about the room, and
    he appeared to be a little frightened. When she had tossed a few trifles
    about, and had looked down into the darkening street out of all the
    three windows, she returned to her sofa, and threw herself among its
    pillows.

    'Now Edmund, come here! Come a little nearer, because I want to be able
    to touch you with my fan, that I may impress you very much with what I
    am going to say. That will do. Quite close enough. Oh, you _do_ look so
    big!'

    Mr Sparkler apologised for the circumstance, pleaded that he couldn't
    help it, and said that 'our fellows,' without more particularly
    indicating whose fellows, used to call him by the name of Quinbus
    Flestrin, Junior, or the Young Man Mountain.

    'You ought to have told me so before,' Fanny complained.

    'My dear,' returned Mr Sparkler, rather gratified, 'I didn't know
    It would interest you, or I would have made a point of telling you.'

    'There! For goodness sake, don't talk,' said Fanny; 'I want to talk,
    myself. Edmund, we must not be alone any more. I must take such
    precautions as will prevent my being ever again reduced to the state of
    dreadful depression in which I am this evening.'

    'My dear,' answered Mr Sparkler; 'being as you are well known to be, a
    remarkably fine woman with no--'

    'Oh, good GRACIOUS!' cried Fanny.

    Mr Sparkler was so discomposed by the energy of this exclamation,
    accompanied with a flouncing up from the sofa and a flouncing down
    again, that a minute or two elapsed before he felt himself equal to
    saying in explanation:

    'I mean, my dear, that everybody knows you are calculated to shine in
    society.'

    'Calculated to shine in society,' retorted Fanny with great
    irritability; 'yes, indeed! And then what happens? I no sooner recover,
    in a visiting point of view, the shock of poor dear papa's death, and my
    poor uncle's--though I do not disguise from myself that the last was
    a happy release, for, if you are not presentable you had much better
    die--'

    'You are not referring to me, my love, I hope?' Mr Sparkler humbly
    interrupted.

    'Edmund, Edmund, you would wear out a Saint. Am I not expressly speaking
    of my poor uncle?'

    'You looked with so much expression at myself, my dear girl,' said Mr
    Sparkler, 'that I felt a little uncomfortable. Thank you, my love.'

    'Now you have put me out,' observed Fanny with a resigned toss of her
    fan, 'and I had better go to bed.'

    'Don't do that, my love,' urged Mr Sparkler. 'Take time.'

    Fanny took a good deal of time: lying back with her eyes shut, and her
    eyebrows raised with a hopeless expression as if she had utterly given
    up all terrestrial affairs. At length, without the slightest notice, she
    opened her eyes again, and recommenced in a short, sharp manner:

    'What happens then, I ask! What happens? Why, I find myself at the very
    period when I might shine most in society, and should most like for
    very momentous reasons to shine in society--I find myself in a situation
    which to a certain extent disqualifies me for going into society. It's
    too bad, really!'

    'My dear,' said Mr Sparkler. 'I don't think it need keep you at
    home.'

    'Edmund, you ridiculous creature,' returned Fanny, with great
    indignation; 'do you suppose that a woman in the bloom of youth and not
    wholly devoid of personal attractions, can put herself, at such a
    time, in competition as to figure with a woman in every other way her
    inferior? If you do suppose such a thing, your folly is boundless.'

    Mr Sparkler submitted that he had thought 'it might be got over.'

    'Got over!' repeated Fanny, with immeasurable scorn.

    'For a time,' Mr Sparkler submitted.

    Honouring the last feeble suggestion with no notice, Mrs Sparkler
    declared with bitterness that it really was too bad, and that positively
    it was enough to make one wish one was dead!

    'However,' she said, when she had in some measure recovered from her
    sense of personal ill-usage; 'provoking as it is, and cruel as it seems,
    I suppose it must be submitted to.'

    'Especially as it was to be expected,' said Mr Sparkler.

    'Edmund,' returned his wife, 'if you have nothing more becoming to do
    than to attempt to insult the woman who has honoured you with her hand,
    when she finds herself in adversity, I think _you_ had better go to bed!'

    Mr Sparkler was much afflicted by the charge, and offered a most
    tender and earnest apology. His apology was accepted; but Mrs Sparkler
    requested him to go round to the other side of the sofa and sit in the
    window-curtain, to tone himself down.

    'Now, Edmund,' she said, stretching out her fan, and touching him with
    it at arm's length, 'what I was going to say to you when you began as
    usual to prose and worry, is, that I shall guard against our being alone
    any more, and that when circumstances prevent my going out to my own
    satisfaction, I must arrange to have some people or other always here;
    for I really cannot, and will not, have another such day as this has
    been.'

    Mr Sparkler's sentiments as to the plan were, in brief, that it had no
    nonsense about it. He added, 'And besides, you know it's likely that
    you'll soon have your sister--'

    'Dearest Amy, yes!' cried Mrs Sparkler with a sigh of affection.
    'Darling little thing! Not, however, that Amy would do here alone.'

    Mr Sparkler was going to say 'No?' interrogatively, but he saw his
    danger and said it assentingly, 'No, Oh dear no; she wouldn't do here
    alone.'

    'No, Edmund. For not only are the virtues of the precious child of that
    still character that they require a contrast--require life and movement
    around them to bring them out in their right colours and make one love
    them of all things; but she will require to be roused, on more accounts
    than one.'

    'That's it,' said Mr Sparkler. 'Roused.'

    'Pray don't, Edmund! Your habit of interrupting without having the least
    thing in the world to say, distracts one. You must be broken of it.
    Speaking of Amy;--my poor little pet was devotedly attached to poor
    papa, and no doubt will have lamented his loss exceedingly, and grieved
    very much. I have done so myself. I have felt it dreadfully. But Amy
    will no doubt have felt it even more, from having been on the spot the
    whole time, and having been with poor dear papa at the last; which I
    unhappily was not.'

    Here Fanny stopped to weep, and to say, 'Dear, dear, beloved papa! How
    truly gentlemanly he was! What a contrast to poor uncle!'

    'From the effects of that trying time,' she pursued, 'my good little
    Mouse will have to be roused. Also, from the effects of this long
    attendance upon Edward in his illness; an attendance which is not
    yet over, which may even go on for some time longer, and which in the
    meanwhile unsettles us all by keeping poor dear papa's affairs from
    being wound up. Fortunately, however, the papers with his agents
    here being all sealed up and locked up, as he left them when he
    providentially came to England, the affairs are in that state of order
    that they can wait until my brother Edward recovers his health in
    Sicily, sufficiently to come over, and administer, or execute, or
    whatever it may be that will have to be done.'

    'He couldn't have a better nurse to bring him round,' Mr Sparkler made
    bold to opine.

    'For a wonder, I can agree with you,' returned his wife, languidly
    turning her eyelids a little in his direction (she held forth, in
            general, as if to the drawing-room furniture), 'and can adopt your
    words. He couldn't have a better nurse to bring him round. There are
    times when my dear child is a little wearing to an active mind; but, as
    a nurse, she is Perfection. Best of Amys!'

    Mr Sparkler, growing rash on his late success, observed that Edward had
    had, biggodd, a long bout of it, my dear girl.

    'If Bout, Edmund,' returned Mrs Sparkler, 'is the slang term for
    indisposition, he has. If it is not, I am unable to give an opinion
    on the barbarous language you address to Edward's sister. That he
    contracted Malaria Fever somewhere, either by travelling day and night
    to Rome, where, after all, he arrived too late to see poor dear papa
    before his death--or under some other unwholesome circumstances--is
    indubitable, if that is what you mean. Likewise that his extremely
    careless life has made him a very bad subject for it indeed.'

    Mr Sparkler considered it a parallel case to that of some of our fellows
    in the West Indies with Yellow Jack. Mrs Sparkler closed her eyes again,
    and refused to have any consciousness of our fellows of the West Indies,
    or of Yellow Jack.

    'So, Amy,' she pursued, when she reopened her eyelids, 'will require
    to be roused from the effects of many tedious and anxious weeks. And
    lastly, she will require to be roused from a low tendency which I know
    very well to be at the bottom of her heart. Don't ask me what it is,
    Edmund, because I must decline to tell you.'

    'I am not going to, my dear,' said Mr Sparkler.

    'I shall thus have much improvement to effect in my sweet child,' Mrs
    Sparkler continued, 'and cannot have her near me too soon. Amiable and
    dear little Twoshoes! As to the settlement of poor papa's affairs, my
    interest in that is not very selfish. Papa behaved very generously to me
    when I was married, and I have little or nothing to expect. Provided
    he had made no will that can come into force, leaving a legacy to Mrs
    General, I am contented. Dear papa, dear papa.'

    She wept again, but Mrs General was the best of restoratives. The name
    soon stimulated her to dry her eyes and say:

    'It is a highly encouraging circumstance in Edward's illness, I am
    thankful to think, and gives one the greatest confidence in his sense
    not being impaired, or his proper spirit weakened--down to the time
    of poor dear papa's death at all events--that he paid off Mrs General
    instantly, and sent her out of the house. I applaud him for it. I could
    forgive him a great deal for doing, with such promptitude, so exactly
    what I would have done myself!'

    Mrs Sparkler was in the full glow of her gratification, when a double
    knock was heard at the door. A very odd knock. Low, as if to avoid
    making a noise and attracting attention. Long, as if the person knocking
    were preoccupied in mind, and forgot to leave off.

    'Halloa!' said Mr Sparkler. 'Who's this?'

    'Not Amy and Edward without notice and without a carriage!' said Mrs
    Sparkler. 'Look out.'

    The room was dark, but the street was lighter, because of its lamps. Mr
    Sparkler's head peeping over the balcony looked so very bulky and heavy
    that it seemed on the point of overbalancing him and flattening the
    unknown below.

    'It's one fellow,' said Mr Sparkler. 'I can't see who--stop though!'

    On this second thought he went out into the balcony again and had
    another look. He came back as the door was opened, and announced that he
    believed he had identified 'his governor's tile.' He was not mistaken,
    for his governor, with his tile in his hand, was introduced immediately
    afterwards.

    'Candles!' said Mrs Sparkler, with a word of excuse for the darkness.

    'It's light enough for me,' said Mr Merdle.

    When the candles were brought in, Mr Merdle was discovered standing
    behind the door, picking his lips. 'I thought I'd give you a call,' he
    said. 'I am rather particularly occupied just now; and, as I happened to
    be out for a stroll, I thought I'd give you a call.'

    As he was in dinner dress, Fanny asked him where he had been dining?

    'Well,' said Mr Merdle, 'I haven't been dining anywhere, particularly.'

    'Of course you have dined?' said Fanny.

    'Why--no, I haven't exactly dined,' said Mr Merdle.

    He had passed his hand over his yellow forehead and considered, as if he
    were not sure about it. Something to eat was proposed. 'No, thank you,'
    said Mr Merdle, 'I don't feel inclined for it. I was to have dined out
    along with Mrs Merdle. But as I didn't feel inclined for dinner, I let
    Mrs Merdle go by herself just as we were getting into the carriage, and
    thought I'd take a stroll instead.'

    Would he have tea or coffee? 'No, thank you,' said Mr Merdle. 'I looked
    in at the Club, and got a bottle of wine.'

    At this period of his visit, Mr Merdle took the chair which Edmund
    Sparkler had offered him, and which he had hitherto been pushing slowly
    about before him, like a dull man with a pair of skates on for the first
    time, who could not make up his mind to start. He now put his hat upon
    another chair beside him, and, looking down into it as if it were some
    twenty feet deep, said again: 'You see I thought I'd give you a call.'

    'Flattering to us,' said Fanny, 'for you are not a calling man.'

    'No--no,' returned Mr Merdle, who was by this time taking himself into
    custody under both coat-sleeves. 'No, I am not a calling man.'

    'You have too much to do for that,' said Fanny. 'Having so much to do,
    Mr Merdle, loss of appetite is a serious thing with you, and you must
    have it seen to. You must not be ill.'

    'Oh! I am very well,' replied Mr Merdle, after deliberating about it. 'I
    am as well as I usually am. I am well enough. I am as well as I want to
    be.'

    The master-mind of the age, true to its characteristic of being at all
    times a mind that had as little as possible to say for itself and great
    difficulty in saying it, became mute again. Mrs Sparkler began to wonder
    how long the master-mind meant to stay.

    'I was speaking of poor papa when you came in, sir.'

    'Aye! Quite a coincidence,' said Mr Merdle.

    Fanny did not see that; but felt it incumbent on her to continue
    talking. 'I was saying,' she pursued, 'that my brother's illness has
    occasioned a delay in examining and arranging papa's property.'

    'Yes,' said Mr Merdle; 'yes. There has been a delay.'

    'Not that it is of consequence,' said Fanny.

    'Not,' assented Mr Merdle, after having examined the cornice of all
    that part of the room which was within his range: 'not that it is of any
    consequence.'

    'My only anxiety is,' said Fanny, 'that Mrs General should not get
    anything.'

    '_She_ won't get anything,' said Mr Merdle.

    Fanny was delighted to hear him express the opinion. Mr Merdle, after
    taking another gaze into the depths of his hat as if he thought he saw
    something at the bottom, rubbed his hair and slowly appended to his last
    remark the confirmatory words, 'Oh dear no. No. Not she. Not likely.'

    As the topic seemed exhausted, and Mr Merdle too, Fanny inquired if he
    were going to take up Mrs Merdle and the carriage in his way home?

    'No,' he answered; 'I shall go by the shortest way, and leave Mrs Merdle
    to--' here he looked all over the palms of both his hands as if he were
    telling his own fortune--'to take care of herself. I dare say she'll
    manage to do it.'

    'Probably,' said Fanny.

    There was then a long silence; during which, Mrs Sparkler, lying back
    on her sofa again, shut her eyes and raised her eyebrows in her former
    retirement from mundane affairs.

    'But, however,' said Mr Merdle, 'I am equally detaining you and myself.
    I thought I'd give you a call, you know.'

    'Charmed, I am sure,' said Fanny.

    'So I am off,' added Mr Merdle, getting up. 'Could you lend me a
    penknife?'

    It was an odd thing, Fanny smilingly observed, for her who could seldom
    prevail upon herself even to write a letter, to lend to a man of such
    vast business as Mr Merdle. 'Isn't it?' Mr Merdle acquiesced; 'but
    I want one; and I know you have got several little wedding keepsakes
    about, with scissors and tweezers and such things in them. You shall
    have it back to-morrow.'

    'Edmund,' said Mrs Sparkler, 'open (now, very carefully, I beg and
            beseech, for you are so very awkward) the mother of pearl box on my
    little table there, and give Mr Merdle the mother of pearl penknife.'

    'Thank you,' said Mr Merdle; 'but if you have got one with a darker
    handle, I think I should prefer one with a darker handle.'

    'Tortoise-shell?'

    'Thank you,' said Mr Merdle; 'yes. I think I should prefer
    tortoise-shell.'

    Edmund accordingly received instructions to open the tortoise-shell box,
    and give Mr Merdle the tortoise-shell knife. On his doing so, his wife
    said to the master-spirit graciously:

    'I will forgive you, if you ink it.'

    'I'll undertake not to ink it,' said Mr Merdle.

    The illustrious visitor then put out his coat-cuff, and for a moment
    entombed Mrs Sparkler's hand: wrist, bracelet, and all. Where his own
    hand had shrunk to, was not made manifest, but it was as remote from Mrs
    Sparkler's sense of touch as if he had been a highly meritorious Chelsea
    Veteran or Greenwich Pensioner.

    Thoroughly convinced, as he went out of the room, that it was the
    longest day that ever did come to an end at last, and that there never
    was a woman, not wholly devoid of personal attractions, so worn out by
    idiotic and lumpish people, Fanny passed into the balcony for a breath
    of air. Waters of vexation filled her eyes; and they had the effect of
    making the famous Mr Merdle, in going down the street, appear to leap,
    and waltz, and gyrate, as if he were possessed of several Devils.




The dinner-party was at the great Physician's. Bar was there, and in
full force. Ferdinand Barnacle was there, and in his most engaging
state. Few ways of life were hidden from Physician, and he was oftener
in its darkest places than even Bishop. There were brilliant ladies
about London who perfectly doted on him, my dear, as the most charming
creature and the most delightful person, who would have been shocked to
find themselves so close to him if they could have known on what sights
those thoughtful eyes of his had rested within an hour or two, and near
to whose beds, and under what roofs, his composed figure had stood. But
Physician was a composed man, who performed neither on his own trumpet,
          nor on the trumpets of other people. Many wonderful things did he see
          and hear, and much irreconcilable moral contradiction did he pass his
          life among; yet his equality of compassion was no more disturbed than
          the Divine Master's of all healing was. He went, like the rain,
          among the just and unjust, doing all the good he could, and neither
          proclaiming it in the synagogues nor at the corner of streets.

          As no man of large experience of humanity, however quietly carried
          it may be, can fail to be invested with an interest peculiar to the
          possession of such knowledge, Physician was an attractive man. Even the
          daintier gentlemen and ladies who had no idea of his secret, and
          who would have been startled out of more wits than they had, by the
          monstrous impropriety of his proposing to them 'Come and see what I
          see!' confessed his attraction. Where he was, something real was. And
          half a grain of reality, like the smallest portion of some other scarce
          natural productions, will flavour an enormous quantity of diluent.

          It came to pass, therefore, that Physician's little dinners always
          presented people in their least conventional lights. The guests said to
          themselves, whether they were conscious of it or no, 'Here is a man who
          really has an acquaintance with us as we are, who is admitted to some
          of us every day with our wigs and paint off, who hears the wanderings of
          our minds, and sees the undisguised expression of our faces, when both
          are past our control; we may as well make an approach to reality with
          him, for the man has got the better of us and is too strong for us.'
          Therefore, Physician's guests came out so surprisingly at his round
          table that they were almost natural.

          Bar's knowledge of that agglomeration of jurymen which is called
          humanity was as sharp as a razor; yet a razor is not a generally
          convenient instrument, and Physician's plain bright scalpel, though far
          less keen, was adaptable to far wider purposes. Bar knew all about the
          gullibility and knavery of people; but Physician could have given him
          a better insight into their tendernesses and affections, in one week of
          his rounds, than Westminster Hall and all the circuits put together,
          in threescore years and ten. Bar always had a suspicion of this, and
          perhaps was glad to encourage it (for, if the world were really a great
                  Law Court, one would think that the last day of Term could not too soon
                  arrive); and so he liked and respected Physician quite as much as any
          other kind of man did.

          Mr Merdle's default left a Banquo's chair at the table; but, if he had
          been there, he would have merely made the difference of Banquo in it,
          and consequently he was no loss. Bar, who picked up all sorts of odds
          and ends about Westminster Hall, much as a raven would have done if he
          had passed as much of his time there, had been picking up a great many
          straws lately and tossing them about, to try which way the Merdle wind
          blew. He now had a little talk on the subject with Mrs Merdle herself;
          sidling up to that lady, of course, with his double eye-glass and his
          jury droop.

          'A certain bird,' said Bar; and he looked as if it could have been no
          other bird than a magpie; 'has been whispering among us lawyers lately,
          that there is to be an addition to the titled personages of this realm.'

          'Really?' said Mrs Merdle.

          'Yes,' said Bar. 'Has not the bird been whispering in very different
          ears from ours--in lovely ears?' He looked expressively at Mrs Merdle's
          nearest ear-ring.

          'Do you mean mine?' asked Mrs Merdle.

          'When I say lovely,' said Bar, 'I always mean you.'

          'You never mean anything, I think,' returned Mrs Merdle (not
                  displeased).

          'Oh, cruelly unjust!' said Bar. 'But, the bird.'

          'I am the last person in the world to hear news,' observed Mrs Merdle,
          carelessly arranging her stronghold. 'Who is it?'

          'What an admirable witness you would make!' said Bar. 'No jury (unless
                  we could empanel one of blind men) could resist you, if you were ever so
          bad a one; but you would be such a good one!'

          'Why, you ridiculous man?' asked Mrs Merdle, laughing.

          Bar waved his double eye-glass three or four times between himself and
          the Bosom, as a rallying answer, and inquired in his most insinuating
          accents:

          'What am I to call the most elegant, accomplished and charming of women,
          a few weeks, or it may be a few days, hence?'

          'Didn't your bird tell you what to call her?' answered Mrs Merdle. 'Do
          ask it to-morrow, and tell me the next time you see me what it says.'

          This led to further passages of similar pleasantry between the two; but
          Bar, with all his sharpness, got nothing out of them. Physician, on the
          other hand, taking Mrs Merdle down to her carriage and attending on her
          as she put on her cloak, inquired into the symptoms with his usual calm
          directness.

          'May I ask,' he said, 'is this true about Merdle?'

          'My dear doctor,' she returned, 'you ask me the very question that I was
          half disposed to ask you.'

          'To ask me! Why me?'

          'Upon my honour, I think Mr Merdle reposes greater confidence in you
          than in any one.'

          'On the contrary, he tells me absolutely nothing, even professionally.
          You have heard the talk, of course?'

          'Of course I have. But you know what Mr Merdle is; you know how
          taciturn and reserved he is. I assure you I have no idea what foundation
          for it there may be. I should like it to be true; why should I deny that
          to you? You would know better, if I did!'

          'Just so,' said Physician.

          'But whether it is all true, or partly true, or entirely false, I am
          wholly unable to say. It is a most provoking situation, a most absurd
          situation; but you know Mr Merdle, and are not surprised.'

          Physician was not surprised, handed her into her carriage, and bade her
          Good Night. He stood for a moment at his own hall door, looking sedately
          at the elegant equipage as it rattled away. On his return up-stairs, the
          rest of the guests soon dispersed, and he was left alone. Being a great
          reader of all kinds of literature (and never at all apologetic for that
                  weakness), he sat down comfortably to read.

          The clock upon his study table pointed to a few minutes short of twelve,
          when his attention was called to it by a ringing at the door bell. A man
          of plain habits, he had sent his servants to bed and must needs go down
          to open the door. He went down, and there found a man without hat or
          coat, whose shirt sleeves were rolled up tight to his shoulders. For a
          moment, he thought the man had been fighting: the rather, as he was much
          agitated and out of breath. A second look, however, showed him that
          the man was particularly clean, and not otherwise discomposed as to his
          dress than as it answered this description.

          'I come from the warm-baths, sir, round in the neighbouring street.'

          'And what is the matter at the warm-baths?'

          'Would you please to come directly, sir. We found that, lying on the
          table.'

          He put into the physician's hand a scrap of paper. Physician looked at
          it, and read his own name and address written in pencil; nothing more.
          He looked closer at the writing, looked at the man, took his hat from
          its peg, put the key of his door in his pocket, and they hurried away
          together.

          When they came to the warm-baths, all the other people belonging to that
          establishment were looking out for them at the door, and running up and
          down the passages. 'Request everybody else to keep back, if you please,'
          said the physician aloud to the master; 'and do you take me straight to
          the place, my friend,' to the messenger.

          The messenger hurried before him, along a grove of little rooms,
          and turning into one at the end of the grove, looked round the door.
          Physician was close upon him, and looked round the door too.

          There was a bath in that corner, from which the water had been hastily
          drained off. Lying in it, as in a grave or sarcophagus, with a hurried
          drapery of sheet and blanket thrown across it, was the body of a
          heavily-made man, with an obtuse head, and coarse, mean, common
          features. A sky-light had been opened to release the steam with which
          the room had been filled; but it hung, condensed into water-drops,
          heavily upon the walls, and heavily upon the face and figure in the
          bath. The room was still hot, and the marble of the bath still warm; but
          the face and figure were clammy to the touch. The white marble at the
          bottom of the bath was veined with a dreadful red. On the ledge at
          the side, were an empty laudanum-bottle and a tortoise-shell handled
          penknife--soiled, but not with ink.

          'Separation of jugular vein--death rapid--been dead at least half an
          hour.' This echo of the physician's words ran through the passages
          and little rooms, and through the house while he was yet straightening
          himself from having bent down to reach to the bottom of the bath, and
          while he was yet dabbling his hands in water; redly veining it as the
          marble was veined, before it mingled into one tint.

          He turned his eyes to the dress upon the sofa, and to the watch, money,
          and pocket-book on the table. A folded note half buckled up in the
          pocket-book, and half protruding from it, caught his observant glance.
          He looked at it, touched it, pulled it a little further out from among
          the leaves, said quietly, 'This is addressed to me,' and opened and read
          it.

          There were no directions for him to give. The people of the house knew
          what to do; the proper authorities were soon brought; and they took an
          equable business-like possession of the deceased, and of what had been
          his property, with no greater disturbance of manner or countenance than
          usually attends the winding-up of a clock. Physician was glad to walk
          out into the night air--was even glad, in spite of his great experience,
          to sit down upon a door-step for a little while: feeling sick and faint.

          Bar was a near neighbour of his, and, when he came to the house, he saw
          a light in the room where he knew his friend often sat late getting up
          his work. As the light was never there when Bar was not, it gave him
          assurance that Bar was not yet in bed. In fact, this busy bee had
          a verdict to get to-morrow, against evidence, and was improving the
          shining hours in setting snares for the gentlemen of the jury.

          Physician's knock astonished Bar; but, as he immediately suspected that
          somebody had come to tell him that somebody else was robbing him, or
          otherwise trying to get the better of him, he came down promptly and
          softly. He had been clearing his head with a lotion of cold water, as a
          good preparative to providing hot water for the heads of the jury, and
          had been reading with the neck of his shirt thrown wide open that he
          might the more freely choke the opposite witnesses. In consequence, he
          came down, looking rather wild. Seeing Physician, the least expected of
          men, he looked wilder and said, 'What's the matter?'

          'You asked me once what Merdle's complaint was.'

          'Extraordinary answer! I know I did.'

          'I told you I had not found out.'

          'Yes. I know you did.'

          'I have found it out.'

          'My God!' said Bar, starting back, and clapping his hand upon the
          other's breast. 'And so have I! I see it in your face.'

          They went into the nearest room, where Physician gave him the letter to
          read. He read it through half-a-dozen times. There was not much in it
          as to quantity; but it made a great demand on his close and continuous
          attention. He could not sufficiently give utterance to his regret that
          he had not himself found a clue to this. The smallest clue, he said,
          would have made him master of the case, and what a case it would have
          been to have got to the bottom of!

          Physician had engaged to break the intelligence in Harley Street. Bar
          could not at once return to his inveiglements of the most enlightened
          and remarkable jury he had ever seen in that box, with whom, he could
          tell his learned friend, no shallow sophistry would go down, and no
          unhappily abused professional tact and skill prevail (this was the way
                  he meant to begin with them); so he said he would go too, and would
          loiter to and fro near the house while his friend was inside. They
          walked there, the better to recover self-possession in the air; and the
          wings of day were fluttering the night when Physician knocked at the
          door.

          A footman of rainbow hues, in the public eye, was sitting up for his
          master--that is to say, was fast asleep in the kitchen over a couple
          of candles and a newspaper, demonstrating the great accumulation of
          mathematical odds against the probabilities of a house being set on fire
          by accident When this serving man was roused, Physician had still to
          await the rousing of the Chief Butler. At last that noble creature came
          into the dining-room in a flannel gown and list shoes; but with his
          cravat on, and a Chief Butler all over. It was morning now. Physician
          had opened the shutters of one window while waiting, that he might see
          the light.

          'Mrs Merdle's maid must be called, and told to get Mrs Merdle up, and
          prepare her as gently as she can to see me. I have dreadful news to
          break to her.'

          Thus Physician to the Chief Butler. The latter, who had a candle in his
          hand, called his man to take it away. Then he approached the window with
          dignity; looking on at Physician's news exactly as he had looked on at
          the dinners in that very room.

          'Mr Merdle is dead.'

          'I should wish,' said the Chief Butler, 'to give a month's notice.'

          'Mr Merdle has destroyed himself.'

          'Sir,' said the Chief Butler, 'that is very unpleasant to the feelings
          of one in my position, as calculated to awaken prejudice; and I should
          wish to leave immediately.'

          'If you are not shocked, are you not surprised, man?' demanded the
          Physician, warmly.

          The Chief Butler, erect and calm, replied in these memorable words.
          'Sir, Mr Merdle never was the gentleman, and no ungentlemanly act on
          Mr Merdle's part would surprise me. Is there anybody else I can send to
          you, or any other directions I can give before I leave, respecting what
          you would wish to be done?'

          When Physician, after discharging himself of his trust up-stairs,
          rejoined Bar in the street, he said no more of his interview with Mrs
          Merdle than that he had not yet told her all, but that what he had told
          her she had borne pretty well. Bar had devoted his leisure in the street
          to the construction of a most ingenious man-trap for catching the whole
          of his jury at a blow; having got that matter settled in his mind,
          it was lucid on the late catastrophe, and they walked home slowly,
          discussing it in every bearing. Before parting at the Physician's door,
          they both looked up at the sunny morning sky, into which the smoke of a
          few early fires and the breath and voices of a few early stirrers were
          peacefully rising, and then looked round upon the immense city, and
          said, if all those hundreds and thousands of beggared people who were
          yet asleep could only know, as they two spoke, the ruin that impended
          over them, what a fearful cry against one miserable soul would go up to
          Heaven!

          The report that the great man was dead, got about with astonishing
          rapidity. At first, he was dead of all the diseases that ever were
          known, and of several bran-new maladies invented with the speed of
          Light to meet the demand of the occasion. He had concealed a dropsy from
          infancy, he had inherited a large estate of water on the chest from his
          grandfather, he had had an operation performed upon him every morning
          of his life for eighteen years, he had been subject to the explosion of
          important veins in his body after the manner of fireworks, he had had
          something the matter with his lungs, he had had something the matter
          with his heart, he had had something the matter with his brain. Five
          hundred people who sat down to breakfast entirely uninformed on the
          whole subject, believed before they had done breakfast, that they
          privately and personally knew Physician to have said to Mr Merdle, 'You
          must expect to go out, some day, like the snuff of a candle;' and that
          they knew Mr Merdle to have said to Physician, 'A man can die but once.'
          By about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, something the matter with the
          brain, became the favourite theory against the field; and by twelve the
          something had been distinctly ascertained to be 'Pressure.'

          Pressure was so entirely satisfactory to the public mind, and seemed to
          make everybody so comfortable, that it might have lasted all day but for
          Bar's having taken the real state of the case into Court at half-past
          nine. This led to its beginning to be currently whispered all over
          London by about one, that Mr Merdle had killed himself. Pressure,
          however, so far from being overthrown by the discovery, became a greater
          favourite than ever. There was a general moralising upon Pressure, in
          every street. All the people who had tried to make money and had not
          been able to do it, said, There you were! You no sooner began to devote
          yourself to the pursuit of wealth than you got Pressure. The idle people
          improved the occasion in a similar manner. See, said they, what you
          brought yourself to by work, work, work! You persisted in working, you
          overdid it. Pressure came on, and you were done for! This consideration
          was very potent in many quarters, but nowhere more so than among the
          young clerks and partners who had never been in the slightest danger
          of overdoing it. These, one and all, declared, quite piously, that they
          hoped they would never forget the warning as long as they lived, and
          that their conduct might be so regulated as to keep off Pressure, and
          preserve them, a comfort to their friends, for many years.

          But, at about the time of High 'Change, Pressure began to wane, and
          appalling whispers to circulate, east, west, north, and south. At first
          they were faint, and went no further than a doubt whether Mr Merdle's
          wealth would be found to be as vast as had been supposed; whether there
          might not be a temporary difficulty in 'realising' it; whether there
          might not even be a temporary suspension (say a month or so), on the
          part of the wonderful Bank. As the whispers became louder, which they
          did from that time every minute, they became more threatening. He had
          sprung from nothing, by no natural growth or process that any one could
          account for; he had been, after all, a low, ignorant fellow; he had been
          a down-looking man, and no one had ever been able to catch his eye;
          he had been taken up by all sorts of people in quite an unaccountable
          manner; he had never had any money of his own, his ventures had been
          utterly reckless, and his expenditure had been most enormous. In steady
          progression, as the day declined, the talk rose in sound and purpose.
          He had left a letter at the Baths addressed to his physician, and his
          physician had got the letter, and the letter would be produced at the
          Inquest on the morrow, and it would fall like a thunderbolt upon the
          multitude he had deluded. Numbers of men in every profession and trade
          would be blighted by his insolvency; old people who had been in easy
          circumstances all their lives would have no place of repentance for
          their trust in him but the workhouse; legions of women and children
          would have their whole future desolated by the hand of this mighty
          scoundrel. Every partaker of his magnificent feasts would be seen to
          have been a sharer in the plunder of innumerable homes; every servile
          worshipper of riches who had helped to set him on his pedestal, would
          have done better to worship the Devil point-blank. So, the talk, lashed
          louder and higher by confirmation on confirmation, and by edition after
          edition of the evening papers, swelled into such a roar when night came,
          as might have brought one to believe that a solitary watcher on the
          gallery above the Dome of St Paul's would have perceived the night air
          to be laden with a heavy muttering of the name of Merdle, coupled with
          every form of execration.

          For by that time it was known that the late Mr Merdle's complaint
          had been simply Forgery and Robbery. He, the uncouth object of such
          wide-spread adulation, the sitter at great men's feasts, the roc's egg
          of great ladies' assemblies, the subduer of exclusiveness, the leveller
          of pride, the patron of patrons, the bargain-driver with a Minister
          for Lordships of the Circumlocution Office, the recipient of more
          acknowledgment within some ten or fifteen years, at most, than had been
          bestowed in England upon all peaceful public benefactors, and upon
          all the leaders of all the Arts and Sciences, with all their works to
          testify for them, during two centuries at least--he, the shining wonder,
          the new constellation to be followed by the wise men bringing gifts,
          until it stopped over a certain carrion at the bottom of a bath and
          disappeared--was simply the greatest Forger and the greatest Thief that
          ever cheated the gallows.




With a precursory sound of hurried breath and hurried feet, Mr Pancks
rushed into Arthur Clennam's Counting-house. The Inquest was over, the
letter was public, the Bank was broken, the other model structures of
straw had taken fire and were turned to smoke. The admired piratical
ship had blown up, in the midst of a vast fleet of ships of all rates,
     and boats of all sizes; and on the deep was nothing but ruin; nothing
     but burning hulls, bursting magazines, great guns self-exploded tearing
     friends and neighbours to pieces, drowning men clinging to unseaworthy
     spars and going down every minute, spent swimmers, floating dead, and
     sharks.

     The usual diligence and order of the Counting-house at the Works were
     overthrown. Unopened letters and unsorted papers lay strewn about the
     desk. In the midst of these tokens of prostrated energy and dismissed
     hope, the master of the Counting-house stood idle in his usual place,
     with his arms crossed on the desk, and his head bowed down upon them.

     Mr Pancks rushed in and saw him, and stood still. In another minute, Mr
     Pancks's arms were on the desk, and Mr Pancks's head was bowed down
     upon them; and for some time they remained in these attitudes, idle and
     silent, with the width of the little room between them.

     Mr Pancks was the first to lift up his head and speak.

     'I persuaded you to it, Mr Clennam. I know it. Say what you will. You
     can't say more to me than I say to myself. You can't say more than I
     deserve.'

     'O, Pancks, Pancks!' returned Clennam, 'don't speak of deserving. What
     do I myself deserve!'

     'Better luck,' said Pancks.

     'I,' pursued Clennam, without attending to him, 'who have ruined my
     partner! Pancks, Pancks, I have ruined Doyce! The honest, self-helpful,
     indefatigable old man who has worked his way all through his life;
the man who has contended against so much disappointment, and who has
brought out of it such a good and hopeful nature; the man I have felt
so much for, and meant to be so true and useful to; I have ruined
him--brought him to shame and disgrace--ruined him, ruined him!'

The agony into which the reflection wrought his mind was so distressing
to see, that Mr Pancks took hold of himself by the hair of his head, and
tore it in desperation at the spectacle.

'Reproach me!' cried Pancks. 'Reproach me, sir, or I'll do myself an
injury. Say,--You fool, you villain. Say,--Ass, how could you do it;
Beast, what did you mean by it! Catch hold of me somewhere. Say
something abusive to me!' All the time, Mr Pancks was tearing at his
tough hair in a most pitiless and cruel manner.

'If you had never yielded to this fatal mania, Pancks,' said Clennam,
    more in commiseration than retaliation, 'it would have been how much
    better for you, and how much better for me!'

    'At me again, sir!' cried Pancks, grinding his teeth in remorse. 'At
    me again!'

    'If you had never gone into those accursed calculations, and brought out
    your results with such abominable clearness,' groaned Clennam, 'it would
    have been how much better for you, Pancks, and how much better for me!'

    'At me again, sir!' exclaimed Pancks, loosening his hold of his hair;
    'at me again, and again!'

    Clennam, however, finding him already beginning to be pacified, had said
    all he wanted to say, and more. He wrung his hand, only adding, 'Blind
    leaders of the blind, Pancks! Blind leaders of the blind! But Doyce,
    Doyce, Doyce; my injured partner!' That brought his head down on the
    desk once more.

    Their former attitudes and their former silence were once more first
    encroached upon by Pancks.

    'Not been to bed, sir, since it began to get about. Been high and low,
    on the chance of finding some hope of saving any cinders from the fire.
    All in vain. All gone. All vanished.'

    'I know it,' returned Clennam, 'too well.'

    Mr Pancks filled up a pause with a groan that came out of the very
    depths of his soul.

    'Only yesterday, Pancks,' said Arthur; 'only yesterday, Monday, I had
    the fixed intention of selling, realising, and making an end of it.'

    'I can't say as much for myself, sir,' returned Pancks. 'Though it's
    wonderful how many people I've heard of, who were going to realise
    yesterday, of all days in the three hundred and sixty-five, if it hadn't
    been too late!'

    His steam-like breathings, usually droll in their effect, were more
    tragic than so many groans: while from head to foot, he was in that
    begrimed, besmeared, neglected state, that he might have been an
    authentic portrait of Misfortune which could scarcely be discerned
    through its want of cleaning.

    'Mr Clennam, had you laid out--everything?' He got over the break before
    the last word, and also brought out the last word itself with great
    difficulty.

    'Everything.'

    Mr Pancks took hold of his tough hair again, and gave it such a wrench
    that he pulled out several prongs of it. After looking at these with an
    eye of wild hatred, he put them in his pocket.

    'My course,' said Clennam, brushing away some tears that had been
    silently dropping down his face, 'must be taken at once. What wretched
    amends I can make must be made. I must clear my unfortunate partner's
    reputation. I must retain nothing for myself. I must resign to our
    creditors the power of management I have so much abused, and I must work
    out as much of my fault--or crime--as is susceptible of being worked out
    in the rest of my days.'

    'Is it impossible, sir, to tide over the present?'

    'Out of the question. Nothing can be tided over now, Pancks. The sooner
    the business can pass out of my hands, the better for it. There are
    engagements to be met, this week, which would bring the catastrophe
    before many days were over, even if I would postpone it for a single day
    by going on for that space, secretly knowing what I know. All last night
    I thought of what I would do; what remains is to do it.'

    'Not entirely of yourself?' said Pancks, whose face was as damp as if
    his steam were turning into water as fast as he dismally blew it off.
    'Have some legal help.'

    'Perhaps I had better.'

    'Have Rugg.'

    'There is not much to do. He will do it as well as another.'

    'Shall I fetch Rugg, Mr Clennam?'

    'If you could spare the time, I should be much obliged to you.'

    Mr Pancks put on his hat that moment, and steamed away to Pentonville.
    While he was gone Arthur never raised his head from the desk, but
    remained in that one position.

    Mr Pancks brought his friend and professional adviser, Mr Rugg, back
    with him. Mr Rugg had had such ample experience, on the road, of Mr
    Pancks's being at that present in an irrational state of mind, that he
    opened his professional mediation by requesting that gentleman to take
    himself out of the way. Mr Pancks, crushed and submissive, obeyed.

    'He is not unlike what my daughter was, sir, when we began the Breach of
    Promise action of Rugg and Bawkins, in which she was Plaintiff,' said
    Mr Rugg. 'He takes too strong and direct an interest in the case. His
    feelings are worked upon. There is no getting on, in our profession,
    with feelings worked upon, sir.'

    As he pulled off his gloves and put them in his hat, he saw, in a side
    glance or two, that a great change had come over his client.

    'I am sorry to perceive, sir,' said Mr Rugg, 'that you have been
    allowing your own feelings to be worked upon. Now, pray don't, pray
    don't. These losses are much to be deplored, sir, but we must look 'em
    in the face.'

    'If the money I have sacrificed had been all my own, Mr Rugg,' sighed Mr
    Clennam, 'I should have cared far less.'

    'Indeed, sir?' said Mr Rugg, rubbing his hands with a cheerful air.
    'You surprise me. That's singular, sir. I have generally found, in my
    experience, that it's their own money people are most particular about.
    I have seen people get rid of a good deal of other people's money, and
    bear it very well: very well indeed.'

    With these comforting remarks, Mr Rugg seated himself on an office-stool
    at the desk and proceeded to business.

    'Now, Mr Clennam, by your leave, let us go into the matter. Let us see
    the state of the case. The question is simple. The question is the
    usual plain, straightforward, common-sense question. What can we do for
    ourself? What can we do for ourself?'

    'This is not the question with me, Mr Rugg,' said Arthur. 'You mistake
    it in the beginning. It is, what can I do for my partner, how can I best
    make reparation to him?'

    'I am afraid, sir, do you know,' argued Mr Rugg persuasively, 'that you
    are still allowing your feeling to be worked upon. I _don't_ like the term
    "reparation," sir, except as a lever in the hands of counsel. Will you
    excuse my saying that I feel it my duty to offer you the caution, that
    you really must not allow your feelings to be worked upon?'

    'Mr Rugg,' said Clennam, nerving himself to go through with what he
    had resolved upon, and surprising that gentleman by appearing, in his
    despondency, to have a settled determination of purpose; 'you give me
    the impression that you will not be much disposed to adopt the course
    I have made up my mind to take. If your disapproval of it should render
    you unwilling to discharge such business as it necessitates, I am sorry
    for it, and must seek other aid. But I will represent to you at once,
    that to argue against it with me is useless.'

    'Good, sir,' answered Mr Rugg, shrugging his shoulders. 'Good, sir. Since
    the business is to be done by some hands, let it be done by mine. Such
    was my principle in the case of Rugg and Bawkins. Such is my principle
    in most cases.'

    Clennam then proceeded to state to Mr Rugg his fixed resolution. He told
    Mr Rugg that his partner was a man of great simplicity and integrity,
    and that in all he meant to do, he was guided above all things by a
    knowledge of his partner's character, and a respect for his feelings.
    He explained that his partner was then absent on an enterprise of
    importance, and that it particularly behoved himself publicly to accept
    the blame of what he had rashly done, and publicly to exonerate his
    partner from all participation in the responsibility of it, lest the
    successful conduct of that enterprise should be endangered by the
    slightest suspicion wrongly attaching to his partner's honour and credit
    in another country. He told Mr Rugg that to clear his partner morally,
    to the fullest extent, and publicly and unreservedly to declare that
    he, Arthur Clennam, of that Firm, had of his own sole act, and even
    expressly against his partner's caution, embarked its resources in the
    swindles that had lately perished, was the only real atonement within
    his power; was a better atonement to the particular man than it would be
    to many men; and was therefore the atonement he had first to make. With
    this view, his intention was to print a declaration to the foregoing
    effect, which he had already drawn up; and, besides circulating it
    among all who had dealings with the House, to advertise it in the public
    papers. Concurrently with this measure (the description of which cost Mr
            Rugg innumerable wry faces and great uneasiness in his limbs), he would
    address a letter to all the creditors, exonerating his partner in a
    solemn manner, informing them of the stoppage of the House until their
    pleasure could be known and his partner communicated with, and humbly
    submitting himself to their direction. If, through their consideration
    for his partner's innocence, the affairs could ever be got into such
    train as that the business could be profitably resumed, and its present
    downfall overcome, then his own share in it should revert to his
    partner, as the only reparation he could make to him in money value for
    the distress and loss he had unhappily brought upon him, and he himself,
    at as small a salary as he could live upon, would ask to be allowed to
    serve the business as a faithful clerk.

    Though Mr Rugg saw plainly there was no preventing this from being done,
    still the wryness of his face and the uneasiness of his limbs so sorely
    required the propitiation of a Protest, that he made one. 'I offer no
    objection, sir,' said he, 'I argue no point with you. I will carry out
    your views, sir; but, under protest.' Mr Rugg then stated, not without
    prolixity, the heads of his protest. These were, in effect, because the
    whole town, or he might say the whole country, was in the first madness
    of the late discovery, and the resentment against the victims would be
    very strong: those who had not been deluded being certain to wax
    exceedingly wroth with them for not having been as wise as they were:
    and those who had been deluded being certain to find excuses and reasons
    for themselves, of which they were equally certain to see that other
    sufferers were wholly devoid: not to mention the great probability of
    every individual sufferer persuading himself, to his violent
    indignation, that but for the example of all the other sufferers he
    never would have put himself in the way of suffering. Because such a
    declaration as Clennam's, made at such a time, would certainly draw down
    upon him a storm of animosity, rendering it impossible to calculate on
    forbearance in the creditors, or on unanimity among them; and exposing
    him a solitary target to a straggling cross-fire, which might bring him
    down from half-a-dozen quarters at once.

    To all this Clennam merely replied that, granting the whole protest,
    nothing in it lessened the force, or could lessen the force, of the
    voluntary and public exoneration of his partner. He therefore, once
    and for all, requested Mr Rugg's immediate aid in getting the business
    despatched. Upon that, Mr Rugg fell to work; and Arthur, retaining no
    property to himself but his clothes and books, and a little loose
    money, placed his small private banker's-account with the papers of the
    business.

    The disclosure was made, and the storm raged fearfully. Thousands of
    people were wildly staring about for somebody alive to heap reproaches
    on; and this notable case, courting publicity, set the living somebody
    so much wanted, on a scaffold. When people who had nothing to do with
    the case were so sensible of its flagrancy, people who lost money by it
    could scarcely be expected to deal mildly with it. Letters of reproach
    and invective showered in from the creditors; and Mr Rugg, who sat upon
    the high stool every day and read them all, informed his client within a
    week that he feared there were writs out.

    'I must take the consequences of what I have done,' said Clennam. 'The
    writs will find me here.'

    On the very next morning, as he was turning in Bleeding Heart Yard by
    Mrs Plornish's corner, Mrs Plornish stood at the door waiting for him,
    and mysteriously besought him to step into Happy Cottage. There he found
    Mr Rugg.

    'I thought I'd wait for you here. I wouldn't go on to the Counting-house
    this morning if I was you, sir.'

    'Why not, Mr Rugg?'

    'There are as many as five out, to my knowledge.'

    'It cannot be too soon over,' said Clennam. 'Let them take me at once.'

    'Yes, but,' said Mr Rugg, getting between him and the door, 'hear
    reason, hear reason. They'll take you soon enough, Mr Clennam, I don't
    doubt; but, hear reason. It almost always happens, in these cases,
    that some insignificant matter pushes itself in front and makes much
    of itself. Now, I find there's a little one out--a mere Palace Court
    jurisdiction--and I have reason to believe that a caption may be made
    upon that. I wouldn't be taken upon that.'

    'Why not?' asked Clennam.

    'I'd be taken on a full-grown one, sir,' said Mr Rugg. 'It's as well to
    keep up appearances. As your professional adviser, I should prefer your
    being taken on a writ from one of the Superior Courts, if you have no
    objection to do me that favour. It looks better.'

    'Mr Rugg,' said Arthur, in his dejection, 'my only wish is, that it
    should be over. I will go on, and take my chance.'

    'Another word of reason, sir!' cried Mr Rugg. 'Now, this _is_ reason.
    The other may be taste; but this is reason. If you should be taken on a
    little one, sir, you would go to the Marshalsea. Now, you know what the
    Marshalsea is. Very close. Excessively confined. Whereas in the King's
    Bench--' Mr Rugg waved his right hand freely, as expressing abundance of
    space.

    'I would rather,' said Clennam, 'be taken to the Marshalsea than to any
    other prison.'

    'Do you say so indeed, sir?' returned Mr Rugg. 'Then this is taste, too,
    and we may be walking.'

    He was a little offended at first, but he soon overlooked it. They
    walked through the Yard to the other end. The Bleeding Hearts were more
    interested in Arthur since his reverses than formerly; now regarding him
    as one who was true to the place and had taken up his freedom. Many of
    them came out to look after him, and to observe to one another, with
    great unctuousness, that he was 'pulled down by it.' Mrs Plornish
    and her father stood at the top of the steps at their own end, much
    depressed and shaking their heads.

    There was nobody visibly in waiting when Arthur and Mr Rugg arrived
    at the Counting-house. But an elderly member of the Jewish persuasion,
    preserved in rum, followed them close, and looked in at the glass before
    Mr Rugg had opened one of the day's letters. 'Oh!' said Mr Rugg,
    looking up. 'How do you do? Step in--Mr Clennam, I think this is the
    gentleman I was mentioning.'

    This gentleman explained the object of his visit to be 'a tyfling madder
    ob bithznithz,' and executed his legal function.

    'Shall I accompany you, Mr Clennam?' asked Mr Rugg politely, rubbing his
    hands.

    'I would rather go alone, thank you. Be so good as send me my clothes.'
    Mr Rugg in a light airy way replied in the affirmative, and shook hands
    with him. He and his attendant then went down-stairs, got into the first
    conveyance they found, and drove to the old gates.

    'Where I little thought, Heaven forgive me,' said Clennam to himself,
    'that I should ever enter thus!'

    Mr Chivery was on the Lock, and Young John was in the Lodge: either
    newly released from it, or waiting to take his own spell of duty. Both
    were more astonished on seeing who the prisoner was, than one might have
    thought turnkeys would have been. The elder Mr Chivery shook hands with
    him in a shame-faced kind of way, and said, 'I don't call to mind,
    sir, as I was ever less glad to see you.' The younger Mr Chivery, more
    distant, did not shake hands with him at all; he stood looking at him
    in a state of indecision so observable that it even came within the
    observation of Clennam with his heavy eyes and heavy heart. Presently
    afterwards, Young John disappeared into the jail.

    As Clennam knew enough of the place to know that he was required to
    remain in the Lodge a certain time, he took a seat in a corner, and
    feigned to be occupied with the perusal of letters from his pocket.
    They did not so engross his attention, but that he saw, with gratitude,
    how the elder Mr Chivery kept the Lodge clear of prisoners; how he
    signed to some, with his keys, not to come in, how he nudged others with
    his elbows to go out, and how he made his misery as easy to him as he
    could.

    Arthur was sitting with his eyes fixed on the floor, recalling the past,
    brooding over the present, and not attending to either, when he felt
    himself touched upon the shoulder. It was by Young John; and he said,
    'You can come now.'

    He got up and followed Young John. When they had gone a step or two
    within the inner iron-gate, Young John turned and said to him:

    'You want a room. I have got you one.'

    'I thank you heartily.'

    Young John turned again, and took him in at the old doorway, up the old
    staircase, into the old room. Arthur stretched out his hand. Young John
    looked at it, looked at him--sternly--swelled, choked, and said:

    'I don't know as I can. No, I find I can't. But I thought you'd like the
    room, and here it is for you.'

    Surprise at this inconsistent behaviour yielded when he was gone (he
            went away directly) to the feelings which the empty room awakened in
    Clennam's wounded breast, and to the crowding associations with the
    one good and gentle creature who had sanctified it. Her absence in his
    altered fortunes made it, and him in it, so very desolate and so much in
    need of such a face of love and truth, that he turned against the
    wall to weep, sobbing out, as his heart relieved itself, 'O my Little
    Dorrit!'




The day was sunny, and the Marshalsea, with the hot noon striking
upon it, was unwontedly quiet. Arthur Clennam dropped into a solitary
arm-chair, itself as faded as any debtor in the jail, and yielded
himself to his thoughts.

In the unnatural peace of having gone through the dreaded arrest, and
got there,--the first change of feeling which the prison most commonly
induced, and from which dangerous resting-place so many men had slipped
down to the depths of degradation and disgrace by so many ways,--he
could think of some passages in his life, almost as if he were removed
from them into another state of existence. Taking into account where he
was, the interest that had first brought him there when he had been free
to keep away, and the gentle presence that was equally inseparable from
the walls and bars about him and from the impalpable remembrances of his
later life which no walls or bars could imprison, it was not remarkable
that everything his memory turned upon should bring him round again to
Little Dorrit. Yet it was remarkable to him; not because of the fact
itself, but because of the reminder it brought with it, how much the
dear little creature had influenced his better resolutions.

None of us clearly know to whom or to what we are indebted in this wise,
     until some marked stop in the whirling wheel of life brings the right
     perception with it. It comes with sickness, it comes with sorrow, it
     comes with the loss of the dearly loved, it is one of the most frequent
     uses of adversity. It came to Clennam in his adversity, strongly and
     tenderly. 'When I first gathered myself together,' he thought, 'and
     set something like purpose before my jaded eyes, whom had I before me,
     toiling on, for a good object's sake, without encouragement, without
     notice, against ignoble obstacles that would have turned an army of
     received heroes and heroines? One weak girl! When I tried to conquer
     my misplaced love, and to be generous to the man who was more fortunate
     than I, though he should never know it or repay me with a gracious word,
     in whom had I watched patience, self-denial, self-subdual, charitable
     construction, the noblest generosity of the affections? In the same poor
     girl! If I, a man, with a man's advantages and means and energies, had
     slighted the whisper in my heart, that if my father had erred, it was my
     first duty to conceal the fault and to repair it, what youthful figure
     with tender feet going almost bare on the damp ground, with spare hands
     ever working, with its slight shape but half protected from the
     sharp weather, would have stood before me to put me to shame? Little
     Dorrit's.' So always as he sat alone in the faded chair, thinking.
     Always, Little Dorrit. Until it seemed to him as if he met the reward of
     having wandered away from her, and suffered anything to pass between him
     and his remembrance of her virtues.

     His door was opened, and the head of the elder Chivery was put in a very
     little way, without being turned towards him.

     'I am off the Lock, Mr Clennam, and going out. Can I do anything for
     you?'

     'Many thanks. Nothing.'

     'You'll excuse me opening the door,' said Mr Chivery; 'but I couldn't
     make you hear.'

     'Did you knock?' 'Half-a-dozen times.'

     Rousing himself, Clennam observed that the prison had awakened from its
     noontide doze, that the inmates were loitering about the shady yard, and
     that it was late in the afternoon. He had been thinking for hours.

     'Your things is come,' said Mr Chivery, 'and my son is going to carry
     'em up. I should have sent 'em up but for his wishing to carry 'em
     himself. Indeed he would have 'em himself, and so I couldn't send 'em
     up. Mr Clennam, could I say a word to you?'

     'Pray come in,' said Arthur; for Mr Chivery's head was still put in at
     the door a very little way, and Mr Chivery had but one ear upon him,
     instead of both eyes. This was native delicacy in Mr Chivery--true
     politeness; though his exterior had very much of a turnkey about it, and
     not the least of a gentleman.

     'Thank you, sir,' said Mr Chivery, without advancing; 'it's no odds me
     coming in. Mr Clennam, don't you take no notice of my son (if you'll
             be so good) in case you find him cut up anyways difficult. My son has a
     'art, and my son's 'art is in the right place. Me and his mother knows
     where to find it, and we find it sitiwated correct.'

     With this mysterious speech, Mr Chivery took his ear away and shut the
     door. He might have been gone ten minutes, when his son succeeded him.

     'Here's your portmanteau,' he said to Arthur, putting it carefully down.

     'It's very kind of you. I am ashamed that you should have the trouble.'

     He was gone before it came to that; but soon returned, saying exactly as
     before, 'Here's your black box:' which he also put down with care.

     'I am very sensible of this attention. I hope we may shake hands now, Mr
     John.'

     Young John, however, drew back, turning his right wrist in a socket made
     of his left thumb and middle-finger and said as he had said at first,
     'I don't know as I can. No; I find I can't!' He then stood regarding the
     prisoner sternly, though with a swelling humour in his eyes that looked
     like pity.

     'Why are you angry with me,' said Clennam, 'and yet so ready to do me
     these kind services? There must be some mistake between us. If I have
     done anything to occasion it I am sorry.'

     'No mistake, sir,' returned John, turning the wrist backwards and
     forwards in the socket, for which it was rather tight. 'No mistake, sir,
     in the feelings with which my eyes behold you at the present moment! If
     I was at all fairly equal to your weight, Mr Clennam--which I am not;
     and if you weren't under a cloud--which you are; and if it wasn't
     against all rules of the Marshalsea--which it is; those feelings are
     such, that they would stimulate me, more to having it out with you in
     a Round on the present spot than to anything else I could name.'

     Arthur looked at him for a moment in some wonder, and some little anger.
     'Well, well!' he said. 'A mistake, a mistake!' Turning away, he sat down
     with a heavy sigh in the faded chair again.

     Young John followed him with his eyes, and, after a short pause, cried
     out, 'I beg your pardon!'

     'Freely granted,' said Clennam, waving his hand without raising his
     sunken head. 'Say no more. I am not worth it.'

     'This furniture, sir,' said Young John in a voice of mild and soft
     explanation, 'belongs to me. I am in the habit of letting it out to
     parties without furniture, that have the room. It an't much, but it's at
     your service. Free, I mean. I could not think of letting you have it on
     any other terms. You're welcome to it for nothing.'

     Arthur raised his head again to thank him, and to say he could
     not accept the favour. John was still turning his wrist, and still
     contending with himself in his former divided manner.

     'What is the matter between us?' said Arthur.

     'I decline to name it, sir,' returned Young John, suddenly turning loud
     and sharp. 'Nothing's the matter.'

     Arthur looked at him again, in vain, for an explanation of his
     behaviour. After a while, Arthur turned away his head again. Young John
     said, presently afterwards, with the utmost mildness:

     'The little round table, sir, that's nigh your elbow, was--you know
     whose--I needn't mention him--he died a great gentleman. I bought it of
     an individual that he gave it to, and that lived here after him. But the
     individual wasn't any ways equal to him. Most individuals would find it
     hard to come up to his level.'

     Arthur drew the little table nearer, rested his arm upon it, and kept it
     there.

     'Perhaps you may not be aware, sir,' said Young John, 'that I intruded
     upon him when he was over here in London. On the whole he was of opinion
     that it _was_ an intrusion, though he was so good as to ask me to sit
     down and to inquire after father and all other old friends. Leastways
     humblest acquaintances. He looked, to me, a good deal changed, and I
     said so when I came back. I asked him if Miss Amy was well--'

     'And she was?'

     'I should have thought you would have known without putting the question
     to such as me,' returned Young John, after appearing to take a large
     invisible pill. 'Since you do put me the question, I am sorry I can't
     answer it. But the truth is, he looked upon the inquiry as a liberty,
     and said, "What was that to me?" It was then I became quite aware I was
     intruding: of which I had been fearful before. However, he spoke very
     handsome afterwards; very handsome.'

     They were both silent for several minutes: except that Young John
     remarked, at about the middle of the pause, 'He both spoke and acted
     very handsome.'

     It was again Young John who broke the silence by inquiring:

     'If it's not a liberty, how long may it be your intentions, sir, to go
     without eating and drinking?'

     'I have not felt the want of anything yet,' returned Clennam. 'I have no
     appetite just now.'

     'The more reason why you should take some support, sir,' urged Young
     John. 'If you find yourself going on sitting here for hours and hours
     partaking of no refreshment because you have no appetite, why then you
     should and must partake of refreshment without an appetite. I'm going to
     have tea in my own apartment. If it's not a liberty, please to come and
     take a cup. Or I can bring a tray here in two minutes.'

     Feeling that Young John would impose that trouble on himself if he
     refused, and also feeling anxious to show that he bore in mind both
     the elder Mr Chivery's entreaty, and the younger Mr Chivery's apology,
     Arthur rose and expressed his willingness to take a cup of tea in Mr
     John's apartment. Young John locked his door for him as they went out,
     slided the key into his pocket with great dexterity, and led the way to
     his own residence.

     It was at the top of the house nearest to the gateway. It was the room
     to which Clennam had hurried on the day when the enriched family had
     left the prison for ever, and where he had lifted her insensible from
     the floor. He foresaw where they were going as soon as their feet
     touched the staircase. The room was so far changed that it was papered
     now, and had been repainted, and was far more comfortably furnished; but
     he could recall it just as he had seen it in that single glance, when he
     raised her from the ground and carried her down to the carriage.

     Young John looked hard at him, biting his fingers.

     'I see you recollect the room, Mr Clennam?'

     'I recollect it well, Heaven bless her!'

     Oblivious of the tea, Young John continued to bite his fingers and to
     look at his visitor, as long as his visitor continued to glance about
     the room. Finally, he made a start at the teapot, gustily rattled a
     quantity of tea into it from a canister, and set off for the common
     kitchen to fill it with hot water.

     The room was so eloquent to Clennam in the changed circumstances of his
     return to the miserable Marshalsea; it spoke to him so mournfully of
     her, and of his loss of her; that it would have gone hard with him to
     resist it, even though he had not been alone. Alone, he did not try.
     He had his hand on the insensible wall as tenderly as if it had been
     herself that he touched, and pronounced her name in a low voice. He
     stood at the window, looking over the prison-parapet with its grim
     spiked border, and breathed a benediction through the summer haze
     towards the distant land where she was rich and prosperous.

     Young John was some time absent, and, when he came back, showed that he
     had been outside by bringing with him fresh butter in a cabbage leaf,
     some thin slices of boiled ham in another cabbage leaf, and a little
     basket of water-cresses and salad herbs. When these were arranged upon
     the table to his satisfaction, they sat down to tea.

     Clennam tried to do honour to the meal, but unavailingly. The ham
     sickened him, the bread seemed to turn to sand in his mouth. He could
     force nothing upon himself but a cup of tea.

     'Try a little something green,' said Young John, handing him the basket.

     He took a sprig or so of water-cress, and tried again; but the bread
     turned to a heavier sand than before, and the ham (though it was good
             enough of itself) seemed to blow a faint simoom of ham through the whole
     Marshalsea.

     'Try a little more something green, sir,' said Young John; and again
     handed the basket.

     It was so like handing green meat into the cage of a dull imprisoned
     bird, and John had so evidently brought the little basket as a handful
     of fresh relief from the stale hot paving-stones and bricks of the jail,
     that Clennam said, with a smile, 'It was very kind of you to think of
     putting this between the wires; but I cannot even get this down to-day.'

     As if the difficulty were contagious, Young John soon pushed away his
     own plate, and fell to folding the cabbage-leaf that had contained the
     ham. When he had folded it into a number of layers, one over another,
     so that it was small in the palm of his hand, he began to flatten it
     between both his hands, and to eye Clennam attentively.

     'I wonder,' he at length said, compressing his green packet with some
     force, 'that if it's not worth your while to take care of yourself for
     your own sake, it's not worth doing for some one else's.'

     'Truly,' returned Arthur, with a sigh and a smile, 'I don't know for
     whose.'

     'Mr Clennam,' said John, warmly, 'I am surprised that a gentleman who
     is capable of the straightforwardness that you are capable of, should be
     capable of the mean action of making me such an answer. Mr Clennam, I am
     surprised that a gentleman who is capable of having a heart of his own,
     should be capable of the heartlessness of treating mine in that way. I
     am astonished at it, sir. Really and truly I am astonished!'

     Having got upon his feet to emphasise his concluding words, Young John
     sat down again, and fell to rolling his green packet on his right leg;
     never taking his eyes off Clennam, but surveying him with a fixed look
     of indignant reproach.

     'I had got over it, sir,' said John. 'I had conquered it, knowing that
     it _must_ be conquered, and had come to the resolution to think no more
     about it. I shouldn't have given my mind to it again, I hope, if to this
     prison you had not been brought, and in an hour unfortunate for me,
     this day!' (In his agitation Young John adopted his mother's powerful
             construction of sentences.) 'When you first came upon me, sir, in the
     Lodge, this day, more as if a Upas tree had been made a capture of than
     a private defendant, such mingled streams of feelings broke loose again
     within me, that everything was for the first few minutes swept away
     before them, and I was going round and round in a vortex. I got out of
     it. I struggled, and got out of it. If it was the last word I had to
     speak, against that vortex with my utmost powers I strove, and out of it
     I came. I argued that if I had been rude, apologies was due, and those
     apologies without a question of demeaning, I did make. And now, when
     I've been so wishful to show that one thought is next to being a holy
     one with me and goes before all others--now, after all, you dodge me
     when I ever so gently hint at it, and throw me back upon myself. For, do
     not, sir,' said Young John, 'do not be so base as to deny that dodge you
     do, and thrown me back upon myself you have!'

     All amazement, Arthur gazed at him like one lost, only saying, 'What is
     it? What do you mean, John?' But, John, being in that state of mind in
     which nothing would seem to be more impossible to a certain class of
     people than the giving of an answer, went ahead blindly.

     'I hadn't,' John declared, 'no, I hadn't, and I never had the
     audaciousness to think, I am sure, that all was anything but lost. I
     hadn't, no, why should I say I hadn't if I ever had, any hope that it
     was possible to be so blest, not after the words that passed, not even
     if barriers insurmountable had not been raised! But is that a reason why
     I am to have no memory, why I am to have no thoughts, why I am to have
     no sacred spots, nor anything?'

     'What can you mean?' cried Arthur.

     'It's all very well to trample on it, sir,' John went on, scouring a
     very prairie of wild words, 'if a person can make up his mind to be
     guilty of the action. It's all very well to trample on it, but it's
     there. It may be that it couldn't be trampled upon if it wasn't there.
     But that doesn't make it gentlemanly, that doesn't make it honourable,
     that doesn't justify throwing a person back upon himself after he has
     struggled and strived out of himself like a butterfly. The world may
     sneer at a turnkey, but he's a man--when he isn't a woman, which among
     female criminals he's expected to be.'

     Ridiculous as the incoherence of his talk was, there was yet a
     truthfulness in Young John's simple, sentimental character, and a sense
     of being wounded in some very tender respect, expressed in his burning
     face and in the agitation of his voice and manner, which Arthur must
     have been cruel to disregard. He turned his thoughts back to the
     starting-point of this unknown injury; and in the meantime Young John,
     having rolled his green packet pretty round, cut it carefully into three
     pieces, and laid it on a plate as if it were some particular delicacy.

     'It seems to me just possible,' said Arthur, when he had retraced the
     conversation to the water-cresses and back again, 'that you have made
     some reference to Miss Dorrit.'

     'It is just possible, sir,' returned John Chivery.

     'I don't understand it. I hope I may not be so unlucky as to make you
     think I mean to offend you again, for I never have meant to offend you
     yet, when I say I don't understand it.'

     'Sir,' said Young John, 'will you have the perfidy to deny that you know
     and long have known that I felt towards Miss Dorrit, call it not the
     presumption of love, but adoration and sacrifice?'

     'Indeed, John, I will not have any perfidy if I know it; why you should
     suspect me of it I am at a loss to think. Did you ever hear from Mrs
     Chivery, your mother, that I went to see her once?'

     'No, sir,' returned John, shortly. 'Never heard of such a thing.'

     'But I did. Can you imagine why?'

     'No, sir,' returned John, shortly. 'I can't imagine why.'

     'I will tell you. I was solicitous to promote Miss Dorrit's happiness;
     and if I could have supposed that Miss Dorrit returned your affection--'

     Poor John Chivery turned crimson to the tips of his ears. 'Miss Dorrit
     never did, sir. I wish to be honourable and true, so far as in my humble
     way I can, and I would scorn to pretend for a moment that she ever did,
     or that she ever led me to believe she did; no, nor even that it was
     ever to be expected in any cool reason that she would or could. She was
     far above me in all respects at all times. As likewise,' added John,
     'similarly was her gen-teel family.'

     His chivalrous feeling towards all that belonged to her made him so very
     respectable, in spite of his small stature and his rather weak legs, and
     his very weak hair, and his poetical temperament, that a Goliath might
     have sat in his place demanding less consideration at Arthur's hands.

     'You speak, John,' he said, with cordial admiration, 'like a Man.'

     'Well, sir,' returned John, brushing his hand across his eyes, 'then I
     wish you'd do the same.'

     He was quick with this unexpected retort, and it again made Arthur
     regard him with a wondering expression of face.

     'Leastways,' said John, stretching his hand across the tea-tray, 'if too
     strong a remark, withdrawn! But, why not, why not? When I say to you,
     Mr Clennam, take care of yourself for some one else's sake, why not be
     open, though a turnkey? Why did I get you the room which I knew you'd
     like best? Why did I carry up your things? Not that I found 'em heavy;
     I don't mention 'em on that accounts; far from it. Why have I cultivated
     you in the manner I have done since the morning? On the ground of your
     own merits? No. They're very great, I've no doubt at all; but not on the
     ground of them. Another's merits have had their weight, and have had far
     more weight with Me. Then why not speak free?'

     'Unaffectedly, John,' said Clennam, 'you are so good a fellow and I have
     so true a respect for your character, that if I have appeared to be less
     sensible than I really am of the fact that the kind services you have
     rendered me to-day are attributable to my having been trusted by
     Miss Dorrit as her friend--I confess it to be a fault, and I ask your
     forgiveness.'

     'Oh! why not,' John repeated with returning scorn, 'why not speak free!'

     'I declare to you,' returned Arthur, 'that I do not understand you.
     Look at me. Consider the trouble I have been in. Is it likely that I
     would wilfully add to my other self-reproaches, that of being ungrateful
     or treacherous to you. I do not understand you.'

     John's incredulous face slowly softened into a face of doubt. He rose,
     backed into the garret-window of the room, beckoned Arthur to come
     there, and stood looking at him thoughtfully.

     'Mr Clennam, do you mean to say that you don't know?'

     'What, John?'

     'Lord,' said Young John, appealing with a gasp to the spikes on the
     wall. 'He says, What!'

     Clennam looked at the spikes, and looked at John; and looked at the
     spikes, and looked at John.

     'He says What! And what is more,' exclaimed Young John, surveying him in
     a doleful maze, 'he appears to mean it! Do you see this window, sir?'

     'Of course I see this window.'

     'See this room?'

     'Why, of course I see this room.'

     'That wall opposite, and that yard down below? They have all been
     witnesses of it, from day to day, from night to night, from week to
     week, from month to month. For how often have I seen Miss Dorrit here
     when she has not seen me!'

     'Witnesses of what?' said Clennam.

     'Of Miss Dorrit's love.'

     'For whom?'

     'You,' said John. And touched him with the back of his hand upon the
     breast, and backed to his chair, and sat down on it with a pale face,
     holding the arms, and shaking his head at him.

     If he had dealt Clennam a heavy blow, instead of laying that light touch
     upon him, its effect could not have been to shake him more. He stood
     amazed; his eyes looking at John; his lips parted, and seeming now and
     then to form the word 'Me!' without uttering it; his hands dropped at
     his sides; his whole appearance that of a man who has been awakened from
     sleep, and stupefied by intelligence beyond his full comprehension.

     'Me!' he at length said aloud.

     'Ah!' groaned Young John. 'You!'

     He did what he could to muster a smile, and returned, 'Your fancy. You
     are completely mistaken.'

     'I mistaken, sir!' said Young John. '_I_ completely mistaken on that
     subject! No, Mr Clennam, don't tell me so. On any other, if you like,
     for I don't set up to be a penetrating character, and am well aware of
     my own deficiencies. But, _I_ mistaken on a point that has caused me
     more smart in my breast than a flight of savages' arrows could have
     done! _I_ mistaken on a point that almost sent me into my grave, as
     I sometimes wished it would, if the grave could only have been made
     compatible with the tobacco-business and father and mother's feelings! I
     mistaken on a point that, even at the present moment, makes me take out
     my pocket-handkerchief like a great girl, as people say: though I am sure
     I don't know why a great girl should be a term of reproach, for every
     rightly constituted male mind loves 'em great and small. Don't tell me
     so, don't tell me so!'

     Still highly respectable at bottom, though absurd enough upon the
     surface, Young John took out his pocket-handkerchief with a genuine
     absence both of display and concealment, which is only to be seen in
     a man with a great deal of good in him, when he takes out his
     pocket-handkerchief for the purpose of wiping his eyes. Having dried
     them, and indulged in the harmless luxury of a sob and a sniff, he put
     it up again.

     The touch was still in its influence so like a blow that Arthur could
     not get many words together to close the subject with. He assured John
     Chivery when he had returned his handkerchief to his pocket, that he
     did all honour to his disinterestedness and to the fidelity of his
     remembrance of Miss Dorrit. As to the impression on his mind, of which
     he had just relieved it--here John interposed, and said, 'No impression!
     Certainty!'--as to that, they might perhaps speak of it at another time,
     but would say no more now. Feeling low-spirited and weary, he would go
     back to his room, with John's leave, and come out no more that night.
     John assented, and he crept back in the shadow of the wall to his own
     lodging.

     The feeling of the blow was still so strong upon him that, when the
     dirty old woman was gone whom he found sitting on the stairs outside
     his door, waiting to make his bed, and who gave him to understand while
     doing it, that she had received her instructions from Mr Chivery, 'not
     the old 'un but the young 'un,' he sat down in the faded arm-chair,
     pressing his head between his hands, as if he had been stunned. Little
     Dorrit love him! More bewildering to him than his misery, far.

     Consider the improbability. He had been accustomed to call her his
     child, and his dear child, and to invite her confidence by dwelling upon
     the difference in their respective ages, and to speak of himself as one
     who was turning old. Yet she might not have thought him old. Something
     reminded him that he had not thought himself so, until the roses had
     floated away upon the river.

     He had her two letters among other papers in his box, and he took them
     out and read them. There seemed to be a sound in them like the sound
     of her sweet voice. It fell upon his ear with many tones of tenderness,
     that were not insusceptible of the new meaning. Now it was that the
     quiet desolation of her answer,'No, No, No,' made to him that night
     in that very room--that night when he had been shown the dawn of her
     altered fortune, and when other words had passed between them which he
     had been destined to remember in humiliation and a prisoner, rushed into
     his mind.

     Consider the improbability.

     But it had a preponderating tendency, when considered, to become
     fainter. There was another and a curious inquiry of his own heart's that
     concurrently became stronger. In the reluctance he had felt to believe
     that she loved any one; in his desire to set that question at rest; in
     a half-formed consciousness he had had that there would be a kind of
     nobleness in his helping her love for any one, was there no suppressed
     something on his own side that he had hushed as it arose? Had he ever
     whispered to himself that he must not think of such a thing as her
     loving him, that he must not take advantage of her gratitude, that he
     must keep his experience in remembrance as a warning and reproof;
     that he must regard such youthful hopes as having passed away, as his
     friend's dead daughter had passed away; that he must be steady in saying
     to himself that the time had gone by him, and he was too saddened and
     old?

     He had kissed her when he raised her from the ground on the day when she
     had been so consistently and expressively forgotten. Quite as he might
     have kissed her, if she had been conscious? No difference?

     The darkness found him occupied with these thoughts. The darkness also
     found Mr and Mrs Plornish knocking at his door. They brought with them a
     basket, filled with choice selections from that stock in trade which met
     with such a quick sale and produced such a slow return. Mrs Plornish was
     affected to tears. Mr Plornish amiably growled, in his philosophical but
     not lucid manner, that there was ups you see, and there was downs. It
     was in vain to ask why ups, why downs; there they was, you know. He had
     heerd it given for a truth that accordin' as the world went round, which
     round it did rewolve undoubted, even the best of gentlemen must take his
     turn of standing with his ed upside down and all his air a flying
     the wrong way into what you might call Space. Wery well then. What
     Mr Plornish said was, wery well then. That gentleman's ed would come
     up-ards when his turn come, that gentleman's air would be a pleasure to
     look upon being all smooth again, and wery well then!

     It has been already stated that Mrs Plornish, not being philosophical,
     wept. It further happened that Mrs Plornish, not being philosophical,
     was intelligible. It may have arisen out of her softened state of mind,
     out of her sex's wit, out of a woman's quick association of ideas,
     or out of a woman's no association of ideas, but it further happened
     somehow that Mrs Plornish's intelligibility displayed itself upon the
     very subject of Arthur's meditations.

     'The way father has been talking about you, Mr Clennam,' said Mrs
     Plornish, 'you hardly would believe. It's made him quite poorly. As
     to his voice, this misfortune has took it away. You know what a sweet
     singer father is; but he couldn't get a note out for the children at
     tea, if you'll credit what I tell you.'

     While speaking, Mrs Plornish shook her head, and wiped her eyes, and
     looked retrospectively about the room.

     'As to Mr Baptist,' pursued Mrs Plornish, 'whatever he'll do when he
     comes to know of it, I can't conceive nor yet imagine. He'd have been
     here before now, you may be sure, but that he's away on confidential
     business of your own. The persevering manner in which he follows up that
     business, and gives himself no rest from it--it really do,' said
     Mrs Plornish, winding up in the Italian manner, 'as I say to him,
     Mooshattonisha padrona.'

     Though not conceited, Mrs Plornish felt that she had turned this Tuscan
     sentence with peculiar elegance. Mr Plornish could not conceal his
     exultation in her accomplishments as a linguist.

     'But what I say is, Mr Clennam,' the good woman went on, 'there's always
     something to be thankful for, as I am sure you will yourself admit.
     Speaking in this room, it's not hard to think what the present something
     is. It's a thing to be thankful for, indeed, that Miss Dorrit is not
     here to know it.'

     Arthur thought she looked at him with particular expression.

     'It's a thing,' reiterated Mrs Plornish, 'to be thankful for, indeed,
     that Miss Dorrit is far away. It's to be hoped she is not likely to hear
     of it. If she had been here to see it, sir, it's not to be doubted
     that the sight of you,' Mrs Plornish repeated those words--'not to be
     doubted, that the sight of you--in misfortune and trouble, would have
     been almost too much for her affectionate heart. There's nothing I can
     think of, that would have touched Miss Dorrit so bad as that.'

     Of a certainty Mrs Plornish did look at him now, with a sort of
     quivering defiance in her friendly emotion.

     'Yes!' said she. 'And it shows what notice father takes, though at his
     time of life, that he says to me this afternoon, which Happy Cottage
     knows I neither make it up nor any ways enlarge, "Mary, it's much to
     be rejoiced in that Miss Dorrit is not on the spot to behold it." Those
     were father's words. Father's own words was, "Much to be rejoiced in,
     Mary, that Miss Dorrit is not on the spot to behold it." I says to
     father then, I says to him, "Father, you are right!" That,' Mrs Plornish
     concluded, with the air of a very precise legal witness, 'is what passed
     betwixt father and me. And I tell you nothing but what did pass betwixt
     me and father.'

     Mr Plornish, as being of a more laconic temperament, embraced this
     opportunity of interposing with the suggestion that she should now leave
     Mr Clennam to himself. 'For, you see,' said Mr Plornish, gravely, 'I
     know what it is, old gal;' repeating that valuable remark several times,
     as if it appeared to him to include some great moral secret. Finally,
     the worthy couple went away arm in arm.

     Little Dorrit, Little Dorrit. Again, for hours. Always Little Dorrit!


     Happily, if it ever had been so, it was over, and better over. Granted
     that she had loved him, and he had known it and had suffered himself
     to love her, what a road to have led her away upon--the road that would
     have brought her back to this miserable place! He ought to be much
     comforted by the reflection that she was quit of it forever; that she
     was, or would soon be, married (vague rumours of her father's projects
             in that direction had reached Bleeding Heart Yard, with the news of her
             sister's marriage); and that the Marshalsea gate had shut for ever on
     all those perplexed possibilities of a time that was gone.

     Dear Little Dorrit.

     Looking back upon his own poor story, she was its vanishing-point. Every
     thing in its perspective led to her innocent figure. He had travelled
     thousands of miles towards it; previous unquiet hopes and doubts had
     worked themselves out before it; it was the centre of the interest
     of his life; it was the termination of everything that was good and
     pleasant in it; beyond, there was nothing but mere waste and darkened
     sky.

     As ill at ease as on the first night of his lying down to sleep within
     those dreary walls, he wore the night out with such thoughts. What time
     Young John lay wrapt in peaceful slumber, after composing and arranging
     the following monumental inscription on his pillow--


     STRANGER!
     RESPECT THE TOMB OF
     JOHN CHIVERY, JUNIOR,
     WHO DIED AT AN ADVANCED AGE
     NOT NECESSARY TO MENTION.
     HE ENCOUNTERED HIS RIVAL IN A DISTRESSED STATE,
     AND FELT INCLINED
     TO HAVE A ROUND WITH HIM;
     BUT, FOR THE SAKE OF THE LOVED ONE,
     CONQUERED THOSE FEELINGS OF BITTERNESS, AND BECAME
     MAGNANIMOUS.




The opinion of the community outside the prison gates bore hard on
Clennam as time went on, and he made no friends among the community
within. Too depressed to associate with the herd in the yard, who got
together to forget their cares; too retiring and too unhappy to join in
the poor socialities of the tavern; he kept his own room, and was held
in distrust. Some said he was proud; some objected that he was
sullen and reserved; some were contemptuous of him, for that he was a
poor-spirited dog who pined under his debts. The whole population were
shy of him on these various counts of indictment, but especially the
last, which involved a species of domestic treason; and he soon became
so confirmed in his seclusion, that his only time for walking up and
down was when the evening Club were assembled at their songs and toasts
and sentiments, and when the yard was nearly left to the women and
children.

Imprisonment began to tell upon him. He knew that he idled and moped.
After what he had known of the influences of imprisonment within the
four small walls of the very room he occupied, this consciousness made
him afraid of himself. Shrinking from the observation of other men, and
shrinking from his own, he began to change very sensibly. Anybody might
see that the shadow of the wall was dark upon him.

One day when he might have been some ten or twelve weeks in jail, and
when he had been trying to read and had not been able to release even
the imaginary people of the book from the Marshalsea, a footstep stopped
at his door, and a hand tapped at it. He arose and opened it, and an
agreeable voice accosted him with 'How do you do, Mr Clennam? I hope I
am not unwelcome in calling to see you.'

It was the sprightly young Barnacle, Ferdinand. He looked very
good-natured and prepossessing, though overpoweringly gay and free, in
contrast with the squalid prison.

'You are surprised to see me, Mr Clennam,' he said, taking the seat
which Clennam offered him.

'I must confess to being much surprised.'

'Not disagreeably, I hope?'

'By no means.'

'Thank you. Frankly,' said the engaging young Barnacle, 'I have been
excessively sorry to hear that you were under the necessity of a
temporary retirement here, and I hope (of course as between two private
        gentlemen) that our place has had nothing to do with it?'

'Your office?'

'Our Circumlocution place.'

'I cannot charge any part of my reverses upon that remarkable
establishment.'

'Upon my life,' said the vivacious young Barnacle, 'I am heartily glad to
know it. It is quite a relief to me to hear you say it. I should have
so exceedingly regretted our place having had anything to do with your
difficulties.'

Clennam again assured him that he absolved it of the responsibility.

'That's right,' said Ferdinand. 'I am very happy to hear it. I was
rather afraid in my own mind that we might have helped to floor you,
       because there is no doubt that it is our misfortune to do that kind
       of thing now and then. We don't want to do it; but if men will be
       gravelled, why--we can't help it.'

       'Without giving an unqualified assent to what you say,' returned Arthur,
       gloomily, 'I am much obliged to you for your interest in me.'

       'No, but really! Our place is,' said the easy young Barnacle, 'the most
       inoffensive place possible. You'll say we are a humbug. I won't say
       we are not; but all that sort of thing is intended to be, and must be.
       Don't you see?'

       'I do not,' said Clennam.

       'You don't regard it from the right point of view. It is the point of
       view that is the essential thing. Regard our place from the point of
       view that we only ask you to leave us alone, and we are as capital a
       Department as you'll find anywhere.'

       'Is your place there to be left alone?' asked Clennam.

       'You exactly hit it,' returned Ferdinand. 'It is there with the express
       intention that everything shall be left alone. That is what it means.
       That is what it's for. No doubt there's a certain form to be kept up
       that it's for something else, but it's only a form. Why, good Heaven,
       we are nothing but forms! Think what a lot of our forms you have gone
       through. And you have never got any nearer to an end?'

       'Never,' said Clennam.

       'Look at it from the right point of view, and there you have
       us--official and effectual. It's like a limited game of cricket. A field
       of outsiders are always going in to bowl at the Public Service, and we
       block the balls.'

       Clennam asked what became of the bowlers? The airy young Barnacle
       replied that they grew tired, got dead beat, got lamed, got their backs
       broken, died off, gave it up, went in for other games.

       'And this occasions me to congratulate myself again,' he pursued,
       'on the circumstance that our place has had nothing to do with your
       temporary retirement. It very easily might have had a hand in it;
       because it is undeniable that we are sometimes a most unlucky place, in
       our effects upon people who will not leave us alone. Mr Clennam, I am
       quite unreserved with you. As between yourself and myself, I know I may
       be. I was so, when I first saw you making the mistake of not leaving us
       alone; because I perceived that you were inexperienced and sanguine, and
       had--I hope you'll not object to my saying--some simplicity?'

       'Not at all.'

       'Some simplicity. Therefore I felt what a pity it was, and I went out
       of my way to hint to you (which really was not official, but I never am
               official when I can help it) something to the effect that if I were you,
       I wouldn't bother myself. However, you did bother yourself, and you have
       since bothered yourself. Now, don't do it any more.'

       'I am not likely to have the opportunity,' said Clennam.

       'Oh yes, you are! You'll leave here. Everybody leaves here. There are no
       ends of ways of leaving here. Now, don't come back to us. That entreaty
       is the second object of my call. Pray, don't come back to us. Upon my
       honour,' said Ferdinand in a very friendly and confiding way, 'I shall
       be greatly vexed if you don't take warning by the past and keep away
       from us.'

       'And the invention?' said Clennam.

       'My good fellow,' returned Ferdinand, 'if you'll excuse the freedom of
       that form of address, nobody wants to know of the invention, and nobody
       cares twopence-halfpenny about it.'

       'Nobody in the Office, that is to say?'

       'Nor out of it. Everybody is ready to dislike and ridicule any
       invention. You have no idea how many people want to be left alone.
       You have no idea how the Genius of the country (overlook the
               Parliamentary nature of the phrase, and don't be bored by it) tends
       to being left alone. Believe me, Mr Clennam,' said the sprightly young
       Barnacle in his pleasantest manner, 'our place is not a wicked Giant to
       be charged at full tilt; but only a windmill showing you, as it grinds
       immense quantities of chaff, which way the country wind blows.'

       'If I could believe that,' said Clennam, 'it would be a dismal prospect
       for all of us.'

       'Oh! Don't say so!' returned Ferdinand. 'It's all right. We must have
       humbug, we all like humbug, we couldn't get on without humbug. A little
       humbug, and a groove, and everything goes on admirably, if you leave it
       alone.'

       With this hopeful confession of his faith as the head of the rising
       Barnacles who were born of woman, to be followed under a variety of
       watchwords which they utterly repudiated and disbelieved, Ferdinand
       rose. Nothing could be more agreeable than his frank and courteous
       bearing, or adapted with a more gentlemanly instinct to the
       circumstances of his visit.

       'Is it fair to ask,' he said, as Clennam gave him his hand with a real
       feeling of thankfulness for his candour and good-humour, 'whether it
       is true that our late lamented Merdle is the cause of this passing
       inconvenience?'

       'I am one of the many he has ruined. Yes.'

       'He must have been an exceedingly clever fellow,' said Ferdinand
       Barnacle.

       Arthur, not being in the mood to extol the memory of the deceased, was
       silent.

       'A consummate rascal, of course,' said Ferdinand, 'but remarkably
       clever! One cannot help admiring the fellow. Must have been such a
       master of humbug. Knew people so well--got over them so completely--did
       so much with them!'

       In his easy way, he was really moved to genuine admiration.

       'I hope,' said Arthur, 'that he and his dupes may be a warning to people
       not to have so much done with them again.'

       'My dear Mr Clennam,' returned Ferdinand, laughing, 'have you really
       such a verdant hope? The next man who has as large a capacity and as
       genuine a taste for swindling, will succeed as well. Pardon me, but
       I think you really have no idea how the human bees will swarm to the
       beating of any old tin kettle; in that fact lies the complete manual of
       governing them. When they can be got to believe that the kettle is made
       of the precious metals, in that fact lies the whole power of men like
       our late lamented. No doubt there are here and there,' said Ferdinand
       politely, 'exceptional cases, where people have been taken in for what
       appeared to them to be much better reasons; and I need not go far to
       find such a case; but they don't invalidate the rule. Good day! I hope
       that when I have the pleasure of seeing you, next, this passing cloud
       will have given place to sunshine. Don't come a step beyond the door. I
       know the way out perfectly. Good day!'

       With those words, the best and brightest of the Barnacles went
       down-stairs, hummed his way through the Lodge, mounted his horse in the
       front court-yard, and rode off to keep an appointment with his noble
       kinsman, who wanted a little coaching before he could triumphantly
       answer certain infidel Snobs who were going to question the Nobs about
       their statesmanship.

       He must have passed Mr Rugg on his way out, for, a minute or two
       afterwards, that ruddy-headed gentleman shone in at the door, like an
       elderly Phoebus.

       'How do you do to-day, sir?' said Mr Rugg. 'Is there any little thing I
       can do for you to-day, sir?'

       'No, I thank you.'

       Mr Rugg's enjoyment of embarrassed affairs was like a housekeeper's
       enjoyment in pickling and preserving, or a washerwoman's enjoyment of a
       heavy wash, or a dustman's enjoyment of an overflowing dust-bin, or any
       other professional enjoyment of a mess in the way of business.

       'I still look round, from time to time, sir,' said Mr Rugg, cheerfully,
       'to see whether any lingering Detainers are accumulating at the gate.
       They have fallen in pretty thick, sir; as thick as we could have
       expected.'

       He remarked upon the circumstance as if it were matter of
       congratulation: rubbing his hands briskly, and rolling his head a
       little.

       'As thick,' repeated Mr Rugg, 'as we could reasonably have expected.
       Quite a shower-bath of 'em. I don't often intrude upon you now, when I
       look round, because I know you are not inclined for company, and that if
       you wished to see me, you would leave word in the Lodge. But I am here
       pretty well every day, sir. Would this be an unseasonable time, sir,'
       asked Mr Rugg, coaxingly, 'for me to offer an observation?'

       'As seasonable a time as any other.'

       'Hum! Public opinion, sir,' said Mr Rugg, 'has been busy with you.'

       'I don't doubt it.'

       'Might it not be advisable, sir,' said Mr Rugg, more coaxingly yet, 'now
       to make, at last and after all, a trifling concession to public opinion?
       We all do it in one way or another. The fact is, we must do it.'

       'I cannot set myself right with it, Mr Rugg, and have no business to
       expect that I ever shall.'

       'Don't say that, sir, don't say that. The cost of being moved to the
       Bench is almost insignificant, and if the general feeling is strong that
       you ought to be there, why--really--'

       'I thought you had settled, Mr Rugg,' said Arthur, 'that my
       determination to remain here was a matter of taste.'

       'Well, sir, well! But is it good taste, is it good taste? That's the
       Question.' Mr Rugg was so soothingly persuasive as to be quite pathetic.
       'I was almost going to say, is it good feeling? This is an extensive
       affair of yours; and your remaining here where a man can come for a
       pound or two, is remarked upon as not in keeping. It is not in keeping.
       I can't tell you, sir, in how many quarters I heard it mentioned. I
       heard comments made upon it last night in a Parlour frequented by what
       I should call, if I did not look in there now and then myself, the best
       legal company--I heard, there, comments on it that I was sorry to hear.
       They hurt me on your account. Again, only this morning at breakfast. My
       daughter (but a woman, you'll say: yet still with a feeling for these
               things, and even with some little personal experience, as the plaintiff
               in Rugg and Bawkins) was expressing her great surprise; her great
       surprise. Now under these circumstances, and considering that none of
       us can quite set ourselves above public opinion, wouldn't a trifling
       concession to that opinion be--Come, sir,' said Rugg, 'I will put it on
       the lowest ground of argument, and say, Amiable?'

       Arthur's thoughts had once more wandered away to Little Dorrit, and the
       question remained unanswered.

       'As to myself, sir,' said Mr Rugg, hoping that his eloquence had reduced
       him to a state of indecision, 'it is a principle of mine not to consider
       myself when a client's inclinations are in the scale. But, knowing your
       considerate character and general wish to oblige, I will repeat that I
       should prefer your being in the Bench. Your case has made a noise; it
       is a creditable case to be professionally concerned in; I should feel on
       a better standing with my connection, if you went to the Bench. Don't
       let that influence you, sir. I merely state the fact.'

       So errant had the prisoner's attention already grown in solitude and
       dejection, and so accustomed had it become to commune with only one
       silent figure within the ever-frowning walls, that Clennam had to shake
       off a kind of stupor before he could look at Mr Rugg, recall the thread
       of his talk, and hurriedly say, 'I am unchanged, and unchangeable, in my
       decision. Pray, let it be; let it be!' Mr Rugg, without concealing that
       he was nettled and mortified, replied:

       'Oh! Beyond a doubt, sir. I have travelled out of the record, sir, I am
       aware, in putting the point to you. But really, when I hear it remarked
       in several companies, and in very good company, that however worthy of a
       foreigner, it is not worthy of the spirit of an Englishman to remain in
       the Marshalsea when the glorious liberties of his island home admit
       of his removal to the Bench, I thought I would depart from the narrow
       professional line marked out to me, and mention it. Personally,' said Mr
       Rugg, 'I have no opinion on the topic.'

       'That's well,' returned Arthur.

       'Oh! None at all, sir!' said Mr Rugg. 'If I had, I should have been
       unwilling, some minutes ago, to see a client of mine visited in this
       place by a gentleman of a high family riding a saddle-horse. But it was
       not my business. If I had, I might have wished to be now empowered to
       mention to another gentleman, a gentleman of military exterior at
       present waiting in the Lodge, that my client had never intended to
       remain here, and was on the eve of removal to a superior abode. But my
       course as a professional machine is clear; I have nothing to do with it.
       Is it your good pleasure to see the gentleman, sir?'

       'Who is waiting to see me, did you say?'

       'I did take that unprofessional liberty, sir. Hearing that I was your
       professional adviser, he declined to interpose before my very limited
       function was performed. Happily,' said Mr Rugg, with sarcasm, 'I did not
       so far travel out of the record as to ask the gentleman for his name.'

       'I suppose I have no resource but to see him,' sighed Clennam, wearily.

       'Then it _is_ your good pleasure, sir?' retorted Rugg. 'Am I honoured by
       your instructions to mention as much to the gentleman, as I pass out? I
       am? Thank you, sir. I take my leave.' His leave he took accordingly, in
       dudgeon.

       The gentleman of military exterior had so imperfectly awakened Clennam's
       curiosity, in the existing state of his mind, that a half-forgetfulness
       of such a visitor's having been referred to, was already creeping over
       it as a part of the sombre veil which almost always dimmed it now, when
       a heavy footstep on the stairs aroused him. It appeared to ascend them,
       not very promptly or spontaneously, yet with a display of stride and
       clatter meant to be insulting. As it paused for a moment on the
       landing outside his door, he could not recall his association with the
       peculiarity of its sound, though he thought he had one. Only a moment
       was given him for consideration. His door was immediately swung open
       by a thump, and in the doorway stood the missing Blandois, the cause of
       many anxieties.

       'Salve, fellow jail-bird!' said he. 'You want me, it seems. Here I am!'

       Before Arthur could speak to him in his indignant wonder, Cavalletto
       followed him into the room. Mr Pancks followed Cavalletto. Neither of
       the two had been there since its present occupant had had possession of
       it. Mr Pancks, breathing hard, sidled near the window, put his hat on
       the ground, stirred his hair up with both hands, and folded his arms,
       like a man who had come to a pause in a hard day's work. Mr Baptist,
       never taking his eyes from his dreaded chum of old, softly sat down on
       the floor with his back against the door and one of his ankles in
       each hand: resuming the attitude (except that it was now expressive of
               unwinking watchfulness) in which he had sat before the same man in the
       deeper shade of another prison, one hot morning at Marseilles.

       'I have it on the witnessing of these two madmen,' said Monsieur
       Blandois, otherwise Lagnier, otherwise Rigaud, 'that you want me,
       brother-bird. Here I am!'

       Glancing round contemptuously at the bedstead, which was
       turned up by day, he leaned his back against it as a resting-place,
       without removing his hat from his head, and stood defiantly lounging
       with his hands in his pockets.

       'You villain of ill-omen!' said Arthur. 'You have purposely cast a
       dreadful suspicion upon my mother's house. Why have you done it?
       What prompted you to the devilish invention?'

       Monsieur Rigaud, after frowning at him for a moment, laughed. 'Hear this
       noble gentleman! Listen, all the world, to this creature of Virtue! But
       take care, take care. It is possible, my friend, that your ardour is a
       little compromising. Holy Blue! It is possible.'

       'Signore!' interposed Cavalletto, also addressing Arthur: 'for to
       commence, hear me! I received your instructions to find him, Rigaud; is
       it not?'

       'It is the truth.'

       'I go, consequentementally,'--it would have given Mrs Plornish great
       concern if she could have been persuaded that his occasional lengthening
       of an adverb in this way, was the chief fault of his English,--'first
       among my countrymen. I ask them what news in Londra, of foreigners
       arrived. Then I go among the French. Then I go among the Germans. They
       all tell me. The great part of us know well the other, and they all tell
       me. But!--no person can tell me nothing of him, Rigaud. Fifteen times,'
       said Cavalletto, thrice throwing out his left hand with all its fingers
       spread, and doing it so rapidly that the sense of sight could hardly
       follow the action, 'I ask of him in every place where go the foreigners;
       and fifteen times,' repeating the same swift performance, 'they know
       nothing. But!--'

       At this significant Italian rest on the word 'But,' his backhanded shake
       of his right forefinger came into play; a very little, and very
       cautiously.

       'But!--After a long time when I have not been able to find that he
       is here in Londra, some one tells me of a soldier with white
       hair--hey?--not hair like this that he carries--white--who lives retired
       secrettementally, in a certain place. But!--' with another rest upon
       the word, 'who sometimes in the after-dinner, walks, and smokes. It is
       necessary, as they say in Italy (and as they know, poor people), to
       have patience. I have patience. I ask where is this certain place. One.
       believes it is here, one believes it is there. Eh well! It is not here,
       it is not there. I wait patientissamentally. At last I find it. Then I
       watch; then I hide, until he walks and smokes. He is a soldier with grey
       hair--But!--' a very decided rest indeed, and a very vigorous play from
       side to side of the back-handed forefinger--'he is also this man that
       you see.'

       It was noticeable, that, in his old habit of submission to one who had
       been at the trouble of asserting superiority over him, he even then
       bestowed upon Rigaud a confused bend of his head, after thus pointing
       him out.

       'Eh well, Signore!' he cried in conclusion, addressing Arthur again. 'I
       waited for a good opportunity. I writed some words to Signor Panco,' an
       air of novelty came over Mr Pancks with this designation, 'to come and
       help. I showed him, Rigaud, at his window, to Signor Panco, who was
       often the spy in the day. I slept at night near the door of the house.
       At last we entered, only this to-day, and now you see him! As he would
       not come up in presence of the illustrious Advocate,' such was Mr
       Baptist's honourable mention of Mr Rugg, 'we waited down below there,
       together, and Signor Panco guarded the street.'

       At the close of this recital, Arthur turned his eyes upon the impudent
       and wicked face. As it met his, the nose came down over the moustache
       and the moustache went up under the nose. When nose and moustache had
       settled into their places again, Monsieur Rigaud loudly snapped his
       fingers half-a-dozen times; bending forward to jerk the snaps at Arthur,
       as if they were palpable missiles which he jerked into his face.

       'Now, Philosopher!' said Rigaud. 'What do you want with me?'

       'I want to know,' returned Arthur, without disguising his abhorrence,
       'how you dare direct a suspicion of murder against my mother's house?'

       'Dare!' cried Rigaud. 'Ho, ho! Hear him! Dare? Is it dare? By Heaven, my
       small boy, but you are a little imprudent!'

       'I want that suspicion to be cleared away,' said Arthur. 'You shall
       be taken there, and be publicly seen. I want to know, moreover,
       what business you had there when I had a burning desire to fling you
       down-stairs. Don't frown at me, man! I have seen enough of you to know
       that you are a bully and coward. I need no revival of my spirits from
       the effects of this wretched place to tell you so plain a fact, and one
       that you know so well.'

       White to the lips, Rigaud stroked his moustache, muttering, 'By Heaven,
       my small boy, but you are a little compromising of my lady, your
       respectable mother'--and seemed for a minute undecided how to act.
       His indecision was soon gone. He sat himself down with a threatening
       swagger, and said:

       'Give me a bottle of wine. You can buy wine here. Send one of your
       madmen to get me a bottle of wine. I won't talk to you without wine.
       Come! Yes or no?'

       'Fetch him what he wants, Cavalletto,' said Arthur, scornfully,
       producing the money.

       'Contraband beast,' added Rigaud, 'bring Port wine! I'll drink nothing
       but Porto-Porto.'

       The contraband beast, however, assuring all present, with his
       significant finger, that he peremptorily declined to leave his post at
       the door, Signor Panco offered his services. He soon returned with the
       bottle of wine: which, according to the custom of the place, originating
       in a scarcity of corkscrews among the Collegians (in common with a
               scarcity of much else), was already opened for use.

       'Madman! A large glass,' said Rigaud.

       Signor Panco put a tumbler before him; not without a visible conflict of
       feeling on the question of throwing it at his head.

       'Haha!' boasted Rigaud. 'Once a gentleman, and always a gentleman.
       A gentleman from the beginning, and a gentleman to the end. What
       the Devil! A gentleman must be waited on, I hope? It's a part of my
       character to be waited on!'

       He half filled the tumbler as he said it, and drank off the contents
       when he had done saying it.

       'Hah!' smacking his lips. 'Not a very old prisoner _that_! I judge by
       your looks, brave sir, that imprisonment will subdue your blood much
       sooner than it softens this hot wine. You are mellowing--losing body
       and colour already. I salute you!'

       He tossed off another half glass: holding it up both before and
       afterwards, so as to display his small, white hand.

       'To business,' he then continued. 'To conversation. You have shown
       yourself more free of speech than body, sir.'

       'I have used the freedom of telling you what you know yourself to be.
       You know yourself, as we all know you, to be far worse than that.'

       'Add, always a gentleman, and it's no matter. Except in that regard, we
       are all alike. For example: you couldn't for your life be a gentleman;
       I couldn't for my life be otherwise. How great the difference! Let us go
       on. Words, sir, never influence the course of the cards, or the course
       of the dice. Do you know that? You do? I also play a game, and words are
       without power over it.'

       Now that he was confronted with Cavalletto, and knew that his story was
       known--whatever thin disguise he had worn, he dropped; and faced it out,
       with a bare face, as the infamous wretch he was.

       'No, my son,' he resumed, with a snap of his fingers. 'I play my game
       to the end in spite of words; and Death of my Body and Death of my Soul!
       I'll win it. You want to know why I played this little trick that
       you have interrupted? Know then that I had, and that I have--do you
       understand me? have--a commodity to sell to my lady your respectable
       mother. I described my precious commodity, and fixed my price. Touching
       the bargain, your admirable mother was a little too calm, too stolid,
       too immovable and statue-like. In fine, your admirable mother vexed me.
       To make variety in my position, and to amuse myself--what! a gentleman
       must be amused at somebody's expense!--I conceived the happy idea of
       disappearing. An idea, see you, that your characteristic mother and my
       Flintwinch would have been well enough pleased to execute. Ah! Bah,
       bah, bah, don't look as from high to low at me! I repeat it. Well enough
       pleased, excessively enchanted, and with all their hearts ravished. How
       strongly will you have it?'

       He threw out the lees of his glass on the ground, so that they nearly
       spattered Cavalletto. This seemed to draw his attention to him anew. He
       set down his glass and said:

       'I'll not fill it. What! I am born to be served. Come then, you
       Cavalletto, and fill!'

       The little man looked at Clennam, whose eyes were occupied with Rigaud,
       and, seeing no prohibition, got up from the ground, and poured out
       from the bottle into the glass. The blending, as he did so, of his old
       submission with a sense of something humorous; the striving of that
       with a certain smouldering ferocity, which might have flashed fire in
       an instant (as the born gentleman seemed to think, for he had a wary
               eye upon him); and the easy yielding of all to a good-natured, careless,
       predominant propensity to sit down on the ground again: formed a very
       remarkable combination of character.

       'This happy idea, brave sir,' Rigaud resumed after drinking, 'was a
       happy idea for several reasons. It amused me, it worried your dear
       mama and my Flintwinch, it caused you agonies (my terms for a lesson
               in politeness towards a gentleman), and it suggested to all the amiable
       persons interested that your entirely devoted is a man to fear. By
       Heaven, he is a man to fear! Beyond this; it might have restored her wit
       to my lady your mother--might, under the pressing little suspicion your
       wisdom has recognised, have persuaded her at last to announce, covertly,
       in the journals, that the difficulties of a certain contract would be
       removed by the appearance of a certain important party to it. Perhaps
       yes, perhaps no. But that, you have interrupted. Now, what is it you
       say? What is it you want?'

       Never had Clennam felt more acutely that he was a prisoner in bonds,
       than when he saw this man before him, and could not accompany him to his
       mother's house. All the undiscernible difficulties and dangers he had
       ever feared were closing in, when he could not stir hand or foot.

       'Perhaps, my friend, philosopher, man of virtue, Imbecile, what you
       will; perhaps,' said Rigaud, pausing in his drink to look out of his
       glass with his horrible smile, 'you would have done better to leave me
       alone?'

       'No! At least,' said Clennam, 'you are known to be alive and unharmed.
       At least you cannot escape from these two witnesses; and they can
       produce you before any public authorities, or before hundreds of
       people!'

       'But will not produce me before one,' said Rigaud, snapping his
       fingers again with an air of triumphant menace. 'To the Devil with your
       witnesses! To the Devil with your produced! To the Devil with yourself!
       What! Do I know what I know, for that? Have I my commodity on sale, for
       that? Bah, poor debtor! You have interrupted my little project. Let it
       pass. How then? What remains? To you, nothing; to me, all. Produce
       _me_! Is that what you want? I will produce myself, only too quickly.
       Contrabandist! Give me pen, ink, and paper.'

       Cavalletto got up again as before, and laid them before him in his
       former manner. Rigaud, after some villainous thinking and smiling,
       wrote, and read aloud, as follows:


       'To MRS CLENNAM.

       'Wait answer.

       'Prison of the Marshalsea.
       'At the apartment of your son.

       'Dear Madam,
       'I am in despair to be informed to-day by our prisoner here
       (who has had the goodness to employ spies to seek me, living for politic
        reasons in retirement), that you have had fears for my safety.

       'Reassure yourself, dear madam. I am well, I am strong and constant.

       'With the greatest impatience I should fly to your house, but that I
       foresee it to be possible, under the circumstances, that you will not
       yet have quite definitively arranged the little proposition I have had
       the honour to submit to you. I name one week from this day, for a last
       final visit on my part; when you will unconditionally accept it or
       reject it, with its train of consequences.

       'I suppress my ardour to embrace you and achieve this interesting
       business, in order that you may have leisure to adjust its details to
       our perfect mutual satisfaction.

       'In the meanwhile, it is not too much to propose (our prisoner having
               deranged my housekeeping), that my expenses of lodging and nourishment
       at an hotel shall be paid by you.

       'Receive, dear madam, the assurance of my highest and most distinguished
       consideration,

       'RIGAUD BLANDOIS.

       'A thousand friendships to that dear Flintwinch.

       'I kiss the hands of Madame F.'


       When he had finished this epistle, Rigaud folded it and tossed it with
       a flourish at Clennam's feet. 'Hola you! Apropos of producing, let
       somebody produce that at its address, and produce the answer here.'

       'Cavalletto,' said Arthur. 'Will you take this fellow's letter?'

       But, Cavalletto's significant finger again expressing that his post was
       at the door to keep watch over Rigaud, now he had found him with so much
       trouble, and that the duty of his post was to sit on the floor backed up
       by the door, looking at Rigaud and holding his own ankles,--Signor Panco
       once more volunteered. His services being accepted, Cavalletto suffered
       the door to open barely wide enough to admit of his squeezing himself
       out, and immediately shut it on him.

       'Touch me with a finger, touch me with an epithet, question my
       superiority as I sit here drinking my wine at my pleasure,' said Rigaud,
       'and I follow the letter and cancel my week's grace. _You_ wanted me? You
       have got me! How do you like me?'

       'You know,' returned Clennam, with a bitter sense of his helplessness,
       'that when I sought you, I was not a prisoner.'

       'To the Devil with you and your prison,' retorted Rigaud, leisurely,
       as he took from his pocket a case containing the materials for making
       cigarettes, and employed his facile hands in folding a few for present
       use; 'I care for neither of you. Contrabandist! A light.'

       Again Cavalletto got up, and gave him what he wanted. There had been
       something dreadful in the noiseless skill of his cold, white hands, with
       the fingers lithely twisting about and twining one over another like
       serpents. Clennam could not prevent himself from shuddering inwardly, as
       if he had been looking on at a nest of those creatures.

       'Hola, Pig!' cried Rigaud, with a noisy stimulating cry, as if
       Cavalletto were an Italian horse or mule. 'What! The infernal old jail
       was a respectable one to this. There was dignity in the bars and stones
       of that place. It was a prison for men. But this? Bah! A hospital for
       imbeciles!'

       He smoked his cigarette out, with his ugly smile so fixed upon his face
       that he looked as though he were smoking with his drooping beak of a
       nose, rather than with his mouth; like a fancy in a weird picture. When
       he had lighted a second cigarette at the still burning end of the first,
       he said to Clennam:

       'One must pass the time in the madman's absence. One must talk. One
       can't drink strong wine all day long, or I would have another bottle.
       She's handsome, sir. Though not exactly to my taste, still, by
       the Thunder and the Lightning! handsome. I felicitate you on your
       admiration.'

       'I neither know nor ask,' said Clennam, 'of whom you speak.'

       'Della bella Gowana, sir, as they say in Italy. Of the Gowan, the fair
       Gowan.'

       'Of whose husband you were the--follower, I think?'

       'Sir? Follower? You are insolent. The friend.'

       'Do you sell all your friends?'

       Rigaud took his cigarette from his mouth, and eyed him with a momentary
       revelation of surprise. But he put it between his lips again, as he
       answered with coolness:

       'I sell anything that commands a price. How do your lawyers live, your
       politicians, your intriguers, your men of the Exchange? How do you live?
       How do you come here? Have you sold no friend? Lady of mine! I rather
       think, yes!'

       Clennam turned away from him towards the window, and sat looking out at
       the wall.

       'Effectively, sir,' said Rigaud, 'Society sells itself and sells me: and
       I sell Society. I perceive you have acquaintance with another lady. Also
       handsome. A strong spirit. Let us see. How do they call her? Wade.'

       He received no answer, but could easily discern that he had hit the
       mark.

       'Yes,' he went on, 'that handsome lady and strong spirit addresses me in
       the street, and I am not insensible. I respond. That handsome lady and
       strong spirit does me the favour to remark, in full confidence, "I have
       my curiosity, and I have my chagrins. You are not more than ordinarily
       honourable, perhaps?" I announce myself, "Madame, a gentleman from
       the birth, and a gentleman to the death; but _not_ more than ordinarily
       honourable. I despise such a weak fantasy." Thereupon she is pleased to
       compliment. "The difference between you and the rest is," she answers,
       "that you say so." For she knows Society. I accept her congratulations
       with gallantry and politeness. Politeness and little gallantries are
       inseparable from my character. She then makes a proposition, which is,
       in effect, that she has seen us much together; that it appears to her
       that I am for the passing time the cat of the house, the friend of
       the family; that her curiosity and her chagrins awaken the fancy to be
       acquainted with their movements, to know the manner of their life, how
       the fair Gowana is beloved, how the fair Gowana is cherished, and so
       on. She is not rich, but offers such and such little recompenses for the
       little cares and derangements of such services; and I graciously--to do
       everything graciously is a part of my character--consent to accept them.
       O yes! So goes the world. It is the mode.'

       Though Clennam's back was turned while he spoke, and thenceforth to the
       end of the interview, he kept those glittering eyes of his that were too
       near together, upon him, and evidently saw in the very carriage of the
       head, as he passed with his braggart recklessness from clause to clause
       of what he said, that he was saying nothing which Clennam did not
       already know.

       'Whoof! The fair Gowana!' he said, lighting a third cigarette with a
       sound as if his lightest breath could blow her away. 'Charming, but
       imprudent! For it was not well of the fair Gowana to make mysteries of
       letters from old lovers, in her bedchamber on the mountain, that her
       husband might not see them. No, no. That was not well. Whoof! The Gowana
       was mistaken there.'

       'I earnestly hope,' cried Arthur aloud, 'that Pancks may not be long
       gone, for this man's presence pollutes the room.'

       'Ah! But he'll flourish here, and everywhere,' said Rigaud, with an
       exulting look and snap of his fingers. 'He always has; he always will!'
       Stretching his body out on the only three chairs in the room besides
       that on which Clennam sat, he sang, smiting himself on the breast as the
       gallant personage of the song.


       'Who passes by this road so late?
       Compagnon de la Majolaine!
       Who passes by this road so late?
       Always gay!


       'Sing the Refrain, pig! You could sing it once, in another jail. Sing
       it! Or, by every Saint who was stoned to death, I'll be affronted and
       compromising; and then some people who are not dead yet, had better have
       been stoned along with them!'


       'Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
       Compagnon de la Majolaine!
       Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
       Always gay!'


       Partly in his old habit of submission, partly because his not doing it
       might injure his benefactor, and partly because he would as soon do
       it as anything else, Cavalletto took up the Refrain this time. Rigaud
       laughed, and fell to smoking with his eyes shut.

       Possibly another quarter of an hour elapsed before Mr Pancks's step was
       heard upon the stairs, but the interval seemed to Clennam insupportably
       long. His step was attended by another step; and when Cavalletto opened
       the door, he admitted Mr Pancks and Mr Flintwinch. The latter was no
       sooner visible, than Rigaud rushed at him and embraced him boisterously.

       'How do you find yourself, sir?' said Mr Flintwinch, as soon as he could
       disengage himself, which he struggled to do with very little ceremony.
       'Thank you, no; I don't want any more.' This was in reference to another
       menace of attention from his recovered friend. 'Well, Arthur. You
       remember what I said to you about sleeping dogs and missing ones. It's
       come true, you see.'

       He was as imperturbable as ever, to all appearance, and nodded his head
       in a moralising way as he looked round the room.

       'And this is the Marshalsea prison for debt!' said Mr Flintwinch. 'Hah!
       you have brought your pigs to a very indifferent market, Arthur.'

       If Arthur had patience, Rigaud had not. He took his little Flintwinch,
       with fierce playfulness, by the two lapels of his coat, and cried:

       'To the Devil with the Market, to the Devil with the Pigs, and to the
       Devil with the Pig-Driver! Now! Give me the answer to my letter.'

       'If you can make it convenient to let go a moment, sir,' returned Mr
       Flintwinch, 'I'll first hand Mr Arthur a little note that I have for
       him.'

       He did so. It was in his mother's maimed writing, on a slip of paper,
       and contained only these words:


       'I hope it is enough that you have ruined yourself. Rest contented
       without more ruin. Jeremiah Flintwinch is my messenger and
       representative. Your affectionate M. C.'


       Clennam read this twice, in silence, and then tore it to pieces. Rigaud
       in the meanwhile stepped into a chair, and sat himself on the back with
       his feet upon the seat.

       'Now, Beau Flintwinch,' he said, when he had closely watched the note to
       its destruction, 'the answer to my letter?'

       'Mrs Clennam did not write, Mr Blandois, her hands being cramped,
       and she thinking it as well to send it verbally by me.' Mr Flintwinch
       screwed this out of himself, unwillingly and rustily. 'She sends
       her compliments, and says she doesn't on the whole wish to term
       you unreasonable, and that she agrees. But without prejudicing the
       appointment that stands for this day week.'

       Monsieur Rigaud, after indulging in a fit of laughter, descended from
       his throne, saying, 'Good! I go to seek an hotel!' But, there his eyes
       encountered Cavalletto, who was still at his post.

       'Come, Pig,' he added, 'I have had you for a follower against my will;
       now, I'll have you against yours. I tell you, my little reptiles, I
       am born to be served. I demand the service of this contrabandist as my
       domestic until this day week.'

       In answer to Cavalletto's look of inquiry, Clennam made him a sign
       to go; but he added aloud, 'unless you are afraid of him.' Cavalletto
       replied with a very emphatic finger-negative.'No, master, I am not
       afraid of him, when I no more keep it secrettementally that he was once
       my comrade.' Rigaud took no notice of either remark until he had lighted
       his last cigarette and was quite ready for walking.

       'Afraid of him,' he said then, looking round upon them all. 'Whoof! My
       children, my babies, my little dolls, you are all afraid of him. You
       give him his bottle of wine here; you give him meat, drink, and lodging
       there; you dare not touch him with a finger or an epithet. No. It is his
       character to triumph! Whoof!


       'Of all the king's knights he's the flower,
       And he's always gay!'


       With this adaptation of the Refrain to himself, he stalked out of the
       room closely followed by Cavalletto, whom perhaps he had pressed into
       his service because he tolerably well knew it would not be easy to get
       rid of him. Mr Flintwinch, after scraping his chin, and looking about
       with caustic disparagement of the Pig-Market, nodded to Arthur, and
       followed. Mr Pancks, still penitent and depressed, followed too; after
       receiving with great attention a secret word or two of instructions from
       Arthur, and whispering back that he would see this affair out, and stand
       by it to the end. The prisoner, with the feeling that he was more
       despised, more scorned and repudiated, more helpless, altogether more
       miserable and fallen than before, was left alone again.




Haggard anxiety and remorse are bad companions to be barred up with.
Brooding all day, and resting very little indeed at night, will not
arm a man against misery. Next morning, Clennam felt that his health was
sinking, as his spirits had already sunk and that the weight under which
he bent was bearing him down.

Night after night he had risen from his bed of wretchedness at twelve or
one o'clock, and had sat at his window watching the sickly lamps in the
yard, and looking upward for the first wan trace of day, hours before it
was possible that the sky could show it to him. Now when the night came,
    he could not even persuade himself to undress.

    For a burning restlessness set in, an agonised impatience of the prison,
    and a conviction that he was going to break his heart and die there,
    which caused him indescribable suffering. His dread and hatred of the
    place became so intense that he felt it a labour to draw his breath in
    it. The sensation of being stifled sometimes so overpowered him, that
    he would stand at the window holding his throat and gasping. At the
    same time a longing for other air, and a yearning to be beyond the blind
    blank wall, made him feel as if he must go mad with the ardour of the
    desire.

    Many other prisoners had had experience of this condition before him,
    and its violence and continuity had worn themselves out in their cases,
    as they did in his. Two nights and a day exhausted it. It came back by
    fits, but those grew fainter and returned at lengthening intervals. A
    desolate calm succeeded; and the middle of the week found him settled
    down in the despondency of low, slow fever.

    With Cavalletto and Pancks away, he had no visitors to fear but Mr and
    Mrs Plornish. His anxiety, in reference to that worthy pair, was that
    they should not come near him; for, in the morbid state of his nerves,
    he sought to be left alone, and spared the being seen so subdued and
    weak. He wrote a note to Mrs Plornish representing himself as occupied
    with his affairs, and bound by the necessity of devoting himself to
    them, to remain for a time even without the pleasant interruption of
    a sight of her kind face. As to Young John, who looked in daily at a
    certain hour, when the turnkeys were relieved, to ask if he could do
    anything for him; he always made a pretence of being engaged in writing,
    and to answer cheerfully in the negative. The subject of their only
    long conversation had never been revived between them. Through all these
    changes of unhappiness, however, it had never lost its hold on Clennam's
    mind.

    The sixth day of the appointed week was a moist, hot, misty day. It
    seemed as though the prison's poverty, and shabbiness, and dirt, were
    growing in the sultry atmosphere. With an aching head and a weary heart,
    Clennam had watched the miserable night out, listening to the fall of
    rain on the yard pavement, thinking of its softer fall upon the country
    earth. A blurred circle of yellow haze had risen up in the sky in lieu
    of sun, and he had watched the patch it put upon his wall, like a bit of
    the prison's raggedness. He had heard the gates open; and the badly shod
    feet that waited outside shuffle in; and the sweeping, and pumping,
    and moving about, begin, which commenced the prison morning. So ill and
    faint that he was obliged to rest many times in the process of getting
    himself washed, he had at length crept to his chair by the open window.
    In it he sat dozing, while the old woman who arranged his room went
    through her morning's work.

    Light of head with want of sleep and want of food (his appetite, and
            even his sense of taste, having forsaken him), he had been two or three
    times conscious, in the night, of going astray. He had heard fragments
    of tunes and songs in the warm wind, which he knew had no existence.
    Now that he began to doze in exhaustion, he heard them again; and voices
    seemed to address him, and he answered, and started.

    Dozing and dreaming, without the power of reckoning time, so that
    a minute might have been an hour and an hour a minute, some abiding
    impression of a garden stole over him--a garden of flowers, with a
    damp warm wind gently stirring their scents. It required such a painful
    effort to lift his head for the purpose of inquiring into this, or
    inquiring into anything, that the impression appeared to have become
    quite an old and importunate one when he looked round. Beside the
    tea-cup on his table he saw, then, a blooming nosegay: a wonderful
    handful of the choicest and most lovely flowers.

    Nothing had ever appeared so beautiful in his sight. He took them up and
    inhaled their fragrance, and he lifted them to his hot head, and he put
    them down and opened his parched hands to them, as cold hands are opened
    to receive the cheering of a fire. It was not until he had delighted in
    them for some time, that he wondered who had sent them; and opened his
    door to ask the woman who must have put them there, how they had come
    into her hands. But she was gone, and seemed to have been long gone; for
    the tea she had left for him on the table was cold. He tried to drink
    some, but could not bear the odour of it: so he crept back to his chair
    by the open window, and put the flowers on the little round table of
    old.

    When the first faintness consequent on having moved about had left him,
    he subsided into his former state. One of the night-tunes was playing
    in the wind, when the door of his room seemed to open to a light touch,
    and, after a moment's pause, a quiet figure seemed to stand there, with
    a black mantle on it. It seemed to draw the mantle off and drop it on
    the ground, and then it seemed to be his Little Dorrit in her old, worn
    dress. It seemed to tremble, and to clasp its hands, and to smile, and
    to burst into tears.

    He roused himself, and cried out. And then he saw, in the loving,
    pitying, sorrowing, dear face, as in a mirror, how changed he was; and
    she came towards him; and with her hands laid on his breast to keep him
    in his chair, and with her knees upon the floor at his feet, and with
    her lips raised up to kiss him, and with her tears dropping on him as
    the rain from Heaven had dropped upon the flowers, Little Dorrit, a
    living presence, called him by his name.

    'O, my best friend! Dear Mr Clennam, don't let me see you weep! Unless
    you weep with pleasure to see me. I hope you do. Your own poor child
    come back!'

    So faithful, tender, and unspoiled by Fortune. In the sound of her
    voice, in the light of her eyes, in the touch of her hands, so
    Angelically comforting and true!

    As he embraced her, she said to him, 'They never told me you were ill,'
    and drawing an arm softly round his neck, laid his head upon her bosom,
    put a hand upon his head, and resting her cheek upon that hand, nursed
    him as lovingly, and GOD knows as innocently, as she had nursed her
    father in that room when she had been but a baby, needing all the care
    from others that she took of them.

    When he could speak, he said, 'Is it possible that you have come to me?
    And in this dress?'

    'I hoped you would like me better in this dress than any other. I have
    always kept it by me, to remind me: though I wanted no reminding. I am
    not alone, you see. I have brought an old friend with me.'

    Looking round, he saw Maggy in her big cap which had been long
    abandoned, with a basket on her arm as in the bygone days, chuckling
    rapturously.

    'It was only yesterday evening that I came to London with my brother.
    I sent round to Mrs Plornish almost as soon as we arrived, that I might
    hear of you and let you know I had come. Then I heard that you were
    here. Did you happen to think of me in the night? I almost believe you
    must have thought of me a little. I thought of you so anxiously, and it
    appeared so long to morning.'

    'I have thought of you--' he hesitated what to call her. She perceived
    it in an instant.

    'You have not spoken to me by my right name yet. You know what my right
    name always is with you.'

    'I have thought of you, Little Dorrit, every day, every hour, every
    minute, since I have been here.'

    'Have you? Have you?'

    He saw the bright delight of her face, and the flush that kindled in
    it, with a feeling of shame. He, a broken, bankrupt, sick, dishonoured
    prisoner.

    'I was here before the gates were opened, but I was afraid to come
    straight to you. I should have done you more harm than good, at first;
    for the prison was so familiar and yet so strange, and it brought back
    so many remembrances of my poor father, and of you too, that at first
    it overpowered me. But we went to Mr Chivery before we came to the gate,
    and he brought us in, and got John's room for us--my poor old room, you
    know--and we waited there a little. I brought the flowers to the door,
    but you didn't hear me.'

    She looked something more womanly than when she had gone away, and the
    ripening touch of the Italian sun was visible upon her face. But,
    otherwise, she was quite unchanged. The same deep, timid earnestness
    that he had always seen in her, and never without emotion, he saw still.
    If it had a new meaning that smote him to the heart, the change was in
    his perception, not in her.

    She took off her old bonnet, hung it in the old place, and noiselessly
    began, with Maggy's help, to make his room as fresh and neat as it could
    be made, and to sprinkle it with a pleasant-smelling water. When that
    was done, the basket, which was filled with grapes and other fruit,
    was unpacked, and all its contents were quietly put away. When that was
    done, a moment's whisper despatched Maggy to despatch somebody else to
    fill the basket again; which soon came back replenished with new
    stores, from which a present provision of cooling drink and jelly, and
    a prospective supply of roast chicken and wine and water, were the first
    extracts. These various arrangements completed, she took out her old
    needle-case to make him a curtain for his window; and thus, with a quiet
    reigning in the room, that seemed to diffuse itself through the else
    noisy prison, he found himself composed in his chair, with Little Dorrit
    working at his side.

    To see the modest head again bent down over its task, and the nimble
    fingers busy at their old work--though she was not so absorbed in it,
    but that her compassionate eyes were often raised to his face, and, when
    they drooped again had tears in them--to be so consoled and comforted,
    and to believe that all the devotion of this great nature was turned to
    him in his adversity to pour out its inexhaustible wealth of goodness
    upon him, did not steady Clennam's trembling voice or hand, or
    strengthen him in his weakness. Yet it inspired him with an inward
    fortitude, that rose with his love. And how dearly he loved her now,
    what words can tell!

    As they sat side by side in the shadow of the wall, the shadow fell like
    light upon him. She would not let him speak much, and he lay back in
    his chair, looking at her. Now and again she would rise and give him
    the glass that he might drink, or would smooth the resting-place of his
    head; then she would gently resume her seat by him, and bend over her
    work again.

    The shadow moved with the sun, but she never moved from his side, except
    to wait upon him. The sun went down and she was still there. She had
    done her work now, and her hand, faltering on the arm of his chair since
    its last tending of him, was hesitating there yet. He laid his hand upon
    it, and it clasped him with a trembling supplication.

    'Dear Mr Clennam, I must say something to you before I go. I have put it
    off from hour to hour, but I must say it.'

    'I too, dear Little Dorrit. I have put off what I must say.'

    She nervously moved her hand towards his lips as if to stop him; then it
    dropped, trembling, into its former place.

    'I am not going abroad again. My brother is, but I am not. He was always
    attached to me, and he is so grateful to me now--so much too grateful,
    for it is only because I happened to be with him in his illness--that
    he says I shall be free to stay where I like best, and to do what I like
    best. He only wishes me to be happy, he says.'

    There was one bright star shining in the sky. She looked up at it while
    she spoke, as if it were the fervent purpose of her own heart shining
    above her.

    'You will understand, I dare say, without my telling you, that my
    brother has come home to find my dear father's will, and to take
    possession of his property. He says, if there is a will, he is sure I
    shall be left rich; and if there is none, that he will make me so.'

    He would have spoken; but she put up her trembling hand again, and he
    stopped.

    'I have no use for money, I have no wish for it. It would be of no value
    at all to me but for your sake. I could not be rich, and you here. I
    must always be much worse than poor, with you distressed. Will you let
    me lend you all I have? Will you let me give it you? Will you let me
    show you that I have never forgotten, that I never can forget, your
    protection of me when this was my home? Dear Mr Clennam, make me of all
    the world the happiest, by saying Yes? Make me as happy as I can be in
    leaving you here, by saying nothing to-night, and letting me go
    away with the hope that you will think of it kindly; and that for my
    sake--not for yours, for mine, for nobody's but mine!--you will give me
    the greatest joy I can experience on earth, the joy of knowing that I
    have been serviceable to you, and that I have paid some little of the
    great debt of my affection and gratitude. I can't say what I wish to
    say. I can't visit you here where I have lived so long, I can't think of
    you here where I have seen so much, and be as calm and comforting as I
    ought. My tears will make their way. I cannot keep them back. But
    pray, pray, pray, do not turn from your Little Dorrit, now, in your
    affliction! Pray, pray, pray, I beg you and implore you with all my
    grieving heart, my friend--my dear!--take all I have, and make it a
    Blessing to me!'

    The star had shone on her face until now, when her face sank upon his
    hand and her own.

    It had grown darker when he raised her in his encircling arm, and softly
    answered her.

    'No, darling Little Dorrit. No, my child. I must not hear of such a
    sacrifice. Liberty and hope would be so dear, bought at such a price,
    that I could never support their weight, never bear the reproach of
    possessing them. But with what ardent thankfulness and love I say this,
    I may call Heaven to witness!'

    'And yet you will not let me be faithful to you in your affliction?'

    'Say, dearest Little Dorrit, and yet I will try to be faithful to you.
    If, in the bygone days when this was your home and when this was your
    dress, I had understood myself (I speak only of myself) better, and
    had read the secrets of my own breast more distinctly; if, through my
    reserve and self-mistrust, I had discerned a light that I see brightly
    now when it has passed far away, and my weak footsteps can never
    overtake it; if I had then known, and told you that I loved and honoured
    you, not as the poor child I used to call you, but as a woman whose
    true hand would raise me high above myself and make me a far happier and
    better man; if I had so used the opportunity there is no recalling--as
    I wish I had, O I wish I had!--and if something had kept us apart then,
    when I was moderately thriving, and when you were poor; I might have met
    your noble offer of your fortune, dearest girl, with other words than
    these, and still have blushed to touch it. But, as it is, I must never
    touch it, never!'

    She besought him, more pathetically and earnestly, with her little
    supplicatory hand, than she could have done in any words.

    'I am disgraced enough, my Little Dorrit. I must not descend so low as
    that, and carry you--so dear, so generous, so good--down with me. GOD
    bless you, GOD reward you! It is past.'

    He took her in his arms, as if she had been his daughter.

    'Always so much older, so much rougher, and so much less worthy, even
    what I was must be dismissed by both of us, and you must see me only as
    I am. I put this parting kiss upon your cheek, my child--who might have
    been more near to me, who never could have been more dear--a ruined man
    far removed from you, for ever separated from you, whose course is
    run while yours is but beginning. I have not the courage to ask to be
    forgotten by you in my humiliation; but I ask to be remembered only as I
    am.'

    The bell began to ring, warning visitors to depart. He took her mantle
    from the wall, and tenderly wrapped it round her.

    'One other word, my Little Dorrit. A hard one to me, but it is a
    necessary one. The time when you and this prison had anything in common
    has long gone by. Do you understand?'

    'O! you will never say to me,' she cried, weeping bitterly, and holding
    up her clasped hands in entreaty, 'that I am not to come back any more!
    You will surely not desert me so!'

    'I would say it, if I could; but I have not the courage quite to shut
    out this dear face, and abandon all hope of its return. But do not come
    soon, do not come often! This is now a tainted place, and I well know
    the taint of it clings to me. You belong to much brighter and better
    scenes. You are not to look back here, my Little Dorrit; you are to look
    away to very different and much happier paths. Again, GOD bless you in
    them! GOD reward you!'

    Maggy, who had fallen into very low spirits, here cried, 'Oh get him
    into a hospital; do get him into a hospital, Mother! He'll never look
    like hisself again, if he an't got into a hospital. And then the little
    woman as was always a spinning at her wheel, she can go to the cupboard
    with the Princess, and say, what do you keep the Chicking there for? and
    then they can take it out and give it to him, and then all be happy!'

    The interruption was seasonable, for the bell had nearly rung itself
    out. Again tenderly wrapping her mantle about her, and taking her on his
    arm (though, but for her visit, he was almost too weak to walk), Arthur
    led Little Dorrit down-stairs. She was the last visitor to pass out at
    the Lodge, and the gate jarred heavily and hopelessly upon her.

    With the funeral clang that it sounded into Arthur's heart, his sense of
    weakness returned. It was a toilsome journey up-stairs to his room, and
    he re-entered its dark solitary precincts in unutterable misery.

    When it was almost midnight, and the prison had long been quiet, a
    cautious creak came up the stairs, and a cautious tap of a key was given
    at his door. It was Young John. He glided in, in his stockings, and held
    the door closed, while he spoke in a whisper.

    'It's against all rules, but I don't mind. I was determined to come
    through, and come to you.'

    'What is the matter?'

    'Nothing's the matter, sir. I was waiting in the court-yard for Miss
    Dorrit when she came out. I thought you'd like some one to see that she
    was safe.'

    'Thank you, thank you! You took her home, John?'

    'I saw her to her hotel. The same that Mr Dorrit was at. Miss Dorrit
    walked all the way, and talked to me so kind, it quite knocked me over.
    Why do you think she walked instead of riding?'

    'I don't know, John.'

    'To talk about you. She said to me, "John, you was always honourable,
    and if you'll promise me that you will take care of him, and never let
    him want for help and comfort when I am not there, my mind will be at
    rest so far." I promised her. And I'll stand by you,' said John Chivery,
    'for ever!'

    Clennam, much affected, stretched out his hand to this honest spirit.

    'Before I take it,' said John, looking at it, without coming from the
    door, 'guess what message Miss Dorrit gave me.'

    Clennam shook his head.

    '"Tell him,"' repeated John, in a distinct, though quavering voice,
    '"that his Little Dorrit sent him her undying love." Now it's delivered.
    Have I been honourable, sir?'

    'Very, very!'

    'Will you tell Miss Dorrit I've been honourable, sir?'

    'I will indeed.'

    'There's my hand, sir,' said John, 'and I'll stand by you forever!'

    After a hearty squeeze, he disappeared with the same cautious creak upon
    the stair, crept shoeless over the pavement of the yard, and, locking
    the gates behind him, passed out into the front where he had left his
    shoes. If the same way had been paved with burning ploughshares, it is
    not at all improbable that John would have traversed it with the same
    devotion, for the same purpose.




The last day of the appointed week touched the bars of the Marshalsea
gate. Black, all night, since the gate had clashed upon Little Dorrit,
    its iron stripes were turned by the early-glowing sun into stripes of
    gold. Far aslant across the city, over its jumbled roofs, and through
    the open tracery of its church towers, struck the long bright rays, bars
    of the prison of this lower world.

    Throughout the day the old house within the gateway remained untroubled
    by any visitors. But, when the sun was low, three men turned in at the
    gateway and made for the dilapidated house.

    Rigaud was the first, and walked by himself smoking. Mr Baptist was
    the second, and jogged close after him, looking at no other object.
    Mr Pancks was the third, and carried his hat under his arm for the
    liberation of his restive hair; the weather being extremely hot. They
    all came together at the door-steps.

    'You pair of madmen!' said Rigaud, facing about. 'Don't go yet!'

    'We don't mean to,' said Mr Pancks.

    Giving him a dark glance in acknowledgment of his answer, Rigaud knocked
    loudly. He had charged himself with drink, for the playing out of his
    game, and was impatient to begin. He had hardly finished one long
    resounding knock, when he turned to the knocker again and began another.
    That was not yet finished when Jeremiah Flintwinch opened the door, and
    they all clanked into the stone hall. Rigaud, thrusting Mr Flintwinch
    aside, proceeded straight up-stairs. His two attendants followed him, Mr
    Flintwinch followed them, and they all came trooping into Mrs Clennam's
    quiet room. It was in its usual state; except that one of the windows
    was wide open, and Affery sat on its old-fashioned window-seat, mending
    a stocking. The usual articles were on the little table; the usual
    deadened fire was in the grate; the bed had its usual pall upon it; and
    the mistress of all sat on her black bier-like sofa, propped up by her
    black angular bolster that was like the headsman's block.

    Yet there was a nameless air of preparation in the room, as if it were
    strung up for an occasion. From what the room derived it--every one of
    its small variety of objects being in the fixed spot it had occupied
    for years--no one could have said without looking attentively at its
    mistress, and that, too, with a previous knowledge of her face. Although
    her unchanging black dress was in every plait precisely as of old, and
    her unchanging attitude was rigidly preserved, a very slight additional
    setting of her features and contraction of her gloomy forehead was so
    powerfully marked, that it marked everything about her.

    'Who are these?' she said, wonderingly, as the two attendants entered.
    'What do these people want here?'

    'Who are these, dear madame, is it?' returned Rigaud. 'Faith, they are
    friends of your son the prisoner. And what do they want here, is it?
    Death, madame, I don't know. You will do well to ask them.'

    'You know you told us at the door, not to go yet,' said Pancks.

    'And you know you told me at the door, you didn't mean to go,' retorted
    Rigaud. 'In a word, madame, permit me to present two spies of the
    prisoner's--madmen, but spies. If you wish them to remain here during
    our little conversation, say the word. It is nothing to me.'

    'Why should I wish them to remain here?' said Mrs Clennam. 'What have I
    to do with them?'

    'Then, dearest madame,' said Rigaud, throwing himself into an arm-chair
    so heavily that the old room trembled, 'you will do well to dismiss
    them. It is your affair. They are not my spies, not my rascals.'

    'Hark! You Pancks,' said Mrs Clennam, bending her brows upon him
    angrily, 'you Casby's clerk! Attend to your employer's business and your
    own. Go. And take that other man with you.'

    'Thank you, ma'am,' returned Mr Pancks, 'I am glad to say I see no
    objection to our both retiring. We have done all we undertook to do for
    Mr Clennam. His constant anxiety has been (and it grew worse upon him
            when he became a prisoner), that this agreeable gentleman should be
    brought back here to the place from which he slipped away. Here he
    is--brought back. And I will say,' added Mr Pancks, 'to his ill-looking
    face, that in my opinion the world would be no worse for his slipping
    out of it altogether.'

    'Your opinion is not asked,' answered Mrs Clennam. 'Go.'

    'I am sorry not to leave you in better company, ma'am,' said Pancks;
    'and sorry, too, that Mr Clennam can't be present. It's my fault, that
    is.'

    'You mean his own,' she returned.

    'No, I mean mine, ma'am,' said Pancks, 'for it was my misfortune to lead
    him into a ruinous investment.' (Mr Pancks still clung to that word,
            and never said speculation.) 'Though I can prove by figures,' added Mr
    Pancks, with an anxious countenance, 'that it ought to have been a good
    investment. I have gone over it since it failed, every day of my life,
    and it comes out--regarded as a question of figures--triumphant. The
    present is not a time or place,' Mr Pancks pursued, with a longing
    glance into his hat, where he kept his calculations, 'for entering upon
    the figures; but the figures are not to be disputed. Mr Clennam ought to
    have been at this moment in his carriage and pair, and I ought to have
    been worth from three to five thousand pound.'

    Mr Pancks put his hair erect with a general aspect of confidence that
    could hardly have been surpassed, if he had had the amount in his
    pocket. These incontrovertible figures had been the occupation of every
    moment of his leisure since he had lost his money, and were destined to
    afford him consolation to the end of his days.

    'However,' said Mr Pancks, 'enough of that. Altro, old boy, you have
    seen the figures, and you know how they come out.' Mr Baptist, who had
    not the slightest arithmetical power of compensating himself in this
    way, nodded, with a fine display of bright teeth.

    At whom Mr Flintwinch had been looking, and to whom he then said:

    'Oh! it's you, is it? I thought I remembered your face, but I wasn't
    certain till I saw your teeth. Ah! yes, to be sure. It was this
    officious refugee,' said Jeremiah to Mrs Clennam, 'who came knocking
    at the door on the night when Arthur and Chatterbox were here, and who
    asked me a whole Catechism of questions about Mr Blandois.'

    'It is true,' Mr Baptist cheerfully admitted. 'And behold him, padrone!
    I have found him consequentementally.'

    'I shouldn't have objected,' returned Mr Flintwinch, 'to your having
    broken your neck consequentementally.'

    'And now,' said Mr Pancks, whose eye had often stealthily wandered to
    the window-seat and the stocking that was being mended there, 'I've
    only one other word to say before I go. If Mr Clennam was here--but
    unfortunately, though he has so far got the better of this fine
    gentleman as to return him to this place against his will, he is ill
    and in prison--ill and in prison, poor fellow--if he was here,' said Mr
    Pancks, taking one step aside towards the window-seat, and laying
    his right hand upon the stocking; 'he would say, "Affery, tell your
    dreams!"'

    Mr Pancks held up his right forefinger between his nose and the stocking
    with a ghostly air of warning, turned, steamed out and towed Mr Baptist
    after him. The house-door was heard to close upon them, their steps
    were heard passing over the dull pavement of the echoing court-yard, and
    still nobody had added a word. Mrs Clennam and Jeremiah had exchanged a
    look; and had then looked, and looked still, at Affery, who sat mending
    the stocking with great assiduity.

    'Come!' said Mr Flintwinch at length, screwing himself a curve or two in
    the direction of the window-seat, and rubbing the palms of his hands on
    his coat-tail as if he were preparing them to do something: 'Whatever
    has to be said among us had better be begun to be said without more loss
    of time.--So, Affery, my woman, take yourself away!'

    In a moment Affery had thrown the stocking down, started up, caught
    hold of the windowsill with her right hand, lodged herself upon the
    window-seat with her right knee, and was flourishing her left hand,
    beating expected assailants off.

    'No, I won't, Jeremiah--no, I won't--no, I won't! I won't go! I'll stay
    here. I'll hear all I don't know, and say all I know. I will, at last,
    if I die for it. I will, I will, I will, I will!'

    Mr Flintwinch, stiffening with indignation and amazement, moistened the
    fingers of one hand at his lips, softly described a circle with them in
    the palm of the other hand, and continued with a menacing grin to
    screw himself in the direction of his wife; gasping some remark as he
    advanced, of which, in his choking anger, only the words, 'Such a dose!'
    were audible.

    'Not a bit nearer, Jeremiah!' cried Affery, never ceasing to beat the
    air. 'Don't come a bit nearer to me, or I'll rouse the neighbourhood!
    I'll throw myself out of window. I'll scream Fire and Murder! I'll wake
    the dead! Stop where you are, or I'll make shrieks enough to wake the
    dead!'

    The determined voice of Mrs Clennam echoed 'Stop!' Jeremiah had stopped
    already.

    'It is closing in, Flintwinch. Let her alone. Affery, do you turn
    against me after these many years?'

    'I do, if it's turning against you to hear what I don't know, and say
    what I know. I have broke out now, and I can't go back. I am determined
    to do it. I will do it, I will, I will, I will! If that's turning
    against you, yes, I turn against both of you two clever ones. I told
    Arthur when he first come home to stand up against you. I told him it
    was no reason, because I was afeard of my life of you, that he should
    be. All manner of things have been a-going on since then, and I won't
    be run up by Jeremiah, nor yet I won't be dazed and scared, nor made a
    party to I don't know what, no more. I won't, I won't, I won't! I'll
    up for Arthur when he has nothing left, and is ill, and in prison, and
    can't up for himself. I will, I will, I will, I will!'

    'How do you know, you heap of confusion,' asked Mrs Clennam sternly,
    'that in doing what you are doing now, you are even serving Arthur?'

    'I don't know nothing rightly about anything,' said Affery; 'and if
    ever you said a true word in your life, it's when you call me a heap of
    confusion, for you two clever ones have done your most to make me such.
    You married me whether I liked it or not, and you've led me, pretty well
    ever since, such a life of dreaming and frightening as never was known,
    and what do you expect me to be but a heap of confusion? You wanted to
    make me such, and I am such; but I won't submit no longer; no, I won't,
    I won't, I won't, I won't!' She was still beating the air against all
    comers.

    After gazing at her in silence, Mrs Clennam turned to Rigaud. 'You
    see and hear this foolish creature. Do you object to such a piece of
    distraction remaining where she is?'

    'I, madame,' he replied, 'do I? That's a question for you.'

    'I do not,' she said, gloomily. 'There is little left to choose now.
    Flintwinch, it is closing in.'

    Mr Flintwinch replied by directing a look of red vengeance at his wife,
    and then, as if to pinion himself from falling upon her, screwed his
    crossed arms into the breast of his waistcoat, and with his chin very
    near one of his elbows stood in a corner, watching Rigaud in the oddest
    attitude. Rigaud, for his part, arose from his chair, and seated himself
    on the table with his legs dangling. In this easy attitude, he met Mrs
    Clennam's set face, with his moustache going up and his nose coming
    down.

    'Madame, I am a gentleman--'

    'Of whom,' she interrupted in her steady tones, 'I have heard
    disparagement, in connection with a French jail and an accusation of
    murder.'

    He kissed his hand to her with his exaggerated gallantry.

    'Perfectly. Exactly. Of a lady too! What absurdity! How incredible! I
    had the honour of making a great success then; I hope to have the
    honour of making a great success now. I kiss your hands. Madame, I am a
    gentleman (I was going to observe), who when he says, "I will definitely
    finish this or that affair at the present sitting," does definitely
    finish it. I announce to you that we are arrived at our last sitting on
    our little business. You do me the favour to follow, and to comprehend?'

    She kept her eyes fixed upon him with a frown. 'Yes.'

    'Further, I am a gentleman to whom mere mercenary trade-bargains are
    unknown, but to whom money is always acceptable as the means of pursuing
    his pleasures. You do me the favour to follow, and to comprehend?'

    'Scarcely necessary to ask, one would say. Yes.'

    'Further, I am a gentleman of the softest and sweetest disposition,
    but who, if trifled with, becomes enraged. Noble natures under such
    circumstances become enraged. I possess a noble nature. When the lion
    is awakened--that is to say, when I enrage--the satisfaction of my
    animosity is as acceptable to me as money. You always do me the favour
    to follow, and to comprehend?'

    'Yes,' she answered, somewhat louder than before.

    'Do not let me derange you; pray be tranquil. I have said we are now
    arrived at our last sitting. Allow me to recall the two sittings we have
    held.'

    'It is not necessary.'

    'Death, madame,' he burst out, 'it's my fancy! Besides, it clears the
    way. The first sitting was limited. I had the honour of making your
    acquaintance--of presenting my letter; I am a Knight of Industry, at
    your service, madame, but my polished manners had won me so much of
    success, as a master of languages, among your compatriots who are as
    stiff as their own starch is to one another, but are ready to relax to
    a foreign gentleman of polished manners--and of observing one or two
    little things,' he glanced around the room and smiled, 'about this
    honourable house, to know which was necessary to assure me, and
    to convince me that I had the distinguished pleasure of making the
    acquaintance of the lady I sought. I achieved this. I gave my word
    of honour to our dear Flintwinch that I would return. I gracefully
    departed.'

    Her face neither acquiesced nor demurred. The same when he paused, and
    when he spoke, it as yet showed him always the one attentive frown,
    and the dark revelation before mentioned of her being nerved for the
    occasion.

    'I say, gracefully departed, because it was graceful to retire without
    alarming a lady. To be morally graceful, not less than physically, is
    a part of the character of Rigaud Blandois. It was also politic, as
    leaving you with something overhanging you, to expect me again with a
    little anxiety on a day not named. But your slave is politic. By Heaven,
    madame, politic! Let us return. On the day not named, I have again the
    honour to render myself at your house. I intimate that I have something
    to sell, which, if not bought, will compromise madame whom I highly
    esteem. I explain myself generally. I demand--I think it was a thousand
    pounds. Will you correct me?'

    Thus forced to speak, she replied with constraint, 'You demanded as much
    as a thousand pounds.'

    'I demand at present, Two. Such are the evils of delay. But to return
    once more. We are not accordant; we differ on that occasion. I am
    playful; playfulness is a part of my amiable character. Playfully, I
    become as one slain and hidden. For, it may alone be worth half the sum
    to madame, to be freed from the suspicions that my droll idea awakens.
    Accident and spies intermix themselves against my playfulness, and spoil
    the fruit, perhaps--who knows? only you and Flintwinch--when it is just
    ripe. Thus, madame, I am here for the last time. Listen! Definitely the
    last.'

    As he struck his straggling boot-heels against the flap of the table,
    meeting her frown with an insolent gaze, he began to change his tone for
    a fierce one.

    'Bah! Stop an instant! Let us advance by steps. Here is my Hotel-note to
    be paid, according to contract. Five minutes hence we may be at daggers'
    points. I'll not leave it till then, or you'll cheat me. Pay it! Count
    me the money!'

    'Take it from his hand and pay it, Flintwinch,' said Mrs Clennam.

    He spirted it into Mr Flintwinch's face when the old man advanced to
    take it, and held forth his hand, repeating noisily, 'Pay it! Count it
    out! Good money!' Jeremiah picked the bill up, looked at the total with
    a bloodshot eye, took a small canvas bag from his pocket, and told the
    amount into his hand.

    Rigaud chinked the money, weighed it in his hand, threw it up a little
    way and caught it, chinked it again.

    'The sound of it, to the bold Rigaud Blandois, is like the taste of
    fresh meat to the tiger. Say, then, madame. How much?'

    He turned upon her suddenly with a menacing gesture of the weighted hand
    that clenched the money, as if he were going to strike her with it.

    'I tell you again, as I told you before, that we are not rich here, as
    you suppose us to be, and that your demand is excessive. I have not the
    present means of complying with such a demand, if I had ever so great an
    inclination.'

    'If!' cried Rigaud. 'Hear this lady with her If! Will you say that you
    have not the inclination?'

    'I will say what presents itself to me, and not what presents itself to
    you.'

    'Say it then. As to the inclination. Quick! Come to the inclination, and
    I know what to do.'

    She was no quicker, and no slower, in her reply. 'It would seem that
    you have obtained possession of a paper--or of papers--which I assuredly
    have the inclination to recover.'

    Rigaud, with a loud laugh, drummed his heels against the table, and
    chinked his money. 'I think so! I believe you there!'

    'The paper might be worth, to me, a sum of money. I cannot say how much,
    or how little.'

    'What the Devil!' he asked savagely. 'Not after a week's grace to
    consider?'

    'No! I will not out of my scanty means--for I tell you again, we are
    poor here, and not rich--I will not offer any price for a power that I
    do not know the worst and the fullest extent of. This is the third time
    of your hinting and threatening. You must speak explicitly, or you may
    go where you will, and do what you will. It is better to be torn to
    pieces at a spring, than to be a mouse at the caprice of such a cat.'

    He looked at her so hard with those eyes too near together that the
    sinister sight of each, crossing that of the other, seemed to make the
    bridge of his hooked nose crooked. After a long survey, he said, with
    the further setting off of his internal smile:

    'You are a bold woman!'

    'I am a resolved woman.'

    'You always were. What? She always was; is it not so, my little
    Flintwinch?'

    'Flintwinch, say nothing to him. It is for him to say, here and now,
    all he can; or to go hence, and do all he can. You know this to be our
    determination. Leave him to his action on it.'

    She did not shrink under his evil leer, or avoid it. He turned it upon
    her again, but she remained steady at the point to which she had fixed
    herself. He got off the table, placed a chair near the sofa, sat down in
    it, and leaned an arm upon the sofa close to her own, which he touched
    with his hand. Her face was ever frowning, attentive, and settled.

    'It is your pleasure then, madame, that I shall relate a morsel of
    family history in this little family society,' said Rigaud, with a
    warning play of his lithe fingers on her arm. 'I am something of a
    doctor. Let me touch your pulse.'

    She suffered him to take her wrist in his hand. Holding it, he proceeded
    to say:

    'A history of a strange marriage, and a strange mother, and a revenge,
    and a suppression.--Aye, aye, aye? this pulse is beating curiously!
    It appears to me that it doubles while I touch it. Are these the usual
    changes of your malady, madame?'

    There was a struggle in her maimed arm as she twisted it away, but there
    was none in her face. On his face there was his own smile.

    'I have lived an adventurous life. I am an adventurous character. I have
    known many adventurers; interesting spirits--amiable society! To one
    of them I owe my knowledge and my proofs--I repeat it, estimable
    lady--proofs--of the ravishing little family history I go to commence.
    You will be charmed with it. But, bah! I forget. One should name a
    history. Shall I name it the history of a house? But, bah, again. There
    are so many houses. Shall I name it the history of this house?'

    Leaning over the sofa, poised on two legs of his chair and his left
    elbow; that hand often tapping her arm to beat his words home; his
    legs crossed; his right hand sometimes arranging his hair, sometimes
    smoothing his moustache, sometimes striking his nose, always threatening
    her whatever it did; coarse, insolent, rapacious, cruel, and powerful,
    he pursued his narrative at his ease.

    'In fine, then, I name it the history of this house. I commence it.
    There live here, let us suppose, an uncle and nephew. The uncle, a
    rigid old gentleman of strong force of character; the nephew, habitually
    timid, repressed, and under constraint.'

    Mistress Affery, fixedly attentive in the window-seat, biting the
    rolled up end of her apron, and trembling from head to foot, here cried
    out,'Jeremiah, keep off from me! I've heerd, in my dreams, of Arthur's
    father and his uncle. He's a talking of them. It was before my time
    here; but I've heerd in my dreams that Arthur's father was a poor,
    irresolute, frightened chap, who had had everything but his orphan life
    scared out of him when he was young, and that he had no voice in the
    choice of his wife even, but his uncle chose her. There she sits! I
    heerd it in my dreams, and you said it to her own self.'

    As Mr Flintwinch shook his fist at her, and as Mrs Clennam gazed upon
    her, Rigaud kissed his hand to her.

    'Perfectly right, dear Madame Flintwinch. You have a genius for
    dreaming.'

    'I don't want none of your praises,' returned Affery. 'I don't want to
    have nothing at all to say to you. But Jeremiah said they was dreams,
    and I'll tell 'em as such!' Here she put her apron in her mouth again,
    as if she were stopping somebody else's mouth--perhaps Jeremiah's, which
    was chattering with threats as if he were grimly cold.

    'Our beloved Madame Flintwinch,' said Rigaud, 'developing all of a
    sudden a fine susceptibility and spirituality, is right to a marvel.
    Yes. So runs the history. Monsieur, the uncle, commands the nephew to
    marry. Monsieur says to him in effect, "My nephew, I introduce to you a
    lady of strong force of character, like myself--a resolved lady, a stern
    lady, a lady who has a will that can break the weak to powder: a lady
    without pity, without love, implacable, revengeful, cold as the stone,
    but raging as the fire." Ah! what fortitude! Ah, what superiority of
    intellectual strength! Truly, a proud and noble character that I
    describe in the supposed words of Monsieur, the uncle. Ha, ha, ha! Death
    of my soul, I love the sweet lady!'

    Mrs Clennam's face had changed. There was a remarkable darkness of
    colour on it, and the brow was more contracted. 'Madame, madame,' said
    Rigaud, tapping her on the arm, as if his cruel hand were sounding a
    musical instrument, 'I perceive I interest you. I perceive I awaken your
    sympathy. Let us go on.'

    The drooping nose and the ascending moustache had, however, to be hidden
    for a moment with the white hand, before he could go on; he enjoyed the
    effect he made so much.

    'The nephew, being, as the lucid Madame Flintwinch has remarked, a poor
    devil who has had everything but his orphan life frightened and famished
    out of him--the nephew abases his head, and makes response: "My uncle,
    it is to you to command. Do as you will!" Monsieur, the uncle, does as
    he will. It is what he always does. The auspicious nuptials take place;
    the newly married come home to this charming mansion; the lady is
    received, let us suppose, by Flintwinch. Hey, old intriguer?'

    Jeremiah, with his eyes upon his mistress, made no reply. Rigaud looked
    from one to the other, struck his ugly nose, and made a clucking with
    his tongue.

    'Soon the lady makes a singular and exciting discovery. Thereupon,
    full of anger, full of jealousy, full of vengeance, she forms--see you,
    madame!--a scheme of retribution, the weight of which she ingeniously
    forces her crushed husband to bear himself, as well as execute upon her
    enemy. What superior intelligence!'

    'Keep off, Jeremiah!' cried the palpitating Affery, taking her apron
    from her mouth again. 'But it was one of my dreams, that you told her,
    when you quarrelled with her one winter evening at dusk--there she sits
    and you looking at her--that she oughtn't to have let Arthur when he
    come home, suspect his father only; that she had always had the strength
    and the power; and that she ought to have stood up more to Arthur, for
    his father. It was in the same dream where you said to her that she was
    not--not something, but I don't know what, for she burst out tremendous
    and stopped you. You know the dream as well as I do. When you come
    down-stairs into the kitchen with the candle in your hand, and hitched
    my apron off my head. When you told me I had been dreaming. When you
    wouldn't believe the noises.' After this explosion Affery put her apron
    into her mouth again; always keeping her hand on the window-sill and her
    knee on the window-seat, ready to cry out or jump out if her lord and
    master approached.

    Rigaud had not lost a word of this.

    'Haha!' he cried, lifting his eyebrows, folding his arms, and leaning
    back in his chair. 'Assuredly, Madame Flintwinch is an oracle! How shall
    we interpret the oracle, you and I and the old intriguer? He said that
    you were not--? And you burst out and stopped him! What was it you were
    not? What is it you are not? Say then, madame!'

    Under this ferocious banter, she sat breathing harder, and her mouth was
    disturbed. Her lips quivered and opened, in spite of her utmost efforts
    to keep them still.

    'Come then, madame! Speak, then! Our old intriguer said that you were
    not--and you stopped him. He was going to say that you were not--what?
    I know already, but I want a little confidence from you. How, then? You
    are not what?'

    She tried again to repress herself, but broke out vehemently, 'Not
    Arthur's mother!'

    'Good,' said Rigaud. 'You are amenable.'

    With the set expression of her face all torn away by the explosion
    of her passion, and with a bursting, from every rent feature, of the
    smouldering fire so long pent up, she cried out: 'I will tell it myself!
    I will not hear it from your lips, and with the taint of your wickedness
    upon it. Since it must be seen, I will have it seen by the light I stood
    in. Not another word. Hear me!'

    'Unless you are a more obstinate and more persisting woman than even
    I know you to be,' Mr Flintwinch interposed, 'you had better leave Mr
    Rigaud, Mr Blandois, Mr Beelzebub, to tell it in his own way. What does
    it signify when he knows all about it?'

    'He does not know all about it.'

    'He knows all he cares about it,' Mr Flintwinch testily urged.

    'He does not know _me_.'

    'What do you suppose he cares for you, you conceited woman?' said Mr
    Flintwinch.

    'I tell you, Flintwinch, I will speak. I tell you when it has come
    to this, I will tell it with my own lips, and will express myself
    throughout it. What! Have I suffered nothing in this room, no
    deprivation, no imprisonment, that I should condescend at last to
    contemplate myself in such a glass as _that_. Can you see him? Can you
    hear him? If your wife were a hundred times the ingrate that she is, and
    if I were a thousand times more hopeless than I am of inducing her to be
    silent if this man is silenced, I would tell it myself, before I would
    bear the torment of the hearing it from him.'

    Rigaud pushed his chair a little back; pushed his legs out straight
    before him; and sat with his arms folded over against her.

    'You do not know what it is,' she went on addressing him, 'to be brought
    up strictly and straitly. I was so brought up. Mine was no light youth
    of sinful gaiety and pleasure. Mine were days of wholesome repression,
    punishment, and fear. The corruption of our hearts, the evil of our
    ways, the curse that is upon us, the terrors that surround us--these
    were the themes of my childhood. They formed my character, and filled me
    with an abhorrence of evil-doers. When old Mr Gilbert Clennam proposed
    his orphan nephew to my father for my husband, my father impressed upon
    me that his bringing-up had been, like mine, one of severe restraint.
    He told me, that besides the discipline his spirit had undergone, he
    had lived in a starved house, where rioting and gaiety were unknown, and
    where every day was a day of toil and trial like the last. He told me
    that he had been a man in years long before his uncle had acknowledged
    him as one; and that from his school-days to that hour, his uncle's roof
    has been a sanctuary to him from the contagion of the irreligious
    and dissolute. When, within a twelvemonth of our marriage, I found
    my husband, at that time when my father spoke of him, to have sinned
    against the Lord and outraged me by holding a guilty creature in my
    place, was I to doubt that it had been appointed to me to make the
    discovery, and that it was appointed to me to lay the hand of punishment
    upon that creature of perdition? Was I to dismiss in a moment--not my
    own wrongs--what was I! but all the rejection of sin, and all the war
    against it, in which I had been bred?'

    She laid her wrathful hand upon the watch on the table.

    'No! "Do not forget." The initials of those words are within here now,
    and were within here then. I was appointed to find the old letter that
    referred to them, and that told me what they meant, and whose work they
    were, and why they were worked, lying with this watch in his secret
    drawer. But for that appointment there would have been no discovery.
    "Do not forget." It spoke to me like a voice from an angry cloud. Do
    not forget the deadly sin, do not forget the appointed discovery, do not
    forget the appointed suffering. I did not forget. Was it my own wrong I
    remembered? Mine! I was but a servant and a minister. What power could I
    have over them, but that they were bound in the bonds of their sin, and
    delivered to me!'

    More than forty years had passed over the grey head of this determined
    woman, since the time she recalled. More than forty years of strife
    and struggle with the whisper that, by whatever name she called her
    vindictive pride and rage, nothing through all eternity could change
    their nature. Yet, gone those more than forty years, and come this
    Nemesis now looking her in the face, she still abided by her old
    impiety--still reversed the order of Creation, and breathed her own
    breath into a clay image of her Creator. Verily, verily, travellers have
    seen many monstrous idols in many countries; but no human eyes have ever
    seen more daring, gross, and shocking images of the Divine nature than
    we creatures of the dust make in our own likenesses, of our own bad
    passions.

    'When I forced him to give her up to me, by her name and place of
    abode,' she went on in her torrent of indignation and defence; 'when I
    accused her, and she fell hiding her face at my feet, was it my injury
    that I asserted, were they my reproaches that I poured upon her? Those
    who were appointed of old to go to wicked kings and accuse them--were
    they not ministers and servants? And had not I, unworthy and far-removed
    from them, sin to denounce? When she pleaded to me her youth, and his
    wretched and hard life (that was her phrase for the virtuous training he
            had belied), and the desecrated ceremony of marriage there had
    secretly been between them, and the terrors of want and shame that had
    overwhelmed them both when I was first appointed to be the instrument of
    their punishment, and the love (for she said the word to me, down at my
            feet) in which she had abandoned him and left him to me, was it _my_
    enemy that became my footstool, were they the words of my wrath that
    made her shrink and quiver! Not unto me the strength be ascribed; not
    unto me the wringing of the expiation!'

    Many years had come and gone since she had had the free use even of
    her fingers; but it was noticeable that she had already more than once
    struck her clenched hand vigorously upon the table, and that when she
    said these words she raised her whole arm in the air, as though it had
    been a common action with her.

    'And what was the repentance that was extorted from the hardness of her
    heart and the blackness of her depravity? I, vindictive and implacable?
    It may be so, to such as you who know no righteousness, and no
    appointment except Satan's. Laugh; but I will be known as I know
    myself, and as Flintwinch knows me, though it is only to you and this
    half-witted woman.'

    'Add, to yourself, madame,' said Rigaud. 'I have my little suspicions
    that madame is rather solicitous to be justified to herself.'

    'It is false. It is not so. I have no need to be,' she said, with great
    energy and anger.

    'Truly?' retorted Rigaud. 'Hah!'

    'I ask, what was the penitence, in works, that was demanded of her?
    "You have a child; I have none. You love that child. Give him to me. He
    shall believe himself to be my son, and he shall be believed by every
    one to be my son. To save you from exposure, his father shall swear
    never to see or communicate with you more; equally to save him from
    being stripped by his uncle, and to save your child from being a beggar,
    you shall swear never to see or communicate with either of them more.
    That done, and your present means, derived from my husband, renounced,
    I charge myself with your support. You may, with your place of retreat
    unknown, then leave, if you please, uncontradicted by me, the lie that
    when you passed out of all knowledge but mine, you merited a good name."
    That was all. She had to sacrifice her sinful and shameful affections;
    no more. She was then free to bear her load of guilt in secret, and to
    break her heart in secret; and through such present misery (light enough
            for her, I think!) to purchase her redemption from endless misery, if
    she could. If, in this, I punished her here, did I not open to her a way
    hereafter? If she knew herself to be surrounded by insatiable vengeance
    and unquenchable fires, were they mine? If I threatened her, then and
    afterwards, with the terrors that encompassed her, did I hold them in my
    right hand?'

    She turned the watch upon the table, and opened it, and, with an
    unsoftening face, looked at the worked letters within.

    'They did _not_ forget. It is appointed against such offences that the
    offenders shall not be able to forget. If the presence of Arthur was a
    daily reproach to his father, and if the absence of Arthur was a daily
    agony to his mother, that was the just dispensation of Jehovah. As well
    might it be charged upon me, that the stings of an awakened conscience
    drove her mad, and that it was the will of the Disposer of all things
    that she should live so, many years. I devoted myself to reclaim the
    otherwise predestined and lost boy; to give him the reputation of an
    honest origin; to bring him up in fear and trembling, and in a life of
    practical contrition for the sins that were heavy on his head before his
    entrance into this condemned world. Was that a cruelty? Was I, too,
    not visited with consequences of the original offence in which I had no
    complicity? Arthur's father and I lived no further apart, with half the
    globe between us, than when we were together in this house. He died,
    and sent this watch back to me, with its Do not forget. I do NOT forget,
    though I do not read it as he did. I read in it, that I was appointed
    to do these things. I have so read these three letters since I have
    had them lying on this table, and I did so read them, with equal
    distinctness, when they were thousands of miles away.'

    As she took the watch-case in her hand, with that new freedom in the use
    of her hand of which she showed no consciousness whatever, bending her
    eyes upon it as if she were defying it to move her, Rigaud cried with a
    loud and contemptuous snapping of his fingers. 'Come, madame! Time runs
    out. Come, lady of piety, it must be! You can tell nothing I don't know.
    Come to the money stolen, or I will! Death of my soul, I have had enough
    of your other jargon. Come straight to the stolen money!'

    'Wretch that you are,' she answered, and now her hands clasped her head:
    'through what fatal error of Flintwinch's, through what incompleteness
    on his part, who was the only other person helping in these things and
    trusted with them, through whose and what bringing together of the ashes
    of a burnt paper, you have become possessed of that codicil, I know no
    more than how you acquired the rest of your power here--'

    'And yet,' interrupted Rigaud, 'it is my odd fortune to have by me, in a
    convenient place that I know of, that same short little addition to the
    will of Monsieur Gilbert Clennam, written by a lady and witnessed by the
    same lady and our old intriguer! Ah, bah, old intriguer, crooked little
    puppet! Madame, let us go on. Time presses. You or I to finish?'

    'I!' she answered, with increased determination, if it were possible.
    'I, because I will not endure to be shown myself, and have myself
    shown to any one, with your horrible distortion upon me. You, with your
    practices of infamous foreign prisons and galleys would make it the
    money that impelled me. It was not the money.'

    'Bah, bah, bah! I repudiate, for the moment, my politeness, and say,
    Lies, lies, lies. You know you suppressed the deed and kept the money.'

    'Not for the money's sake, wretch!' She made a struggle as if she were
    starting up; even as if, in her vehemence, she had almost risen on her
    disabled feet. 'If Gilbert Clennam, reduced to imbecility, at the point
    of death, and labouring under the delusion of some imaginary relenting
    towards a girl of whom he had heard that his nephew had once had a fancy
    for her which he had crushed out of him, and that she afterwards drooped
    away into melancholy and withdrawal from all who knew her--if, in that
    state of weakness, he dictated to me, whose life she had darkened with
    her sin, and who had been appointed to know her wickedness from her
    own hand and her own lips, a bequest meant as a recompense to her
    for supposed unmerited suffering; was there no difference between my
    spurning that injustice, and coveting mere money--a thing which you, and
    your comrades in the prisons, may steal from anyone?'

    'Time presses, madame. Take care!'

    'If this house was blazing from the roof to the ground,' she returned,
    'I would stay in it to justify myself against my righteous motives being
    classed with those of stabbers and thieves.'

    Rigaud snapped his fingers tauntingly in her face. 'One thousand guineas
    to the little beauty you slowly hunted to death. One thousand guineas
    to the youngest daughter her patron might have at fifty, or (if he
            had none) brother's youngest daughter, on her coming of age, "as the
    remembrance his disinterestedness may like best, of his protection of
    a friendless young orphan girl." Two thousand guineas. What! You will
    never come to the money?'

    'That patron,' she was vehemently proceeding, when he checked her.

    'Names! Call him Mr Frederick Dorrit. No more evasions.'

    'That Frederick Dorrit was the beginning of it all. If he had not been
    a player of music, and had not kept, in those days of his youth and
    prosperity, an idle house where singers, and players, and such-like
    children of Evil turned their backs on the Light and their faces to the
    Darkness, she might have remained in her lowly station, and might not
    have been raised out of it to be cast down. But, no. Satan entered into
    that Frederick Dorrit, and counselled him that he was a man of innocent
    and laudable tastes who did kind actions, and that here was a poor girl
    with a voice for singing music with. Then he is to have her taught. Then
    Arthur's father, who has all along been secretly pining in the ways of
    virtuous ruggedness for those accursed snares which are called the Arts,
    becomes acquainted with her. And so, a graceless orphan, training to be
    a singing girl, carries it, by that Frederick Dorrit's agency, against
    me, and I am humbled and deceived!--Not I, that is to say,' she added
    quickly, as colour flushed into her face; 'a greater than I. What am I?'

    Jeremiah Flintwinch, who had been gradually screwing himself towards
    her, and who was now very near her elbow without her knowing it, made a
    specially wry face of objection when she said these words, and moreover
    twitched his gaiters, as if such pretensions were equivalent to little
    barbs in his legs.

    'Lastly,' she continued, 'for I am at the end of these things, and I
    will say no more of them, and you shall say no more of them, and all
    that remains will be to determine whether the knowledge of them can
    be kept among us who are here present; lastly, when I suppressed that
    paper, with the knowledge of Arthur's father--'

    'But not with his consent, you know,' said Mr Flintwinch.

    'Who said with his consent?' She started to find Jeremiah so near her,
    and drew back her head, looking at him with some rising distrust. 'You
    were often enough between us when he would have had me produce it and
    I would not, to have contradicted me if I had said, with his consent. I
    say, when I suppressed that paper, I made no effort to destroy it, but
    kept it by me, here in this house, many years. The rest of the Gilbert
    property being left to Arthur's father, I could at any time, without
    unsettling more than the two sums, have made a pretence of finding
    it. But, besides that I must have supported such pretence by a direct
    falsehood (a great responsibility), I have seen no new reason, in
    all the time I have been tried here, to bring it to light. It was a
    rewarding of sin; the wrong result of a delusion. I did what I was
    appointed to do, and I have undergone, within these four walls, what
    I was appointed to undergo. When the paper was at last destroyed--as
    I thought--in my presence, she had long been dead, and her patron,
    Frederick Dorrit, had long been deservedly ruined and imbecile. He had
    no daughter. I had found the niece before then; and what I did for her,
    was better for her far than the money of which she would have had no
    good.' She added, after a moment, as though she addressed the watch:
    'She herself was innocent, and I might not have forgotten to relinquish
    it to her at my death:' and sat looking at it.

    'Shall I recall something to you, worthy madame?' said Rigaud. 'The
    little paper was in this house on the night when our friend the
    prisoner--jail-comrade of my soul--came home from foreign countries.
    Shall I recall yet something more to you? The little singing-bird
    that never was fledged, was long kept in a cage by a guardian of your
    appointing, well enough known to our old intriguer here. Shall we coax
    our old intriguer to tell us when he saw him last?'

    'I'll tell you!' cried Affery, unstopping her mouth. 'I dreamed it,
    first of all my dreams. Jeremiah, if you come a-nigh me now, I'll scream
    to be heard at St Paul's! The person as this man has spoken of, was
    Jeremiah's own twin brother; and he was here in the dead of the night,
    on the night when Arthur come home, and Jeremiah with his own hands give
    him this paper, along with I don't know what more, and he took it away
    in an iron box--Help! Murder! Save me from Jere-_mi_-ah!'

    Mr Flintwinch had made a run at her, but Rigaud had caught him in his
    arms midway. After a moment's wrestle with him, Flintwinch gave up, and
    put his hands in his pockets.

    'What!' cried Rigaud, rallying him as he poked and jerked him back with
    his elbows, 'assault a lady with such a genius for dreaming! Ha, ha, ha!
    Why, she'll be a fortune to you as an exhibition. All that she dreams
    comes true. Ha, ha, ha! You're so like him, Little Flintwinch. So like
    him, as I knew him (when I first spoke English for him to the host) in
    the Cabaret of the Three Billiard Tables, in the little street of the
    high roofs, by the wharf at Antwerp! Ah, but he was a brave boy to
    drink. Ah, but he was a brave boy to smoke! Ah, but he lived in a sweet
    bachelor-apartment--furnished, on the fifth floor, above the wood and
    charcoal merchant's, and the dress-maker's, and the chair-maker's, and
    the maker of tubs--where I knew him too, and wherewith his cognac and
    tobacco, he had twelve sleeps a day and one fit, until he had a fit too
    much, and ascended to the skies. Ha, ha, ha! What does it matter how I
    took possession of the papers in his iron box? Perhaps he confided it
    to my hands for you, perhaps it was locked and my curiosity was piqued,
    perhaps I suppressed it. Ha, ha, ha! What does it matter, so that I
    have it safe? We are not particular here; hey, Flintwinch? We are not
    particular here; is it not so, madame?'

    Retiring before him with vicious counter-jerks of his own elbows, Mr
    Flintwinch had got back into his corner, where he now stood with his
    hands in his pockets, taking breath, and returning Mrs Clennam's stare.
    'Ha, ha, ha! But what's this?' cried Rigaud. 'It appears as if you
    don't know, one the other. Permit me, Madame Clennam who suppresses, to
    present Monsieur Flintwinch who intrigues.'

    Mr Flintwinch, unpocketing one of his hands to scrape his jaw, advanced
    a step or so in that attitude, still returning Mrs Clennam's look, and
    thus addressed her:

    'Now, I know what you mean by opening your eyes so wide at me, but you
    needn't take the trouble, because I don't care for it. I've been telling
    you for how many years that you're one of the most opinionated and
    obstinate of women. That's what _you_ are. You call yourself humble and
    sinful, but you are the most Bumptious of your sex. That's what _you_ are.
    I have told you, over and over again when we have had a tiff, that you
    wanted to make everything go down before you, but I wouldn't go down
    before you--that you wanted to swallow up everybody alive, but I
    wouldn't be swallowed up alive. Why didn't you destroy the paper when
    you first laid hands upon it? I advised you to; but no, it's not your
    way to take advice. You must keep it forsooth. Perhaps you may carry it
    out at some other time, forsooth. As if I didn't know better than that!
    I think I see your pride carrying it out, with a chance of being
    suspected of having kept it by you. But that's the way you cheat
    yourself. Just as you cheat yourself into making out that you didn't do
    all this business because you were a rigorous woman, all slight, and
    spite, and power, and unforgiveness, but because you were a servant and
    a minister, and were appointed to do it. Who are you, that you should
    be appointed to do it? That may be your religion, but it's my gammon.
    And to tell you all the truth while I am about it,' said Mr Flintwinch,
    crossing his arms, and becoming the express image of irascible
    doggedness, 'I have been rasped--rasped these forty years--by your
    taking such high ground even with me, who knows better; the effect of it
    being coolly to put me on low ground. I admire you very much; you are a
    woman of strong head and great talent; but the strongest head, and the
    greatest talent, can't rasp a man for forty years without making him
    sore. So I don't care for your present eyes. Now, I am coming to the
    paper, and mark what I say. You put it away somewhere, and you kept your
    own counsel where. You're an active woman at that time, and if you want
    to get that paper, you can get it. But, mark. There comes a time when
    you are struck into what you are now, and then if you want to get that
    paper, you can't get it. So it lies, long years, in its hiding-place. At
    last, when we are expecting Arthur home every day, and when any day may
    bring him home, and it's impossible to say what rummaging he may make
    about the house, I recommend you five thousand times, if you can't get
    at it, to let me get at it, that it may be put in the fire. But no--no
    one but you knows where it is, and that's power; and, call yourself
    whatever humble names you will, I call you a female Lucifer in appetite
    for power! On a Sunday night, Arthur comes home. He has not been in this
    room ten minutes, when he speaks of his father's watch. You know very
    well that the Do Not Forget, at the time when his father sent that watch
    to you, could only mean, the rest of the story being then all dead and
    over, Do Not Forget the suppression. Make restitution! Arthur's ways
    have frightened you a bit, and the paper shall be burnt after all. So,
    before that jumping jade and Jezebel,' Mr Flintwinch grinned at his
    wife, 'has got you into bed, you at last tell me where you have put the
    paper, among the old ledgers in the cellars, where Arthur himself went
    prowling the very next morning. But it's not to be burnt on a Sunday
    night. No; you are strict, you are; we must wait over twelve o'clock,
    and get into Monday. Now, all this is a swallowing of me up alive that
    rasps me; so, feeling a little out of temper, and not being as strict as
    yourself, I take a look at the document before twelve o'clock to refresh
    my memory as to its appearance--fold up one of the many yellow old
    papers in the cellars like it--and afterwards, when we have got into
    Monday morning, and I have, by the light of your lamp, to walk from you,
    lying on that bed, to this grate, make a little exchange like the
    conjuror, and burn accordingly. My brother Ephraim, the lunatic-keeper
    (I wish he had had himself to keep in a strait-waistcoat), had had many
    jobs since the close of the long job he got from you, but had not done
    well. His wife died (not that that was much; mine might have died
            instead, and welcome), he speculated unsuccessfully in lunatics, he got
    into difficulty about over-roasting a patient to bring him to reason,
    and he got into debt. He was going out of the way, on what he had been
    able to scrape up, and a trifle from me. He was here that early Monday
    morning, waiting for the tide; in short, he was going to Antwerp, where
    (I am afraid you'll be shocked at my saying, And be damned to him!) he
    made the acquaintance of this gentleman. He had come a long way, and, I
    thought then, was only sleepy; but, I suppose now, was drunk. When
    Arthur's mother had been under the care of him and his wife, she had
    been always writing, incessantly writing,--mostly letters of confession
    to you, and Prayers for forgiveness. My brother had handed, from time to
    time, lots of these sheets to me. I thought I might as well keep them to
    myself as have them swallowed up alive too; so I kept them in a box,
    looking over them when I felt in the humour. Convinced that it was
    advisable to get the paper out of the place, with Arthur coming about
    it, I put it into this same box, and I locked the whole up with two
    locks, and I trusted it to my brother to take away and keep, till I
    should write about it. I did write about it, and never got an answer. I
    didn't know what to make of it, till this gentleman favoured us with his
    first visit. Of course, I began to suspect how it was, then; and I don't
    want his word for it now to understand how he gets his knowledge from my
    papers, and your paper, and my brother's cognac and tobacco talk (I wish
            he'd had to gag himself). Now, I have only one thing more to say, you
    hammer-headed woman, and that is, that I haven't altogether made up my
    mind whether I might, or might not, have ever given you any trouble
    about the codicil. I think not; and that I should have been quite
    satisfied with knowing I had got the better of you, and that I held the
    power over you. In the present state of circumstances, I have no more
    explanation to give you till this time to-morrow night. So you may as
    well,' said Mr Flintwinch, terminating his oration with a screw, 'keep
    your eyes open at somebody else, for it's no use keeping 'em open at
    me.'

    She slowly withdrew them when he had ceased, and dropped her forehead
    on her hand. Her other hand pressed hard upon the table, and again the
    curious stir was observable in her, as if she were going to rise.

    'This box can never bring, elsewhere, the price it will bring here.
    This knowledge can never be of the same profit to you, sold to any other
    person, as sold to me. But I have not the present means of raising the
    sum you have demanded. I have not prospered. What will you take now, and
    what at another time, and how am I to be assured of your silence?'

    'My angel,' said Rigaud, 'I have said what I will take, and time
    presses. Before coming here, I placed copies of the most important of
    these papers in another hand. Put off the time till the Marshalsea
    gate shall be shut for the night, and it will be too late to treat. The
    prisoner will have read them.'

    She put her two hands to her head again, uttered a loud exclamation, and
    started to her feet. She staggered for a moment, as if she would have
    fallen; then stood firm.

    'Say what you mean. Say what you mean, man!'

    Before her ghostly figure, so long unused to its erect attitude, and so
    stiffened in it, Rigaud fell back and dropped his voice. It was, to all
    the three, almost as if a dead woman had risen.

    'Miss Dorrit,' answered Rigaud, 'the little niece of Monsieur Frederick,
    whom I have known across the water, is attached to the prisoner. Miss
    Dorrit, little niece of Monsieur Frederick, watches at this moment over
    the prisoner, who is ill. For her I with my own hands left a packet
    at the prison, on my way here, with a letter of instructions, "_for his
    sake_"--she will do anything for his sake--to keep it without breaking
    the seal, in case of its being reclaimed before the hour of shutting up
    to-night--if it should not be reclaimed before the ringing of the prison
    bell, to give it to him; and it encloses a second copy for herself,
    which he must give to her. What! I don't trust myself among you, now we
    have got so far, without giving my secret a second life. And as to its
    not bringing me, elsewhere, the price it will bring here, say then,
    madame, have you limited and settled the price the little niece will
    give--for his sake--to hush it up? Once more I say, time presses. The
    packet not reclaimed before the ringing of the bell to-night, you cannot
    buy. I sell, then, to the little girl!'

    Once more the stir and struggle in her, and she ran to a closet, tore
    the door open, took down a hood or shawl, and wrapped it over her head.
    Affery, who had watched her in terror, darted to her in the middle of
    the room, caught hold of her dress, and went on her knees to her.

    'Don't, don't, don't! What are you doing? Where are you going? You're a
    fearful woman, but I don't bear you no ill-will. I can do poor Arthur
    no good now, that I see; and you needn't be afraid of me. I'll keep your
    secret. Don't go out, you'll fall dead in the street. Only promise me,
    that, if it's the poor thing that's kept here secretly, you'll let me
    take charge of her and be her nurse. Only promise me that, and never be
    afraid of me.'

    Mrs Clennam stood still for an instant, at the height of her rapid
    haste, saying in stern amazement:

    'Kept here? She has been dead a score of years or more. Ask
    Flintwinch--ask _him_. They can both tell you that she died when Arthur
    went abroad.'

    'So much the worse,' said Affery, with a shiver, 'for she haunts the
    house, then. Who else rustles about it, making signals by dropping
    dust so softly? Who else comes and goes, and marks the walls with
    long crooked touches when we are all a-bed? Who else holds the door
    sometimes? But don't go out--don't go out! Mistress, you'll die in the
    street!'

    Her mistress only disengaged her dress from the beseeching hands, said
    to Rigaud, 'Wait here till I come back!' and ran out of the room. They
    saw her, from the window, run wildly through the court-yard and out at
    the gateway.

    For a few moments they stood motionless. Affery was the first to move,
    and she, wringing her hands, pursued her mistress. Next, Jeremiah
    Flintwinch, slowly backing to the door, with one hand in a pocket, and
    the other rubbing his chin, twisted himself out in his reticent way,
    speechlessly. Rigaud, left alone, composed himself upon the window-seat
    of the open window, in the old Marseilles-jail attitude. He laid his
    cigarettes and fire-box ready to his hand, and fell to smoking.

    'Whoof! Almost as dull as the infernal old jail. Warmer, but almost as
    dismal. Wait till she comes back? Yes, certainly; but where is she gone,
    and how long will she be gone? No matter! Rigaud Lagnier Blandois, my
    amiable subject, you will get your money. You will enrich yourself. You
    have lived a gentleman; you will die a gentleman. You triumph, my little
    boy; but it is your character to triumph. Whoof!'

    In the hour of his triumph, his moustache went up and his nose came
    down, as he ogled a great beam over his head with particular
    satisfaction.




