If Young John Chivery had had the inclination and the power to write a
satire on family pride, he would have had no need to go for an avenging
illustration out of the family of his beloved. He would have found it
amply in that gallant brother and that dainty sister, so steeped in mean
experiences, and so loftily conscious of the family name; so ready
to beg or borrow from the poorest, to eat of anybody's bread, spend
anybody's money, drink from anybody's cup and break it afterwards.
To have painted the sordid facts of their lives, and they throughout
invoking the death's head apparition of the family gentility to come and
scare their benefactors, would have made Young John a satirist of the
first water.

Tip had turned his liberty to hopeful account by becoming a
billiard-marker. He had troubled himself so little as to the means of
his release, that Clennam scarcely needed to have been at the pains of
impressing the mind of Mr Plornish on that subject. Whoever had paid
him the compliment, he very readily accepted the compliment with _his_
compliments, and there was an end of it. Issuing forth from the gate
on these easy terms, he became a billiard-marker; and now occasionally
looked in at the little skittle-ground in a green Newmarket coat
(second-hand), with a shining collar and bright buttons (new), and drank
the beer of the Collegians.

One solid stationary point in the looseness of this gentleman's
character was, that he respected and admired his sister Amy. The feeling
had never induced him to spare her a moment's uneasiness, or to put
himself to any restraint or inconvenience on her account; but with that
Marshalsea taint upon his love, he loved her. The same rank Marshalsea
flavour was to be recognised in his distinctly perceiving that she
sacrificed her life to her father, and in his having no idea that she
had done anything for himself.

When this spirited young man and his sister had begun systematically
to produce the family skeleton for the overawing of the College, this
narrative cannot precisely state. Probably at about the period when
they began to dine on the College charity. It is certain that the more
reduced and necessitous they were, the more pompously the skeleton
emerged from its tomb; and that when there was anything particularly
shabby in the wind, the skeleton always came out with the ghastliest
flourish.

Little Dorrit was late on the Monday morning, for her father slept
late, and afterwards there was his breakfast to prepare and his room to
arrange. She had no engagement to go out to work, however, and therefore
stayed with him until, with Maggy's help, she had put everything right
about him, and had seen him off upon his morning walk (of twenty yards
        or so) to the coffee-house to read the paper. She then got on her bonnet
and went out, having been anxious to get out much sooner. There was, as
usual, a cessation of the small-talk in the Lodge as she passed through
it; and a Collegian who had come in on Saturday night, received the
intimation from the elbow of a more seasoned Collegian, 'Look out. Here
she is!'

She wanted to see her sister, but when she got round to Mr Cripples's,
    she found that both her sister and her uncle had gone to the theatre
    where they were engaged. Having taken thought of this probability by
    the way, and having settled that in such case she would follow them, she
    set off afresh for the theatre, which was on that side of the river, and
    not very far away.

    Little Dorrit was almost as ignorant of the ways of theatres as of the
    ways of gold mines, and when she was directed to a furtive sort of door,
    with a curious up-all-night air about it, that appeared to be ashamed of
    itself and to be hiding in an alley, she hesitated to approach it; being
    further deterred by the sight of some half-dozen close-shaved gentlemen
    with their hats very strangely on, who were lounging about the door,
    looking not at all unlike Collegians. On her applying to them, reassured
    by this resemblance, for a direction to Miss Dorrit, they made way for
    her to enter a dark hall--it was more like a great grim lamp gone out
    than anything else--where she could hear the distant playing of music
    and the sound of dancing feet. A man so much in want of airing that he
    had a blue mould upon him, sat watching this dark place from a hole in
    a corner, like a spider; and he told her that he would send a message
    up to Miss Dorrit by the first lady or gentleman who went through. The
    first lady who went through had a roll of music, half in her muff and
    half out of it, and was in such a tumbled condition altogether, that it
    seemed as if it would be an act of kindness to iron her. But as she was
    very good-natured, and said, 'Come with me; I'll soon find Miss Dorrit
    for you,' Miss Dorrit's sister went with her, drawing nearer and nearer
    at every step she took in the darkness to the sound of music and the
    sound of dancing feet.

    At last they came into a maze of dust, where a quantity of people were
    tumbling over one another, and where there was such a confusion of
    unaccountable shapes of beams, bulkheads, brick walls, ropes, and
    rollers, and such a mixing of gaslight and daylight, that they seemed
    to have got on the wrong side of the pattern of the universe. Little
    Dorrit, left to herself, and knocked against by somebody every moment,
    was quite bewildered, when she heard her sister's voice.

    'Why, good gracious, Amy, what ever brought you here?'

    'I wanted to see you, Fanny dear; and as I am going out all day
    to-morrow, and knew you might be engaged all day to-day, I thought--'

    'But the idea, Amy, of _you_ coming behind! I never did!' As her sister
    said this in no very cordial tone of welcome, she conducted her to a
    more open part of the maze, where various golden chairs and tables were
    heaped together, and where a number of young ladies were sitting on
    anything they could find, chattering. All these young ladies wanted
    ironing, and all had a curious way of looking everywhere while they
    chattered.

    Just as the sisters arrived here, a monotonous boy in a Scotch cap put
    his head round a beam on the left, and said, 'Less noise there, ladies!'
    and disappeared. Immediately after which, a sprightly gentleman with a
    quantity of long black hair looked round a beam on the right, and said,
    'Less noise there, darlings!' and also disappeared.

    'The notion of you among professionals, Amy, is really the last thing
    I could have conceived!' said her sister. 'Why, how did you ever get
    here?'

    'I don't know. The lady who told you I was here, was so good as to bring
    me in.'

    'Like you quiet little things! You can make your way anywhere, I
    believe. _I_ couldn't have managed it, Amy, though I know so much more of
    the world.'

    It was the family custom to lay it down as family law, that she was a
    plain domestic little creature, without the great and sage experience of
    the rest. This family fiction was the family assertion of itself against
    her services. Not to make too much of them.

    'Well! And what have you got on your mind, Amy? Of course you have
    got something on your mind about me?' said Fanny. She spoke as if her
    sister, between two and three years her junior, were her prejudiced
    grandmother.

    'It is not much; but since you told me of the lady who gave you the
    bracelet, Fanny--'

    The monotonous boy put his head round the beam on the left, and said,
    'Look out there, ladies!' and disappeared. The sprightly gentleman with
    the black hair as suddenly put his head round the beam on the right, and
    said, 'Look out there, darlings!' and also disappeared. Thereupon all
    the young ladies rose and began shaking their skirts out behind.

    'Well, Amy?' said Fanny, doing as the rest did; 'what were you going to
    say?'

    'Since you told me a lady had given you the bracelet you showed me,
    Fanny, I have not been quite easy on your account, and indeed want to
    know a little more if you will confide more to me.'

    'Now, ladies!' said the boy in the Scotch cap. 'Now, darlings!' said the
    gentleman with the black hair. They were every one gone in a moment, and
    the music and the dancing feet were heard again.

    Little Dorrit sat down in a golden chair, made quite giddy by these
    rapid interruptions. Her sister and the rest were a long time gone; and
    during their absence a voice (it appeared to be that of the gentleman
            with the black hair) was continually calling out through the music,
    'One, two, three, four, five, six--go! One, two, three, four, five,
    six--go! Steady, darlings! One, two, three, four, five, six--go!'
    Ultimately the voice stopped, and they all came back again, more or less
    out of breath, folding themselves in their shawls, and making ready
    for the streets. 'Stop a moment, Amy, and let them get away before
    us,' whispered Fanny. They were soon left alone; nothing more important
    happening, in the meantime, than the boy looking round his old beam, and
    saying, 'Everybody at eleven to-morrow, ladies!' and the gentleman with
    the black hair looking round his old beam, and saying, 'Everybody at
    eleven to-morrow, darlings!' each in his own accustomed manner.

    When they were alone, something was rolled up or by other means got out
    of the way, and there was a great empty well before them, looking down
    into the depths of which Fanny said, 'Now, uncle!' Little Dorrit, as her
    eyes became used to the darkness, faintly made him out at the bottom of
    the well, in an obscure corner by himself, with his instrument in its
    ragged case under his arm.

    The old man looked as if the remote high gallery windows, with their
    little strip of sky, might have been the point of his better fortunes,
    from which he had descended, until he had gradually sunk down below
    there to the bottom. He had been in that place six nights a week for
    many years, but had never been observed to raise his eyes above his
    music-book, and was confidently believed to have never seen a play.
    There were legends in the place that he did not so much as know the
    popular heroes and heroines by sight, and that the low comedian had
    'mugged' at him in his richest manner fifty nights for a wager, and he
    had shown no trace of consciousness. The carpenters had a joke to the
    effect that he was dead without being aware of it; and the frequenters
    of the pit supposed him to pass his whole life, night and day, and
    Sunday and all, in the orchestra. They had tried him a few times with
    pinches of snuff offered over the rails, and he had always responded to
    this attention with a momentary waking up of manner that had the pale
    phantom of a gentleman in it: beyond this he never, on any occasion, had
    any other part in what was going on than the part written out for the
    clarionet; in private life, where there was no part for the clarionet,
    he had no part at all. Some said he was poor, some said he was a wealthy
    miser; but he said nothing, never lifted up his bowed head, never varied
    his shuffling gait by getting his springless foot from the ground.
    Though expecting now to be summoned by his niece, he did not hear her
    until she had spoken to him three or four times; nor was he at all
    surprised by the presence of two nieces instead of one, but merely said
    in his tremulous voice, 'I am coming, I am coming!' and crept forth by
    some underground way which emitted a cellarous smell.

    'And so, Amy,' said her sister, when the three together passed out at
    the door that had such a shame-faced consciousness of being different
    from other doors: the uncle instinctively taking Amy's arm as the arm to
    be relied on: 'so, Amy, you are curious about me?'

    She was pretty, and conscious, and rather flaunting; and the
    condescension with which she put aside the superiority of her charms,
    and of her worldly experience, and addressed her sister on almost equal
    terms, had a vast deal of the family in it.

    'I am interested, Fanny, and concerned in anything that concerns you.'

    'So you are, so you are, and you are the best of Amys. If I am ever a
    little provoking, I am sure you'll consider what a thing it is to
    occupy my position and feel a consciousness of being superior to it. I
    shouldn't care,' said the Daughter of the Father of the Marshalsea, 'if
    the others were not so common. None of them have come down in the world
    as we have. They are all on their own level. Common.'

    Little Dorrit mildly looked at the speaker, but did not interrupt her.
    Fanny took out her handkerchief, and rather angrily wiped her eyes. 'I
    was not born where you were, you know, Amy, and perhaps that makes a
    difference. My dear child, when we get rid of Uncle, you shall know all
    about it. We'll drop him at the cook's shop where he is going to dine.'

    They walked on with him until they came to a dirty shop window in a
    dirty street, which was made almost opaque by the steam of hot meats,
    vegetables, and puddings. But glimpses were to be caught of a roast leg
    of pork bursting into tears of sage and onion in a metal reservoir full
    of gravy, of an unctuous piece of roast beef and blisterous Yorkshire
    pudding, bubbling hot in a similar receptacle, of a stuffed fillet of
    veal in rapid cut, of a ham in a perspiration with the pace it was going
    at, of a shallow tank of baked potatoes glued together by their own
    richness, of a truss or two of boiled greens, and other substantial
    delicacies. Within, were a few wooden partitions, behind which such
    customers as found it more convenient to take away their dinners in
    stomachs than in their hands, Packed their purchases in solitude. Fanny
    opening her reticule, as they surveyed these things, produced from that
    repository a shilling and handed it to Uncle. Uncle, after not looking
    at it a little while, divined its object, and muttering 'Dinner? Ha!
    Yes, yes, yes!' slowly vanished from them into the mist.

    'Now, Amy,' said her sister, 'come with me, if you are not too tired to
    walk to Harley Street, Cavendish Square.'

    The air with which she threw off this distinguished address and the toss
    she gave to her new bonnet (which was more gauzy than serviceable), made
    her sister wonder; however, she expressed her readiness to go to Harley
    Street, and thither they directed their steps. Arrived at that grand
    destination, Fanny singled out the handsomest house, and knocking at the
    door, inquired for Mrs Merdle. The footman who opened the door, although
    he had powder on his head and was backed up by two other footmen
    likewise powdered, not only admitted Mrs Merdle to be at home, but asked
    Fanny to walk in. Fanny walked in, taking her sister with her; and they
    went up-stairs with powder going before and powder stopping behind,
    and were left in a spacious semicircular drawing-room, one of several
    drawing-rooms, where there was a parrot on the outside of a golden cage
    holding on by its beak, with its scaly legs in the air, and putting
    itself into many strange upside-down postures. This peculiarity has been
    observed in birds of quite another feather, climbing upon golden wires.

    The room was far more splendid than anything Little Dorrit had ever
    imagined, and would have been splendid and costly in any eyes. She
    looked in amazement at her sister and would have asked a question,
    but that Fanny with a warning frown pointed to a curtained doorway of
    communication with another room. The curtain shook next moment, and a
    lady, raising it with a heavily ringed hand, dropped it behind her again
    as she entered.

    The lady was not young and fresh from the hand of Nature, but was young
    and fresh from the hand of her maid. She had large unfeeling handsome
    eyes, and dark unfeeling handsome hair, and a broad unfeeling handsome
    bosom, and was made the most of in every particular. Either because she
    had a cold, or because it suited her face, she wore a rich white
    fillet tied over her head and under her chin. And if ever there were
    an unfeeling handsome chin that looked as if, for certain, it had never
    been, in familiar parlance, 'chucked' by the hand of man, it was the
    chin curbed up so tight and close by that laced bridle.

    'Mrs Merdle,' said Fanny. 'My sister, ma'am.'

    'I am glad to see your sister, Miss Dorrit. I did not remember that you
    had a sister.'

    'I did not mention that I had,' said Fanny.

    'Ah!' Mrs Merdle curled the little finger of her left hand as who should
    say, 'I have caught you. I know you didn't!' All her action was usually
    with her left hand because her hands were not a pair; and left being
    much the whiter and plumper of the two. Then she added: 'Sit down,' and
    composed herself voluptuously, in a nest of crimson and gold cushions,
    on an ottoman near the parrot.

    'Also professional?' said Mrs Merdle, looking at Little Dorrit through
    an eye-glass.

    Fanny answered No. 'No,' said Mrs Merdle, dropping her glass. 'Has not a
    professional air. Very pleasant; but not professional.'

    'My sister, ma'am,' said Fanny, in whom there was a singular mixture
    of deference and hardihood, 'has been asking me to tell her, as between
    sisters, how I came to have the honour of knowing you. And as I had
    engaged to call upon you once more, I thought I might take the liberty
    of bringing her with me, when perhaps you would tell her. I wish her to
    know, and perhaps you will tell her?'

    'Do you think, at your sister's age--' hinted Mrs Merdle.

    'She is much older than she looks,' said Fanny; 'almost as old as I am.'

    'Society,' said Mrs Merdle, with another curve of her little finger, 'is
    so difficult to explain to young persons (indeed is so difficult to
            explain to most persons), that I am glad to hear that. I wish Society
    was not so arbitrary, I wish it was not so exacting--Bird, be quiet!'

    The parrot had given a most piercing shriek, as if its name were Society
    and it asserted its right to its exactions.

    'But,' resumed Mrs Merdle, 'we must take it as we find it. We know it is
    hollow and conventional and worldly and very shocking, but unless we
    are Savages in the Tropical seas (I should have been charmed to be one
            myself--most delightful life and perfect climate, I am told), we
    must consult it. It is the common lot. Mr Merdle is a most extensive
    merchant, his transactions are on the vastest scale, his wealth and
    influence are very great, but even he--Bird, be quiet!'

    The parrot had shrieked another shriek; and it filled up the sentence so
    expressively that Mrs Merdle was under no necessity to end it.

    'Since your sister begs that I would terminate our personal
    acquaintance,' she began again, addressing Little Dorrit, 'by relating
    the circumstances that are much to her credit, I cannot object to comply
    with her request, I am sure. I have a son (I was first married extremely
            young) of two or three-and-twenty.'

    Fanny set her lips, and her eyes looked half triumphantly at her sister.

    'A son of two or three-and-twenty. He is a little gay, a thing Society
    is accustomed to in young men, and he is very impressible. Perhaps he
    inherits that misfortune. I am very impressible myself, by nature. The
    weakest of creatures--my feelings are touched in a moment.'

    She said all this, and everything else, as coldly as a woman of snow;
    quite forgetting the sisters except at odd times, and apparently
    addressing some abstraction of Society; for whose behoof, too, she
    occasionally arranged her dress, or the composition of her figure upon
    the ottoman.

    'So he is very impressible. Not a misfortune in our natural state I dare
    say, but we are not in a natural state. Much to be lamented, no doubt,
    particularly by myself, who am a child of nature if I could but show it;
but so it is. Society suppresses us and dominates us--Bird, be quiet!'

The parrot had broken into a violent fit of laughter, after twisting
divers bars of his cage with his crooked bill, and licking them with his
black tongue.

'It is quite unnecessary to say to a person of your good sense, wide
range of experience, and cultivated feeling,' said Mrs Merdle from her
nest of crimson and gold--and there put up her glass to refresh her
memory as to whom she was addressing,--'that the stage sometimes has
a fascination for young men of that class of character. In saying the
stage, I mean the people on it of the female sex. Therefore, when I
heard that my son was supposed to be fascinated by a dancer, I knew what
that usually meant in Society, and confided in her being a dancer at the
Opera, where young men moving in Society are usually fascinated.'

She passed her white hands over one another, observant of the sisters
now; and the rings upon her fingers grated against each other with a
hard sound.

'As your sister will tell you, when I found what the theatre was I was
much surprised and much distressed. But when I found that your sister,
     by rejecting my son's advances (I must add, in an unexpected manner),
     had brought him to the point of proposing marriage, my feelings were
     of the profoundest anguish--acute.'

     She traced the outline of her left eyebrow, and put it right.

     'In a distracted condition, which only a mother--moving in Society--can
     be susceptible of, I determined to go myself to the theatre, and
     represent my state of mind to the dancer. I made myself known to your
     sister. I found her, to my surprise, in many respects different from
     my expectations; and certainly in none more so, than in meeting me
     with--what shall I say--a sort of family assertion on her own part?' Mrs
     Merdle smiled.

     'I told you, ma'am,' said Fanny, with a heightening colour, 'that
     although you found me in that situation, I was so far above the rest,
     that I considered my family as good as your son's; and that I had a
     brother who, knowing the circumstances, would be of the same opinion,
     and would not consider such a connection any honour.'

     'Miss Dorrit,' said Mrs Merdle, after frostily looking at her through
     her glass, 'precisely what I was on the point of telling your sister,
     in pursuance of your request. Much obliged to you for recalling it
     so accurately and anticipating me. I immediately,' addressing Little
     Dorrit, '(for I am the creature of impulse), took a bracelet from my
     arm, and begged your sister to let me clasp it on hers, in token of
     the delight I had in our being able to approach the subject so far on
     a common footing.' (This was perfectly true, the lady having bought a
             cheap and showy article on her way to the interview, with a general eye
             to bribery.)

     'And I told you, Mrs Merdle,' said Fanny, 'that we might be unfortunate,
     but we are not common.'

     'I think, the very words, Miss Dorrit,' assented Mrs Merdle.

     'And I told you, Mrs Merdle,' said Fanny, 'that if you spoke to me
     of the superiority of your son's standing in Society, it was barely
     possible that you rather deceived yourself in your suppositions about my
     origin; and that my father's standing, even in the Society in which
     he now moved (what that was, was best known to myself), was eminently
     superior, and was acknowledged by every one.'

     'Quite accurate,' rejoined Mrs Merdle. 'A most admirable memory.'

     'Thank you, ma'am. Perhaps you will be so kind as to tell my sister the
     rest.'

     'There is very little to tell,' said Mrs Merdle, reviewing the breadth
     of bosom which seemed essential to her having room enough to be
     unfeeling in, 'but it is to your sister's credit. I pointed out to your
     sister the plain state of the case; the impossibility of the Society
     in which we moved recognising the Society in which she moved--though
     charming, I have no doubt; the immense disadvantage at which she would
     consequently place the family she had so high an opinion of, upon which
     we should find ourselves compelled to look down with contempt, and
     from which (socially speaking) we should feel obliged to recoil with
     abhorrence. In short, I made an appeal to that laudable pride in your
     sister.'

     'Let my sister know, if you please, Mrs Merdle,' Fanny pouted, with a
     toss of her gauzy bonnet, 'that I had already had the honour of telling
     your son that I wished to have nothing whatever to say to him.'

     'Well, Miss Dorrit,' assented Mrs Merdle, 'perhaps I might have
     mentioned that before. If I did not think of it, perhaps it was because
     my mind reverted to the apprehensions I had at the time that he might
     persevere and you might have something to say to him. I also mentioned
     to your sister--I again address the non-professional Miss Dorrit--that
     my son would have nothing in the event of such a marriage, and would be
     an absolute beggar. (I mention that merely as a fact which is part of
             the narrative, and not as supposing it to have influenced your sister,
             except in the prudent and legitimate way in which, constituted as our
             artificial system is, we must all be influenced by such considerations.)
     Finally, after some high words and high spirit on the part of your
     sister, we came to the complete understanding that there was no danger;
     and your sister was so obliging as to allow me to present her with a
     mark or two of my appreciation at my dressmaker's.'

     Little Dorrit looked sorry, and glanced at Fanny with a troubled face.

     'Also,' said Mrs Merdle, 'as to promise to give me the present pleasure
     of a closing interview, and of parting with her on the best of terms.
     On which occasion,' added Mrs Merdle, quitting her nest, and putting
     something in Fanny's hand, 'Miss Dorrit will permit me to say Farewell
     with best wishes in my own dull manner.'

     The sisters rose at the same time, and they all stood near the cage of
     the parrot, as he tore at a claw-full of biscuit and spat it out, seemed
     to mock them with a pompous dance of his body without moving his feet,
     and suddenly turned himself upside down and trailed himself all over
     the outside of his golden cage, with the aid of his cruel beak and black
     tongue.

     'Adieu, Miss Dorrit, with best wishes,' said Mrs Merdle. 'If we could
     only come to a Millennium, or something of that sort, I for one might
     have the pleasure of knowing a number of charming and talented persons
     from whom I am at present excluded. A more primitive state of society
     would be delicious to me. There used to be a poem when I learnt lessons,
     something about Lo the poor Indians whose something mind! If a few
     thousand persons moving in Society, could only go and be Indians, I
     would put my name down directly; but as, moving in Society, we can't be
     Indians, unfortunately--Good morning!'

     They came down-stairs with powder before them and powder behind, the
     elder sister haughty and the younger sister humbled, and were shut out
     into unpowdered Harley Street, Cavendish Square.

     'Well?' said Fanny, when they had gone a little way without speaking.
     'Have you nothing to say, Amy?'

     'Oh, I don't know what to say!' she answered, distressed. 'You didn't
     like this young man, Fanny?'

     'Like him? He is almost an idiot.'

     'I am so sorry--don't be hurt--but, since you ask me what I have to
     say, I am so very sorry, Fanny, that you suffered this lady to give you
     anything.'

     'You little Fool!' returned her sister, shaking her with the sharp pull
     she gave her arm. 'Have you no spirit at all? But that's just the way!
     You have no self-respect, you have no becoming pride, just as you allow
     yourself to be followed about by a contemptible little Chivery of a
     thing,' with the scornfullest emphasis, 'you would let your family be
     trodden on, and never turn.'

     'Don't say that, dear Fanny. I do what I can for them.'

     'You do what you can for them!' repeated Fanny, walking her on very
     fast. 'Would you let a woman like this, whom you could see, if you had
     any experience of anything, to be as false and insolent as a woman can
     be--would you let her put her foot upon your family, and thank her for
     it?'

     'No, Fanny, I am sure.'

     'Then make her pay for it, you mean little thing. What else can you make
     her do? Make her pay for it, you stupid child; and do your family some
     credit with the money!'

     They spoke no more all the way back to the lodging where Fanny and her
     uncle lived. When they arrived there, they found the old man practising
     his clarionet in the dolefullest manner in a corner of the room.
     Fanny had a composite meal to make, of chops, and porter, and tea; and
     indignantly pretended to prepare it for herself, though her sister did
     all that in quiet reality. When at last Fanny sat down to eat and drink,
     she threw the table implements about and was angry with her bread, much
     as her father had been last night.

     'If you despise me,' she said, bursting into vehement tears, 'because I
     am a dancer, why did you put me in the way of being one? It was your
     doing. You would have me stoop as low as the ground before this Mrs
     Merdle, and let her say what she liked and do what she liked, and hold
     us all in contempt, and tell me so to my face. Because I am a dancer!'

     'O Fanny!'

     'And Tip, too, poor fellow. She is to disparage him just as much as she
     likes, without any check--I suppose because he has been in the law, and
     the docks, and different things. Why, it was your doing, Amy. You might
     at least approve of his being defended.'

     All this time the uncle was dolefully blowing his clarionet in the
     corner, sometimes taking it an inch or so from his mouth for a moment
     while he stopped to gaze at them, with a vague impression that somebody
     had said something.

     'And your father, your poor father, Amy. Because he is not free to show
     himself and to speak for himself, you would let such people insult him
     with impunity. If you don't feel for yourself because you go out to
     work, you might at least feel for him, I should think, knowing what he
     has undergone so long.'

     Poor Little Dorrit felt the injustice of this taunt rather sharply.
     The remembrance of last night added a barbed point to it. She said
     nothing in reply, but turned her chair from the table towards the fire.
     Uncle, after making one more pause, blew a dismal wail and went on
     again.

     Fanny was passionate with the tea-cups and the bread as long as her
     passion lasted, and then protested that she was the wretchedest girl in
     the world, and she wished she was dead. After that, her crying became
     remorseful, and she got up and put her arms round her sister. Little
     Dorrit tried to stop her from saying anything, but she answered that
     she would, she must! Thereupon she said again, and again, 'I beg your
     pardon, Amy,' and 'Forgive me, Amy,' almost as passionately as she had
     said what she regretted.

     'But indeed, indeed, Amy,' she resumed when they were seated in sisterly
     accord side by side, 'I hope and I think you would have seen this
     differently, if you had known a little more of Society.'

     'Perhaps I might, Fanny,' said the mild Little Dorrit.

     'You see, while you have been domestic and resignedly shut up there,
     Amy,' pursued her sister, gradually beginning to patronise, 'I have
     been out, moving more in Society, and may have been getting proud and
     spirited--more than I ought to be, perhaps?'

     Little Dorrit answered 'Yes. O yes!'

     'And while you have been thinking of the dinner or the clothes, I may
     have been thinking, you know, of the family. Now, may it not be so,
     Amy?'

     Little Dorrit again nodded 'Yes,' with a more cheerful face than heart.

     'Especially as we know,' said Fanny, 'that there certainly is a tone in
     the place to which you have been so true, which does belong to it, and
     which does make it different from other aspects of Society. So kiss me
     once again, Amy dear, and we will agree that we may both be right, and
     that you are a tranquil, domestic, home-loving, good girl.'

     The clarionet had been lamenting most pathetically during this dialogue,
     but was cut short now by Fanny's announcement that it was time to go;
which she conveyed to her uncle by shutting up his scrap of music, and
taking the clarionet out of his mouth.

Little Dorrit parted from them at the door, and hastened back to the
Marshalsea. It fell dark there sooner than elsewhere, and going into it
that evening was like going into a deep trench. The shadow of the wall
was on every object. Not least upon the figure in the old grey gown and
the black velvet cap, as it turned towards her when she opened the door
of the dim room.

'Why not upon me too!' thought Little Dorrit, with the door yet in her
hand. 'It was not unreasonable in Fanny.'




Upon that establishment of state, the Merdle establishment in Harley
Street, Cavendish Square, there was the shadow of no more common wall
than the fronts of other establishments of state on the opposite side of
the street. Like unexceptionable Society, the opposing rows of houses in
Harley Street were very grim with one another. Indeed, the mansions and
their inhabitants were so much alike in that respect, that the people
were often to be found drawn up on opposite sides of dinner-tables, in
the shade of their own loftiness, staring at the other side of the way
with the dullness of the houses.

Everybody knows how like the street the two dinner-rows of people who
take their stand by the street will be. The expressionless uniform
twenty houses, all to be knocked at and rung at in the same form, all
approachable by the same dull steps, all fended off by the same pattern
of railing, all with the same impracticable fire-escapes, the same
inconvenient fixtures in their heads, and everything without exception
to be taken at a high valuation--who has not dined with these? The
house so drearily out of repair, the occasional bow-window, the stuccoed
house, the newly-fronted house, the corner house with nothing but
angular rooms, the house with the blinds always down, the house with the
hatchment always up, the house where the collector has called for one
quarter of an Idea, and found nobody at home--who has not dined with
these? The house that nobody will take, and is to be had a bargain--who
does not know her? The showy house that was taken for life by the
disappointed gentleman, and which does not suit him at all--who is
unacquainted with that haunted habitation?

Harley Street, Cavendish Square, was more than aware of Mr and Mrs
Merdle. Intruders there were in Harley Street, of whom it was not aware;
but Mr and Mrs Merdle it delighted to honour. Society was aware of
Mr and Mrs Merdle. Society had said 'Let us license them; let us know
them.'

Mr Merdle was immensely rich; a man of prodigious enterprise; a
Midas without the ears, who turned all he touched to gold. He was in
everything good, from banking to building. He was in Parliament, of
course. He was in the City, necessarily. He was Chairman of this,
    Trustee of that, President of the other. The weightiest of men had said
    to projectors, 'Now, what name have you got? Have you got Merdle?' And,
    the reply being in the negative, had said, 'Then I won't look at you.'

    This great and fortunate man had provided that extensive bosom which
    required so much room to be unfeeling enough in, with a nest of crimson
    and gold some fifteen years before. It was not a bosom to repose
    upon, but it was a capital bosom to hang jewels upon. Mr Merdle wanted
    something to hang jewels upon, and he bought it for the purpose. Storr
    and Mortimer might have married on the same speculation.

    Like all his other speculations, it was sound and successful. The jewels
    showed to the richest advantage. The bosom moving in Society with
    the jewels displayed upon it, attracted general admiration. Society
    approving, Mr Merdle was satisfied. He was the most disinterested of
    men,--did everything for Society, and got as little for himself out of
    all his gain and care, as a man might.

    That is to say, it may be supposed that he got all he wanted, otherwise
    with unlimited wealth he would have got it. But his desire was to the
    utmost to satisfy Society (whatever that was), and take up all its
    drafts upon him for tribute. He did not shine in company; he had not
    very much to say for himself; he was a reserved man, with a broad,
    overhanging, watchful head, that particular kind of dull red colour
    in his cheeks which is rather stale than fresh, and a somewhat uneasy
    expression about his coat-cuffs, as if they were in his confidence, and
    had reasons for being anxious to hide his hands. In the little he said,
    he was a pleasant man enough; plain, emphatic about public and private
    confidence, and tenacious of the utmost deference being shown by every
    one, in all things, to Society. In this same Society (if that were it
            which came to his dinners, and to Mrs Merdle's receptions and concerts),
    he hardly seemed to enjoy himself much, and was mostly to be found
    against walls and behind doors. Also when he went out to it, instead of
    its coming home to him, he seemed a little fatigued, and upon the
    whole rather more disposed for bed; but he was always cultivating it
    nevertheless, and always moving in it--and always laying out money on it
    with the greatest liberality.

    Mrs Merdle's first husband had been a colonel, under whose auspices the
    bosom had entered into competition with the snows of North America, and
    had come off at little disadvantage in point of whiteness, and at none
    in point of coldness. The colonel's son was Mrs Merdle's only child. He
    was of a chuckle-headed, high-shouldered make, with a general appearance
    of being, not so much a young man as a swelled boy. He had given so few
    signs of reason, that a by-word went among his companions that his brain
    had been frozen up in a mighty frost which prevailed at St John's, New
    Brunswick, at the period of his birth there, and had never thawed from
    that hour. Another by-word represented him as having in his infancy,
    through the negligence of a nurse, fallen out of a high window on his
    head, which had been heard by responsible witnesses to crack. It is
    probable that both these representations were of ex post facto
    origin; the young gentleman (whose expressive name was Sparkler) being
    monomaniacal in offering marriage to all manner of undesirable young
    ladies, and in remarking of every successive young lady to whom he
    tendered a matrimonial proposal that she was 'a doosed fine gal--well
    educated too--with no biggodd nonsense about her.'

    A son-in-law with these limited talents, might have been a clog upon
    another man; but Mr Merdle did not want a son-in-law for himself; he
    wanted a son-in-law for Society. Mr Sparkler having been in the Guards,
    and being in the habit of frequenting all the races, and all the
    lounges, and all the parties, and being well known, Society was
    satisfied with its son-in-law. This happy result Mr Merdle would have
    considered well attained, though Mr Sparkler had been a more expensive
    article. And he did not get Mr Sparkler by any means cheap for
    Society, even as it was.

    There was a dinner giving in the Harley Street establishment, while
    Little Dorrit was stitching at her father's new shirts by his side that
    night; and there were magnates from the Court and magnates from the
    City, magnates from the Commons and magnates from the Lords, magnates
    from the bench and magnates from the bar, Bishop magnates, Treasury
    magnates, Horse Guard magnates, Admiralty magnates,--all the magnates
    that keep us going, and sometimes trip us up.

    'I am told,' said Bishop magnate to Horse Guards, 'that Mr Merdle has
    made another enormous hit. They say a hundred thousand pounds.'

    Horse Guards had heard two.

    Treasury had heard three.

    Bar, handling his persuasive double eye-glass, was by no means clear but
    that it might be four. It was one of those happy strokes of calculation
    and combination, the result of which it was difficult to estimate. It
    was one of those instances of a comprehensive grasp, associated with
    habitual luck and characteristic boldness, of which an age presented us
    but few. But here was Brother Bellows, who had been in the great Bank
    case, and who could probably tell us more. What did Brother Bellows put
    this new success at?

    Brother Bellows was on his way to make his bow to the bosom, and could
    only tell them in passing that he had heard it stated, with great
    appearance of truth, as being worth, from first to last, half-a-million
    of money.

    Admiralty said Mr Merdle was a wonderful man, Treasury said he was a
    new power in the country, and would be able to buy up the whole House of
    Commons. Bishop said he was glad to think that this wealth flowed into
    the coffers of a gentleman who was always disposed to maintain the best
    interests of Society.

    Mr Merdle himself was usually late on these occasions, as a man still
    detained in the clutch of giant enterprises when other men had shaken
    off their dwarfs for the day. On this occasion, he was the last arrival.
    Treasury said Merdle's work punished him a little. Bishop said he was
    glad to think that this wealth flowed into the coffers of a gentleman
    who accepted it with meekness.

    Powder! There was so much Powder in waiting, that it flavoured the
    dinner. Pulverous particles got into the dishes, and Society's meats had
    a seasoning of first-rate footmen. Mr Merdle took down a countess who
    was secluded somewhere in the core of an immense dress, to which she
    was in the proportion of the heart to the overgrown cabbage. If so low a
    simile may be admitted, the dress went down the staircase like a richly
    brocaded Jack in the Green, and nobody knew what sort of small person
    carried it.

    Society had everything it could want, and could not want, for dinner.
    It had everything to look at, and everything to eat, and everything to
    drink. It is to be hoped it enjoyed itself; for Mr Merdle's own share of
    the repast might have been paid for with eighteenpence. Mrs Merdle was
    magnificent. The chief butler was the next magnificent institution of
    the day. He was the stateliest man in the company. He did nothing, but
    he looked on as few other men could have done. He was Mr Merdle's
    last gift to Society. Mr Merdle didn't want him, and was put out of
    countenance when the great creature looked at him; but inappeasable
    Society would have him--and had got him.

    The invisible countess carried out the Green at the usual stage of
    the entertainment, and the file of beauty was closed up by the bosom.
    Treasury said, Juno. Bishop said, Judith.

    Bar fell into discussion with Horse Guards concerning courts-martial.
    Brothers Bellows and Bench struck in. Other magnates paired off. Mr
    Merdle sat silent, and looked at the table-cloth. Sometimes a magnate
    addressed him, to turn the stream of his own particular discussion
    towards him; but Mr Merdle seldom gave much attention to it, or did more
    than rouse himself from his calculations and pass the wine.

    When they rose, so many of the magnates had something to say to Mr
    Merdle individually that he held little levees by the sideboard, and
    checked them off as they went out at the door.

    Treasury hoped he might venture to congratulate one of England's
    world-famed capitalists and merchant-princes (he had turned that
            original sentiment in the house a few times, and it came easy to him) on
    a new achievement. To extend the triumphs of such men was to extend
    the triumphs and resources of the nation; and Treasury felt--he gave Mr
    Merdle to understand--patriotic on the subject.

    'Thank you, my lord,' said Mr Merdle; 'thank you. I accept your
    congratulations with pride, and I am glad you approve.'

    'Why, I don't unreservedly approve, my dear Mr Merdle. Because,'
    smiling Treasury turned him by the arm towards the sideboard and spoke
    banteringly, 'it never can be worth your while to come among us and help
    us.'

    Mr Merdle felt honoured by the--

    'No, no,' said Treasury, 'that is not the light in which one so
    distinguished for practical knowledge and great foresight, can be
    expected to regard it. If we should ever be happily enabled, by
    accidentally possessing the control over circumstances, to propose
    to one so eminent to--to come among us, and give us the weight of his
    influence, knowledge, and character, we could only propose it to him as
    a duty. In fact, as a duty that he owed to Society.'

    Mr Merdle intimated that Society was the apple of his eye, and that its
    claims were paramount to every other consideration. Treasury moved
    on, and Bar came up.

    Bar, with his little insinuating jury droop, and fingering his
    persuasive double eye-glass, hoped he might be excused if he mentioned
    to one of the greatest converters of the root of all evil into the root
    of all good, who had for a long time reflected a shining lustre on the
    annals even of our commercial country--if he mentioned, disinterestedly,
    and as, what we lawyers called in our pedantic way, amicus curiae, a
    fact that had come by accident within his knowledge. He had been
    required to look over the title of a very considerable estate in one of
    the eastern counties--lying, in fact, for Mr Merdle knew we lawyers
    loved to be particular, on the borders of two of the eastern counties.
    Now, the title was perfectly sound, and the estate was to be purchased
    by one who had the command of--Money (jury droop and persuasive
            eye-glass), on remarkably advantageous terms. This had come to Bar's
    knowledge only that day, and it had occurred to him, 'I shall have the
    honour of dining with my esteemed friend Mr Merdle this evening, and,
    strictly between ourselves, I will mention the opportunity.' Such a
    purchase would involve not only a great legitimate political influence,
    but some half-dozen church presentations of considerable annual value.
    Now, that Mr Merdle was already at no loss to discover means of
    occupying even his capital, and of fully employing even his active and
    vigorous intellect, Bar well knew: but he would venture to suggest that
    the question arose in his mind, whether one who had deservedly gained so
    high a position and so European a reputation did not owe it--we would
    not say to himself, but we would say to Society, to possess himself of
    such influences as these; and to exercise them--we would not say for his
    own, or for his party's, but we would say for Society's--benefit.

    Mr Merdle again expressed himself as wholly devoted to that object of
    his constant consideration, and Bar took his persuasive eye-glass up the
    grand staircase. Bishop then came undesignedly sidling in the direction
    of the sideboard.

    Surely the goods of this world, it occurred in an accidental way to
    Bishop to remark, could scarcely be directed into happier channels than
    when they accumulated under the magic touch of the wise and sagacious,
    who, while they knew the just value of riches (Bishop tried here to
            look as if he were rather poor himself), were aware of their importance,
    judiciously governed and rightly distributed, to the welfare of our
    brethren at large.

    Mr Merdle with humility expressed his conviction that Bishop couldn't
    mean him, and with inconsistency expressed his high gratification in
    Bishop's good opinion.

    Bishop then--jauntily stepping out a little with his well-shaped right
    leg, as though he said to Mr Merdle 'don't mind the apron; a mere form!'
    put this case to his good friend:

    Whether it had occurred to his good friend, that Society might not
    unreasonably hope that one so blest in his undertakings, and whose
    example on his pedestal was so influential with it, would shed a little
    money in the direction of a mission or so to Africa?

    Mr Merdle signifying that the idea should have his best attention,
    Bishop put another case:

    Whether his good friend had at all interested himself in the proceedings
    of our Combined Additional Endowed Dignitaries Committee, and whether it
    had occurred to him that to shed a little money in _that_ direction might
    be a great conception finely executed?

    Mr Merdle made a similar reply, and Bishop explained his reason for
    inquiring.

    Society looked to such men as his good friend to do such things. It was
    not that _he_ looked to them, but that Society looked to them.
    Just as it was not Our Committee who wanted the Additional Endowed
    Dignitaries, but it was Society that was in a state of the most
    agonising uneasiness of mind until it got them. He begged to assure his
    good friend that he was extremely sensible of his good friend's regard
    on all occasions for the best interests of Society; and he considered
    that he was at once consulting those interests and expressing the
    feeling of Society, when he wished him continued prosperity, continued
    increase of riches, and continued things in general.

    Bishop then betook himself up-stairs, and the other magnates gradually
    floated up after him until there was no one left below but Mr Merdle.
    That gentleman, after looking at the table-cloth until the soul of the
    chief butler glowed with a noble resentment, went slowly up after the
    rest, and became of no account in the stream of people on the grand
    staircase. Mrs Merdle was at home, the best of the jewels were hung out
    to be seen, Society got what it came for, Mr Merdle drank twopennyworth
    of tea in a corner and got more than he wanted.

    Among the evening magnates was a famous physician, who knew everybody,
    and whom everybody knew. On entering at the door, he came upon Mr Merdle
    drinking his tea in a corner, and touched him on the arm.

    Mr Merdle started. 'Oh! It's you!'

    'Any better to-day?'

    'No,' said Mr Merdle, 'I am no better.'

    'A pity I didn't see you this morning. Pray come to me to-morrow, or let
    me come to you.'

    'Well!' he replied. 'I will come to-morrow as I drive by.'

    Bar and Bishop had both been bystanders during this short dialogue, and
    as Mr Merdle was swept away by the crowd, they made their remarks upon
    it to the Physician. Bar said, there was a certain point of mental
    strain beyond which no man could go; that the point varied with various
    textures of brain and peculiarities of constitution, as he had had
    occasion to notice in several of his learned brothers; but the point of
    endurance passed by a line's breadth, depression and dyspepsia ensued.
    Not to intrude on the sacred mysteries of medicine, he took it, now
    (with the jury droop and persuasive eye-glass), that this was Merdle's
    case? Bishop said that when he was a young man, and had fallen for a
    brief space into the habit of writing sermons on Saturdays, a habit
    which all young sons of the church should sedulously avoid, he had
    frequently been sensible of a depression, arising as he supposed from an
    over-taxed intellect, upon which the yolk of a new-laid egg, beaten up
    by the good woman in whose house he at that time lodged, with a glass
    of sound sherry, nutmeg, and powdered sugar acted like a charm. Without
    presuming to offer so simple a remedy to the consideration of so
    profound a professor of the great healing art, he would venture to
    inquire whether the strain, being by way of intricate calculations,
    the spirits might not (humanly speaking) be restored to their tone by a
    gentle and yet generous stimulant?

    'Yes,' said the physician, 'yes, you are both right. But I may as well
    tell you that I can find nothing the matter with Mr Merdle. He has
    the constitution of a rhinoceros, the digestion of an ostrich, and
    the concentration of an oyster. As to nerves, Mr Merdle is of a cool
    temperament, and not a sensitive man: is about as invulnerable, I should
    say, as Achilles. How such a man should suppose himself unwell without
    reason, you may think strange. But I have found nothing the matter with
    him. He may have some deep-seated recondite complaint. I can't say. I
    only say, that at present I have not found it out.'

    There was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint on the bosom now displaying
    precious stones in rivalry with many similar superb jewel-stands; there
    was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint on young Sparkler hovering about
    the rooms, monomaniacally seeking any sufficiently ineligible young lady
    with no nonsense about her; there was no shadow of Mr Merdle's complaint
    on the Barnacles and Stiltstalkings, of whom whole colonies were
    present; or on any of the company. Even on himself, its shadow was faint
    enough as he moved about among the throng, receiving homage.

    Mr Merdle's complaint. Society and he had so much to do with one another
    in all things else, that it is hard to imagine his complaint, if he
    had one, being solely his own affair. Had he that deep-seated recondite
    complaint, and did any doctor find it out? Patience, in the meantime,
    the shadow of the Marshalsea wall was a real darkening influence, and
    could be seen on the Dorrit Family at any stage of the sun's course.




Mr Clennam did not increase in favour with the Father of the Marshalsea
in the ratio of his increasing visits. His obtuseness on the great
Testimonial question was not calculated to awaken admiration in the
paternal breast, but had rather a tendency to give offence in that
sensitive quarter, and to be regarded as a positive shortcoming in point
of gentlemanly feeling. An impression of disappointment, occasioned
by the discovery that Mr Clennam scarcely possessed that delicacy for
which, in the confidence of his nature, he had been inclined to give
him credit, began to darken the fatherly mind in connection with that
gentleman. The father went so far as to say, in his private family
circle, that he feared Mr Clennam was not a man of high instincts.
He was happy, he observed, in his public capacity as leader and
representative of the College, to receive Mr Clennam when he called to
pay his respects; but he didn't find that he got on with him personally.
There appeared to be something (he didn't know what it was) wanting in
him. Howbeit, the father did not fail in any outward show of politeness,
    but, on the contrary, honoured him with much attention; perhaps
    cherishing the hope that, although not a man of a sufficiently
    brilliant and spontaneous turn of mind to repeat his former testimonial
    unsolicited, it might still be within the compass of his nature to
    bear the part of a responsive gentleman, in any correspondence that way
    tending.

    In the threefold capacity, of the gentleman from outside who had been
    accidentally locked in on the night of his first appearance, of the
    gentleman from outside who had inquired into the affairs of the Father
    of the Marshalsea with the stupendous idea of getting him out, and of
    the gentleman from outside who took an interest in the child of the
    Marshalsea, Clennam soon became a visitor of mark. He was not surprised
    by the attentions he received from Mr Chivery when that officer was on
    the lock, for he made little distinction between Mr Chivery's politeness
    and that of the other turnkeys. It was on one particular afternoon that
    Mr Chivery surprised him all at once, and stood forth from his
    companions in bold relief.

    Mr Chivery, by some artful exercise of his power of clearing the Lodge,
    had contrived to rid it of all sauntering Collegians; so that Clennam,
    coming out of the prison, should find him on duty alone.

    '(Private) I ask your pardon, sir,' said Mr Chivery in a secret manner;
    'but which way might you be going?'

    'I am going over the Bridge.' He saw in Mr Chivery, with some
    astonishment, quite an Allegory of Silence, as he stood with his key on
    his lips.

    '(Private) I ask your pardon again,' said Mr Chivery, 'but could you go
    round by Horsemonger Lane? Could you by any means find time to look in
    at that address?' handing him a little card, printed for circulation
    among the connection of Chivery and Co., Tobacconists, Importers of pure
    Havannah Cigars, Bengal Cheroots, and fine-flavoured Cubas, Dealers in
    Fancy Snuffs, &c. &c.

    '(Private) It an't tobacco business,' said Mr Chivery. 'The truth is,
    it's my wife. She's wishful to say a word to you, sir, upon a point
    respecting--yes,' said Mr Chivery, answering Clennam's look of
    apprehension with a nod, 'respecting _her_.'

    'I will make a point of seeing your wife directly.'

    'Thank you, sir. Much obliged. It an't above ten minutes out of your
    way. Please to ask for _Mrs_ Chivery!' These instructions, Mr Chivery, who
    had already let him out, cautiously called through a little slide in the
    outer door, which he could draw back from within for the inspection of
    visitors when it pleased him.

    Arthur Clennam, with the card in his hand, betook himself to the address
    set forth upon it, and speedily arrived there. It was a very small
    establishment, wherein a decent woman sat behind the counter working
    at her needle. Little jars of tobacco, little boxes of cigars, a
    little assortment of pipes, a little jar or two of snuff, and a little
    instrument like a shoeing horn for serving it out, composed the retail
    stock in trade.

    Arthur mentioned his name, and his having promised to call, on the
    solicitation of Mr Chivery. About something relating to Miss Dorrit, he
    believed. Mrs Chivery at once laid aside her work, rose up from her seat
    behind the counter, and deploringly shook her head.

    'You may see him now,' said she, 'if you'll condescend to take a peep.'

    With these mysterious words, she preceded the visitor into a little
    parlour behind the shop, with a little window in it commanding a very
    little dull back-yard. In this yard a wash of sheets and table-cloths
    tried (in vain, for want of air) to get itself dried on a line or two;
    and among those flapping articles was sitting in a chair, like the
    last mariner left alive on the deck of a damp ship without the power of
    furling the sails, a little woe-begone young man.

    'Our John,' said Mrs Chivery.

    Not to be deficient in interest, Clennam asked what he might be doing
    there?

    'It's the only change he takes,' said Mrs Chivery, shaking her head
    afresh. 'He won't go out, even in the back-yard, when there's no linen;
    but when there's linen to keep the neighbours' eyes off, he'll sit
    there, hours. Hours he will. Says he feels as if it was groves!' Mrs
    Chivery shook her head again, put her apron in a motherly way to her
    eyes, and reconducted her visitor into the regions of the business.

    'Please to take a seat, sir,' said Mrs Chivery. 'Miss Dorrit is the
    matter with Our John, sir; he's a breaking his heart for her, and I
    would wish to take the liberty to ask how it's to be made good to his
    parents when bust?'

    Mrs Chivery, who was a comfortable-looking woman much respected about
    Horsemonger Lane for her feelings and her conversation, uttered this
    speech with fell composure, and immediately afterwards began again to
    shake her head and dry her eyes.

    'Sir,' said she in continuation, 'you are acquainted with the family,
    and have interested yourself with the family, and are influential with
    the family. If you can promote views calculated to make two young people
    happy, let me, for Our John's sake, and for both their sakes, implore
    you so to do!'

    'I have been so habituated,' returned Arthur, at a loss, 'during
    the short time I have known her, to consider Little--I have been so
    habituated to consider Miss Dorrit in a light altogether removed from
    that in which you present her to me, that you quite take me by surprise.
    Does she know your son?'

    'Brought up together, sir,' said Mrs Chivery. 'Played together.'

    'Does she know your son as her admirer?'

    'Oh! bless you, sir,' said Mrs Chivery, with a sort of triumphant
    shiver, 'she never could have seen him on a Sunday without knowing he
    was that. His cane alone would have told it long ago, if nothing else
    had. Young men like John don't take to ivory hands a pinting, for
    nothing. How did I first know it myself? Similarly.'

    'Perhaps Miss Dorrit may not be so ready as you, you see.'

    'Then she knows it, sir,' said Mrs Chivery, 'by word of mouth.'

    'Are you sure?'

    'Sir,' said Mrs Chivery, 'sure and certain as in this house I am. I see
    my son go out with my own eyes when in this house I was, and I see my
    son come in with my own eyes when in this house I was, and I know he
    done it!' Mrs Chivery derived a surprising force of emphasis from the
    foregoing circumstantiality and repetition.

    'May I ask you how he came to fall into the desponding state which
    causes you so much uneasiness?'

    'That,' said Mrs Chivery, 'took place on that same day when to this
    house I see that John with these eyes return. Never been himself in this
    house since. Never was like what he has been since, not from the hour
    when to this house seven year ago me and his father, as tenants by the
    quarter, came!' An effect in the nature of an affidavit was gained from
    this speech by Mrs Chivery's peculiar power of construction.

    'May I venture to inquire what is your version of the matter?'

    'You may,' said Mrs Chivery, 'and I will give it to you in honour and in
    word as true as in this shop I stand. Our John has every one's good word
    and every one's good wish. He played with her as a child when in that
    yard a child she played. He has known her ever since. He went out upon
    the Sunday afternoon when in this very parlour he had dined, and met
    her, with appointment or without appointment; which, I do not pretend to
    say. He made his offer to her. Her brother and sister is high in their
    views, and against Our John. Her father is all for himself in his views
    and against sharing her with any one. Under which circumstances she
    has answered Our John, "No, John, I cannot have you, I cannot have
    any husband, it is not my intentions ever to become a wife, it is my
    intentions to be always a sacrifice, farewell, find another worthy of
    you, and forget me!" This is the way in which she is doomed to be a
    constant slave to them that are not worthy that a constant slave she
    unto them should be. This is the way in which Our John has come to find
    no pleasure but in taking cold among the linen, and in showing in that
    yard, as in that yard I have myself shown you, a broken-down ruin that
    goes home to his mother's heart!' Here the good woman pointed to the
    little window, whence her son might be seen sitting disconsolate in
    the tuneless groves; and again shook her head and wiped her eyes, and
    besought him, for the united sakes of both the young people, to exercise
    his influence towards the bright reversal of these dismal events.

    She was so confident in her exposition of the case, and it was so
    undeniably founded on correct premises in so far as the relative
    positions of Little Dorrit and her family were concerned, that Clennam
    could not feel positive on the other side. He had come to attach to
    Little Dorrit an interest so peculiar--an interest that removed her
    from, while it grew out of, the common and coarse things surrounding
    her--that he found it disappointing, disagreeable, almost painful, to
    suppose her in love with young Mr Chivery in the back-yard, or any such
    person. On the other hand, he reasoned with himself that she was just
    as good and just as true in love with him, as not in love with him;
    and that to make a kind of domesticated fairy of her, on the penalty
    of isolation at heart from the only people she knew, would be but a
    weakness of his own fancy, and not a kind one. Still, her youthful and
    ethereal appearance, her timid manner, the charm of her sensitive voice
    and eyes, the very many respects in which she had interested him out
    of her own individuality, and the strong difference between herself and
    those about her, were not in unison, and were determined not to be in
    unison, with this newly presented idea.

    He told the worthy Mrs Chivery, after turning these things over in his
    mind--he did that, indeed, while she was yet speaking--that he might be
    relied upon to do his utmost at all times to promote the happiness of
    Miss Dorrit, and to further the wishes of her heart if it were in his
    power to do so, and if he could discover what they were. At the same
    time he cautioned her against assumptions and appearances; enjoined
    strict silence and secrecy, lest Miss Dorrit should be made unhappy; and
    particularly advised her to endeavour to win her son's confidence and so
    to make quite sure of the state of the case. Mrs Chivery considered the
    latter precaution superfluous, but said she would try. She shook her
    head as if she had not derived all the comfort she had fondly expected
    from this interview, but thanked him nevertheless for the trouble he had
    kindly taken. They then parted good friends, and Arthur walked away.

    The crowd in the street jostling the crowd in his mind, and the two
    crowds making a confusion, he avoided London Bridge, and turned off in
    the quieter direction of the Iron Bridge. He had scarcely set foot upon
    it, when he saw Little Dorrit walking on before him. It was a pleasant
    day, with a light breeze blowing, and she seemed to have that minute
    come there for air. He had left her in her father's room within an hour.

    It was a timely chance, favourable to his wish of observing her face
    and manner when no one else was by. He quickened his pace; but before he
    reached her, she turned her head.

    'Have I startled you?' he asked.

    'I thought I knew the step,' she answered, hesitating.

    'And did you know it, Little Dorrit? You could hardly have expected
    mine.'

    'I did not expect any. But when I heard a step, I thought it--sounded
    like yours.'

    'Are you going further?'

    'No, sir, I am only walking here for a little change.'

    They walked together, and she recovered her confiding manner with him,
    and looked up in his face as she said, after glancing around:

    'It is so strange. Perhaps you can hardly understand it. I sometimes
    have a sensation as if it was almost unfeeling to walk here.'

    'Unfeeling?'

    'To see the river, and so much sky, and so many objects, and such change
    and motion. Then to go back, you know, and find him in the same cramped
    place.'

    'Ah yes! But going back, you must remember that you take with you the
    spirit and influence of such things to cheer him.'

    'Do I? I hope I may! I am afraid you fancy too much, sir, and make me
    out too powerful. If you were in prison, could I bring such comfort to
    you?'

    'Yes, Little Dorrit, I am sure of it.'

    He gathered from a tremor on her lip, and a passing shadow of great
    agitation on her face, that her mind was with her father. He remained
    silent for a few moments, that she might regain her composure. The
    Little Dorrit, trembling on his arm, was less in unison than ever with
    Mrs Chivery's theory, and yet was not irreconcilable with a new fancy
    which sprung up within him, that there might be some one else in the
    hopeless--newer fancy still--in the hopeless unattainable distance.

    They turned, and Clennam said, Here was Maggy coming! Little Dorrit
    looked up, surprised, and they confronted Maggy, who brought herself
    at sight of them to a dead stop. She had been trotting along, so
    preoccupied and busy that she had not recognised them until they turned
    upon her. She was now in a moment so conscience-stricken that her very
    basket partook of the change.

    'Maggy, you promised me to stop near father.'

    'So I would, Little Mother, only he wouldn't let me. If he takes and
    sends me out I must go. If he takes and says, "Maggy, you hurry away and
    back with that letter, and you shall have a sixpence if the answer's a
    good 'un," I must take it. Lor, Little Mother, what's a poor thing of
    ten year old to do? And if Mr Tip--if he happens to be a coming in as
    I come out, and if he says "Where are you going, Maggy?" and if I says,
    "I'm a going So and So," and if he says, "I'll have a Try too," and if
    he goes into the George and writes a letter and if he gives it me and
    says, "Take that one to the same place, and if the answer's a good 'un
    I'll give you a shilling," it ain't my fault, mother!'

    Arthur read, in Little Dorrit's downcast eyes, to whom she foresaw that
    the letters were addressed.

    'I'm a going So and So. There! That's where I am a going to,' said
    Maggy. 'I'm a going So and So. It ain't you, Little Mother, that's got
    anything to do with it--it's you, you know,' said Maggy, addressing
    Arthur. 'You'd better come, So and So, and let me take and give 'em to
    you.'

    'We will not be so particular as that, Maggy. Give them me here,' said
    Clennam in a low voice.

    'Well, then, come across the road,' answered Maggy in a very loud
    whisper. 'Little Mother wasn't to know nothing of it, and she would
    never have known nothing of it if you had only gone So and So, instead
    of bothering and loitering about. It ain't my fault. I must do what I am
    told. They ought to be ashamed of themselves for telling me.'

    Clennam crossed to the other side, and hurriedly opened the letters.
    That from the father mentioned that most unexpectedly finding himself in
    the novel position of having been disappointed of a remittance from
    the City on which he had confidently counted, he took up his pen, being
    restrained by the unhappy circumstance of his incarceration during
    three-and-twenty years (doubly underlined), from coming himself, as
    he would otherwise certainly have done--took up his pen to entreat Mr
    Clennam to advance him the sum of Three Pounds Ten Shillings upon his
    I.O.U., which he begged to enclose. That from the son set forth that
    Mr Clennam would, he knew, be gratified to hear that he had at
    length obtained permanent employment of a highly satisfactory nature,
    accompanied with every prospect of complete success in life; but that
    the temporary inability of his employer to pay him his arrears of salary
    to that date (in which condition said employer had appealed to that
            generous forbearance in which he trusted he should never be wanting
            towards a fellow-creature), combined with the fraudulent conduct of a
    false friend and the present high price of provisions, had reduced
    him to the verge of ruin, unless he could by a quarter before six that
    evening raise the sum of eight pounds. This sum, Mr Clennam would be
    happy to learn, he had, through the promptitude of several friends
    who had a lively confidence in his probity, already raised, with the
    exception of a trifling balance of one pound seventeen and fourpence;
    the loan of which balance, for the period of one month, would be fraught
    with the usual beneficent consequences.

    These letters Clennam answered with the aid of his pencil and
    pocket-book, on the spot; sending the father what he asked for, and
    excusing himself from compliance with the demand of the son. He then
    commissioned Maggy to return with his replies, and gave her the
    shilling of which the failure of her supplemental enterprise would have
    disappointed her otherwise.

    When he rejoined Little Dorrit, and they had begun walking as before,
    she said all at once:

    'I think I had better go. I had better go home.'

    'Don't be distressed,' said Clennam, 'I have answered the letters. They
    were nothing. You know what they were. They were nothing.'

    'But I am afraid,' she returned, 'to leave him, I am afraid to leave
    any of them. When I am gone, they pervert--but they don't mean it--even
    Maggy.'

    'It was a very innocent commission that she undertook, poor thing. And
    in keeping it secret from you, she supposed, no doubt, that she was only
    saving you uneasiness.'

    'Yes, I hope so, I hope so. But I had better go home! It was but the
    other day that my sister told me I had become so used to the prison that
    I had its tone and character. It must be so. I am sure it must be when I
    see these things. My place is there. I am better there, it is unfeeling
    in me to be here, when I can do the least thing there. Good-bye. I had
    far better stay at home!'

    The agonised way in which she poured this out, as if it burst of itself
    from her suppressed heart, made it difficult for Clennam to keep the
    tears from his eyes as he saw and heard her.

    'Don't call it home, my child!' he entreated. 'It is always painful to
    me to hear you call it home.'

    'But it is home! What else can I call home? Why should I ever forget it
    for a single moment?'

    'You never do, dear Little Dorrit, in any good and true service.'

    'I hope not, O I hope not! But it is better for me to stay there; much
    better, much more dutiful, much happier. Please don't go with me, let me
    go by myself. Good-bye, God bless you. Thank you, thank you.'

    He felt that it was better to respect her entreaty, and did not move
    while her slight form went quickly away from him. When it had fluttered
    out of sight, he turned his face towards the water and stood thinking.

    She would have been distressed at any time by this discovery of the
    letters; but so much so, and in that unrestrainable way?

    No.

    When she had seen her father begging with his threadbare disguise on,
    when she had entreated him not to give her father money, she had
    been distressed, but not like this. Something had made her keenly and
    additionally sensitive just now. Now, was there some one in the hopeless
    unattainable distance? Or had the suspicion been brought into his mind,
    by his own associations of the troubled river running beneath the bridge
    with the same river higher up, its changeless tune upon the prow of the
    ferry-boat, so many miles an hour the peaceful flowing of the stream,
    here the rushes, there the lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet?

    He thought of his poor child, Little Dorrit, for a long time there; he
    thought of her going home; he thought of her in the night; he thought
    of her when the day came round again. And the poor child Little Dorrit
    thought of him--too faithfully, ah, too faithfully!--in the shadow of
    the Marshalsea wall.




Mr Meagles bestirred himself with such prompt activity in the matter of
the negotiation with Daniel Doyce which Clennam had entrusted to him,
    that he soon brought it into business train, and called on Clennam at
    nine o'clock one morning to make his report.

    'Doyce is highly gratified by your good opinion,' he opened the business
    by saying, 'and desires nothing so much as that you should examine the
    affairs of the Works for yourself, and entirely understand them. He has
    handed me the keys of all his books and papers--here they are jingling
    in this pocket--and the only charge he has given me is "Let Mr Clennam
    have the means of putting himself on a perfect equality with me as to
    knowing whatever I know. If it should come to nothing after all, he
    will respect my confidence. Unless I was sure of that to begin with, I
    should have nothing to do with him." And there, you see,' said Mr
    Meagles, 'you have Daniel Doyce all over.'

    'A very honourable character.'

    'Oh, yes, to be sure. Not a doubt of it. Odd, but very honourable. Very
    odd though. Now, would you believe, Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, with
    a hearty enjoyment of his friend's eccentricity, 'that I had a whole
    morning in What's-his-name Yard--'

    'Bleeding Heart?'

    'A whole morning in Bleeding Heart Yard, before I could induce him to
    pursue the subject at all?'

    'How was that?'

    'How was that, my friend? I no sooner mentioned your name in connection
    with it than he declared off.'

    'Declared off on my account?'

    'I no sooner mentioned your name, Clennam, than he said, "That will
    never do!" What did he mean by that? I asked him. No matter, Meagles;
    that would never do. Why would it never do? You'll hardly believe it,
    Clennam,' said Mr Meagles, laughing within himself, 'but it came out
    that it would never do, because you and he, walking down to Twickenham
    together, had glided into a friendly conversation in the course of which
    he had referred to his intention of taking a partner, supposing at the
    time that you were as firmly and finally settled as St Paul's Cathedral.
    "Whereas," says he, "Mr Clennam might now believe, if I entertained his
    proposition, that I had a sinister and designing motive in what was open
    free speech. Which I can't bear," says he, "which I really am too proud
    to bear."'

    'I should as soon suspect--'

    'Of course you would,' interrupted Mr Meagles, 'and so I told him. But
    it took a morning to scale that wall; and I doubt if any other man
    than myself (he likes me of old) could have got his leg over it. Well,
    Clennam. This business-like obstacle surmounted, he then stipulated that
    before resuming with you I should look over the books and form my own
    opinion. I looked over the books, and formed my own opinion. "Is it, on
    the whole, for, or against?" says he. "For," says I. "Then," says he,
    "you may now, my good friend, give Mr Clennam the means of forming
    his opinion. To enable him to do which, without bias and with perfect
    freedom, I shall go out of town for a week." And he's gone,' said Mr
    Meagles; 'that's the rich conclusion of the thing.'

    'Leaving me,' said Clennam, 'with a high sense, I must say, of his
    candour and his--'

    'Oddity,' Mr Meagles struck in. 'I should think so!'

    It was not exactly the word on Clennam's lips, but he forbore to
    interrupt his good-humoured friend.

    'And now,' added Mr Meagles, 'you can begin to look into matters as soon
    as you think proper. I have undertaken to explain where you may want
    explanation, but to be strictly impartial, and to do nothing more.'

    They began their perquisitions in Bleeding Heart Yard that same
    forenoon. Little peculiarities were easily to be detected by experienced
    eyes in Mr Doyce's way of managing his affairs, but they almost always
    involved some ingenious simplification of a difficulty, and some plain
    road to the desired end. That his papers were in arrear, and that he
    stood in need of assistance to develop the capacity of his business, was
    clear enough; but all the results of his undertakings during many years
    were distinctly set forth, and were ascertainable with ease. Nothing had
    been done for the purposes of the pending investigation; everything was
    in its genuine working dress, and in a certain honest rugged order. The
    calculations and entries, in his own hand, of which there were many,
    were bluntly written, and with no very neat precision; but were always
    plain and directed straight to the purpose. It occurred to Arthur that
    a far more elaborate and taking show of business--such as the records of
    the Circumlocution Office made perhaps--might be far less serviceable,
    as being meant to be far less intelligible.

    Three or four days of steady application tendered him master of all the
    facts it was essential to become acquainted with. Mr Meagles was at hand
    the whole time, always ready to illuminate any dim place with the bright
    little safety-lamp belonging to the scales and scoop. Between them they
    agreed upon the sum it would be fair to offer for the purchase of a
    half-share in the business, and then Mr Meagles unsealed a paper in
    which Daniel Doyce had noted the amount at which he valued it; which was
    even something less. Thus, when Daniel came back, he found the affair as
    good as concluded.

    'And I may now avow, Mr Clennam,' said he, with a cordial shake of the
    hand, 'that if I had looked high and low for a partner, I believe I
    could not have found one more to my mind.'

    'I say the same,' said Clennam.

    'And I say of both of you,' added Mr Meagles, 'that you are well
    matched. You keep him in check, Clennam, with your common sense, and you
    stick to the Works, Dan, with your--'

    'Uncommon sense?' suggested Daniel, with his quiet smile.

    'You may call it so, if you like--and each of you will be a right hand
    to the other. Here's my own right hand upon it, as a practical man, to
    both of you.'

    The purchase was completed within a month. It left Arthur in possession
    of private personal means not exceeding a few hundred pounds; but it
    opened to him an active and promising career. The three friends dined
    together on the auspicious occasion; the factory and the factory wives
    and children made holiday and dined too; even Bleeding Heart Yard
    dined and was full of meat. Two months had barely gone by in all, when
    Bleeding Heart Yard had become so familiar with short-commons again,
    that the treat was forgotten there; when nothing seemed new in the
    partnership but the paint of the inscription on the door-posts, DOYCE
    AND CLENNAM; when it appeared even to Clennam himself, that he had had
    the affairs of the firm in his mind for years.

    The little counting-house reserved for his own occupation, was a room of
    wood and glass at the end of a long low workshop, filled with benches,
    and vices, and tools, and straps, and wheels; which, when they were
    in gear with the steam-engine, went tearing round as though they had a
    suicidal mission to grind the business to dust and tear the factory to
    pieces. A communication of great trap-doors in the floor and roof with
    the workshop above and the workshop below, made a shaft of light in
    this perspective, which brought to Clennam's mind the child's old
    picture-book, where similar rays were the witnesses of Abel's
    murder. The noises were sufficiently removed and shut out from the
    counting-house to blend into a busy hum, interspersed with periodical
    clinks and thumps. The patient figures at work were swarthy with the
    filings of iron and steel that danced on every bench and bubbled up
    through every chink in the planking. The workshop was arrived at by a
    step-ladder from the outer yard below, where it served as a shelter for
    the large grindstone where tools were sharpened. The whole had at once
    a fanciful and practical air in Clennam's eyes, which was a welcome
    change; and, as often as he raised them from his first work of getting
    the array of business documents into perfect order, he glanced at these
    things with a feeling of pleasure in his pursuit that was new to him.

    Raising his eyes thus one day, he was surprised to see a bonnet
    labouring up the step-ladder. The unusual apparition was followed by
    another bonnet. He then perceived that the first bonnet was on the head
    of Mr F.'s Aunt, and that the second bonnet was on the head of Flora,
    who seemed to have propelled her legacy up the steep ascent with
    considerable difficulty.

    Though not altogether enraptured at the sight of these visitors, Clennam
    lost no time in opening the counting-house door, and extricating them
    from the workshop; a rescue which was rendered the more necessary by Mr
    F.'s Aunt already stumbling over some impediment, and menacing steam
    power as an Institution with a stony reticule she carried.

    'Good gracious, Arthur,--I should say Mr Clennam, far more proper--the
    climb we have had to get up here and how ever to get down again without
    a fire-escape and Mr F.'s Aunt slipping through the steps and bruised
    all over and you in the machinery and foundry way too only think, and
    never told us!'

    Thus, Flora, out of breath. Meanwhile, Mr F.'s Aunt rubbed her esteemed
    insteps with her umbrella, and vindictively glared.

    'Most unkind never to have come back to see us since that day, though
    naturally it was not to be expected that there should be any attraction
    at _our_ house and you were much more pleasantly engaged, that's pretty
    certain, and is she fair or dark blue eyes or black I wonder, not that
    I expect that she should be anything but a perfect contrast to me in all
    particulars for I am a disappointment as I very well know and you are
    quite right to be devoted no doubt though what I am saying Arthur never
    mind I hardly know myself Good gracious!'

    By this time he had placed chairs for them in the counting-house. As
    Flora dropped into hers, she bestowed the old look upon him.

    'And to think of Doyce and Clennam, and who Doyce can be,' said Flora;
    'delightful man no doubt and married perhaps or perhaps a daughter, now
    has he really? then one understands the partnership and sees it all,
    don't tell me anything about it for I know I have no claim to ask the
    question the golden chain that once was forged being snapped and very
    proper.'

    Flora put her hand tenderly on his, and gave him another of the youthful
    glances.

    'Dear Arthur--force of habit, Mr Clennam every way more delicate and
    adapted to existing circumstances--I must beg to be excused for taking
    the liberty of this intrusion but I thought I might so far presume upon
    old times for ever faded never more to bloom as to call with Mr F.'s
    Aunt to congratulate and offer best wishes, A great deal superior to
    China not to be denied and much nearer though higher up!'

    'I am very happy to see you,' said Clennam, 'and I thank you, Flora,
    very much for your kind remembrance.'

    'More than I can say myself at any rate,' returned Flora, 'for I might
    have been dead and buried twenty distinct times over and no doubt
    whatever should have been before you had genuinely remembered Me or
    anything like it in spite of which one last remark I wish to make, one
    last explanation I wish to offer--'

    'My dear Mrs Finching,' Arthur remonstrated in alarm.

    'Oh not that disagreeable name, say Flora!'

    'Flora, is it worth troubling yourself afresh to enter into
    explanations? I assure you none are needed. I am satisfied--I am
    perfectly satisfied.'

    A diversion was occasioned here, by Mr F.'s Aunt making the following
    inexorable and awful statement:

    'There's mile-stones on the Dover road!'

    With such mortal hostility towards the human race did she discharge this
    missile, that Clennam was quite at a loss how to defend himself; the
    rather as he had been already perplexed in his mind by the honour of a
    visit from this venerable lady, when it was plain she held him in the
    utmost abhorrence. He could not but look at her with disconcertment, as
    she sat breathing bitterness and scorn, and staring leagues away. Flora,
    however, received the remark as if it had been of a most apposite and
    agreeable nature; approvingly observing aloud that Mr F.'s Aunt had a
    great deal of spirit. Stimulated either by this compliment, or by her
    burning indignation, that illustrious woman then added, 'Let him meet
    it if he can!' And, with a rigid movement of her stony reticule (an
            appendage of great size and of a fossil appearance), indicated that
    Clennam was the unfortunate person at whom the challenge was hurled.

    'One last remark,' resumed Flora, 'I was going to say I wish to make one
    last explanation I wish to offer, Mr F.'s Aunt and myself would not have
    intruded on business hours Mr F. having been in business and though the
    wine trade still business is equally business call it what you will and
    business habits are just the same as witness Mr F. himself who had his
    slippers always on the mat at ten minutes before six in the afternoon
    and his boots inside the fender at ten minutes before eight in the
    morning to the moment in all weathers light or dark--would not therefore
    have intruded without a motive which being kindly meant it may be hoped
    will be kindly taken Arthur, Mr Clennam far more proper, even Doyce and
    Clennam probably more business-like.'

    'Pray say nothing in the way of apology,' Arthur entreated. 'You are
    always welcome.'

    'Very polite of you to say so Arthur--cannot remember Mr Clennam until
    the word is out, such is the habit of times for ever fled, and so true
    it is that oft in the stilly night ere slumber's chain has bound people,
    fond memory brings the light of other days around people--very polite
    but more polite than true I am afraid, for to go into the machinery
    business without so much as sending a line or a card to papa--I don't
    say me though there was a time but that is past and stern reality has
    now my gracious never mind--does not look like it you must confess.'

    Even Flora's commas seemed to have fled on this occasion; she was so
    much more disjointed and voluble than in the preceding interview.

    'Though indeed,' she hurried on, 'nothing else is to be expected and why
    should it be expected and if it's not to be expected why should it be,
    and I am far from blaming you or any one, When your mama and my papa
    worried us to death and severed the golden bowl--I mean bond but I dare
    say you know what I mean and if you don't you don't lose much and care
    just as little I will venture to add--when they severed the golden bond
    that bound us and threw us into fits of crying on the sofa nearly choked
    at least myself everything was changed and in giving my hand to Mr F. I
    know I did so with my eyes open but he was so very unsettled and in such
    low spirits that he had distractedly alluded to the river if not oil of
    something from the chemist's and I did it for the best.'

    'My good Flora, we settled that before. It was all quite right.'

    'It's perfectly clear you think so,' returned Flora, 'for you take it
    very coolly, if I hadn't known it to be China I should have guessed
    myself the Polar regions, dear Mr Clennam you are right however and I
    cannot blame you but as to Doyce and Clennam papa's property being about
    here we heard it from Pancks and but for him we never should have heard
    one word about it I am satisfied.'

    'No, no, don't say that.'

    'What nonsense not to say it Arthur--Doyce and Clennam--easier and less
    trying to me than Mr Clennam--when I know it and you know it too and
    can't deny it.'

    'But I do deny it, Flora. I should soon have made you a friendly visit.'

    'Ah!' said Flora, tossing her head. 'I dare say!' and she gave him
    another of the old looks. 'However when Pancks told us I made up my mind
    that Mr F.'s Aunt and I would come and call because when papa--which was
    before that--happened to mention her name to me and to say that you were
    interested in her I said at the moment Good gracious why not have her
    here then when there's anything to do instead of putting it out.'

    'When you say Her,' observed Clennam, by this time pretty well
    bewildered, 'do you mean Mr F.'s--'

    'My goodness, Arthur--Doyce and Clennam really easier to me with old
    remembrances--who ever heard of Mr F.'s Aunt doing needlework and going
    out by the day?'

    'Going out by the day! Do you speak of Little Dorrit?'

    'Why yes of course,' returned Flora; 'and of all the strangest names I
    ever heard the strangest, like a place down in the country with a
    turnpike, or a favourite pony or a puppy or a bird or something from a
    seed-shop to be put in a garden or a flower-pot and come up speckled.'

    'Then, Flora,' said Arthur, with a sudden interest in the conversation,
    'Mr Casby was so kind as to mention Little Dorrit to you, was he? What
    did he say?'

    'Oh you know what papa is,' rejoined Flora, 'and how aggravatingly he
    sits looking beautiful and turning his thumbs over and over one another
    till he makes one giddy if one keeps one's eyes upon him, he said when
    we were talking of you--I don't know who began the subject Arthur (Doyce
            and Clennam) but I am sure it wasn't me, at least I hope not but you
    really must excuse my confessing more on that point.'

    'Certainly,' said Arthur. 'By all means.'

    'You are very ready,' pouted Flora, coming to a sudden stop in a
    captivating bashfulness, 'that I must admit, Papa said you had spoken of
    her in an earnest way and I said what I have told you and that's all.'

    'That's all?' said Arthur, a little disappointed.

    'Except that when Pancks told us of your having embarked in this
    business and with difficulty persuaded us that it was really you I said
    to Mr F.'s Aunt then we would come and ask you if it would be agreeable
    to all parties that she should be engaged at our house when required
    for I know she often goes to your mama's and I know that your mama has
    a very touchy temper Arthur--Doyce and Clennam--or I never might have
    married Mr F. and might have been at this hour but I am running into
    nonsense.'

    'It was very kind of you, Flora, to think of this.'

    Poor Flora rejoined with a plain sincerity which became her better than
    her youngest glances, that she was glad he thought so. She said it with
    so much heart that Clennam would have given a great deal to buy his
    old character of her on the spot, and throw it and the mermaid away for
    ever.

    'I think, Flora,' he said, 'that the employment you can give Little
    Dorrit, and the kindness you can show her--'

    'Yes and I will,' said Flora, quickly.

    'I am sure of it--will be a great assistance and support to her. I do
    not feel that I have the right to tell you what I know of her, for I
    acquired the knowledge confidentially, and under circumstances that
    bind me to silence. But I have an interest in the little creature, and
    a respect for her that I cannot express to you. Her life has been one
    of such trial and devotion, and such quiet goodness, as you can scarcely
    imagine. I can hardly think of her, far less speak of her, without
    feeling moved. Let that feeling represent what I could tell you, and
    commit her to your friendliness with my thanks.'

    Once more he put out his hand frankly to poor Flora; once more poor
    Flora couldn't accept it frankly, found it worth nothing openly, must
    make the old intrigue and mystery of it. As much to her own enjoyment as
    to his dismay, she covered it with a corner of her shawl as she took it.
    Then, looking towards the glass front of the counting-house, and seeing
    two figures approaching, she cried with infinite relish, 'Papa! Hush,
    Arthur, for Mercy's sake!' and tottered back to her chair with an
    amazing imitation of being in danger of swooning, in the dread surprise
    and maidenly flutter of her spirits.

    The Patriarch, meanwhile, came inanely beaming towards the
    counting-house in the wake of Pancks. Pancks opened the door for him,
    towed him in, and retired to his own moorings in a corner.

    'I heard from Flora,' said the Patriarch with his benevolent smile,
    'that she was coming to call, coming to call. And being out, I thought
    I'd come also, thought I'd come also.'

    The benign wisdom he infused into this declaration (not of itself
            profound), by means of his blue eyes, his shining head, and his long
    white hair, was most impressive. It seemed worth putting down among the
    noblest sentiments enunciated by the best of men. Also, when he said to
    Clennam, seating himself in the proffered chair, 'And you are in a new
    business, Mr Clennam? I wish you well, sir, I wish you well!' he seemed
    to have done benevolent wonders.

    'Mrs Finching has been telling me, sir,' said Arthur, after making his
    acknowledgments; the relict of the late Mr F. meanwhile protesting, with
    a gesture, against his use of that respectable name; 'that she hopes
    occasionally to employ the young needlewoman you recommended to my
    mother. For which I have been thanking her.'

    The Patriarch turning his head in a lumbering way towards Pancks, that
    assistant put up the note-book in which he had been absorbed, and took
    him in tow.

    'You didn't recommend her, you know,' said Pancks; 'how could you? You
    knew nothing about her, you didn't. The name was mentioned to you, and
    you passed it on. That's what _you_ did.'

    'Well!' said Clennam. 'As she justifies any recommendation, it is much
    the same thing.'

    'You are glad she turns out well,' said Pancks, 'but it wouldn't have
    been your fault if she had turned out ill. The credit's not yours as it
    is, and the blame wouldn't have been yours as it might have been. You
    gave no guarantee. You knew nothing about her.'

    'You are not acquainted, then,' said Arthur, hazarding a random question,
    'with any of her family?'

    'Acquainted with any of her family?' returned Pancks. 'How should you be
    acquainted with any of her family? You never heard of 'em. You can't
    be acquainted with people you never heard of, can you? You should think
    not!'

    All this time the Patriarch sat serenely smiling; nodding or shaking his
    head benevolently, as the case required.

    'As to being a reference,' said Pancks, 'you know, in a general way,
    what being a reference means. It's all your eye, that is! Look at your
    tenants down the Yard here. They'd all be references for one another,
    if you'd let 'em. What would be the good of letting 'em? It's no
    satisfaction to be done by two men instead of one. One's enough. A
    person who can't pay, gets another person who can't pay, to guarantee
    that he can pay. Like a person with two wooden legs getting another
    person with two wooden legs, to guarantee that he has got two natural
    legs. It don't make either of them able to do a walking match. And four
    wooden legs are more troublesome to you than two, when you don't want
    any.' Mr Pancks concluded by blowing off that steam of his.

    A momentary silence that ensued was broken by Mr F.'s Aunt, who had been
    sitting upright in a cataleptic state since her last public remark. She
    now underwent a violent twitch, calculated to produce a startling effect
    on the nerves of the uninitiated, and with the deadliest animosity
    observed:

    'You can't make a head and brains out of a brass knob with nothing in
    it. You couldn't do it when your Uncle George was living; much less when
    he's dead.'

    Mr Pancks was not slow to reply, with his usual calmness, 'Indeed,
    ma'am! Bless my soul! I'm surprised to hear it.' Despite his presence of
    mind, however, the speech of Mr F.'s Aunt produced a depressing effect
    on the little assembly; firstly, because it was impossible to disguise
    that Clennam's unoffending head was the particular temple of reason
    depreciated; and secondly, because nobody ever knew on these occasions
    whose Uncle George was referred to, or what spectral presence might be
    invoked under that appellation.

    Therefore Flora said, though still not without a certain boastfulness
    and triumph in her legacy, that Mr F.'s Aunt was 'very lively to-day,
    and she thought they had better go.' But Mr F.'s Aunt proved so lively
    as to take the suggestion in unexpected dudgeon and declare that she
    would not go; adding, with several injurious expressions, that if
    'He'--too evidently meaning Clennam--wanted to get rid of her, 'let
    him chuck her out of winder;' and urgently expressing her desire to see
    'Him' perform that ceremony.

    In this dilemma, Mr Pancks, whose resources appeared equal to any
    emergency in the Patriarchal waters, slipped on his hat, slipped out at
    the counting-house door, and slipped in again a moment afterwards with
    an artificial freshness upon him, as if he had been in the country for
    some weeks. 'Why, bless my heart, ma'am!' said Mr Pancks, rubbing up his
    hair in great astonishment, 'is that you? How do you _do_, ma'am? You
    are looking charming to-day! I am delighted to see you. Favour me with
    your arm, ma'am; we'll have a little walk together, you and me, if
    you'll honour me with your company.' And so escorted Mr F.'s Aunt down
    the private staircase of the counting-house with great gallantry and
    success. The patriarchal Mr Casby then rose with the air of having done
    it himself, and blandly followed: leaving his daughter, as she followed
    in her turn, to remark to her former lover in a distracted whisper
    (which she very much enjoyed), that they had drained the cup of life to
    the dregs; and further to hint mysteriously that the late Mr F. was at
    the bottom of it.

    Alone again, Clennam became a prey to his old doubts in reference to his
    mother and Little Dorrit, and revolved the old thoughts and suspicions.
    They were all in his mind, blending themselves with the duties he was
    mechanically discharging, when a shadow on his papers caused him to look
    up for the cause. The cause was Mr Pancks. With his hat thrown back upon
    his ears as if his wiry prongs of hair had darted up like springs and
    cast it off, with his jet-black beads of eyes inquisitively sharp, with
    the fingers of his right hand in his mouth that he might bite the nails,
    and with the fingers of his left hand in reserve in his pocket for
    another course, Mr Pancks cast his shadow through the glass upon the
    books and papers.

    Mr Pancks asked, with a little inquiring twist of his head, if he
    might come in again? Clennam replied with a nod of his head in the
    affirmative. Mr Pancks worked his way in, came alongside the desk, made
    himself fast by leaning his arms upon it, and started conversation with
    a puff and a snort.

    'Mr F.'s Aunt is appeased, I hope?' said Clennam.

    'All right, sir,' said Pancks.

    'I am so unfortunate as to have awakened a strong animosity in the
    breast of that lady,' said Clennam. 'Do you know why?'

    'Does _she_ know why?' said Pancks.

    'I suppose not.'

    '_I_ suppose not,' said Pancks.

    He took out his note-book, opened it, shut it, dropped it into his hat,
    which was beside him on the desk, and looked in at it as it lay at the
    bottom of the hat: all with a great appearance of consideration.

    'Mr Clennam,' he then began, 'I am in want of information, sir.'

    'Connected with this firm?' asked Clennam.

    'No,' said Pancks.

    'With what then, Mr Pancks? That is to say, assuming that you want it of
    me.'

    'Yes, sir; yes, I want it of you,' said Pancks, 'if I can persuade you
    to furnish it. A, B, C, D. DA, DE, DI, DO. Dictionary order. Dorrit.
    That's the name, sir?'

    Mr Pancks blew off his peculiar noise again, and fell to at his
    right-hand nails. Arthur looked searchingly at him; he returned the
    look.

    'I don't understand you, Mr Pancks.'

    'That's the name that I want to know about.'

    'And what do you want to know?'

    'Whatever you can and will tell me.' This comprehensive summary of his
    desires was not discharged without some heavy labouring on the part of
    Mr Pancks's machinery.

    'This is a singular visit, Mr Pancks. It strikes me as rather
    extraordinary that you should come, with such an object, to me.'

    'It may be all extraordinary together,' returned Pancks. 'It may be out
    of the ordinary course, and yet be business. In short, it is business. I
    am a man of business. What business have I in this present world, except
    to stick to business? No business.'

    With his former doubt whether this dry hard personage were quite in
    earnest, Clennam again turned his eyes attentively upon his face. It
    was as scrubby and dingy as ever, and as eager and quick as ever, and he
    could see nothing lurking in it that was at all expressive of a latent
    mockery that had seemed to strike upon his ear in the voice.

    'Now,' said Pancks, 'to put this business on its own footing, it's not
    my proprietor's.'

    'Do you refer to Mr Casby as your proprietor?'

    Pancks nodded. 'My proprietor. Put a case. Say, at my proprietor's I
    hear name--name of young person Mr Clennam wants to serve. Say, name
    first mentioned to my proprietor by Plornish in the Yard. Say, I go to
    Plornish. Say, I ask Plornish as a matter of business for information.
    Say, Plornish, though six weeks in arrear to my proprietor, declines.
    Say, Mrs Plornish declines. Say, both refer to Mr Clennam. Put the
    case.'

    'Well?'

    'Well, sir,' returned Pancks, 'say, I come to him. Say, here I am.'

    With those prongs of hair sticking up all over his head, and his breath
    coming and going very hard and short, the busy Pancks fell back a step
    (in Tug metaphor, took half a turn astern) as if to show his dingy hull
    complete, then forged a-head again, and directed his quick glance by
    turns into his hat where his note-book was, and into Clennam's face.

    'Mr Pancks, not to trespass on your grounds of mystery, I will be as
    plain with you as I can. Let me ask two questions. First--'

    'All right!' said Pancks, holding up his dirty forefinger with his
    broken nail. 'I see! "What's your motive?"'

    'Exactly.'

    'Motive,' said Pancks, 'good. Nothing to do with my proprietor; not
    stateable at present, ridiculous to state at present; but good.
    Desiring to serve young person, name of Dorrit,' said Pancks, with his
    forefinger still up as a caution. 'Better admit motive to be good.'

    'Secondly, and lastly, what do you want to know?'

    Mr Pancks fished up his note-book before the question was put, and
    buttoning it with care in an inner breast-pocket, and looking straight
    at Clennam all the time, replied with a pause and a puff, 'I want
    supplementary information of any sort.'

    Clennam could not withhold a smile, as the panting little steam-tug, so
    useful to that unwieldy ship, the Casby, waited on and watched him as if
    it were seeking an opportunity of running in and rifling him of all he
    wanted before he could resist its manoeuvres; though there was that in
    Mr Pancks's eagerness, too, which awakened many wondering speculations
    in his mind. After a little consideration, he resolved to supply Mr
    Pancks with such leading information as it was in his power to impart
    him; well knowing that Mr Pancks, if he failed in his present research,
    was pretty sure to find other means of getting it.

    He, therefore, first requesting Mr Pancks to remember his voluntary
    declaration that his proprietor had no part in the disclosure, and that
    his own intentions were good (two declarations which that coaly little
            gentleman with the greatest ardour repeated), openly told him that as to
    the Dorrit lineage or former place of habitation, he had no information
    to communicate, and that his knowledge of the family did not extend
    beyond the fact that it appeared to be now reduced to five members;
    namely, to two brothers, of whom one was single, and one a widower with
    three children. The ages of the whole family he made known to Mr Pancks,
    as nearly as he could guess at them; and finally he described to him
    the position of the Father of the Marshalsea, and the course of time and
    events through which he had become invested with that character. To
    all this, Mr Pancks, snorting and blowing in a more and more portentous
    manner as he became more interested, listened with great attention;
    appearing to derive the most agreeable sensations from the painfullest
    parts of the narrative, and particularly to be quite charmed by the
    account of William Dorrit's long imprisonment.

    'In conclusion, Mr Pancks,' said Arthur, 'I have but to say this. I have
    reasons beyond a personal regard for speaking as little as I can of the
    Dorrit family, particularly at my mother's house' (Mr Pancks nodded),
    'and for knowing as much as I can. So devoted a man of business as you
    are--eh?'

    For Mr Pancks had suddenly made that blowing effort with unusual force.

    'It's nothing,' said Pancks.

    'So devoted a man of business as yourself has a perfect understanding of
    a fair bargain. I wish to make a fair bargain with you, that you shall
    enlighten me concerning the Dorrit family when you have it in your
    power, as I have enlightened you. It may not give you a very flattering
    idea of my business habits, that I failed to make my terms beforehand,'
    continued Clennam; 'but I prefer to make them a point of honour. I have
    seen so much business done on sharp principles that, to tell you the
    truth, Mr Pancks, I am tired of them.'

    Mr Pancks laughed. 'It's a bargain, sir,' said he. 'You shall find me
    stick to it.'

    After that, he stood a little while looking at Clennam, and biting his
    ten nails all round; evidently while he fixed in his mind what he had
    been told, and went over it carefully, before the means of supplying a
    gap in his memory should be no longer at hand. 'It's all right,' he said
    at last, 'and now I'll wish you good day, as it's collecting day in the
    Yard. By-the-bye, though. A lame foreigner with a stick.'

    'Ay, ay. You do take a reference sometimes, I see?' said Clennam.

    'When he can pay, sir,' replied Pancks. 'Take all you can get, and
    keep back all you can't be forced to give up. That's business. The lame
    foreigner with the stick wants a top room down the Yard. Is he good for
    it?'

    'I am,' said Clennam, 'and I will answer for him.'

    'That's enough. What I must have of Bleeding Heart Yard,' said Pancks,
    making a note of the case in his book, 'is my bond. I want my bond, you
    see. Pay up, or produce your property! That's the watchword down the
    Yard. The lame foreigner with the stick represented that you sent him;
    but he could represent (as far as that goes) that the Great Mogul sent
    him. He has been in the hospital, I believe?'

    'Yes. Through having met with an accident. He is only just now
    discharged.'

    'It's pauperising a man, sir, I have been shown, to let him into a
    hospital?' said Pancks. And again blew off that remarkable sound.

    'I have been shown so too,' said Clennam, coldly.

    Mr Pancks, being by that time quite ready for a start, got under steam
    in a moment, and, without any other signal or ceremony, was snorting
    down the step-ladder and working into Bleeding Heart Yard, before he
    seemed to be well out of the counting-house.

    Throughout the remainder of the day, Bleeding Heart Yard was in
    consternation, as the grim Pancks cruised in it; haranguing the
    inhabitants on their backslidings in respect of payment, demanding his
    bond, breathing notices to quit and executions, running down defaulters,
    sending a swell of terror on before him, and leaving it in his wake.
    Knots of people, impelled by a fatal attraction, lurked outside any
    house in which he was known to be, listening for fragments of his
    discourses to the inmates; and, when he was rumoured to be coming down
    the stairs, often could not disperse so quickly but that he would be
    prematurely in among them, demanding their own arrears, and rooting them
    to the spot. Throughout the remainder of the day, Mr Pancks's What were
    they up to? and What did they mean by it? sounded all over the Yard. Mr
    Pancks wouldn't hear of excuses, wouldn't hear of complaints, wouldn't
    hear of repairs, wouldn't hear of anything but unconditional money down.
    Perspiring and puffing and darting about in eccentric directions, and
    becoming hotter and dingier every moment, he lashed the tide of the yard
    into a most agitated and turbid state. It had not settled down into calm
    water again full two hours after he had been seen fuming away on the
    horizon at the top of the steps.

    There were several small assemblages of the Bleeding Hearts at the
    popular points of meeting in the Yard that night, among whom it was
    universally agreed that Mr Pancks was a hard man to have to do with; and
    that it was much to be regretted, so it was, that a gentleman like Mr
    Casby should put his rents in his hands, and never know him in his true
    light. For (said the Bleeding Hearts), if a gentleman with that head of
    hair and them eyes took his rents into his own hands, ma'am, there
    would be none of this worriting and wearing, and things would be very
    different.

    At which identical evening hour and minute, the Patriarch--who had
    floated serenely through the Yard in the forenoon before the harrying
    began, with the express design of getting up this trustfulness in his
    shining bumps and silken locks--at which identical hour and minute,
    that first-rate humbug of a thousand guns was heavily floundering in the
    little Dock of his exhausted Tug at home, and was saying, as he turned
    his thumbs:

    'A very bad day's work, Pancks, very bad day's work. It seems to me,
    sir, and I must insist on making this observation forcibly in justice to
    myself, that you ought to have got much more money, much more money.'




Little Dorrit received a call that same evening from Mr Plornish, who,
       having intimated that he wished to speak to her privately, in a series
       of coughs so very noticeable as to favour the idea that her father, as
       regarded her seamstress occupation, was an illustration of the axiom
       that there are no such stone-blind men as those who will not see,
       obtained an audience with her on the common staircase outside the door.

       'There's been a lady at our place to-day, Miss Dorrit,' Plornish
       growled, 'and another one along with her as is a old wixen if ever I met
       with such. The way she snapped a person's head off, dear me!'

       The mild Plornish was at first quite unable to get his mind away from Mr
       F.'s Aunt. 'For,' said he, to excuse himself, 'she is, I do assure you,
       the winegariest party.'

       At length, by a great effort, he detached himself from the subject
       sufficiently to observe:

       'But she's neither here nor there just at present. The other lady, she's
       Mr Casby's daughter; and if Mr Casby an't well off, none better, it an't
       through any fault of Pancks. For, as to Pancks, he does, he really does,
       he does indeed!'

       Mr Plornish, after his usual manner, was a little obscure, but
       conscientiously emphatic.

       'And what she come to our place for,' he pursued, 'was to leave word
       that if Miss Dorrit would step up to that card--which it's Mr Casby's
       house that is, and Pancks he has a office at the back, where he really
       does, beyond belief--she would be glad for to engage her. She was a old
       and a dear friend, she said particular, of Mr Clennam, and hoped for to
       prove herself a useful friend to _his_ friend. Them was her words. Wishing
       to know whether Miss Dorrit could come to-morrow morning, I said I would
       see you, Miss, and inquire, and look round there to-night, to say yes,
       or, if you was engaged to-morrow, when?'

       'I can go to-morrow, thank you,' said Little Dorrit. 'This is very kind
       of you, but you are always kind.'

       Mr Plornish, with a modest disavowal of his merits, opened the room door
       for her readmission, and followed her in with such an exceedingly bald
       pretence of not having been out at all, that her father might
       have observed it without being very suspicious. In his affable
       unconsciousness, however, he took no heed. Plornish, after a little
       conversation, in which he blended his former duty as a Collegian with
       his present privilege as a humble outside friend, qualified again by his
       low estate as a plasterer, took his leave; making the tour of the prison
       before he left, and looking on at a game of skittles with the mixed
       feelings of an old inhabitant who had his private reasons for believing
       that it might be his destiny to come back again.

       Early in the morning, Little Dorrit, leaving Maggy in high domestic
       trust, set off for the Patriarchal tent. She went by the Iron Bridge,
       though it cost her a penny, and walked more slowly in that part of her
       journey than in any other. At five minutes before eight her hand was on
       the Patriarchal knocker, which was quite as high as she could reach.

       She gave Mrs Finching's card to the young woman who opened the door, and
       the young woman told her that 'Miss Flora'--Flora having, on her return
       to the parental roof, reinvested herself with the title under which she
       had lived there--was not yet out of her bedroom, but she was to please
       to walk up into Miss Flora's sitting-room. She walked up into
       Miss Flora's sitting-room, as in duty bound, and there found a
       breakfast-table comfortably laid for two, with a supplementary tray
       upon it laid for one. The young woman, disappearing for a few moments,
       returned to say that she was to please to take a chair by the fire,
       and to take off her bonnet and make herself at home. But Little Dorrit,
       being bashful, and not used to make herself at home on such occasions,
       felt at a loss how to do it; so she was still sitting near the door with
       her bonnet on, when Flora came in in a hurry half an hour afterwards.

       Flora was so sorry to have kept her waiting, and good gracious why did
       she sit out there in the cold when she had expected to find her by the
       fire reading the paper, and hadn't that heedless girl given her the
       message then, and had she really been in her bonnet all this time, and
       pray for goodness sake let Flora take it off! Flora taking it off in the
       best-natured manner in the world, was so struck with the face disclosed,
       that she said, 'Why, what a good little thing you are, my dear!' and
       pressed her face between her hands like the gentlest of women.

       It was the word and the action of a moment. Little Dorrit had hardly
       time to think how kind it was, when Flora dashed at the breakfast-table
       full of business, and plunged over head and ears into loquacity.

       'Really so sorry that I should happen to be late on this morning of all
       mornings because my intention and my wish was to be ready to meet you
       when you came in and to say that any one that interested Arthur Clennam
       half so much must interest me and that I gave you the heartiest welcome
       and was so glad, instead of which they never called me and there I
       still am snoring I dare say if the truth was known and if you don't like
       either cold fowl or hot boiled ham which many people don't I dare say
       besides Jews and theirs are scruples of conscience which we must all
       respect though I must say I wish they had them equally strong when they
       sell us false articles for real that certainly ain't worth the money I
       shall be quite vexed,' said Flora.

       Little Dorrit thanked her, and said, shyly, bread-and-butter and tea was
       all she usually--

       'Oh nonsense my dear child I can never hear of that,' said Flora,
       turning on the urn in the most reckless manner, and making herself wink
       by splashing hot water into her eyes as she bent down to look into the
       teapot. 'You are coming here on the footing of a friend and companion
       you know if you will let me take that liberty and I should be ashamed
       of myself indeed if you could come here upon any other, besides which
       Arthur Clennam spoke in such terms--you are tired my dear.'

       'No, ma'am.'

       'You turn so pale you have walked too far before breakfast and I dare
       say live a great way off and ought to have had a ride,' said Flora,
       'dear dear is there anything that would do you good?'

       'Indeed I am quite well, ma'am. I thank you again and again, but I am
       quite well.'

       'Then take your tea at once I beg,' said Flora, 'and this wing of fowl
       and bit of ham, don't mind me or wait for me, because I always carry in
       this tray myself to Mr F.'s Aunt who breakfasts in bed and a charming
       old lady too and very clever, Portrait of Mr F. behind the door and very
       like though too much forehead and as to a pillar with a marble pavement
       and balustrades and a mountain, I never saw him near it nor not likely
       in the wine trade, excellent man but not at all in that way.'

       Little Dorrit glanced at the portrait, very imperfectly following the
       references to that work of art.

       'Mr F. was so devoted to me that he never could bear me out of his
       sight,' said Flora, 'though of course I am unable to say how long that
       might have lasted if he hadn't been cut short while I was a new broom,
       worthy man but not poetical manly prose but not romance.'

       Little Dorrit glanced at the portrait again. The artist had given it a
       head that would have been, in an intellectual point of view, top-heavy
       for Shakespeare.

       'Romance, however,' Flora went on, busily arranging Mr F.'s Aunt's
       toast, 'as I openly said to Mr F. when he proposed to me and you will be
       surprised to hear that he proposed seven times once in a hackney-coach
       once in a boat once in a pew once on a donkey at Tunbridge Wells and the
       rest on his knees, Romance was fled with the early days of Arthur
       Clennam, our parents tore us asunder we became marble and stern reality
       usurped the throne, Mr F. said very much to his credit that he was
       perfectly aware of it and even preferred that state of things
       accordingly the word was spoken the fiat went forth and such is life you
       see my dear and yet we do not break but bend, pray make a good breakfast
       while I go in with the tray.'

       She disappeared, leaving Little Dorrit to ponder over the meaning of her
       scattered words. She soon came back again; and at last began to take her
       own breakfast, talking all the while.

       'You see, my dear,' said Flora, measuring out a spoonful or two of some
       brown liquid that smelt like brandy, and putting it into her tea, 'I am
       obliged to be careful to follow the directions of my medical man though
       the flavour is anything but agreeable being a poor creature and it may
       be have never recovered the shock received in youth from too much giving
       way to crying in the next room when separated from Arthur, have you
       known him long?'

       As soon as Little Dorrit comprehended that she had been asked this
       question--for which time was necessary, the galloping pace of her new
       patroness having left her far behind--she answered that she had known Mr
       Clennam ever since his return.

       'To be sure you couldn't have known him before unless you had been in
       China or had corresponded neither of which is likely,' returned Flora,
       'for travelling-people usually get more or less mahogany and you are not
       at all so and as to corresponding what about? that's very true unless
       tea, so it was at his mother's was it really that you knew him first,
       highly sensible and firm but dreadfully severe--ought to be the mother
       of the man in the iron mask.'

       'Mrs Clennam has been kind to me,' said Little Dorrit.

       'Really? I am sure I am glad to hear it because as Arthur's mother it's
       naturally pleasant to my feelings to have a better opinion of her than
       I had before, though what she thinks of me when I run on as I am certain
       to do and she sits glowering at me like Fate in a go-cart--shocking
       comparison really--invalid and not her fault--I never know or can
       imagine.'

       'Shall I find my work anywhere, ma'am?' asked Little Dorrit, looking
       timidly about; 'can I get it?'

       'You industrious little fairy,' returned Flora, taking, in another cup
       of tea, another of the doses prescribed by her medical man, 'there's
       not the slightest hurry and it's better that we should begin by being
       confidential about our mutual friend--too cold a word for me at least
       I don't mean that, very proper expression mutual friend--than become
       through mere formalities not you but me like the Spartan boy with the
       fox biting him, which I hope you'll excuse my bringing up for of all
       the tiresome boys that will go tumbling into every sort of company that
       boy's the tiresomest.'

       Little Dorrit, her face very pale, sat down again to listen. 'Hadn't I
       better work the while?' she asked. 'I can work and attend too. I would
       rather, if I may.'

       Her earnestness was so expressive of her being uneasy without her work,
       that Flora answered, 'Well my dear whatever you like best,' and produced
       a basket of white handkerchiefs. Little Dorrit gladly put it by her
       side, took out her little pocket-housewife, threaded the needle, and
       began to hem.

       'What nimble fingers you have,' said Flora, 'but are you sure you are
       well?'

       'Oh yes, indeed!'

       Flora put her feet upon the fender, and settled herself for a thorough
       good romantic disclosure. She started off at score, tossing her head,
       sighing in the most demonstrative manner, making a great deal of use
       of her eyebrows, and occasionally, but not often, glancing at the quiet
       face that bent over the work.

       'You must know my dear,' said Flora, 'but that I have no doubt you know
       already not only because I have already thrown it out in a general way
       but because I feel I carry it stamped in burning what's his names
       upon my brow that before I was introduced to the late Mr F. I had
       been engaged to Arthur Clennam--Mr Clennam in public where reserve is
       necessary Arthur here--we were all in all to one another it was the
       morning of life it was bliss it was frenzy it was everything else of
       that sort in the highest degree, when rent asunder we turned to stone in
       which capacity Arthur went to China and I became the statue bride of the
       late Mr F.'

       Flora, uttering these words in a deep voice, enjoyed herself immensely.

       'To paint,' said she, 'the emotions of that morning when all was marble
       within and Mr F.'s Aunt followed in a glass-coach which it stands to
       reason must have been in shameful repair or it never could have broken
       down two streets from the house and Mr F.'s Aunt brought home like the
       fifth of November in a rush-bottomed chair I will not attempt,
       suffice it to say that the hollow form of breakfast took place in the
       dining-room downstairs that papa partaking too freely of pickled salmon
       was ill for weeks and that Mr F. and myself went upon a continental
       tour to Calais where the people fought for us on the pier until they
       separated us though not for ever that was not yet to be.'

       The statue bride, hardly pausing for breath, went on, with the greatest
       complacency, in a rambling manner sometimes incidental to flesh and
       blood.

       'I will draw a veil over that dreamy life, Mr F. was in good spirits his
       appetite was good he liked the cookery he considered the wine weak but
       palatable and all was well, we returned to the immediate neighbourhood
       of Number Thirty Little Gosling Street London Docks and settled down,
       ere we had yet fully detected the housemaid in selling the feathers
       out of the spare bed Gout flying upwards soared with Mr F. to another
       sphere.'

       His relict, with a glance at his portrait, shook her head and wiped her
       eyes.

       'I revere the memory of Mr F. as an estimable man and most indulgent
       husband, only necessary to mention Asparagus and it appeared or to hint
       at any little delicate thing to drink and it came like magic in a pint
       bottle it was not ecstasy but it was comfort, I returned to papa's roof
       and lived secluded if not happy during some years until one day papa
       came smoothly blundering in and said that Arthur Clennam awaited me
       below, I went below and found him ask me not what I found him except
       that he was still unmarried still unchanged!'

       The dark mystery with which Flora now enshrouded herself might have
       stopped other fingers than the nimble fingers that worked near her.
       They worked on without pause, and the busy head bent over them watching
       the stitches.

       'Ask me not,' said Flora, 'if I love him still or if he still loves me
       or what the end is to be or when, we are surrounded by watchful eyes and
       it may be that we are destined to pine asunder it may be never more to
       be reunited not a word not a breath not a look to betray us all must
       be secret as the tomb wonder not therefore that even if I should seem
       comparatively cold to Arthur or Arthur should seem comparatively cold to
       me we have fatal reasons it is enough if we understand them hush!'

       All of which Flora said with so much headlong vehemence as if she really
       believed it. There is not much doubt that when she worked herself into
       full mermaid condition, she did actually believe whatever she said in
       it.

       'Hush!' repeated Flora, 'I have now told you all, confidence is
       established between us hush, for Arthur's sake I will always be a friend
       to you my dear girl and in Arthur's name you may always rely upon me.'

       The nimble fingers laid aside the work, and the little figure rose and
       kissed her hand. 'You are very cold,' said Flora, changing to her own
       natural kind-hearted manner, and gaining greatly by the change. 'Don't
       work to-day. I am sure you are not well I am sure you are not strong.'

       'It is only that I feel a little overcome by your kindness, and by Mr
       Clennam's kindness in confiding me to one he has known and loved so
       long.'

       'Well really my dear,' said Flora, who had a decided tendency to be
       always honest when she gave herself time to think about it, 'it's as
       well to leave that alone now, for I couldn't undertake to say after all,
       but it doesn't signify lie down a little!'

       'I have always been strong enough to do what I want to do, and I shall
       be quite well directly,' returned Little Dorrit, with a faint smile.
       'You have overpowered me with gratitude, that's all. If I keep near the
       window for a moment I shall be quite myself.'

       Flora opened a window, sat her in a chair by it, and considerately
       retired to her former place. It was a windy day, and the air stirring
       on Little Dorrit's face soon brightened it. In a very few minutes she
       returned to her basket of work, and her nimble fingers were as nimble as
       ever.

       Quietly pursuing her task, she asked Flora if Mr Clennam had told her
       where she lived? When Flora replied in the negative, Little Dorrit said
       that she understood why he had been so delicate, but that she felt sure
       he would approve of her confiding her secret to Flora, and that
       she would therefore do so now with Flora's permission. Receiving an
       encouraging answer, she condensed the narrative of her life into a few
       scanty words about herself and a glowing eulogy upon her father; and
       Flora took it all in with a natural tenderness that quite understood it,
       and in which there was no incoherence.

       When dinner-time came, Flora drew the arm of her new charge through
       hers, and led her down-stairs, and presented her to the Patriarch and Mr
       Pancks, who were already in the dining-room waiting to begin. (Mr F.'s
               Aunt was, for the time, laid up in ordinary in her chamber.) By those
       gentlemen she was received according to their characters; the Patriarch
       appearing to do her some inestimable service in saying that he was glad
       to see her, glad to see her; and Mr Pancks blowing off his favourite
       sound as a salute.

       In that new presence she would have been bashful enough under any
       circumstances, and particularly under Flora's insisting on her
       drinking a glass of wine and eating of the best that was there; but her
       constraint was greatly increased by Mr Pancks. The demeanour of that
       gentleman at first suggested to her mind that he might be a taker of
       likenesses, so intently did he look at her, and so frequently did he
       glance at the little note-book by his side. Observing that he made no
       sketch, however, and that he talked about business only, she began to
       have suspicions that he represented some creditor of her father's, the
       balance due to whom was noted in that pocket volume. Regarded from this
       point of view Mr Pancks's puffings expressed injury and impatience, and
       each of his louder snorts became a demand for payment.

       But here again she was undeceived by anomalous and incongruous conduct
       on the part of Mr Pancks himself. She had left the table half an hour,
       and was at work alone. Flora had 'gone to lie down' in the next room,
       concurrently with which retirement a smell of something to drink
       had broken out in the house. The Patriarch was fast asleep, with his
       philanthropic mouth open under a yellow pocket-handkerchief in the
       dining-room. At this quiet time, Mr Pancks softly appeared before her,
       urbanely nodding.

       'Find it a little dull, Miss Dorrit?' inquired Pancks in a low voice.

       'No, thank you, sir,' said Little Dorrit.

       'Busy, I see,' observed Mr Pancks, stealing into the room by inches.
       'What are those now, Miss Dorrit?'

       'Handkerchiefs.'

       'Are they, though!' said Pancks. 'I shouldn't have thought it.' Not in
       the least looking at them, but looking at Little Dorrit. 'Perhaps you
       wonder who I am. Shall I tell you? I am a fortune-teller.'

       Little Dorrit now began to think he was mad.

       'I belong body and soul to my proprietor,' said Pancks; 'you saw my
       proprietor having his dinner below. But I do a little in the other way,
       sometimes; privately, very privately, Miss Dorrit.'

       Little Dorrit looked at him doubtfully, and not without alarm. 'I wish
       you'd show me the palm of your hand,' said Pancks. 'I should like to
       have a look at it. Don't let me be troublesome.'

       He was so far troublesome that he was not at all wanted there, but she
       laid her work in her lap for a moment, and held out her left hand with
       her thimble on it.

       'Years of toil, eh?' said Pancks, softly, touching it with his blunt
       forefinger. 'But what else are we made for? Nothing. Hallo!' looking
       into the lines. 'What's this with bars? It's a College! And what's this
       with a grey gown and a black velvet cap? it's a father! And what's this
       with a clarionet? It's an uncle! And what's this in dancing-shoes? It's
       a sister! And what's this straggling about in an idle sort of a way?
       It's a brother! And what's this thinking for 'em all? Why, this is you,
       Miss Dorrit!'

       Her eyes met his as she looked up wonderingly into his face, and she
       thought that although his were sharp eyes, he was a brighter and
       gentler-looking man than she had supposed at dinner. His eyes were on
       her hand again directly, and her opportunity of confirming or correcting
       the impression was gone.

       'Now, the deuce is in it,' muttered Pancks, tracing out a line in her
       hand with his clumsy finger, 'if this isn't me in the corner here! What
       do I want here? What's behind me?'

       He carried his finger slowly down to the wrist, and round the wrist, and
       affected to look at the back of the hand for what was behind him.

       'Is it any harm?' asked Little Dorrit, smiling.

       'Deuce a bit!' said Pancks. 'What do you think it's worth?'

       'I ought to ask you that. I am not the fortune-teller.'

       'True,' said Pancks. 'What's it worth? You shall live to see, Miss
       Dorrit.'

       Releasing the hand by slow degrees, he drew all his fingers through his
       prongs of hair, so that they stood up in their most portentous manner;
       and repeated slowly, 'Remember what I say, Miss Dorrit. You shall live
       to see.'

       She could not help showing that she was much surprised, if it were only
       by his knowing so much about her.

       'Ah! That's it!' said Pancks, pointing at her. 'Miss Dorrit, not that,
       ever!'

       More surprised than before, and a little more frightened, she looked to
       him for an explanation of his last words.

       'Not that,' said Pancks, making, with great seriousness, an imitation
       of a surprised look and manner that appeared to be unintentionally
       grotesque. 'Don't do that. Never on seeing me, no matter when, no matter
       where. I am nobody. Don't take on to mind me. Don't mention me. Take no
       notice. Will you agree, Miss Dorrit?'

       'I hardly know what to say,' returned Little Dorrit, quite astounded.
       'Why?'

       'Because I am a fortune-teller. Pancks the gipsy. I haven't told you so
       much of your fortune yet, Miss Dorrit, as to tell you what's behind
       me on that little hand. I have told you you shall live to see. Is it
       agreed, Miss Dorrit?'

       'Agreed that I--am--to--'

       'To take no notice of me away from here, unless I take on first. Not
       to mind me when I come and go. It's very easy. I am no loss, I am not
       handsome, I am not good company, I am only my proprietors grubber.
       You need do no more than think, "Ah! Pancks the gipsy at his
       fortune-telling--he'll tell the rest of my fortune one day--I shall live
       to know it." Is it agreed, Miss Dorrit?'

       'Ye-es,' faltered Little Dorrit, whom he greatly confused, 'I suppose
       so, while you do no harm.'

       'Good!' Mr Pancks glanced at the wall of the adjoining room, and stooped
       forward. 'Honest creature, woman of capital points, but heedless and
       a loose talker, Miss Dorrit.' With that he rubbed his hands as if the
       interview had been very satisfactory to him, panted away to the door,
       and urbanely nodded himself out again.

       If Little Dorrit were beyond measure perplexed by this curious conduct
       on the part of her new acquaintance, and by finding herself involved
       in this singular treaty, her perplexity was not diminished by ensuing
       circumstances. Besides that Mr Pancks took every opportunity afforded
       him in Mr Casby's house of significantly glancing at her and snorting
       at her--which was not much, after what he had done already--he began to
       pervade her daily life. She saw him in the street, constantly. When she
       went to Mr Casby's, he was always there. When she went to Mrs Clennam's,
       he came there on any pretence, as if to keep her in his sight. A week
       had not gone by, when she found him to her astonishment in the Lodge one
       night, conversing with the turnkey on duty, and to all appearance one
       of his familiar companions. Her next surprise was to find him equally at
       his ease within the prison; to hear of his presenting himself among
       the visitors at her father's Sunday levee; to see him arm in arm with
       a Collegiate friend about the yard; to learn, from Fame, that he had
       greatly distinguished himself one evening at the social club that held
       its meetings in the Snuggery, by addressing a speech to the members
       of the institution, singing a song, and treating the company to five
       gallons of ale--report madly added a bushel of shrimps. The effect on
       Mr Plornish of such of these phenomena as he became an eye-witness of in
       his faithful visits, made an impression on Little Dorrit only second to
       that produced by the phenomena themselves. They seemed to gag and bind
       him. He could only stare, and sometimes weakly mutter that it wouldn't
       be believed down Bleeding Heart Yard that this was Pancks; but he never
       said a word more, or made a sign more, even to Little Dorrit. Mr Pancks
       crowned his mysteries by making himself acquainted with Tip in some
       unknown manner, and taking a Sunday saunter into the College on that
       gentleman's arm. Throughout he never took any notice of Little Dorrit,
       save once or twice when he happened to come close to her and there
       was no one very near; on which occasions, he said in passing,
       with a friendly look and a puff of encouragement, 'Pancks the
       gipsy--fortune-telling.'

       Little Dorrit worked and strove as usual, wondering at all this, but
       keeping her wonder, as she had from her earliest years kept many heavier
       loads, in her own breast. A change had stolen, and was stealing yet,
       over the patient heart. Every day found her something more retiring
       than the day before. To pass in and out of the prison unnoticed, and
       elsewhere to be overlooked and forgotten, were, for herself, her chief
       desires.

       To her own room too, strangely assorted room for her delicate youth
       and character, she was glad to retreat as often as she could without
       desertion of any duty. There were afternoon times when she was
       unemployed, when visitors dropped in to play a hand at cards with her
       father, when she could be spared and was better away. Then she would
       flit along the yard, climb the scores of stairs that led to her room,
       and take her seat at the window. Many combinations did those spikes
       upon the wall assume, many light shapes did the strong iron weave itself
       into, many golden touches fell upon the rust, while Little Dorrit sat
       there musing. New zig-zags sprung into the cruel pattern sometimes, when
       she saw it through a burst of tears; but beautified or hardened still,
       always over it and under it and through it, she was fain to look in her
       solitude, seeing everything with that ineffaceable brand.

       A garret, and a Marshalsea garret without compromise, was Little
       Dorrit's room. Beautifully kept, it was ugly in itself, and had little
       but cleanliness and air to set it off; for what embellishment she had
       ever been able to buy, had gone to her father's room. Howbeit, for this
       poor place she showed an increasing love; and to sit in it alone became
       her favourite rest.

       Insomuch, that on a certain afternoon during the Pancks mysteries, when
       she was seated at her window, and heard Maggy's well-known step coming
       up the stairs, she was very much disturbed by the apprehension of being
       summoned away. As Maggy's step came higher up and nearer, she trembled
       and faltered; and it was as much as she could do to speak, when Maggy at
       length appeared.

       'Please, Little Mother,' said Maggy, panting for breath, 'you must come
       down and see him. He's here.'

       'Who, Maggy?'

       'Who, o' course Mr Clennam. He's in your father's room, and he says to
       me, Maggy, will you be so kind and go and say it's only me.'

       'I am not very well, Maggy. I had better not go. I am going to lie down.
       See! I lie down now, to ease my head. Say, with my grateful regard, that
       you left me so, or I would have come.'

       'Well, it an't very polite though, Little Mother,' said the staring
       Maggy, 'to turn your face away, neither!'

       Maggy was very susceptible to personal slights, and very ingenious in
       inventing them. 'Putting both your hands afore your face too!' she went
       on. 'If you can't bear the looks of a poor thing, it would be better to
       tell her so at once, and not go and shut her out like that, hurting her
       feelings and breaking her heart at ten year old, poor thing!'

       'It's to ease my head, Maggy.'

       'Well, and if you cry to ease your head, Little Mother, let me cry too.
       Don't go and have all the crying to yourself,' expostulated Maggy, 'that
       an't not being greedy.' And immediately began to blubber.

       It was with some difficulty that she could be induced to go back with
       the excuse; but the promise of being told a story--of old her great
       delight--on condition that she concentrated her faculties upon the
       errand and left her little mistress to herself for an hour longer,
       combined with a misgiving on Maggy's part that she had left her good
       temper at the bottom of the staircase, prevailed. So away she went,
       muttering her message all the way to keep it in her mind, and, at the
       appointed time, came back.

       'He was very sorry, I can tell you,' she announced, 'and wanted to send
       a doctor. And he's coming again to-morrow he is and I don't think he'll
       have a good sleep to-night along o' hearing about your head, Little
       Mother. Oh my! Ain't you been a-crying!'

       'I think I have, a little, Maggy.'

       'A little! Oh!'

       'But it's all over now--all over for good, Maggy. And my head is much
       better and cooler, and I am quite comfortable. I am very glad I did not
       go down.'

       Her great staring child tenderly embraced her; and having smoothed her
       hair, and bathed her forehead and eyes with cold water (offices in which
               her awkward hands became skilful), hugged her again, exulted in her
       brighter looks, and stationed her in her chair by the window. Over
       against this chair, Maggy, with apoplectic exertions that were not
       at all required, dragged the box which was her seat on story-telling
       occasions, sat down upon it, hugged her own knees, and said, with a
       voracious appetite for stories, and with widely-opened eyes:

       'Now, Little Mother, let's have a good 'un!'

       'What shall it be about, Maggy?'

       'Oh, let's have a princess,' said Maggy, 'and let her be a reg'lar one.
       Beyond all belief, you know!'

       Little Dorrit considered for a moment; and with a rather sad smile upon
       her face, which was flushed by the sunset, began:

       'Maggy, there was once upon a time a fine King, and he had everything he
       could wish for, and a great deal more. He had gold and silver, diamonds
       and rubies, riches of every kind. He had palaces, and he had--'

       'Hospitals,' interposed Maggy, still nursing her knees. 'Let him have
       hospitals, because they're so comfortable. Hospitals with lots of
       Chicking.'

       'Yes, he had plenty of them, and he had plenty of everything.'

       'Plenty of baked potatoes, for instance?' said Maggy.

       'Plenty of everything.'

       'Lor!' chuckled Maggy, giving her knees a hug. 'Wasn't it prime!'

       'This King had a daughter, who was the wisest and most beautiful
       Princess that ever was seen. When she was a child she understood all her
       lessons before her masters taught them to her; and when she was grown
       up, she was the wonder of the world. Now, near the Palace where this
       Princess lived, there was a cottage in which there was a poor little
       tiny woman, who lived all alone by herself.'

       'An old woman,' said Maggy, with an unctuous smack of her lips.

       'No, not an old woman. Quite a young one.'

       'I wonder she warn't afraid,' said Maggy. 'Go on, please.'

       'The Princess passed the cottage nearly every day, and whenever she went
       by in her beautiful carriage, she saw the poor tiny woman spinning at
       her wheel, and she looked at the tiny woman, and the tiny woman looked
       at her. So, one day she stopped the coachman a little way from the
       cottage, and got out and walked on and peeped in at the door, and there,
       as usual, was the tiny woman spinning at her wheel, and she looked at
       the Princess, and the Princess looked at her.'

       'Like trying to stare one another out,' said Maggy. 'Please go on,
       Little Mother.'

       'The Princess was such a wonderful Princess that she had the power of
       knowing secrets, and she said to the tiny woman, Why do you keep it
       there? This showed her directly that the Princess knew why she lived
       all alone by herself spinning at her wheel, and she kneeled down at
       the Princess's feet, and asked her never to betray her. So the Princess
       said, I never will betray you. Let me see it. So the tiny woman closed
       the shutter of the cottage window and fastened the door, and trembling
       from head to foot for fear that any one should suspect her, opened a
       very secret place and showed the Princess a shadow.'

       'Lor!' said Maggy.

       'It was the shadow of Some one who had gone by long before: of Some one
       who had gone on far away quite out of reach, never, never to come back.
       It was bright to look at; and when the tiny woman showed it to the
       Princess, she was proud of it with all her heart, as a great, great
       treasure. When the Princess had considered it a little while, she said
       to the tiny woman, And you keep watch over this every day? And she cast
       down her eyes, and whispered, Yes. Then the Princess said, Remind me
       why. To which the other replied, that no one so good and kind had ever
       passed that way, and that was why in the beginning. She said, too, that
       nobody missed it, that nobody was the worse for it, that Some one had
       gone on, to those who were expecting him--'

       'Some one was a man then?' interposed Maggy.

       Little Dorrit timidly said Yes, she believed so; and resumed:

       '--Had gone on to those who were expecting him, and that this
       remembrance was stolen or kept back from nobody. The Princess made
       answer, Ah! But when the cottager died it would be discovered there. The
       tiny woman told her No; when that time came, it would sink quietly into
       her own grave, and would never be found.'

       'Well, to be sure!' said Maggy. 'Go on, please.'

       'The Princess was very much astonished to hear this, as you may suppose,
       Maggy.'

       ('And well she might be,' said Maggy.)

       'So she resolved to watch the tiny woman, and see what came of it. Every
       day she drove in her beautiful carriage by the cottage-door, and there
       she saw the tiny woman always alone by herself spinning at her wheel,
       and she looked at the tiny woman, and the tiny woman looked at her. At
       last one day the wheel was still, and the tiny woman was not to be seen.
       When the Princess made inquiries why the wheel had stopped, and where
       the tiny woman was, she was informed that the wheel had stopped because
       there was nobody to turn it, the tiny woman being dead.'

       ('They ought to have took her to the Hospital,' said Maggy, and then
        she'd have got over it.')

       'The Princess, after crying a very little for the loss of the tiny
       woman, dried her eyes and got out of her carriage at the place where
       she had stopped it before, and went to the cottage and peeped in at the
       door. There was nobody to look at her now, and nobody for her to look
       at, so she went in at once to search for the treasured shadow. But there
       was no sign of it to be found anywhere; and then she knew that the tiny
       woman had told her the truth, and that it would never give anybody any
       trouble, and that it had sunk quietly into her own grave, and that she
       and it were at rest together.

       'That's all, Maggy.'

       The sunset flush was so bright on Little Dorrit's face when she came
       thus to the end of her story, that she interposed her hand to shade it.

       'Had she got to be old?' Maggy asked.

       'The tiny woman?'

       'Ah!'

       'I don't know,' said Little Dorrit. 'But it would have been just the
       same if she had been ever so old.'

       'Would it raly!' said Maggy. 'Well, I suppose it would though.' And sat
       staring and ruminating.

       She sat so long with her eyes wide open, that at length Little Dorrit,
       to entice her from her box, rose and looked out of window. As she
       glanced down into the yard, she saw Pancks come in and leer up with the
       corner of his eye as he went by.

       'Who's he, Little Mother?' said Maggy. She had joined her at the window
       and was leaning on her shoulder. 'I see him come in and out often.'

       'I have heard him called a fortune-teller,' said Little Dorrit. 'But I
       doubt if he could tell many people even their past or present fortunes.'

       'Couldn't have told the Princess hers?' said Maggy.

       Little Dorrit, looking musingly down into the dark valley of the prison,
       shook her head.

       'Nor the tiny woman hers?' said Maggy.

       'No,' said Little Dorrit, with the sunset very bright upon her. 'But let
       us come away from the window.'




