Thirty years ago, Marseilles lay burning in the sun, one day.

A blazing sun upon a fierce August day was no greater rarity in southern
France then, than at any other time, before or since. Everything in
Marseilles, and about Marseilles, had stared at the fervid sky, and been
stared at in return, until a staring habit had become universal there.
Strangers were stared out of countenance by staring white houses,
          staring white walls, staring white streets, staring tracts of arid road,
          staring hills from which verdure was burnt away. The only things to be
          seen not fixedly staring and glaring were the vines drooping under their
          load of grapes. These did occasionally wink a little, as the hot air
          barely moved their faint leaves.

          There was no wind to make a ripple on the foul water within the harbour,
          or on the beautiful sea without. The line of demarcation between the two
          colours, black and blue, showed the point which the pure sea would not
          pass; but it lay as quiet as the abominable pool, with which it never
          mixed. Boats without awnings were too hot to touch; ships blistered at
          their moorings; the stones of the quays had not cooled, night or
          day, for months. Hindoos, Russians, Chinese, Spaniards, Portuguese,
          Englishmen, Frenchmen, Genoese, Neapolitans, Venetians, Greeks, Turks,
          descendants from all the builders of Babel, come to trade at Marseilles,
          sought the shade alike--taking refuge in any hiding-place from a sea too
          intensely blue to be looked at, and a sky of purple, set with one great
          flaming jewel of fire.

          The universal stare made the eyes ache. Towards the distant line of
          Italian coast, indeed, it was a little relieved by light clouds of mist,
          slowly rising from the evaporation of the sea, but it softened nowhere
          else. Far away the staring roads, deep in dust, stared from the
          hill-side, stared from the hollow, stared from the interminable
          plain. Far away the dusty vines overhanging wayside cottages, and the
          monotonous wayside avenues of parched trees without shade, drooped
          beneath the stare of earth and sky. So did the horses with drowsy bells,
          in long files of carts, creeping slowly towards the interior; so did
          their recumbent drivers, when they were awake, which rarely happened;
          so did the exhausted labourers in the fields. Everything that lived or
          grew, was oppressed by the glare; except the lizard, passing swiftly
          over rough stone walls, and the cicala, chirping his dry hot chirp, like
          a rattle. The very dust was scorched brown, and something quivered in
          the atmosphere as if the air itself were panting.

          Blinds, shutters, curtains, awnings, were all closed and drawn to keep
          out the stare. Grant it but a chink or keyhole, and it shot in like a
          white-hot arrow. The churches were the freest from it. To come out of
          the twilight of pillars and arches--dreamily dotted with winking lamps,
          dreamily peopled with ugly old shadows piously dozing, spitting, and
          begging--was to plunge into a fiery river, and swim for life to the
          nearest strip of shade. So, with people lounging and lying wherever
          shade was, with but little hum of tongues or barking of dogs, with
          occasional jangling of discordant church bells and rattling of vicious
          drums, Marseilles, a fact to be strongly smelt and tasted, lay broiling
          in the sun one day.

          In Marseilles that day there was a villainous prison. In one of its
          chambers, so repulsive a place that even the obtrusive stare blinked at
          it, and left it to such refuse of reflected light as it could find for
          itself, were two men. Besides the two men, a notched and disfigured
          bench, immovable from the wall, with a draught-board rudely hacked upon
          it with a knife, a set of draughts, made of old buttons and soup bones,
          a set of dominoes, two mats, and two or three wine bottles. That was all
          the chamber held, exclusive of rats and other unseen vermin, in addition
          to the seen vermin, the two men.

          It received such light as it got through a grating of iron bars
          fashioned like a pretty large window, by means of which it could be
          always inspected from the gloomy staircase on which the grating gave.
          There was a broad strong ledge of stone to this grating where the bottom
          of it was let into the masonry, three or four feet above the ground.
          Upon it, one of the two men lolled, half sitting and half lying, with
          his knees drawn up, and his feet and shoulders planted against the
          opposite sides of the aperture. The bars were wide enough apart to
          admit of his thrusting his arm through to the elbow; and so he held on
          negligently, for his greater ease.

          A prison taint was on everything there. The imprisoned air, the
          imprisoned light, the imprisoned damps, the imprisoned men, were all
          deteriorated by confinement. As the captive men were faded and haggard,
          so the iron was rusty, the stone was slimy, the wood was rotten, the air
          was faint, the light was dim. Like a well, like a vault, like a tomb,
          the prison had no knowledge of the brightness outside, and would have
          kept its polluted atmosphere intact in one of the spice islands of the
          Indian ocean.

          The man who lay on the ledge of the grating was even chilled. He jerked
          his great cloak more heavily upon him by an impatient movement of one
          shoulder, and growled, 'To the devil with this Brigand of a Sun that
          never shines in here!'

          He was waiting to be fed, looking sideways through the bars that he
          might see the further down the stairs, with much of the expression of
          a wild beast in similar expectation. But his eyes, too close together,
          were not so nobly set in his head as those of the king of beasts are in
          his, and they were sharp rather than bright--pointed weapons with little
          surface to betray them. They had no depth or change; they glittered,
          and they opened and shut. So far, and waiving their use to himself, a
          clockmaker could have made a better pair. He had a hook nose, handsome
          after its kind, but too high between the eyes by probably just as much
          as his eyes were too near to one another. For the rest, he was large and
          tall in frame, had thin lips, where his thick moustache showed them at
          all, and a quantity of dry hair, of no definable colour, in its shaggy
          state, but shot with red. The hand with which he held the grating
          (seamed all over the back with ugly scratches newly healed), was
          unusually small and plump; would have been unusually white but for the
          prison grime.

          The other man was lying on the stone floor, covered with a coarse brown
          coat.

          'Get up, pig!' growled the first. 'Don't sleep when I am hungry.'

          'It's all one, master,' said the pig, in a submissive manner, and not
          without cheerfulness; 'I can wake when I will, I can sleep when I will.
          It's all the same.'

          As he said it, he rose, shook himself, scratched himself, tied his brown
          coat loosely round his neck by the sleeves (he had previously used it
                  as a coverlet), and sat down upon the pavement yawning, with his back
          against the wall opposite to the grating.

          'Say what the hour is,' grumbled the first man.

          'The mid-day bells will ring--in forty minutes.' When he made the
          little pause, he had looked round the prison-room, as if for certain
          information.

          'You are a clock. How is it that you always know?'

          'How can I say? I always know what the hour is, and where I am. I was
          brought in here at night, and out of a boat, but I know where I am. See
          here! Marseilles harbour;' on his knees on the pavement, mapping it all
          out with a swarthy forefinger; 'Toulon (where the galleys are), Spain
          over there, Algiers over _there_. Creeping away to the left here, Nice.
          Round by the Cornice to Genoa. Genoa Mole and Harbour. Quarantine
          Ground. City there; terrace gardens blushing with the bella donna. Here,
          Porto Fino. Stand out for Leghorn. Out again for Civita Vecchia, so away
          to--hey! there's no room for Naples;' he had got to the wall by this
          time; 'but it's all one; it's in there!'

          He remained on his knees, looking up at his fellow-prisoner with a
          lively look for a prison. A sunburnt, quick, lithe, little man, though
          rather thickset. Earrings in his brown ears, white teeth lighting up his
          grotesque brown face, intensely black hair clustering about his brown
          throat, a ragged red shirt open at his brown breast. Loose, seaman-like
          trousers, decent shoes, a long red cap, a red sash round his waist, and
          a knife in it.

          'Judge if I come back from Naples as I went! See here, my master! Civita
          Vecchia, Leghorn, Porto Fino, Genoa, Cornice, Off Nice (which is in
                  there), Marseilles, you and me. The apartment of the jailer and his keys
          is where I put this thumb; and here at my wrist they keep the national
          razor in its case--the guillotine locked up.'

          The other man spat suddenly on the pavement, and gurgled in his throat.

          Some lock below gurgled in _its_ throat immediately afterwards, and then
          a door crashed. Slow steps began ascending the stairs; the prattle of
          a sweet little voice mingled with the noise they made; and the
          prison-keeper appeared carrying his daughter, three or four years old,
          and a basket.

          'How goes the world this forenoon, gentlemen? My little one, you see,
          going round with me to have a peep at her father's birds. Fie, then!
          Look at the birds, my pretty, look at the birds.'

          He looked sharply at the birds himself, as he held the child up at
          the grate, especially at the little bird, whose activity he seemed to
          mistrust. 'I have brought your bread, Signor John Baptist,' said he
          (they all spoke in French, but the little man was an Italian); 'and if I
          might recommend you not to game--'

          'You don't recommend the master!' said John Baptist, showing his teeth
          as he smiled.

          'Oh! but the master wins,' returned the jailer, with a passing look of
          no particular liking at the other man, 'and you lose. It's quite another
          thing. You get husky bread and sour drink by it; and he gets sausage of
          Lyons, veal in savoury jelly, white bread, strachino cheese, and good
          wine by it. Look at the birds, my pretty!'

          'Poor birds!' said the child.

          The fair little face, touched with divine compassion, as it peeped
          shrinkingly through the grate, was like an angel's in the prison. John
          Baptist rose and moved towards it, as if it had a good attraction for
          him. The other bird remained as before, except for an impatient glance
          at the basket.

          'Stay!' said the jailer, putting his little daughter on the outer ledge
          of the grate, 'she shall feed the birds. This big loaf is for Signor
          John Baptist. We must break it to get it through into the cage. So,
          there's a tame bird to kiss the little hand! This sausage in a vine
          leaf is for Monsieur Rigaud. Again--this veal in savoury jelly is for
          Monsieur Rigaud. Again--these three white little loaves are for Monsieur
          Rigaud. Again, this cheese--again, this wine--again, this tobacco--all
          for Monsieur Rigaud. Lucky bird!'

          The child put all these things between the bars into the soft, Smooth,
          well-shaped hand, with evident dread--more than once drawing back
          her own and looking at the man with her fair brow roughened into an
          expression half of fright and half of anger. Whereas she had put the
          lump of coarse bread into the swart, scaled, knotted hands of John
          Baptist (who had scarcely as much nail on his eight fingers and two
                  thumbs as would have made out one for Monsieur Rigaud), with ready
          confidence; and, when he kissed her hand, had herself passed it
          caressingly over his face. Monsieur Rigaud, indifferent to this
          distinction, propitiated the father by laughing and nodding at the
          daughter as often as she gave him anything; and, so soon as he had
          all his viands about him in convenient nooks of the ledge on which he
          rested, began to eat with an appetite.

          When Monsieur Rigaud laughed, a change took place in his face, that
          was more remarkable than prepossessing. His moustache went up under his
          nose, and his nose came down over his moustache, in a very sinister and
          cruel manner.

          'There!' said the jailer, turning his basket upside down to beat the
          crumbs out, 'I have expended all the money I received; here is the note
          of it, and _that's_ a thing accomplished. Monsieur Rigaud, as I expected
          yesterday, the President will look for the pleasure of your society at
          an hour after mid-day, to-day.'

          'To try me, eh?' said Rigaud, pausing, knife in hand and morsel in
          mouth.

          'You have said it. To try you.'

          'There is no news for me?' asked John Baptist, who had begun,
          contentedly, to munch his bread.

          The jailer shrugged his shoulders.

          'Lady of mine! Am I to lie here all my life, my father?'

          'What do I know!' cried the jailer, turning upon him with southern
          quickness, and gesticulating with both his hands and all his fingers,
          as if he were threatening to tear him to pieces. 'My friend, how is it
          possible for me to tell how long you are to lie here? What do I know,
          John Baptist Cavalletto? Death of my life! There are prisoners here
          sometimes, who are not in such a devil of a hurry to be tried.'

          He seemed to glance obliquely at Monsieur Rigaud in this remark; but
          Monsieur Rigaud had already resumed his meal, though not with quite so
          quick an appetite as before.

          'Adieu, my birds!' said the keeper of the prison, taking his pretty
          child in his arms, and dictating the words with a kiss.

          'Adieu, my birds!' the pretty child repeated.

          Her innocent face looked back so brightly over his shoulder, as he
          walked away with her, singing her the song of the child's game:

          'Who passes by this road so late?
          Compagnon de la Majolaine!
          Who passes by this road so late?
          Always gay!'

          that John Baptist felt it a point of honour to reply at the grate, and
          in good time and tune, though a little hoarsely:

          'Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
          Compagnon de la Majolaine!
          Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
          Always gay!'

          Which accompanied them so far down the few steep stairs, that the
          prison-keeper had to stop at last for his little daughter to hear the
          song out, and repeat the Refrain while they were yet in sight. Then the
          child's head disappeared, and the prison-keeper's head disappeared, but
          the little voice prolonged the strain until the door clashed.

          Monsieur Rigaud, finding the listening John Baptist in his way before
          the echoes had ceased (even the echoes were the weaker for imprisonment,
                  and seemed to lag), reminded him with a push of his foot that he had
          better resume his own darker place. The little man sat down again
          upon the pavement with the negligent ease of one who was thoroughly
          accustomed to pavements; and placing three hunks of coarse bread before
          himself, and falling to upon a fourth, began contentedly to work his way
          through them as if to clear them off were a sort of game.

          Perhaps he glanced at the Lyons sausage, and perhaps he glanced at the
          veal in savoury jelly, but they were not there long, to make his mouth
          water; Monsieur Rigaud soon dispatched them, in spite of the president
          and tribunal, and proceeded to suck his fingers as clean as he could,
          and to wipe them on his vine leaves. Then, as he paused in his drink
          to contemplate his fellow-prisoner, his moustache went up, and his nose
          came down.

          'How do you find the bread?'

          'A little dry, but I have my old sauce here,' returned John Baptist,
          holding up his knife.

          'How sauce?'

          'I can cut my bread so--like a melon. Or so--like an omelette. Or
          so--like a fried fish. Or so--like Lyons sausage,' said John Baptist,
          demonstrating the various cuts on the bread he held, and soberly chewing
          what he had in his mouth.

          'Here!' cried Monsieur Rigaud. 'You may drink. You may finish this.'

          It was no great gift, for there was mighty little wine left; but Signor
          Cavalletto, jumping to his feet, received the bottle gratefully, turned
          it upside down at his mouth, and smacked his lips.

          'Put the bottle by with the rest,' said Rigaud.

          The little man obeyed his orders, and stood ready to give him a lighted
          match; for he was now rolling his tobacco into cigarettes by the aid of
          little squares of paper which had been brought in with it.

          'Here! You may have one.'

          'A thousand thanks, my master!' John Baptist said in his own language,
          and with the quick conciliatory manner of his own countrymen.

          Monsieur Rigaud arose, lighted a cigarette, put the rest of his stock
          into a breast-pocket, and stretched himself out at full length upon the
          bench. Cavalletto sat down on the pavement, holding one of his ankles in
          each hand, and smoking peacefully. There seemed to be some uncomfortable
          attraction of Monsieur Rigaud's eyes to the immediate neighbourhood of
          that part of the pavement where the thumb had been in the plan. They
          were so drawn in that direction, that the Italian more than once
          followed them to and back from the pavement in some surprise.

          'What an infernal hole this is!' said Monsieur Rigaud, breaking a long
          pause. 'Look at the light of day. Day? the light of yesterday week, the
          light of six months ago, the light of six years ago. So slack and dead!'

          It came languishing down a square funnel that blinded a window in the
          staircase wall, through which the sky was never seen--nor anything else.

          'Cavalletto,' said Monsieur Rigaud, suddenly withdrawing his gaze from
          this funnel to which they had both involuntarily turned their eyes, 'you
          know me for a gentleman?'

          'Surely, surely!'

          'How long have we been here?'

          'I, eleven weeks, to-morrow night at midnight. You, nine weeks and three
          days, at five this afternoon.'

          'Have I ever done anything here? Ever touched the broom, or spread
          the mats, or rolled them up, or found the draughts, or collected the
          dominoes, or put my hand to any kind of work?'

          'Never!'

          'Have you ever thought of looking to me to do any kind of work?'

          John Baptist answered with that peculiar back-handed shake of the
          right forefinger which is the most expressive negative in the Italian
          language.

          'No! You knew from the first moment when you saw me here, that I was a
          gentleman?'

          'ALTRO!' returned John Baptist, closing his eyes and giving his head a
          most vehement toss. The word being, according to its Genoese emphasis,
          a confirmation, a contradiction, an assertion, a denial, a taunt,
          a compliment, a joke, and fifty other things, became in the present
          instance, with a significance beyond all power of written expression,
          our familiar English 'I believe you!'

          'Haha! You are right! A gentleman I am! And a gentleman I'll live, and
          a gentleman I'll die! It's my intent to be a gentleman. It's my game.
          Death of my soul, I play it out wherever I go!'

          He changed his posture to a sitting one, crying with a triumphant air:

          'Here I am! See me! Shaken out of destiny's dice-box into the company
          of a mere smuggler;--shut up with a poor little contraband trader, whose
          papers are wrong, and whom the police lay hold of besides, for placing
          his boat (as a means of getting beyond the frontier) at the disposition
          of other little people whose papers are wrong; and he instinctively
          recognises my position, even by this light and in this place. It's well
          done! By Heaven! I win, however the game goes.'

          Again his moustache went up, and his nose came down.

          'What's the hour now?' he asked, with a dry hot pallor upon him, rather
          difficult of association with merriment.

          'A little half-hour after mid-day.'

          'Good! The President will have a gentleman before him soon. Come!
          Shall I tell you on what accusation? It must be now, or never, for I
          shall not return here. Either I shall go free, or I shall go to be made
          ready for shaving. You know where they keep the razor.'

          Signor Cavalletto took his cigarette from between his parted lips, and
          showed more momentary discomfiture than might have been expected.

          'I am a'--Monsieur Rigaud stood up to say it--'I am a cosmopolitan
          gentleman. I own no particular country. My father was Swiss--Canton de
          Vaud. My mother was French by blood, English by birth. I myself was born
          in Belgium. I am a citizen of the world.'

          His theatrical air, as he stood with one arm on his hip within the folds
          of his cloak, together with his manner of disregarding his companion
          and addressing the opposite wall instead, seemed to intimate that he
          was rehearsing for the President, whose examination he was shortly to
          undergo, rather than troubling himself merely to enlighten so small a
          person as John Baptist Cavalletto.

          'Call me five-and-thirty years of age. I have seen the world. I have
          lived here, and lived there, and lived like a gentleman everywhere. I
          have been treated and respected as a gentleman universally. If you try
          to prejudice me by making out that I have lived by my wits--how do
          your lawyers live--your politicians--your intriguers--your men of the
          Exchange?'

          He kept his small smooth hand in constant requisition, as if it were a
          witness to his gentility that had often done him good service before.

          'Two years ago I came to Marseilles. I admit that I was poor; I had been
          ill. When your lawyers, your politicians, your intriguers, your men of
          the Exchange fall ill, and have not scraped money together, _they_ become
          poor. I put up at the Cross of Gold,--kept then by Monsieur Henri
          Barronneau--sixty-five at least, and in a failing state of health. I had
          lived in the house some four months when Monsieur Henri Barronneau had
          the misfortune to die;--at any rate, not a rare misfortune, that. It
          happens without any aid of mine, pretty often.'

          John Baptist having smoked his cigarette down to his fingers' ends,
          Monsieur Rigaud had the magnanimity to throw him another. He lighted the
          second at the ashes of the first, and smoked on, looking sideways at his
          companion, who, preoccupied with his own case, hardly looked at him.

          'Monsieur Barronneau left a widow. She was two-and-twenty. She had
          gained a reputation for beauty, and (which is often another thing) was
          beautiful. I continued to live at the Cross of Gold. I married Madame
          Barronneau. It is not for me to say whether there was any great
          disparity in such a match. Here I stand, with the contamination of a
          jail upon me; but it is possible that you may think me better suited to
          her than her former husband was.'

          He had a certain air of being a handsome man--which he was not; and
          a certain air of being a well-bred man--which he was not. It was mere
          swagger and challenge; but in this particular, as in many others,
          blustering assertion goes for proof, half over the world.

          'Be it as it may, Madame Barronneau approved of me. _That_ is not to
          prejudice me, I hope?'

          His eye happening to light upon John Baptist with this inquiry, that
          little man briskly shook his head in the negative, and repeated in an
          argumentative tone under his breath, altro, altro, altro, altro--an
          infinite number of times.

          'Now came the difficulties of our position. I am proud. I say nothing
          in defence of pride, but I am proud. It is also my character to govern.
          I can't submit; I must govern. Unfortunately, the property of Madame
          Rigaud was settled upon herself. Such was the insane act of her late
          husband. More unfortunately still, she had relations. When a wife's
          relations interpose against a husband who is a gentleman, who is proud,
          and who must govern, the consequences are inimical to peace. There
          was yet another source of difference between us. Madame Rigaud was
          unfortunately a little vulgar. I sought to improve her manners and
          ameliorate her general tone; she (supported in this likewise by her
                  relations) resented my endeavours. Quarrels began to arise between us;
          and, propagated and exaggerated by the slanders of the relations of
          Madame Rigaud, to become notorious to the neighbours. It has been said
          that I treated Madame Rigaud with cruelty. I may have been seen to slap
          her face--nothing more. I have a light hand; and if I have been seen
          apparently to correct Madame Rigaud in that manner, I have done it
          almost playfully.'

          If the playfulness of Monsieur Rigaud were at all expressed by his smile
          at this point, the relations of Madame Rigaud might have said that
          they would have much preferred his correcting that unfortunate woman
          seriously.

          'I am sensitive and brave. I do not advance it as a merit to be
          sensitive and brave, but it is my character. If the male relations of
          Madame Rigaud had put themselves forward openly, I should have known how
          to deal with them. They knew that, and their machinations were conducted
          in secret; consequently, Madame Rigaud and I were brought into frequent
          and unfortunate collision. Even when I wanted any little sum of money
          for my personal expenses, I could not obtain it without collision--and
          I, too, a man whose character it is to govern! One night, Madame Rigaud
          and myself were walking amicably--I may say like lovers--on a height
          overhanging the sea. An evil star occasioned Madame Rigaud to advert to
          her relations; I reasoned with her on that subject, and remonstrated on
          the want of duty and devotion manifested in her allowing herself to be
          influenced by their jealous animosity towards her husband. Madame Rigaud
          retorted; I retorted; Madame Rigaud grew warm; I grew warm, and provoked
          her. I admit it. Frankness is a part of my character. At length, Madame
          Rigaud, in an access of fury that I must ever deplore, threw herself
          upon me with screams of passion (no doubt those that were overheard
                  at some distance), tore my clothes, tore my hair, lacerated my hands,
          trampled and trod the dust, and finally leaped over, dashing herself to
          death upon the rocks below. Such is the train of incidents which
          malice has perverted into my endeavouring to force from Madame Rigaud
          a relinquishment of her rights; and, on her persistence in a refusal to
          make the concession I required, struggling with her--assassinating her!'

          He stepped aside to the ledge where the vine leaves yet lay strewn
          about, collected two or three, and stood wiping his hands upon them,
          with his back to the light.

          'Well,' he demanded after a silence, 'have you nothing to say to all
          that?'

          'It's ugly,' returned the little man, who had risen, and was brightening
          his knife upon his shoe, as he leaned an arm against the wall.

          'What do you mean?'

          John Baptist polished his knife in silence.

          'Do you mean that I have not represented the case correctly?'

          'Al-tro!' returned John Baptist. The word was an apology now, and stood
          for 'Oh, by no means!'

          'What then?'

          'Presidents and tribunals are so prejudiced.'

          'Well,' cried the other, uneasily flinging the end of his cloak over his
          shoulder with an oath, 'let them do their worst!'

          'Truly I think they will,' murmured John Baptist to himself, as he bent
          his head to put his knife in his sash.

          Nothing more was said on either side, though they both began walking
          to and fro, and necessarily crossed at every turn. Monsieur Rigaud
          sometimes stopped, as if he were going to put his case in a new light,
          or make some irate remonstrance; but Signor Cavalletto continuing to
          go slowly to and fro at a grotesque kind of jog-trot pace with his eyes
          turned downward, nothing came of these inclinings.

          By-and-by the noise of the key in the lock arrested them both. The sound
          of voices succeeded, and the tread of feet. The door clashed, the voices
          and the feet came on, and the prison-keeper slowly ascended the stairs,
          followed by a guard of soldiers.

          'Now, Monsieur Rigaud,' said he, pausing for a moment at the grate, with
          his keys in his hands, 'have the goodness to come out.'

          'I am to depart in state, I see?'

          'Why, unless you did,' returned the jailer, 'you might depart in so many
          pieces that it would be difficult to get you together again. There's a
          crowd, Monsieur Rigaud, and it doesn't love you.'

          He passed on out of sight, and unlocked and unbarred a low door in the
          corner of the chamber. 'Now,' said he, as he opened it and appeared
          within, 'come out.'

          There is no sort of whiteness in all the hues under the sun at all like
          the whiteness of Monsieur Rigaud's face as it was then. Neither is there
          any expression of the human countenance at all like that expression in
          every little line of which the frightened heart is seen to beat. Both
          are conventionally compared with death; but the difference is the whole
          deep gulf between the struggle done, and the fight at its most desperate
          extremity.

          He lighted another of his paper cigars at his companion's; put it
          tightly between his teeth; covered his head with a soft slouched hat;
          threw the end of his cloak over his shoulder again; and walked out into
          the side gallery on which the door opened, without taking any further
          notice of Signor Cavalletto. As to that little man himself, his whole
          attention had become absorbed in getting near the door and looking out
          at it. Precisely as a beast might approach the opened gate of his den
          and eye the freedom beyond, he passed those few moments in watching and
          peering, until the door was closed upon him.

          There was an officer in command of the soldiers; a stout, serviceable,
          profoundly calm man, with his drawn sword in his hand, smoking a cigar.
          He very briefly directed the placing of Monsieur Rigaud in the midst of
          the party, put himself with consummate indifference at their head, gave
          the word 'march!' and so they all went jingling down the staircase. The
          door clashed--the key turned--and a ray of unusual light, and a breath
          of unusual air, seemed to have passed through the jail, vanishing in a
          tiny wreath of smoke from the cigar.

          Still, in his captivity, like a lower animal--like some impatient ape,
          or roused bear of the smaller species--the prisoner, now left solitary,
          had jumped upon the ledge, to lose no glimpse of this departure. As he
          yet stood clasping the grate with both hands, an uproar broke upon his
          hearing; yells, shrieks, oaths, threats, execrations, all comprehended
          in it, though (as in a storm) nothing but a raging swell of sound
          distinctly heard.

          Excited into a still greater resemblance to a caged wild animal by his
          anxiety to know more, the prisoner leaped nimbly down, ran round the
          chamber, leaped nimbly up again, clasped the grate and tried to shake
          it, leaped down and ran, leaped up and listened, and never rested until
          the noise, becoming more and more distant, had died away. How many
          better prisoners have worn their noble hearts out so; no man thinking
          of it; not even the beloved of their souls realising it; great kings
          and governors, who had made them captive, careering in the sunlight
          jauntily, and men cheering them on. Even the said great personages dying
          in bed, making exemplary ends and sounding speeches; and polite history,
          more servile than their instruments, embalming them!

          At last, John Baptist, now able to choose his own spot within the
          compass of those walls for the exercise of his faculty of going to sleep
          when he would, lay down upon the bench, with his face turned over on his
          crossed arms, and slumbered. In his submission, in his lightness, in his
          good humour, in his short-lived passion, in his easy contentment with
          hard bread and hard stones, in his ready sleep, in his fits and starts,
          altogether a true son of the land that gave him birth.

          The wide stare stared itself out for one while; the Sun went down in
          a red, green, golden glory; the stars came out in the heavens, and the
          fire-flies mimicked them in the lower air, as men may feebly imitate
          the goodness of a better order of beings; the long dusty roads and the
          interminable plains were in repose--and so deep a hush was on the sea,
          that it scarcely whispered of the time when it shall give up its dead.




'No more of yesterday's howling over yonder to-day, Sir; is there?'

'I have heard none.'

'Then you may be sure there _is_ none. When these people howl, they howl
to be heard.'

'Most people do, I suppose.'

'Ah! but these people are always howling. Never happy otherwise.'

'Do you mean the Marseilles people?'

'I mean the French people. They're always at it. As to Marseilles, we
know what Marseilles is. It sent the most insurrectionary tune into the
world that was ever composed. It couldn't exist without allonging and
marshonging to something or other--victory or death, or blazes, or
something.'

The speaker, with a whimsical good humour upon him all the time, looked
over the parapet-wall with the greatest disparagement of Marseilles; and
taking up a determined position by putting his hands in his pockets and
rattling his money at it, apostrophised it with a short laugh.

'Allong and marshong, indeed. It would be more creditable to you,
    I think, to let other people allong and marshong about their lawful
    business, instead of shutting 'em up in quarantine!'

    'Tiresome enough,' said the other. 'But we shall be out to-day.'

    'Out to-day!' repeated the first. 'It's almost an aggravation of the
    enormity, that we shall be out to-day. Out! What have we ever been in
    for?'

    'For no very strong reason, I must say. But as we come from the East,
    and as the East is the country of the plague--'

    'The plague!' repeated the other. 'That's my grievance. I have had the
    plague continually, ever since I have been here. I am like a sane man
    shut up in a madhouse; I can't stand the suspicion of the thing. I came
    here as well as ever I was in my life; but to suspect me of the plague
    is to give me the plague. And I have had it--and I have got it.'

    'You bear it very well, Mr Meagles,' said the second speaker, smiling.

    'No. If you knew the real state of the case, that's the last observation
    you would think of making. I have been waking up night after night, and
    saying, _now_ I have got it, _now_ it has developed itself, _now_ I am
    in for it, _now_ these fellows are making out their case for their
    precautions. Why, I'd as soon have a spit put through me, and be stuck
    upon a card in a collection of beetles, as lead the life I have been
    leading here.'

    'Well, Mr Meagles, say no more about it now it's over,' urged a cheerful
    feminine voice.

    'Over!' repeated Mr Meagles, who appeared (though without any
            ill-nature) to be in that peculiar state of mind in which the last word
    spoken by anybody else is a new injury. 'Over! and why should I say no
    more about it because it's over?'

    It was Mrs Meagles who had spoken to Mr Meagles; and Mrs Meagles was,
    like Mr Meagles, comely and healthy, with a pleasant English face which
    had been looking at homely things for five-and-fifty years or more, and
    shone with a bright reflection of them.

    'There! Never mind, Father, never mind!' said Mrs Meagles. 'For goodness
    sake content yourself with Pet.'

    'With Pet?' repeated Mr Meagles in his injured vein. Pet, however,
    being close behind him, touched him on the shoulder, and Mr Meagles
    immediately forgave Marseilles from the bottom of his heart.

    Pet was about twenty. A fair girl with rich brown hair hanging free in
    natural ringlets. A lovely girl, with a frank face, and wonderful eyes;
    so large, so soft, so bright, set to such perfection in her kind good
    head. She was round and fresh and dimpled and spoilt, and there was in
    Pet an air of timidity and dependence which was the best weakness in
    the world, and gave her the only crowning charm a girl so pretty and
    pleasant could have been without.

    'Now, I ask you,' said Mr Meagles in the blandest confidence, falling
    back a step himself, and handing his daughter a step forward to
    illustrate his question: 'I ask you simply, as between man and man,
    you know, DID you ever hear of such damned nonsense as putting Pet in
    quarantine?'

    'It has had the result of making even quarantine enjoyable.'

    'Come!' said Mr Meagles, 'that's something to be sure. I am obliged to
    you for that remark. Now, Pet, my darling, you had better go along with
    Mother and get ready for the boat. The officer of health, and a variety
    of humbugs in cocked hats, are coming off to let us out of this at last:
    and all we jail-birds are to breakfast together in something approaching
    to a Christian style again, before we take wing for our different
    destinations. Tattycoram, stick you close to your young mistress.'

    He spoke to a handsome girl with lustrous dark hair and eyes, and very
    neatly dressed, who replied with a half curtsey as she passed off in the
    train of Mrs Meagles and Pet. They crossed the bare scorched terrace
    all three together, and disappeared through a staring white archway.
    Mr Meagles's companion, a grave dark man of forty, still stood looking
    towards this archway after they were gone; until Mr Meagles tapped him
    on the arm.

    'I beg your pardon,' said he, starting.

    'Not at all,' said Mr Meagles.

    They took one silent turn backward and forward in the shade of the wall,
    getting, at the height on which the quarantine barracks are placed, what
    cool refreshment of sea breeze there was at seven in the morning. Mr
    Meagles's companion resumed the conversation.

    'May I ask you,' he said, 'what is the name of--'

    'Tattycoram?' Mr Meagles struck in. 'I have not the least idea.'

    'I thought,' said the other, 'that--'

    'Tattycoram?' suggested Mr Meagles again.

    'Thank you--that Tattycoram was a name; and I have several times
    wondered at the oddity of it.'

    'Why, the fact is,' said Mr Meagles, 'Mrs Meagles and myself are, you
    see, practical people.'

    'That you have frequently mentioned in the course of the agreeable and
    interesting conversations we have had together, walking up and down on
    these stones,' said the other, with a half smile breaking through the
    gravity of his dark face.

    'Practical people. So one day, five or six years ago now, when we took
    Pet to church at the Foundling--you have heard of the Foundling Hospital
    in London? Similar to the Institution for the Found Children in Paris?'

    'I have seen it.'

    'Well! One day when we took Pet to church there to hear the
    music--because, as practical people, it is the business of our lives to
    show her everything that we think can please her--Mother (my usual name
            for Mrs Meagles) began to cry so, that it was necessary to take her out.
    "What's the matter, Mother?" said I, when we had brought her a little
    round: "you are frightening Pet, my dear." "Yes, I know that, Father,"
    says Mother, "but I think it's through my loving her so much, that it
    ever came into my head." "That ever what came into your head, Mother?"
    "O dear, dear!" cried Mother, breaking out again, "when I saw all those
    children ranged tier above tier, and appealing from the father none of
    them has ever known on earth, to the great Father of us all in Heaven,
    I thought, does any wretched mother ever come here, and look among those
    young faces, wondering which is the poor child she brought into this
    forlorn world, never through all its life to know her love, her kiss,
    her face, her voice, even her name!" Now that was practical in Mother,
    and I told her so. I said, "Mother, that's what I call practical in you,
    my dear."'

    The other, not unmoved, assented.

    'So I said next day: Now, Mother, I have a proposition to make that I
    think you'll approve of. Let us take one of those same little children
    to be a little maid to Pet. We are practical people. So if we should
    find her temper a little defective, or any of her ways a little wide
    of ours, we shall know what we have to take into account. We shall
    know what an immense deduction must be made from all the influences and
    experiences that have formed us--no parents, no child-brother or sister,
    no individuality of home, no Glass Slipper, or Fairy Godmother. And
    that's the way we came by Tattycoram.'

    'And the name itself--'

    'By George!' said Mr Meagles, 'I was forgetting the name itself. Why,
    she was called in the Institution, Harriet Beadle--an arbitrary name,
    of course. Now, Harriet we changed into Hattey, and then into Tatty,
    because, as practical people, we thought even a playful name might be
    a new thing to her, and might have a softening and affectionate kind of
    effect, don't you see? As to Beadle, that I needn't say was wholly out
    of the question. If there is anything that is not to be tolerated on
    any terms, anything that is a type of Jack-in-office insolence and
    absurdity, anything that represents in coats, waistcoats, and big sticks
    our English holding on by nonsense after every one has found it out, it
    is a beadle. You haven't seen a beadle lately?'

    'As an Englishman who has been more than twenty years in China, no.'

    'Then,' said Mr Meagles, laying his forefinger on his companion's breast
    with great animation, 'don't you see a beadle, now, if you can help it.
    Whenever I see a beadle in full fig, coming down a street on a Sunday
    at the head of a charity school, I am obliged to turn and run away, or
    I should hit him. The name of Beadle being out of the question, and the
    originator of the Institution for these poor foundlings having been a
    blessed creature of the name of Coram, we gave that name to Pet's little
    maid. At one time she was Tatty, and at one time she was Coram, until we
    got into a way of mixing the two names together, and now she is always
    Tattycoram.'

    'Your daughter,' said the other, when they had taken another silent turn
    to and fro, and, after standing for a moment at the wall glancing down
    at the sea, had resumed their walk, 'is your only child, I know, Mr
    Meagles. May I ask you--in no impertinent curiosity, but because I have
    had so much pleasure in your society, may never in this labyrinth of
    a world exchange a quiet word with you again, and wish to preserve an
    accurate remembrance of you and yours--may I ask you, if I have not
    gathered from your good wife that you have had other children?'

    'No. No,' said Mr Meagles. 'Not exactly other children. One other
    child.'

    'I am afraid I have inadvertently touched upon a tender theme.'

    'Never mind,' said Mr Meagles. 'If I am grave about it, I am not at all
    sorrowful. It quiets me for a moment, but does not make me unhappy. Pet
    had a twin sister who died when we could just see her eyes--exactly like
    Pet's--above the table, as she stood on tiptoe holding by it.'

    'Ah! indeed, indeed!'

    'Yes, and being practical people, a result has gradually sprung up in
    the minds of Mrs Meagles and myself which perhaps you may--or perhaps
    you may not--understand. Pet and her baby sister were so exactly alike,
    and so completely one, that in our thoughts we have never been able
    to separate them since. It would be of no use to tell us that our dead
    child was a mere infant. We have changed that child according to the
    changes in the child spared to us and always with us. As Pet has grown,
    that child has grown; as Pet has become more sensible and womanly, her
    sister has become more sensible and womanly by just the same degrees.
    It would be as hard to convince me that if I was to pass into the other
    world to-morrow, I should not, through the mercy of God, be received
    there by a daughter, just like Pet, as to persuade me that Pet herself
    is not a reality at my side.'

    'I understand you,' said the other, gently.

    'As to her,' pursued her father, 'the sudden loss of her little picture
    and playfellow, and her early association with that mystery in which we
    all have our equal share, but which is not often so forcibly presented
    to a child, has necessarily had some influence on her character. Then,
    her mother and I were not young when we married, and Pet has always had
    a sort of grown-up life with us, though we have tried to adapt ourselves
    to her. We have been advised more than once when she has been a
    little ailing, to change climate and air for her as often as we
    could--especially at about this time of her life--and to keep her
    amused. So, as I have no need to stick at a bank-desk now (though I have
            been poor enough in my time I assure you, or I should have married Mrs
            Meagles long before), we go trotting about the world. This is how you
    found us staring at the Nile, and the Pyramids, and the Sphinxes, and
    the Desert, and all the rest of it; and this is how Tattycoram will be a
    greater traveller in course of time than Captain Cook.'

    'I thank you,' said the other, 'very heartily for your confidence.'

    'Don't mention it,' returned Mr Meagles, 'I am sure you are quite
    welcome. And now, Mr Clennam, perhaps I may ask you whether you have yet
    come to a decision where to go next?'

    'Indeed, no. I am such a waif and stray everywhere, that I am liable to
    be drifted where any current may set.'

    'It's extraordinary to me--if you'll excuse my freedom in saying
    so--that you don't go straight to London,' said Mr Meagles, in the tone
    of a confidential adviser.

    'Perhaps I shall.'

    'Ay! But I mean with a will.'

    'I have no will. That is to say,'--he coloured a little,--'next to none
    that I can put in action now. Trained by main force; broken, not bent;
    heavily ironed with an object on which I was never consulted and which
    was never mine; shipped away to the other end of the world before I
    was of age, and exiled there until my father's death there, a year ago;
    always grinding in a mill I always hated; what is to be expected from me
    in middle life? Will, purpose, hope? All those lights were extinguished
    before I could sound the words.'

    'Light 'em up again!' said Mr Meagles.

    'Ah! Easily said. I am the son, Mr Meagles, of a hard father and
    mother. I am the only child of parents who weighed, measured, and priced
    everything; for whom what could not be weighed, measured, and priced,
    had no existence. Strict people as the phrase is, professors of a stern
    religion, their very religion was a gloomy sacrifice of tastes and
    sympathies that were never their own, offered up as a part of a bargain
    for the security of their possessions. Austere faces, inexorable
    discipline, penance in this world and terror in the next--nothing
    graceful or gentle anywhere, and the void in my cowed heart
    everywhere--this was my childhood, if I may so misuse the word as to
    apply it to such a beginning of life.'

    'Really though?' said Mr Meagles, made very uncomfortable by the picture
    offered to his imagination. 'That was a tough commencement. But come!
    You must now study, and profit by, all that lies beyond it, like a
    practical man.'

    'If the people who are usually called practical, were practical in your
    direction--'

    'Why, so they are!' said Mr Meagles.

    'Are they indeed?'

    'Well, I suppose so,' returned Mr Meagles, thinking about it. 'Eh? One
    can but _be_ practical, and Mrs Meagles and myself are nothing else.'

    'My unknown course is easier and more helpful than I had expected to
    find it, then,' said Clennam, shaking his head with his grave smile.
    'Enough of me. Here is the boat.'

    The boat was filled with the cocked hats to which Mr Meagles entertained
    a national objection; and the wearers of those cocked hats landed
    and came up the steps, and all the impounded travellers congregated
    together. There was then a mighty production of papers on the part of
    the cocked hats, and a calling over of names, and great work of signing,
    sealing, stamping, inking, and sanding, with exceedingly blurred,
    gritty, and undecipherable results. Finally, everything was done
    according to rule, and the travellers were at liberty to depart
    whithersoever they would.

    They made little account of stare and glare, in the new pleasure of
    recovering their freedom, but flitted across the harbour in gay boats,
    and reassembled at a great hotel, whence the sun was excluded by closed
    lattices, and where bare paved floors, lofty ceilings, and resounding
    corridors tempered the intense heat. There, a great table in a great
    room was soon profusely covered with a superb repast; and the quarantine
    quarters became bare indeed, remembered among dainty dishes, southern
    fruits, cooled wines, flowers from Genoa, snow from the mountain tops,
    and all the colours of the rainbow flashing in the mirrors.

    'But I bear those monotonous walls no ill-will now,' said Mr Meagles.
    'One always begins to forgive a place as soon as it's left behind; I
    dare say a prisoner begins to relent towards his prison, after he is let
    out.'

    They were about thirty in company, and all talking; but necessarily in
    groups. Father and Mother Meagles sat with their daughter between them,
    the last three on one side of the table: on the opposite side sat Mr
    Clennam; a tall French gentleman with raven hair and beard, of a swart
    and terrible, not to say genteelly diabolical aspect, but who had
    shown himself the mildest of men; and a handsome young Englishwoman,
    travelling quite alone, who had a proud observant face, and had either
    withdrawn herself from the rest or been avoided by the rest--nobody,
    herself excepted perhaps, could have quite decided which. The rest
    of the party were of the usual materials: travellers on business, and
    travellers for pleasure; officers from India on leave; merchants in
    the Greek and Turkey trades; a clerical English husband in a meek
    strait-waistcoat, on a wedding trip with his young wife; a majestic
    English mama and papa, of the patrician order, with a family of three
    growing-up daughters, who were keeping a journal for the confusion of
    their fellow-creatures; and a deaf old English mother, tough in travel,
    with a very decidedly grown-up daughter indeed, which daughter went
    sketching about the universe in the expectation of ultimately toning
    herself off into the married state.

    The reserved Englishwoman took up Mr Meagles in his last remark.

    'Do you mean that a prisoner forgives his prison?' said she, slowly and
    with emphasis.


    'That was my speculation, Miss Wade. I don't pretend to know positively
    how a prisoner might feel. I never was one before.'

    'Mademoiselle doubts,' said the French gentleman in his own language,
    'it's being so easy to forgive?'

    'I do.'

    Pet had to translate this passage to Mr Meagles, who never by any
    accident acquired any knowledge whatever of the language of any country
    into which he travelled. 'Oh!' said he. 'Dear me! But that's a pity,
    isn't it?'

    'That I am not credulous?' said Miss Wade.

    'Not exactly that. Put it another way. That you can't believe it easy to
    forgive.'

    'My experience,' she quietly returned, 'has been correcting my belief
    in many respects, for some years. It is our natural progress, I have
    heard.'

    'Well, well! But it's not natural to bear malice, I hope?' said Mr
    Meagles, cheerily.

    'If I had been shut up in any place to pine and suffer, I should always
    hate that place and wish to burn it down, or raze it to the ground. I
    know no more.'

    'Strong, sir?' said Mr Meagles to the Frenchman; it being another of his
    habits to address individuals of all nations in idiomatic English, with
    a perfect conviction that they were bound to understand it somehow.
    'Rather forcible in our fair friend, you'll agree with me, I think?'

    The French gentleman courteously replied, 'Plait-il?' To which Mr
    Meagles returned with much satisfaction, 'You are right. My opinion.'

    The breakfast beginning by-and-by to languish, Mr Meagles made the
    company a speech. It was short enough and sensible enough, considering
    that it was a speech at all, and hearty. It merely went to the effect
    that as they had all been thrown together by chance, and had all
    preserved a good understanding together, and were now about to disperse,
    and were not likely ever to find themselves all together again, what
    could they do better than bid farewell to one another, and give one
    another good-speed in a simultaneous glass of cool champagne all round
    the table? It was done, and with a general shaking of hands the assembly
    broke up for ever.

    The solitary young lady all this time had said no more. She rose with
    the rest, and silently withdrew to a remote corner of the great room,
    where she sat herself on a couch in a window, seeming to watch the
    reflection of the water as it made a silver quivering on the bars of the
    lattice. She sat, turned away from the whole length of the apartment, as
    if she were lonely of her own haughty choice. And yet it would have been
    as difficult as ever to say, positively, whether she avoided the rest,
    or was avoided.

    The shadow in which she sat, falling like a gloomy veil across her
    forehead, accorded very well with the character of her beauty. One could
    hardly see the face, so still and scornful, set off by the arched
    dark eyebrows, and the folds of dark hair, without wondering what its
    expression would be if a change came over it. That it could soften or
    relent, appeared next to impossible. That it could deepen into anger or
    any extreme of defiance, and that it must change in that direction when
    it changed at all, would have been its peculiar impression upon most
    observers. It was dressed and trimmed into no ceremony of expression.
    Although not an open face, there was no pretence in it. 'I am
    self-contained and self-reliant; your opinion is nothing to me; I have
    no interest in you, care nothing for you, and see and hear you with
    indifference'--this it said plainly. It said so in the proud eyes, in
    the lifted nostril, in the handsome but compressed and even cruel mouth.
    Cover either two of those channels of expression, and the third would
    have said so still. Mask them all, and the mere turn of the head would
    have shown an unsubduable nature.

    Pet had moved up to her (she had been the subject of remark among her
            family and Mr Clennam, who were now the only other occupants of the
            room), and was standing at her side.

    'Are you'--she turned her eyes, and Pet faltered--'expecting any one to
    meet you here, Miss Wade?'

    'I? No.'

    'Father is sending to the Poste Restante. Shall he have the pleasure of
    directing the messenger to ask if there are any letters for you?'

    'I thank him, but I know there can be none.'

    'We are afraid,' said Pet, sitting down beside her, shyly and half
    tenderly, 'that you will feel quite deserted when we are all gone.'

    'Indeed!'

    'Not,' said Pet, apologetically and embarrassed by her eyes, 'not, of
    course, that we are any company to you, or that we have been able to be
    so, or that we thought you wished it.'

    'I have not intended to make it understood that I did wish it.'

    'No. Of course. But--in short,' said Pet, timidly touching her hand as
    it lay impassive on the sofa between them, 'will you not allow Father to
    tender you any slight assistance or service? He will be very glad.'

    'Very glad,' said Mr Meagles, coming forward with his wife and Clennam.
    'Anything short of speaking the language, I shall be delighted to
    undertake, I am sure.'

    'I am obliged to you,' she returned, 'but my arrangements are made, and
    I prefer to go my own way in my own manner.'

    '_Do_ you?' said Mr Meagles to himself, as he surveyed her with a puzzled
    look. 'Well! There's character in that, too.'

    'I am not much used to the society of young ladies, and I am afraid I
    may not show my appreciation of it as others might. A pleasant journey
    to you. Good-bye!'

    She would not have put out her hand, it seemed, but that Mr Meagles put
    out his so straight before her that she could not pass it. She put hers
    in it, and it lay there just as it had lain upon the couch.

    'Good-bye!' said Mr Meagles. 'This is the last good-bye upon the list,
    for Mother and I have just said it to Mr Clennam here, and he only waits
    to say it to Pet. Good-bye! We may never meet again.'

    'In our course through life we shall meet the people who are coming to
    meet _us_, from many strange places and by many strange roads,' was the
    composed reply; 'and what it is set to us to do to them, and what it is
    set to them to do to us, will all be done.'

    There was something in the manner of these words that jarred upon Pet's
    ear. It implied that what was to be done was necessarily evil, and it
    caused her to say in a whisper, 'O Father!' and to shrink childishly, in
    her spoilt way, a little closer to him. This was not lost on the
    speaker.

    'Your pretty daughter,' she said, 'starts to think of such things. Yet,'
    looking full upon her, 'you may be sure that there are men and women
    already on their road, who have their business to do with _you_, and who
    will do it. Of a certainty they will do it. They may be coming hundreds,
    thousands, of miles over the sea there; they may be close at hand now;
they may be coming, for anything you know or anything you can do to
prevent it, from the vilest sweepings of this very town.'

With the coldest of farewells, and with a certain worn expression on her
beauty that gave it, though scarcely yet in its prime, a wasted look,
       she left the room.

       Now, there were many stairs and passages that she had to traverse in
       passing from that part of the spacious house to the chamber she had
       secured for her own occupation. When she had almost completed the
       journey, and was passing along the gallery in which her room was, she
       heard an angry sound of muttering and sobbing. A door stood open, and
       within she saw the attendant upon the girl she had just left; the maid
       with the curious name.

       She stood still, to look at this maid. A sullen, passionate girl! Her
       rich black hair was all about her face, her face was flushed and hot,
       and as she sobbed and raged, she plucked at her lips with an unsparing
       hand.

       'Selfish brutes!' said the girl, sobbing and heaving between whiles.
       'Not caring what becomes of me! Leaving me here hungry and thirsty and
       tired, to starve, for anything they care! Beasts! Devils! Wretches!'

       'My poor girl, what is the matter?'

       She looked up suddenly, with reddened eyes, and with her hands
       suspended, in the act of pinching her neck, freshly disfigured with
       great scarlet blots. 'It's nothing to you what's the matter. It don't
       signify to any one.'

       'O yes it does; I am sorry to see you so.'

       'You are not sorry,' said the girl. 'You are glad. You know you are
       glad. I never was like this but twice over in the quarantine yonder; and
       both times you found me. I am afraid of you.'

       'Afraid of me?'

       'Yes. You seem to come like my own anger, my own malice, my
       own--whatever it is--I don't know what it is. But I am ill-used, I am
       ill-used, I am ill-used!' Here the sobs and the tears, and the tearing
       hand, which had all been suspended together since the first surprise,
       went on together anew.

       The visitor stood looking at her with a strange attentive smile. It was
       wonderful to see the fury of the contest in the girl, and the bodily
       struggle she made as if she were rent by the Demons of old.

       'I am younger than she is by two or three years, and yet it's me that
       looks after her, as if I was old, and it's she that's always petted and
       called Baby! I detest the name. I hate her! They make a fool of her,
       they spoil her. She thinks of nothing but herself, she thinks no more of
       me than if I was a stock and a stone!' So the girl went on.

       'You must have patience.'

       'I _won't_ have patience!'

       'If they take much care of themselves, and little or none of you, you
       must not mind it.'

       I _will_ mind it.'

       'Hush! Be more prudent. You forget your dependent position.'

       'I don't care for that. I'll run away. I'll do some mischief. I won't
       bear it; I can't bear it; I shall die if I try to bear it!'

       The observer stood with her hand upon her own bosom, looking at the
       girl, as one afflicted with a diseased part might curiously watch the
       dissection and exposition of an analogous case.

       The girl raged and battled with all the force of her youth and fulness
       of life, until by little and little her passionate exclamations trailed
       off into broken murmurs as if she were in pain. By corresponding degrees
       she sank into a chair, then upon her knees, then upon the ground beside
       the bed, drawing the coverlet with her, half to hide her shamed head and
       wet hair in it, and half, as it seemed, to embrace it, rather than have
       nothing to take to her repentant breast.

       'Go away from me, go away from me! When my temper comes upon me, I
       am mad. I know I might keep it off if I only tried hard enough, and
       sometimes I do try hard enough, and at other times I don't and won't.
       What have I said! I knew when I said it, it was all lies. They think I
       am being taken care of somewhere, and have all I want. They are nothing
       but good to me. I love them dearly; no people could ever be kinder to a
       thankless creature than they always are to me. Do, do go away, for I am
       afraid of you. I am afraid of myself when I feel my temper coming, and I
       am as much afraid of you. Go away from me, and let me pray and cry
       myself better!'

       The day passed on; and again the wide stare stared itself out; and the
       hot night was on Marseilles; and through it the caravan of the morning,
       all dispersed, went their appointed ways. And thus ever by day and
       night, under the sun and under the stars, climbing the dusty hills and
       toiling along the weary plains, journeying by land and journeying by
       sea, coming and going so strangely, to meet and to act and react on one
       another, move all we restless travellers through the pilgrimage of life.




It was a Sunday evening in London, gloomy, close, and stale. Maddening
church bells of all degrees of dissonance, sharp and flat, cracked
and clear, fast and slow, made the brick-and-mortar echoes hideous.
Melancholy streets, in a penitential garb of soot, steeped the souls of
the people who were condemned to look at them out of windows, in dire
despondency. In every thoroughfare, up almost every alley, and down
almost every turning, some doleful bell was throbbing, jerking, tolling,
       as if the Plague were in the city and the dead-carts were going round.
       Everything was bolted and barred that could by possibility furnish
       relief to an overworked people. No pictures, no unfamiliar animals, no
       rare plants or flowers, no natural or artificial wonders of the ancient
       world--all _taboo_ with that enlightened strictness, that the ugly South
       Sea gods in the British Museum might have supposed themselves at home
       again. Nothing to see but streets, streets, streets. Nothing to breathe
       but streets, streets, streets. Nothing to change the brooding mind,
       or raise it up. Nothing for the spent toiler to do, but to compare the
       monotony of his seventh day with the monotony of his six days, think
       what a weary life he led, and make the best of it--or the worst,
       according to the probabilities.

       At such a happy time, so propitious to the interests of religion and
       morality, Mr Arthur Clennam, newly arrived from Marseilles by way of
       Dover, and by Dover coach the Blue-eyed Maid, sat in the window of a
       coffee-house on Ludgate Hill. Ten thousand responsible houses surrounded
       him, frowning as heavily on the streets they composed, as if they were
       every one inhabited by the ten young men of the Calender's story, who
       blackened their faces and bemoaned their miseries every night. Fifty
       thousand lairs surrounded him where people lived so unwholesomely that
       fair water put into their crowded rooms on Saturday night, would be
       corrupt on Sunday morning; albeit my lord, their county member, was
       amazed that they failed to sleep in company with their butcher's meat.
       Miles of close wells and pits of houses, where the inhabitants gasped
       for air, stretched far away towards every point of the compass. Through
       the heart of the town a deadly sewer ebbed and flowed, in the place of
       a fine fresh river. What secular want could the million or so of
       human beings whose daily labour, six days in the week, lay among these
       Arcadian objects, from the sweet sameness of which they had no escape
       between the cradle and the grave--what secular want could they possibly
       have upon their seventh day? Clearly they could want nothing but a
       stringent policeman.

       Mr Arthur Clennam sat in the window of the coffee-house on Ludgate Hill,
       counting one of the neighbouring bells, making sentences and burdens of
       songs out of it in spite of himself, and wondering how many sick
       people it might be the death of in the course of the year. As the hour
       approached, its changes of measure made it more and more exasperating.
       At the quarter, it went off into a condition of deadly-lively
       importunity, urging the populace in a voluble manner to Come to church,
       Come to church, Come to church! At the ten minutes, it became aware
       that the congregation would be scanty, and slowly hammered out in low
       spirits, They _won't_ come, they _won't_ come, they _won't_ come! At the
       five minutes, it abandoned hope, and shook every house in the
       neighbourhood for three hundred seconds, with one dismal swing per
       second, as a groan of despair.

       'Thank Heaven!' said Clennam, when the hour struck, and the bell
       stopped.

       But its sound had revived a long train of miserable Sundays, and the
       procession would not stop with the bell, but continued to march on.
       'Heaven forgive me,' said he, 'and those who trained me. How I have
       hated this day!'

       There was the dreary Sunday of his childhood, when he sat with his hands
       before him, scared out of his senses by a horrible tract which commenced
       business with the poor child by asking him in its title, why he was
       going to Perdition?--a piece of curiosity that he really, in a frock and
       drawers, was not in a condition to satisfy--and which, for the further
       attraction of his infant mind, had a parenthesis in every other line
       with some such hiccupping reference as 2 Ep. Thess. c. iii, v. 6 &
       7. There was the sleepy Sunday of his boyhood, when, like a military
       deserter, he was marched to chapel by a picquet of teachers three times
       a day, morally handcuffed to another boy; and when he would willingly
       have bartered two meals of indigestible sermon for another ounce or
       two of inferior mutton at his scanty dinner in the flesh. There was the
       interminable Sunday of his nonage; when his mother, stern of face and
       unrelenting of heart, would sit all day behind a Bible--bound, like her
       own construction of it, in the hardest, barest, and straitest boards,
       with one dinted ornament on the cover like the drag of a chain, and a
       wrathful sprinkling of red upon the edges of the leaves--as if it, of
       all books! were a fortification against sweetness of temper, natural
       affection, and gentle intercourse. There was the resentful Sunday of a
       little later, when he sat down glowering and glooming through the tardy
       length of the day, with a sullen sense of injury in his heart, and no
       more real knowledge of the beneficent history of the New Testament than
       if he had been bred among idolaters. There was a legion of Sundays,
       all days of unserviceable bitterness and mortification, slowly passing
       before him.

       'Beg pardon, sir,' said a brisk waiter, rubbing the table. 'Wish see
       bed-room?'

       'Yes. I have just made up my mind to do it.'

       'Chaymaid!' cried the waiter. 'Gelen box num seven wish see room!'

       'Stay!' said Clennam, rousing himself. 'I was not thinking of what I
       said; I answered mechanically. I am not going to sleep here. I am going
       home.'

       'Deed, sir? Chaymaid! Gelen box num seven, not go sleep here, gome.'

       He sat in the same place as the day died, looking at the dull houses
       opposite, and thinking, if the disembodied spirits of former inhabitants
       were ever conscious of them, how they must pity themselves for their old
       places of imprisonment. Sometimes a face would appear behind the dingy
       glass of a window, and would fade away into the gloom as if it had seen
       enough of life and had vanished out of it. Presently the rain began to
       fall in slanting lines between him and those houses, and people began
       to collect under cover of the public passage opposite, and to look out
       hopelessly at the sky as the rain dropped thicker and faster. Then wet
       umbrellas began to appear, draggled skirts, and mud. What the mud had
       been doing with itself, or where it came from, who could say? But it
       seemed to collect in a moment, as a crowd will, and in five minutes to
       have splashed all the sons and daughters of Adam. The lamplighter was
       going his rounds now; and as the fiery jets sprang up under his touch,
       one might have fancied them astonished at being suffered to introduce
       any show of brightness into such a dismal scene.

       Mr Arthur Clennam took up his hat and buttoned his coat, and walked out.
       In the country, the rain would have developed a thousand fresh scents,
       and every drop would have had its bright association with some beautiful
       form of growth or life. In the city, it developed only foul stale
       smells, and was a sickly, lukewarm, dirt-stained, wretched addition to
       the gutters.

       He crossed by St Paul's and went down, at a long angle, almost to the
       water's edge, through some of the crooked and descending streets which
       lie (and lay more crookedly and closely then) between the river and
       Cheapside. Passing, now the mouldy hall of some obsolete Worshipful
       Company, now the illuminated windows of a Congregationless Church that
       seemed to be waiting for some adventurous Belzoni to dig it out and
       discover its history; passing silent warehouses and wharves, and here
       and there a narrow alley leading to the river, where a wretched little
       bill, FOUND DROWNED, was weeping on the wet wall; he came at last to the
       house he sought. An old brick house, so dingy as to be all but black,
       standing by itself within a gateway. Before it, a square court-yard
       where a shrub or two and a patch of grass were as rank (which is saying
               much) as the iron railings enclosing them were rusty; behind it,
       a jumble of roots. It was a double house, with long, narrow,
       heavily-framed windows. Many years ago, it had had it in its mind to
       slide down sideways; it had been propped up, however, and was leaning on
       some half-dozen gigantic crutches: which gymnasium for the neighbouring
       cats, weather-stained, smoke-blackened, and overgrown with weeds,
       appeared in these latter days to be no very sure reliance.

       'Nothing changed,' said the traveller, stopping to look round. 'Dark and
       miserable as ever. A light in my mother's window, which seems never to
       have been extinguished since I came home twice a year from school, and
       dragged my box over this pavement. Well, well, well!'

       He went up to the door, which had a projecting canopy in carved work
       of festooned jack-towels and children's heads with water on the brain,
       designed after a once-popular monumental pattern, and knocked. A
       shuffling step was soon heard on the stone floor of the hall, and the
       door was opened by an old man, bent and dried, but with keen eyes.

       He had a candle in his hand, and he held it up for a moment to assist
       his keen eyes. 'Ah, Mr Arthur?' he said, without any emotion, 'you are
       come at last? Step in.'

       Mr Arthur stepped in and shut the door.

       'Your figure is filled out, and set,' said the old man, turning to look
       at him with the light raised again, and shaking his head; 'but you don't
       come up to your father in my opinion. Nor yet your mother.'

       'How is my mother?'

       'She is as she always is now. Keeps her room when not actually
       bedridden, and hasn't been out of it fifteen times in as many years,
       Arthur.' They had walked into a spare, meagre dining-room. The old man
       had put the candlestick upon the table, and, supporting his right elbow
       with his left hand, was smoothing his leathern jaws while he looked at
       the visitor. The visitor offered his hand. The old man took it coldly
       enough, and seemed to prefer his jaws, to which he returned as soon as
       he could.

       'I doubt if your mother will approve of your coming home on the Sabbath,
       Arthur,' he said, shaking his head warily.

       'You wouldn't have me go away again?'

       'Oh! I? I? I am not the master. It's not what _I_ would have. I have
       stood between your father and mother for a number of years. I don't
       pretend to stand between your mother and you.'

       'Will you tell her that I have come home?'

       'Yes, Arthur, yes. Oh, to be sure! I'll tell her that you have come
       home. Please to wait here. You won't find the room changed.' He took
       another candle from a cupboard, lighted it, left the first on the table,
       and went upon his errand. He was a short, bald old man, in a
       high-shouldered black coat and waistcoat, drab breeches, and long drab
       gaiters. He might, from his dress, have been either clerk or servant,
       and in fact had long been both. There was nothing about him in the way
       of decoration but a watch, which was lowered into the depths of its
       proper pocket by an old black ribbon, and had a tarnished copper key
       moored above it, to show where it was sunk. His head was awry, and
       he had a one-sided, crab-like way with him, as if his foundations had
       yielded at about the same time as those of the house, and he ought to
       have been propped up in a similar manner.

       'How weak am I,' said Arthur Clennam, when he was gone, 'that I could
       shed tears at this reception! I, who have never experienced anything
       else; who have never expected anything else.'

       He not only could, but did. It was the momentary yielding of a nature
       that had been disappointed from the dawn of its perceptions, but had not
       quite given up all its hopeful yearnings yet. He subdued it, took up the
       candle, and examined the room. The old articles of furniture were in
       their old places; the Plagues of Egypt, much the dimmer for the fly and
       smoke plagues of London, were framed and glazed upon the walls. There
       was the old cellaret with nothing in it, lined with lead, like a sort of
       coffin in compartments; there was the old dark closet, also with nothing
       in it, of which he had been many a time the sole contents, in days of
       punishment, when he had regarded it as the veritable entrance to that
       bourne to which the tract had found him galloping. There was the large,
       hard-featured clock on the sideboard, which he used to see bending its
       figured brows upon him with a savage joy when he was behind-hand with
       his lessons, and which, when it was wound up once a week with an iron
       handle, used to sound as if it were growling in ferocious anticipation
       of the miseries into which it would bring him. But here was the old man
       come back, saying, 'Arthur, I'll go before and light you.'

       Arthur followed him up the staircase, which was panelled off into spaces
       like so many mourning tablets, into a dim bed-chamber, the floor of
       which had gradually so sunk and settled, that the fire-place was in a
       dell. On a black bier-like sofa in this hollow, propped up behind with
       one great angular black bolster like the block at a state execution in
       the good old times, sat his mother in a widow's dress.

       She and his father had been at variance from his earliest remembrance.
       To sit speechless himself in the midst of rigid silence, glancing in
       dread from the one averted face to the other, had been the peacefullest
       occupation of his childhood. She gave him one glassy kiss, and four
       stiff fingers muffled in worsted. This embrace concluded, he sat down on
       the opposite side of her little table. There was a fire in the grate,
       as there had been night and day for fifteen years. There was a kettle on
       the hob, as there had been night and day for fifteen years. There was a
       little mound of damped ashes on the top of the fire, and another little
       mound swept together under the grate, as there had been night and day
       for fifteen years. There was a smell of black dye in the airless room,
       which the fire had been drawing out of the crape and stuff of the
       widow's dress for fifteen months, and out of the bier-like sofa for
       fifteen years.

       'Mother, this is a change from your old active habits.'

       'The world has narrowed to these dimensions, Arthur,' she replied,
       glancing round the room. 'It is well for me that I never set my heart
       upon its hollow vanities.'

       The old influence of her presence and her stern strong voice, so
       gathered about her son, that he felt conscious of a renewal of the timid
       chill and reserve of his childhood.

       'Do you never leave your room, mother?'

       'What with my rheumatic affection, and what with its attendant debility
       or nervous weakness--names are of no matter now--I have lost the use
       of my limbs. I never leave my room. I have not been outside this door
       for--tell him for how long,' she said, speaking over her shoulder.

       'A dozen year next Christmas,' returned a cracked voice out of the
       dimness behind.

       'Is that Affery?' said Arthur, looking towards it.

       The cracked voice replied that it was Affery: and an old woman came
       forward into what doubtful light there was, and kissed her hand once;
       then subsided again into the dimness.

       'I am able,' said Mrs Clennam, with a slight motion of her
       worsted-muffled right hand toward a chair on wheels, standing before a
       tall writing cabinet close shut up, 'I am able to attend to my business
       duties, and I am thankful for the privilege. It is a great privilege.
       But no more of business on this day. It is a bad night, is it not?'

       'Yes, mother.'

       'Does it snow?'

       'Snow, mother? And we only yet in September?'

       'All seasons are alike to me,' she returned, with a grim kind of
       luxuriousness. 'I know nothing of summer and winter, shut up here.
       The Lord has been pleased to put me beyond all that.' With her cold grey
       eyes and her cold grey hair, and her immovable face, as stiff as the
       folds of her stony head-dress,--her being beyond the reach of the
       seasons seemed but a fit sequence to her being beyond the reach of all
       changing emotions.

       On her little table lay two or three books, her handkerchief, a pair of
       steel spectacles newly taken off, and an old-fashioned gold watch in a
       heavy double case. Upon this last object her son's eyes and her own now
       rested together.

       'I see that you received the packet I sent you on my father's death,
       safely, mother.'

       'You see.'

       'I never knew my father to show so much anxiety on any subject, as that
       his watch should be sent straight to you.'

       'I keep it here as a remembrance of your father.'

       'It was not until the last, that he expressed the wish; when he could
       only put his hand upon it, and very indistinctly say to me "your
       mother." A moment before, I thought him wandering in his mind, as he
       had been for many hours--I think he had no consciousness of pain in his
       short illness--when I saw him turn himself in his bed and try to open
       it.'

       'Was your father, then, not wandering in his mind when he tried to open
       it?'

       'No. He was quite sensible at that time.'

       Mrs Clennam shook her head; whether in dismissal of the deceased or
       opposing herself to her son's opinion, was not clearly expressed.

       'After my father's death I opened it myself, thinking there might be,
       for anything I knew, some memorandum there. However, as I need not tell
       you, mother, there was nothing but the old silk watch-paper worked in
       beads, which you found (no doubt) in its place between the cases, where
       I found and left it.'

       Mrs Clennam signified assent; then added, 'No more of business on this
       day,' and then added, 'Affery, it is nine o'clock.'

       Upon this, the old woman cleared the little table, went out of the room,
       and quickly returned with a tray on which was a dish of little rusks and
       a small precise pat of butter, cool, symmetrical, white, and plump. The
       old man who had been standing by the door in one attitude during the
       whole interview, looking at the mother up-stairs as he had looked at the
       son down-stairs, went out at the same time, and, after a longer absence,
       returned with another tray on which was the greater part of a bottle
       of port wine (which, to judge by his panting, he had brought from the
               cellar), a lemon, a sugar-basin, and a spice box. With these materials
       and the aid of the kettle, he filled a tumbler with a hot and
       odorous mixture, measured out and compounded with as much nicety as a
       physician's prescription. Into this mixture Mrs Clennam dipped certain
       of the rusks, and ate them; while the old woman buttered certain other
       of the rusks, which were to be eaten alone. When the invalid had eaten
       all the rusks and drunk all the mixture, the two trays were removed;
       and the books and the candle, watch, handkerchief, and spectacles were
       replaced upon the table. She then put on the spectacles and read certain
       passages aloud from a book--sternly, fiercely, wrathfully--praying that
       her enemies (she made them by her tone and manner expressly hers) might
       be put to the edge of the sword, consumed by fire, smitten by plagues
       and leprosy, that their bones might be ground to dust, and that they
       might be utterly exterminated. As she read on, years seemed to fall
       away from her son like the imaginings of a dream, and all the old dark
       horrors of his usual preparation for the sleep of an innocent child to
       overshadow him.

       She shut the book and remained for a little time with her face shaded by
       her hand. So did the old man, otherwise still unchanged in attitude; so,
       probably, did the old woman in her dimmer part of the room. Then the
       sick woman was ready for bed.

       'Good night, Arthur. Affery will see to your accommodation. Only touch
       me, for my hand is tender.' He touched the worsted muffling of her
       hand--that was nothing; if his mother had been sheathed in brass there
       would have been no new barrier between them--and followed the old man
       and woman down-stairs.

       The latter asked him, when they were alone together among the heavy
       shadows of the dining-room, would he have some supper?

       'No, Affery, no supper.'

       'You shall if you like,' said Affery. 'There's her tomorrow's partridge
       in the larder--her first this year; say the word and I'll cook it.'

       No, he had not long dined, and could eat nothing.

       'Have something to drink, then,' said Affery; 'you shall have some of
       her bottle of port, if you like. I'll tell Jeremiah that you ordered me
       to bring it you.'

       No; nor would he have that, either.

       'It's no reason, Arthur,' said the old woman, bending over him to
       whisper, 'that because I am afeared of my life of 'em, you should be.
       You've got half the property, haven't you?'

       'Yes, yes.'

       'Well then, don't you be cowed. You're clever, Arthur, an't you?'

       He nodded, as she seemed to expect an answer in the affirmative.

       'Then stand up against them! She's awful clever, and none but a clever
       one durst say a word to her. _He's_ a clever one--oh, he's a clever
       one!--and he gives it her when he has a mind to't, he does!'

       'Your husband does?'

       'Does? It makes me shake from head to foot, to hear him give it her. My
       husband, Jeremiah Flintwinch, can conquer even your mother. What can he
       be but a clever one to do that!'

       His shuffling footstep coming towards them caused her to retreat to the
       other end of the room. Though a tall, hard-favoured, sinewy old woman,
       who in her youth might have enlisted in the Foot Guards without much
       fear of discovery, she collapsed before the little keen-eyed crab-like
       old man.

       'Now, Affery,' said he, 'now, woman, what are you doing? Can't you find
       Master Arthur something or another to pick at?'

       Master Arthur repeated his recent refusal to pick at anything.

       'Very well, then,' said the old man; 'make his bed. Stir yourself.' His
       neck was so twisted that the knotted ends of his white cravat usually
       dangled under one ear; his natural acerbity and energy, always
       contending with a second nature of habitual repression, gave his
       features a swollen and suffused look; and altogether, he had a weird
       appearance of having hanged himself at one time or other, and of having
       gone about ever since, halter and all, exactly as some timely hand had
       cut him down.

       'You'll have bitter words together to-morrow, Arthur; you and your
       mother,' said Jeremiah. 'Your having given up the business on your
       father's death--which she suspects, though we have left it to you to
       tell her--won't go off smoothly.'

       'I have given up everything in life for the business, and the time came
       for me to give up that.'

       'Good!' cried Jeremiah, evidently meaning Bad. 'Very good! only don't
       expect me to stand between your mother and you, Arthur. I stood between
       your mother and your father, fending off this, and fending off that, and
       getting crushed and pounded betwixt em; and I've done with such work.'

       'You will never be asked to begin it again for me, Jeremiah.'

       'Good. I'm glad to hear it; because I should have had to decline it, if
       I had been. That's enough--as your mother says--and more than enough of
       such matters on a Sabbath night. Affery, woman, have you found what you
       want yet?'

       She had been collecting sheets and blankets from a press, and hastened
       to gather them up, and to reply, 'Yes, Jeremiah.' Arthur Clennam helped
       her by carrying the load himself, wished the old man good night, and
       went up-stairs with her to the top of the house.

       They mounted up and up, through the musty smell of an old close house,
       little used, to a large garret bed-room. Meagre and spare, like all the
       other rooms, it was even uglier and grimmer than the rest, by being the
       place of banishment for the worn-out furniture. Its movables were ugly
       old chairs with worn-out seats, and ugly old chairs without any seats;
       a threadbare patternless carpet, a maimed table, a crippled wardrobe,
       a lean set of fire-irons like the skeleton of a set deceased, a
       washing-stand that looked as if it had stood for ages in a hail of
       dirty soapsuds, and a bedstead with four bare atomies of posts, each
       terminating in a spike, as if for the dismal accommodation of lodgers
       who might prefer to impale themselves. Arthur opened the long low
       window, and looked out upon the old blasted and blackened forest of
       chimneys, and the old red glare in the sky, which had seemed to him once
       upon a time but a nightly reflection of the fiery environment that was
       presented to his childish fancy in all directions, let it look where it
       would.

       He drew in his head again, sat down at the bedside, and looked on at
       Affery Flintwinch making the bed.

       'Affery, you were not married when I went away.'

       She screwed her mouth into the form of saying 'No,' shook her head, and
       proceeded to get a pillow into its case.

       'How did it happen?'

       'Why, Jeremiah, o' course,' said Affery, with an end of the pillow-case
       between her teeth.

       'Of course he proposed it, but how did it all come about? I should have
       thought that neither of you would have married; least of all should I
       have thought of your marrying each other.'

       'No more should I,' said Mrs Flintwinch, tying the pillow tightly in its
       case.

       'That's what I mean. When did you begin to think otherwise?'

       'Never begun to think otherwise at all,' said Mrs Flintwinch.

       Seeing, as she patted the pillow into its place on the bolster, that he
       was still looking at her as if waiting for the rest of her reply,
       she gave it a great poke in the middle, and asked, 'How could I help
       myself?'

       'How could you help yourself from being married!'

       'O' course,' said Mrs Flintwinch. 'It was no doing o' mine. I'd never
       thought of it. I'd got something to do, without thinking, indeed! She
       kept me to it (as well as he) when she could go about, and she could go
       about then.'

       'Well?'

       'Well?' echoed Mrs Flintwinch. 'That's what I said myself. Well! What's
       the use of considering? If them two clever ones have made up their minds
       to it, what's left for _me_ to do? Nothing.'

       'Was it my mother's project, then?'

       'The Lord bless you, Arthur, and forgive me the wish!' cried Affery,
       speaking always in a low tone. 'If they hadn't been both of a mind in
       it, how could it ever have been? Jeremiah never courted me; t'ant likely
       that he would, after living in the house with me and ordering me
       about for as many years as he'd done. He said to me one day, he said,
       "Affery," he said, "now I am going to tell you something. What do you
       think of the name of Flintwinch?" "What do I think of it?" I says.
       "Yes," he said, "because you're going to take it," he said. "Take it?" I
       says. "Jere-_mi_-ah?" Oh! he's a clever one!'

       Mrs Flintwinch went on to spread the upper sheet over the bed, and the
       blanket over that, and the counterpane over that, as if she had quite
       concluded her story.

       'Well?' said Arthur again.

       'Well?' echoed Mrs Flintwinch again. 'How could I help myself? He said
       to me, "Affery, you and me must be married, and I'll tell you why. She's
       failing in health, and she'll want pretty constant attendance up in
       her room, and we shall have to be much with her, and there'll be nobody
       about now but ourselves when we're away from her, and altogether it will
       be more convenient. She's of my opinion," he said, "so if you'll put
       your bonnet on next Monday morning at eight, we'll get it over."' Mrs
       Flintwinch tucked up the bed.

       'Well?'

       'Well?' repeated Mrs Flintwinch, 'I think so! I sits me down and says
       it. Well!--Jeremiah then says to me, "As to banns, next Sunday being the
       third time of asking (for I've put 'em up a fortnight), is my reason for
       naming Monday. She'll speak to you about it herself, and now she'll find
       you prepared, Affery." That same day she spoke to me, and she said, "So,
       Affery, I understand that you and Jeremiah are going to be married. I
       am glad of it, and so are you, with reason. It is a very good thing for
       you, and very welcome under the circumstances to me. He is a sensible
       man, and a trustworthy man, and a persevering man, and a pious man."
       What could I say when it had come to that? Why, if it had been--a
       smothering instead of a wedding,' Mrs Flintwinch cast about in her mind
       with great pains for this form of expression, 'I couldn't have said a
       word upon it, against them two clever ones.'

       'In good faith, I believe so.'

       'And so you may, Arthur.'

       'Affery, what girl was that in my mother's room just now?'

       'Girl?' said Mrs Flintwinch in a rather sharp key.

       'It was a girl, surely, whom I saw near you--almost hidden in the dark
       corner?'

       'Oh! She? Little Dorrit? _She_'s nothing; she's a whim of--hers.' It was a
       peculiarity of Affery Flintwinch that she never spoke of Mrs Clennam
       by name. 'But there's another sort of girls than that about. Have you
       forgot your old sweetheart? Long and long ago, I'll be bound.'

       'I suffered enough from my mother's separating us, to remember her.
       I recollect her very well.'

       'Have you got another?'

       'No.'

       'Here's news for you, then. She's well to do now, and a widow. And if
       you like to have her, why you can.'

       'And how do you know that, Affery?'

       'Them two clever ones have been speaking about it.--There's Jeremiah on
       the stairs!' She was gone in a moment.

       Mrs Flintwinch had introduced into the web that his mind was busily
       weaving, in that old workshop where the loom of his youth had stood, the
       last thread wanting to the pattern. The airy folly of a boy's love had
       found its way even into that house, and he had been as wretched under
       its hopelessness as if the house had been a castle of romance. Little
       more than a week ago at Marseilles, the face of the pretty girl from
       whom he had parted with regret, had had an unusual interest for him, and
       a tender hold upon him, because of some resemblance, real or imagined,
       to this first face that had soared out of his gloomy life into the
       bright glories of fancy. He leaned upon the sill of the long low window,
       and looking out upon the blackened forest of chimneys again, began to
       dream; for it had been the uniform tendency of this man's life--so much
       was wanting in it to think about, so much that might have been better
       directed and happier to speculate upon--to make him a dreamer, after
       all.




When Mrs Flintwinch dreamed, she usually dreamed, unlike the son of her
old mistress, with her eyes shut. She had a curiously vivid dream that
night, and before she had left the son of her old mistress many hours.
In fact it was not at all like a dream; it was so very real in every
respect. It happened in this wise.

The bed-chamber occupied by Mr and Mrs Flintwinch was within a few paces
of that to which Mrs Clennam had been so long confined. It was not on
the same floor, for it was a room at the side of the house, which was
approached by a steep descent of a few odd steps, diverging from the
main staircase nearly opposite to Mrs Clennam's door. It could scarcely
be said to be within call, the walls, doors, and panelling of the old
place were so cumbrous; but it was within easy reach, in any undress,
      at any hour of the night, in any temperature. At the head of the bed
      and within a foot of Mrs Flintwinch's ear, was a bell, the line of which
      hung ready to Mrs Clennam's hand. Whenever this bell rang, up started
      Affery, and was in the sick room before she was awake.

      Having got her mistress into bed, lighted her lamp, and given her good
      night, Mrs Flintwinch went to roost as usual, saving that her lord had
      not yet appeared. It was her lord himself who became--unlike the
      last theme in the mind, according to the observation of most
      philosophers--the subject of Mrs Flintwinch's dream.

      It seemed to her that she awoke after sleeping some hours, and found
      Jeremiah not yet abed. That she looked at the candle she had left
      burning, and, measuring the time like King Alfred the Great, was
      confirmed by its wasted state in her belief that she had been asleep for
      some considerable period. That she arose thereupon, muffled herself up
      in a wrapper, put on her shoes, and went out on the staircase, much
      surprised, to look for Jeremiah.

      The staircase was as wooden and solid as need be, and Affery went
      straight down it without any of those deviations peculiar to dreams.
      She did not skim over it, but walked down it, and guided herself by the
      banisters on account of her candle having died out. In one corner of
      the hall, behind the house-door, there was a little waiting-room, like a
      well-shaft, with a long narrow window in it as if it had been ripped up.
      In this room, which was never used, a light was burning.

      Mrs Flintwinch crossed the hall, feeling its pavement cold to her
      stockingless feet, and peeped in between the rusty hinges on the door,
      which stood a little open. She expected to see Jeremiah fast asleep or
      in a fit, but he was calmly seated in a chair, awake, and in his usual
      health. But what--hey?--Lord forgive us!--Mrs Flintwinch muttered some
      ejaculation to this effect, and turned giddy.

      For, Mr Flintwinch awake, was watching Mr Flintwinch asleep. He sat on
      one side of the small table, looking keenly at himself on the other side
      with his chin sunk on his breast, snoring. The waking Flintwinch had his
      full front face presented to his wife; the sleeping Flintwinch was
      in profile. The waking Flintwinch was the old original; the sleeping
      Flintwinch was the double, just as she might have distinguished between
      a tangible object and its reflection in a glass, Affery made out this
      difference with her head going round and round.

      If she had had any doubt which was her own Jeremiah, it would have been
      resolved by his impatience. He looked about him for an offensive weapon,
      caught up the snuffers, and, before applying them to the cabbage-headed
      candle, lunged at the sleeper as though he would have run him through
      the body.

      'Who's that? What's the matter?' cried the sleeper, starting.

      Mr Flintwinch made a movement with the snuffers, as if he would have
      enforced silence on his companion by putting them down his throat; the
      companion, coming to himself, said, rubbing his eyes, 'I forgot where I
      was.'

      'You have been asleep,' snarled Jeremiah, referring to his watch, 'two
      hours. You said you would be rested enough if you had a short nap.'

      'I have had a short nap,' said Double.

      'Half-past two o'clock in the morning,' muttered Jeremiah. 'Where's your
      hat? Where's your coat? Where's the box?'

      'All here,' said Double, tying up his throat with sleepy carefulness in
      a shawl. 'Stop a minute. Now give me the sleeve--not that sleeve, the
      other one. Ha! I'm not as young as I was.' Mr Flintwinch had pulled
      him into his coat with vehement energy. 'You promised me a second glass
      after I was rested.'

      'Drink it!' returned Jeremiah, 'and--choke yourself, I was going
      to say--but go, I mean.' At the same time he produced the identical
      port-wine bottle, and filled a wine-glass.

      'Her port-wine, I believe?' said Double, tasting it as if he were in the
      Docks, with hours to spare. 'Her health.'

      He took a sip.

      'Your health!'

      He took another sip.

      'His health!'

      He took another sip.

      'And all friends round St Paul's.' He emptied and put down the
      wine-glass half-way through this ancient civic toast, and took up the
      box. It was an iron box some two feet square, which he carried under his
      arms pretty easily. Jeremiah watched his manner of adjusting it, with
      jealous eyes; tried it with his hands, to be sure that he had a firm
      hold of it; bade him for his life be careful what he was about; and then
      stole out on tiptoe to open the door for him. Affery, anticipating
      the last movement, was on the staircase. The sequence of things was
      so ordinary and natural, that, standing there, she could hear the door
      open, feel the night air, and see the stars outside.

      But now came the most remarkable part of the dream. She felt so afraid
      of her husband, that being on the staircase, she had not the power to
      retreat to her room (which she might easily have done before he had
              fastened the door), but stood there staring. Consequently when he came
      up the staircase to bed, candle in hand, he came full upon her. He
      looked astonished, but said not a word. He kept his eyes upon her, and
      kept advancing; and she, completely under his influence, kept retiring
      before him. Thus, she walking backward and he walking forward, they
      came into their own room. They were no sooner shut in there, than Mr
      Flintwinch took her by the throat, and shook her until she was black in
      the face.

      'Why, Affery, woman--Affery!' said Mr Flintwinch. 'What have you been
      dreaming of? Wake up, wake up! What's the matter?'

      'The--the matter, Jeremiah?' gasped Mrs Flintwinch, rolling her eyes.

      'Why, Affery, woman--Affery! You have been getting out of bed in your
      sleep, my dear! I come up, after having fallen asleep myself, below, and
      find you in your wrapper here, with the nightmare. Affery, woman,' said
      Mr Flintwinch, with a friendly grin on his expressive countenance, 'if
      you ever have a dream of this sort again, it'll be a sign of your being
      in want of physic. And I'll give you such a dose, old woman--such a
      dose!'

      Mrs Flintwinch thanked him and crept into bed.




As the city clocks struck nine on Monday morning, Mrs Clennam was
wheeled by Jeremiah Flintwinch of the cut-down aspect to her tall
cabinet. When she had unlocked and opened it, and had settled herself
at its desk, Jeremiah withdrew--as it might be, to hang himself more
effectually--and her son appeared.

'Are you any better this morning, mother?'

She shook her head, with the same austere air of luxuriousness that she
had shown over-night when speaking of the weather. 'I shall never be
better any more. It is well for me, Arthur, that I know it and can bear
it.'

Sitting with her hands laid separately upon the desk, and the tall
cabinet towering before her, she looked as if she were performing on a
dumb church organ. Her son thought so (it was an old thought with him),
     while he took his seat beside it.

     She opened a drawer or two, looked over some business papers, and put
     them back again. Her severe face had no thread of relaxation in it, by
     which any explorer could have been guided to the gloomy labyrinth of her
     thoughts.

     'Shall I speak of our affairs, mother? Are you inclined to enter upon
     business?'

     'Am I inclined, Arthur? Rather, are you? Your father has been dead a
     year and more. I have been at your disposal, and waiting your pleasure,
     ever since.'

     'There was much to arrange before I could leave; and when I did leave, I
     travelled a little for rest and relief.'

     She turned her face towards him, as not having heard or understood his
     last words.

     'For rest and relief.'

     She glanced round the sombre room, and appeared from the motion of her
     lips to repeat the words to herself, as calling it to witness how little
     of either it afforded her.

     'Besides, mother, you being sole executrix, and having the direction and
     management of the estate, there remained little business, or I might say
     none, that I could transact, until you had had time to arrange matters
     to your satisfaction.'

     'The accounts are made out,' she returned. 'I have them here. The
     vouchers have all been examined and passed. You can inspect them when
     you like, Arthur; now, if you please.'

     'It is quite enough, mother, to know that the business is completed.
     Shall I proceed then?'

     'Why not?' she said, in her frozen way.

     'Mother, our House has done less and less for some years past, and our
     dealings have been progressively on the decline. We have never shown
     much confidence, or invited much; we have attached no people to us; the
     track we have kept is not the track of the time; and we have been
     left far behind. I need not dwell on this to you, mother. You know it
     necessarily.'

     'I know what you mean,' she answered, in a qualified tone.

     'Even this old house in which we speak,' pursued her son, 'is an
     instance of what I say. In my father's earlier time, and in his uncle's
     time before him, it was a place of business--really a place of business,
     and business resort. Now, it is a mere anomaly and incongruity here, out
     of date and out of purpose. All our consignments have long been made to
     Rovinghams' the commission-merchants; and although, as a check upon
     them, and in the stewardship of my father's resources, your judgment and
     watchfulness have been actively exerted, still those qualities would
     have influenced my father's fortunes equally, if you had lived in any
     private dwelling: would they not?'

     'Do you consider,' she returned, without answering his question, 'that
     a house serves no purpose, Arthur, in sheltering your infirm and
     afflicted--justly infirm and righteously afflicted--mother?'

     'I was speaking only of business purposes.'

     'With what object?'

     'I am coming to it.'

     'I foresee,' she returned, fixing her eyes upon him, 'what it is.
     But the Lord forbid that I should repine under any visitation. In my
     sinfulness I merit bitter disappointment, and I accept it.'

     'Mother, I grieve to hear you speak like this, though I have had my
     apprehensions that you would--'

     'You knew I would. You knew _me_,' she interrupted.

     Her son paused for a moment. He had struck fire out of her, and was
     surprised. 'Well!' she said, relapsing into stone. 'Go on. Let me hear.'

     'You have anticipated, mother, that I decide for my part, to abandon
     the business. I have done with it. I will not take upon myself to advise
     you; you will continue it, I see. If I had any influence with you, I
     would simply use it to soften your judgment of me in causing you this
     disappointment: to represent to you that I have lived the half of a long
     term of life, and have never before set my own will against yours. I
     cannot say that I have been able to conform myself, in heart and spirit,
     to your rules; I cannot say that I believe my forty years have been
     profitable or pleasant to myself, or any one; but I have habitually
     submitted, and I only ask you to remember it.'

     Woe to the suppliant, if such a one there were or ever had been, who had
     any concession to look for in the inexorable face at the cabinet. Woe to
     the defaulter whose appeal lay to the tribunal where those severe eyes
     presided. Great need had the rigid woman of her mystical religion,
     veiled in gloom and darkness, with lightnings of cursing, vengeance, and
     destruction, flashing through the sable clouds. Forgive us our debts as
     we forgive our debtors, was a prayer too poor in spirit for her. Smite
     Thou my debtors, Lord, wither them, crush them; do Thou as I would do,
     and Thou shalt have my worship: this was the impious tower of stone she
     built up to scale Heaven.

     'Have you finished, Arthur, or have you anything more to say to me? I
     think there can be nothing else. You have been short, but full of matter!'

     'Mother, I have yet something more to say. It has been upon my mind,
     night and day, this long time. It is far more difficult to say than what
     I have said. That concerned myself; this concerns us all.'

     'Us all! Who are us all?'

     'Yourself, myself, my dead father.'

     She took her hands from the desk; folded them in her lap; and sat
     looking towards the fire, with the impenetrability of an old Egyptian
     sculpture.

     'You knew my father infinitely better than I ever knew him; and his
     reserve with me yielded to you. You were much the stronger, mother, and
     directed him. As a child, I knew it as well as I know it now. I knew
     that your ascendancy over him was the cause of his going to China to
     take care of the business there, while you took care of it here (though
             I do not even now know whether these were really terms of separation
             that you agreed upon); and that it was your will that I should remain
     with you until I was twenty, and then go to him as I did. You will not
     be offended by my recalling this, after twenty years?'

     'I am waiting to hear why you recall it.'

     He lowered his voice, and said, with manifest reluctance, and against
     his will:

     'I want to ask you, mother, whether it ever occurred to you to
     suspect--'

     At the word Suspect, she turned her eyes momentarily upon her son, with
     a dark frown. She then suffered them to seek the fire, as before; but
     with the frown fixed above them, as if the sculptor of old Egypt had
     indented it in the hard granite face, to frown for ages.

     '--that he had any secret remembrance which caused him trouble of
     mind--remorse? Whether you ever observed anything in his conduct
     suggesting that; or ever spoke to him upon it, or ever heard him hint at
     such a thing?'

     'I do not understand what kind of secret remembrance you mean to infer
     that your father was a prey to,' she returned, after a silence. 'You
     speak so mysteriously.'

     'Is it possible, mother,' her son leaned forward to be the nearer to her
     while he whispered it, and laid his hand nervously upon her desk, 'is
     it possible, mother, that he had unhappily wronged any one, and made no
     reparation?'

     Looking at him wrathfully, she bent herself back in her chair to keep
     him further off, but gave him no reply.

     'I am deeply sensible, mother, that if this thought has never at any
     time flashed upon you, it must seem cruel and unnatural in me, even in
     this confidence, to breathe it. But I cannot shake it off. Time and
     change (I have tried both before breaking silence) do nothing to wear it
     out.  Remember, I was with my father. Remember, I saw his face when he
     gave the watch into my keeping, and struggled to express that he sent it
     as a token you would understand, to you. Remember, I saw him at the last
     with the pencil in his failing hand, trying to write some word for you
     to read, but to which he could give no shape. The more remote and cruel
     this vague suspicion that I have, the stronger the circumstances that
     could give it any semblance of probability to me. For Heaven's sake, let
     us examine sacredly whether there is any wrong entrusted to us to set
     right. No one can help towards it, mother, but you.'

     Still so recoiling in her chair that her overpoised weight moved it,
     from time to time, a little on its wheels, and gave her the appearance
     of a phantom of fierce aspect gliding away from him, she interposed her
     left arm, bent at the elbow with the back of her hand towards her face,
     between herself and him, and looked at him in a fixed silence.

     'In grasping at money and in driving hard bargains--I have begun, and I
     must speak of such things now, mother--some one may have been grievously
     deceived, injured, ruined. You were the moving power of all this
     machinery before my birth; your stronger spirit has been infused into
     all my father's dealings for more than two score years. You can set
     these doubts at rest, I think, if you will really help me to discover
     the truth. Will you, mother?'

     He stopped in the hope that she would speak. But her grey hair was not
     more immovable in its two folds, than were her firm lips.

     'If reparation can be made to any one, if restitution can be made to any
     one, let us know it and make it. Nay, mother, if within my means, let _me_
     make it. I have seen so little happiness come of money; it has brought
     within my knowledge so little peace to this house, or to any one
     belonging to it, that it is worth less to me than to another. It can buy
     me nothing that will not be a reproach and misery to me, if I am haunted
     by a suspicion that it darkened my father's last hours with remorse, and
     that it is not honestly and justly mine.'

     There was a bell-rope hanging on the panelled wall, some two or three yards
     from the cabinet. By a swift and sudden action of her foot, she drove her
     wheeled chair rapidly back to it and pulled it violently--still holding her
     arm up in its shield-like posture, as if he were striking at her, and she
     warding off the blow.

     A girl came hurrying in, frightened.

     'Send Flintwinch here!'

     In a moment the girl had withdrawn, and the old man stood within the
     door. 'What! You're hammer and tongs, already, you two?' he said, coolly
     stroking his face. 'I thought you would be. I was pretty sure of it.'

     'Flintwinch!' said the mother, 'look at my son. Look at him!'

     'Well, I _am_ looking at him,' said Flintwinch.

     She stretched out the arm with which she had shielded herself, and as
     she went on, pointed at the object of her anger.

     'In the very hour of his return almost--before the shoe upon his foot is
     dry--he asperses his father's memory to his mother! Asks his mother
     to become, with him, a spy upon his father's transactions through a
     lifetime! Has misgivings that the goods of this world which we have
     painfully got together early and late, with wear and tear and toil and
     self-denial, are so much plunder; and asks to whom they shall be given
     up, as reparation and restitution!'

     Although she said this raging, she said it in a voice so far from being
     beyond her control that it was even lower than her usual tone. She also
     spoke with great distinctness.

     'Reparation!' said she. 'Yes, truly! It is easy for him to talk of
     reparation, fresh from journeying and junketing in foreign lands, and
     living a life of vanity and pleasure. But let him look at me, in prison,
     and in bonds here. I endure without murmuring, because it is appointed
     that I shall so make reparation for my sins. Reparation! Is there none
     in this room? Has there been none here this fifteen years?'

     Thus was she always balancing her bargains with the Majesty of heaven,
     posting up the entries to her credit, strictly keeping her set-off, and
     claiming her due. She was only remarkable in this, for the force
     and emphasis with which she did it. Thousands upon thousands do it,
     according to their varying manner, every day.

     'Flintwinch, give me that book!'

     The old man handed it to her from the table. She put two fingers between
     the leaves, closed the book upon them, and held it up to her son in
     a threatening way.

     'In the days of old, Arthur, treated of in this commentary, there were
     pious men, beloved of the Lord, who would have cursed their sons for
     less than this: who would have sent them forth, and sent whole nations
     forth, if such had supported them, to be avoided of God and man, and
     perish, down to the baby at the breast. But I only tell you that if you
     ever renew that theme with me, I will renounce you; I will so dismiss
     you through that doorway, that you had better have been motherless from
     your cradle. I will never see or know you more. And if, after all, you
     were to come into this darkened room to look upon me lying dead, my body
     should bleed, if I could make it, when you came near me.'

     In part relieved by the intensity of this threat, and in part (monstrous
             as the fact is) by a general impression that it was in some sort a
     religious proceeding, she handed back the book to the old man, and was
     silent.

    'Now,' said Jeremiah; 'premising that I'm not going to stand between you
two, will you let me ask (as I _have_ been called in, and made a third)
    what is all this about?'

    'Take your version of it,' returned Arthur, finding it left to him to
    speak, 'from my mother. Let it rest there. What I have said, was said to
    my mother only.'

    'Oh!' returned the old man. 'From your mother? Take it from your mother?
    Well! But your mother mentioned that you had been suspecting your father.
    That's not dutiful, Mr Arthur. Who will you be suspecting next?'

    'Enough,' said Mrs Clennam, turning her face so that it was addressed
    for the moment to the old man only. 'Let no more be said about this.'

    'Yes, but stop a bit, stop a bit,' the old man persisted. 'Let us see
    how we stand. Have you told Mr Arthur that he mustn't lay offences at
    his father's door? That he has no right to do it? That he has no ground
    to go upon?'

    'I tell him so now.'

    'Ah! Exactly,' said the old man. 'You tell him so now. You hadn't told
    him so before, and you tell him so now. Ay, ay! That's right! You know I
    stood between you and his father so long, that it seems as if death had
    made no difference, and I was still standing between you. So I will, and
    so in fairness I require to have that plainly put forward. Arthur, you
    please to hear that you have no right to mistrust your father, and have
    no ground to go upon.'

    He put his hands to the back of the wheeled chair, and muttering to
    himself, slowly wheeled his mistress back to her cabinet. 'Now,' he
    resumed, standing behind her: 'in case I should go away leaving things
    half done, and so should be wanted again when you come to the other half
    and get into one of your flights, has Arthur told you what he means to
    do about the business?'

    'He has relinquished it.'

    'In favour of nobody, I suppose?'

    Mrs Clennam glanced at her son, leaning against one of the windows. He
    observed the look and said, 'To my mother, of course. She does what she
    pleases.'

    'And if any pleasure,' she said after a short pause, 'could arise for me
    out of the disappointment of my expectations that my son, in the prime
    of his life, would infuse new youth and strength into it, and make it
    of great profit and power, it would be in advancing an old and faithful
    servant. Jeremiah, the captain deserts the ship, but you and I will sink
    or float with it.'

    Jeremiah, whose eyes glistened as if they saw money, darted a sudden
    look at the son, which seemed to say, 'I owe _you_ no thanks for this;
    _you_ have done nothing towards it!' and then told the mother that he
    thanked her, and that Affery thanked her, and that he would never desert
    her, and that Affery would never desert her. Finally, he hauled up his
    watch from its depths, and said, 'Eleven. Time for your oysters!' and with
    that change of subject, which involved no change of expression or manner,
    rang the bell.

    But Mrs Clennam, resolved to treat herself with the greater rigour for
    having been supposed to be unacquainted with reparation, refused to
    eat her oysters when they were brought. They looked tempting; eight in
    number, circularly set out on a white plate on a tray covered with a
    white napkin, flanked by a slice of buttered French roll, and a little
    compact glass of cool wine and water; but she resisted all persuasions,
    and sent them down again--placing the act to her credit, no doubt, in
    her Eternal Day-Book.

    This refection of oysters was not presided over by Affery, but by the
    girl who had appeared when the bell was rung; the same who had been in
    the dimly-lighted room last night. Now that he had an opportunity of
    observing her, Arthur found that her diminutive figure, small features,
    and slight spare dress, gave her the appearance of being much younger
    than she was. A woman, probably of not less than two-and-twenty, she
    might have been passed in the street for little more than half that
    age. Not that her face was very youthful, for in truth there was more
    consideration and care in it than naturally belonged to her utmost
    years; but she was so little and light, so noiseless and shy, and
    appeared so conscious of being out of place among the three hard elders,
    that she had all the manner and much of the appearance of a subdued
    child.

    In a hard way, and in an uncertain way that fluctuated between patronage
    and putting down, the sprinkling from a watering-pot and hydraulic
    pressure, Mrs Clennam showed an interest in this dependent. Even in the
    moment of her entrance, upon the violent ringing of the bell, when the
    mother shielded herself with that singular action from the son, Mrs
    Clennam's eyes had had some individual recognition in them, which seemed
    reserved for her. As there are degrees of hardness in the hardest metal,
    and shades of colour in black itself, so, even in the asperity of Mrs
    Clennam's demeanour towards all the rest of humanity and towards Little
    Dorrit, there was a fine gradation.

    Little Dorrit let herself out to do needlework. At so much a day--or at
    so little--from eight to eight, Little Dorrit was to be hired. Punctual
    to the moment, Little Dorrit appeared; punctual to the moment, Little
    Dorrit vanished. What became of Little Dorrit between the two eights was
    a mystery.

    Another of the moral phenomena of Little Dorrit. Besides her
    consideration money, her daily contract included meals. She had an
    extraordinary repugnance to dining in company; would never do so, if
    it were possible to escape. Would always plead that she had this bit of
    work to begin first, or that bit of work to finish first; and would, of
    a certainty, scheme and plan--not very cunningly, it would seem, for she
    deceived no one--to dine alone. Successful in this, happy in carrying
    off her plate anywhere, to make a table of her lap, or a box, or the
    ground, or even as was supposed, to stand on tip-toe, dining moderately
    at a mantel-shelf; the great anxiety of Little Dorrit's day was set at
    rest.

    It was not easy to make out Little Dorrit's face; she was so retiring,
    plied her needle in such removed corners, and started away so scared if
    encountered on the stairs. But it seemed to be a pale transparent face,
    quick in expression, though not beautiful in feature, its soft hazel
    eyes excepted. A delicately bent head, a tiny form, a quick little pair
    of busy hands, and a shabby dress--it must needs have been very shabby
    to look at all so, being so neat--were Little Dorrit as she sat at work.

    For these particulars or generalities concerning Little Dorrit, Mr
    Arthur was indebted in the course of the day to his own eyes and to Mrs
    Affery's tongue. If Mrs Affery had had any will or way of her own, it
    would probably have been unfavourable to Little Dorrit. But as 'them two
    clever ones'--Mrs Affery's perpetual reference, in whom her personality
    was swallowed up--were agreed to accept Little Dorrit as a matter of
    course, she had nothing for it but to follow suit. Similarly, if the
    two clever ones had agreed to murder Little Dorrit by candlelight, Mrs
    Affery, being required to hold the candle, would no doubt have done it.

    In the intervals of roasting the partridge for the invalid chamber, and
    preparing a baking-dish of beef and pudding for the dining-room, Mrs
    Affery made the communications above set forth; invariably putting
    her head in at the door again after she had taken it out, to enforce
    resistance to the two clever ones. It appeared to have become a perfect
    passion with Mrs Flintwinch, that the only son should be pitted against
    them.

    In the course of the day, too, Arthur looked through the whole house.
    Dull and dark he found it. The gaunt rooms, deserted for years upon
    years, seemed to have settled down into a gloomy lethargy from which
    nothing could rouse them again. The furniture, at once spare and
    lumbering, hid in the rooms rather than furnished them, and there was
    no colour in all the house; such colour as had ever been there, had long
    ago started away on lost sunbeams--got itself absorbed, perhaps, into
    flowers, butterflies, plumage of birds, precious stones, what not. There
    was not one straight floor from the foundation to the roof; the ceilings
    were so fantastically clouded by smoke and dust, that old women might
    have told fortunes in them better than in grouts of tea; the dead-cold
    hearths showed no traces of having ever been warmed but in heaps of soot
    that had tumbled down the chimneys, and eddied about in little
    dusky whirlwinds when the doors were opened. In what had once been
    a drawing-room, there were a pair of meagre mirrors, with dismal
    processions of black figures carrying black garlands, walking round
    the frames; but even these were short of heads and legs, and one
    undertaker-like Cupid had swung round on its own axis and got upside
    down, and another had fallen off altogether. The room Arthur Clennam's
    deceased father had occupied for business purposes, when he first
    remembered him, was so unaltered that he might have been imagined still
    to keep it invisibly, as his visible relict kept her room up-stairs;
    Jeremiah Flintwinch still going between them negotiating. His picture,
    dark and gloomy, earnestly speechless on the wall, with the eyes
    intently looking at his son as they had looked when life departed from
    them, seemed to urge him awfully to the task he had attempted; but as
    to any yielding on the part of his mother, he had now no hope, and as to
    any other means of setting his distrust at rest, he had abandoned hope a
    long time. Down in the cellars, as up in the bed-chambers, old objects
    that he well remembered were changed by age and decay, but were still in
    their old places; even to empty beer-casks hoary with cobwebs, and empty
    wine-bottles with fur and fungus choking up their throats. There, too,
    among unusual bottle-racks and pale slants of light from the yard above,
    was the strong room stored with old ledgers, which had as musty and
    corrupt a smell as if they were regularly balanced, in the dead small
    hours, by a nightly resurrection of old book-keepers.

    The baking-dish was served up in a penitential manner on a shrunken
    cloth at an end of the dining-table, at two o'clock, when he dined with
    Mr Flintwinch, the new partner. Mr Flintwinch informed him that his
    mother had recovered her equanimity now, and that he need not fear her
    again alluding to what had passed in the morning. 'And don't you lay
    offences at your father's door, Mr Arthur,' added Jeremiah, 'once for
    all, don't do it! Now, we have done with the subject.'

    Mr Flintwinch had been already rearranging and dusting his own
    particular little office, as if to do honour to his accession to new
    dignity. He resumed this occupation when he was replete with beef, had
    sucked up all the gravy in the baking-dish with the flat of his knife,
    and had drawn liberally on a barrel of small beer in the scullery. Thus
    refreshed, he tucked up his shirt-sleeves and went to work again; and Mr
    Arthur, watching him as he set about it, plainly saw that his father's
    picture, or his father's grave, would be as communicative with him as
    this old man.

    'Now, Affery, woman,' said Mr Flintwinch, as she crossed the hall. 'You
    hadn't made Mr Arthur's bed when I was up there last. Stir yourself.
    Bustle.'

    But Mr Arthur found the house so blank and dreary, and was so unwilling
    to assist at another implacable consignment of his mother's enemies
    (perhaps himself among them) to mortal disfigurement and immortal ruin,
    that he announced his intention of lodging at the coffee-house where he
    had left his luggage. Mr Flintwinch taking kindly to the idea of getting
    rid of him, and his mother being indifferent, beyond considerations of
    saving, to most domestic arrangements that were not bounded by the walls
    of her own chamber, he easily carried this point without new offence.
    Daily business hours were agreed upon, which his mother, Mr Flintwinch,
    and he, were to devote together to a necessary checking of books and
    papers; and he left the home he had so lately found, with depressed
    heart.

    But Little Dorrit?

    The business hours, allowing for intervals of invalid regimen of oysters
    and partridges, during which Clennam refreshed himself with a walk,
    were from ten to six for about a fortnight. Sometimes Little Dorrit was
    employed at her needle, sometimes not, sometimes appeared as a humble
    visitor: which must have been her character on the occasion of his
    arrival. His original curiosity augmented every day, as he watched for
    her, saw or did not see her, and speculated about her. Influenced by his
    predominant idea, he even fell into a habit of discussing with himself
    the possibility of her being in some way associated with it. At last he
    resolved to watch Little Dorrit and know more of her story.




Thirty years ago there stood, a few doors short of the church of Saint
George, in the borough of Southwark, on the left-hand side of the way
going southward, the Marshalsea Prison. It had stood there many years
before, and it remained there some years afterwards; but it is gone now,
    and the world is none the worse without it.

    It was an oblong pile of barrack building, partitioned into squalid
    houses standing back to back, so that there were no back rooms;
    environed by a narrow paved yard, hemmed in by high walls duly spiked at
    top. Itself a close and confined prison for debtors, it contained within
    it a much closer and more confined jail for smugglers. Offenders against
    the revenue laws, and defaulters to excise or customs who had incurred
    fines which they were unable to pay, were supposed to be incarcerated
    behind an iron-plated door closing up a second prison, consisting of a
    strong cell or two, and a blind alley some yard and a half wide, which
    formed the mysterious termination of the very limited skittle-ground in
    which the Marshalsea debtors bowled down their troubles.

    Supposed to be incarcerated there, because the time had rather outgrown
    the strong cells and the blind alley. In practice they had come to be
    considered a little too bad, though in theory they were quite as good as
    ever; which may be observed to be the case at the present day with other
    cells that are not at all strong, and with other blind alleys that are
    stone-blind. Hence the smugglers habitually consorted with the debtors
    (who received them with open arms), except at certain constitutional
    moments when somebody came from some Office, to go through some form of
    overlooking something which neither he nor anybody else knew anything
    about. On these truly British occasions, the smugglers, if any, made a
    feint of walking into the strong cells and the blind alley, while this
    somebody pretended to do his something: and made a reality of walking
    out again as soon as he hadn't done it--neatly epitomising the
    administration of most of the public affairs in our right little, tight
    little, island.

    There had been taken to the Marshalsea Prison, long before the day when
    the sun shone on Marseilles and on the opening of this narrative, a
    debtor with whom this narrative has some concern.

    He was, at that time, a very amiable and very helpless middle-aged
    gentleman, who was going out again directly. Necessarily, he was going
    out again directly, because the Marshalsea lock never turned upon a
    debtor who was not. He brought in a portmanteau with him, which he
    doubted its being worth while to unpack; he was so perfectly clear--like
    all the rest of them, the turnkey on the lock said--that he was going
    out again directly.

    He was a shy, retiring man; well-looking, though in an effeminate style;
    with a mild voice, curling hair, and irresolute hands--rings upon the
    fingers in those days--which nervously wandered to his trembling lip a
    hundred times in the first half-hour of his acquaintance with the jail.
    His principal anxiety was about his wife.

    'Do you think, sir,' he asked the turnkey, 'that she will be very much
    shocked, if she should come to the gate to-morrow morning?'

    The turnkey gave it as the result of his experience that some of 'em was
    and some of 'em wasn't. In general, more no than yes. 'What like is she,
    you see?' he philosophically asked: 'that's what it hinges on.'

    'She is very delicate and inexperienced indeed.'

    'That,' said the turnkey, 'is agen her.'

    'She is so little used to go out alone,' said the debtor, 'that I am at
    a loss to think how she will ever make her way here, if she walks.'

    'P'raps,' quoth the turnkey, 'she'll take a ackney coach.'

    'Perhaps.' The irresolute fingers went to the trembling lip. 'I hope she
    will. She may not think of it.'

    'Or p'raps,' said the turnkey, offering his suggestions from the the top
    of his well-worn wooden stool, as he might have offered them to a child
    for whose weakness he felt a compassion, 'p'raps she'll get her brother,
    or her sister, to come along with her.'

    'She has no brother or sister.'

    'Niece, nevy, cousin, serwant, young 'ooman, greengrocer.--Dash it! One
    or another on 'em,' said the turnkey, repudiating beforehand the refusal
    of all his suggestions.

    'I fear--I hope it is not against the rules--that she will bring the
    children.'

    'The children?' said the turnkey. 'And the rules? Why, lord set you
    up like a corner pin, we've a reg'lar playground o' children here.
    Children! Why we swarm with 'em. How many a you got?'

    'Two,' said the debtor, lifting his irresolute hand to his lip again,
    and turning into the prison.

    The turnkey followed him with his eyes. 'And you another,' he observed
    to himself, 'which makes three on you. And your wife another, I'll lay
    a crown. Which makes four on you. And another coming, I'll lay
    half-a-crown. Which'll make five on you. And I'll go another seven and
    sixpence to name which is the helplessest, the unborn baby or you!'

    He was right in all his particulars. She came next day with a little
    boy of three years old, and a little girl of two, and he stood entirely
    corroborated.

    'Got a room now; haven't you?' the turnkey asked the debtor after a week
    or two.

    'Yes, I have got a very good room.'

    'Any little sticks a coming to furnish it?' said the turnkey.

    'I expect a few necessary articles of furniture to be delivered by the
    carrier, this afternoon.'

    'Missis and little 'uns a coming to keep you company?' asked the
    turnkey.

    'Why, yes, we think it better that we should not be scattered, even for
    a few weeks.'

    'Even for a few weeks, _of_ course,' replied the turnkey. And he followed
    him again with his eyes, and nodded his head seven times when he was
    gone.

    The affairs of this debtor were perplexed by a partnership, of which he
    knew no more than that he had invested money in it; by legal matters
    of assignment and settlement, conveyance here and conveyance there,
    suspicion of unlawful preference of creditors in this direction, and of
    mysterious spiriting away of property in that; and as nobody on the face
    of the earth could be more incapable of explaining any single item in
    the heap of confusion than the debtor himself, nothing comprehensible
    could be made of his case. To question him in detail, and endeavour
    to reconcile his answers; to closet him with accountants and sharp
    practitioners, learned in the wiles of insolvency and bankruptcy; was
    only to put the case out at compound interest and incomprehensibility.
    The irresolute fingers fluttered more and more ineffectually about the
    trembling lip on every such occasion, and the sharpest practitioners
    gave him up as a hopeless job.

    'Out?' said the turnkey, '_he_'ll never get out, unless his creditors take
    him by the shoulders and shove him out.'

    He had been there five or six months, when he came running to this
    turnkey one forenoon to tell him, breathless and pale, that his wife was
    ill.

    'As anybody might a known she would be,' said the turnkey.

    'We intended,' he returned, 'that she should go to a country lodging
    only to-morrow. What am I to do! Oh, good heaven, what am I to do!'

    'Don't waste your time in clasping your hands and biting your fingers,'
    responded the practical turnkey, taking him by the elbow, 'but come
    along with me.'

    The turnkey conducted him--trembling from head to foot, and constantly
    crying under his breath, What was he to do! while his irresolute fingers
    bedabbled the tears upon his face--up one of the common staircases in
    the prison to a door on the garret story. Upon which door the turnkey
    knocked with the handle of his key.

    'Come in!' cried a voice inside.

    The turnkey, opening the door, disclosed in a wretched, ill-smelling
    little room, two hoarse, puffy, red-faced personages seated at a
    rickety table, playing at all-fours, smoking pipes, and drinking brandy.

    'Doctor,' said the turnkey, 'here's a gentleman's wife in want of you
    without a minute's loss of time!'

    The doctor's friend was in the positive degree of hoarseness, puffiness,
    red-facedness, all-fours, tobacco, dirt, and brandy; the doctor in
    the comparative--hoarser, puffier, more red-faced, more all-fourey,
    tobaccoer, dirtier, and brandier. The doctor was amazingly shabby, in
    a torn and darned rough-weather sea-jacket, out at elbows and eminently
    short of buttons (he had been in his time the experienced surgeon
            carried by a passenger ship), the dirtiest white trousers conceivable by
    mortal man, carpet slippers, and no visible linen. 'Childbed?' said
    the doctor. 'I'm the boy!' With that the doctor took a comb from the
    chimney-piece and stuck his hair upright--which appeared to be his
    way of washing himself--produced a professional chest or case, of most
    abject appearance, from the cupboard where his cup and saucer and coals
    were, settled his chin in the frowsy wrapper round his neck, and became
    a ghastly medical scarecrow.

    The doctor and the debtor ran down-stairs, leaving the turnkey to return
    to the lock, and made for the debtor's room. All the ladies in the
    prison had got hold of the news, and were in the yard. Some of them
    had already taken possession of the two children, and were hospitably
    carrying them off; others were offering loans of little comforts from
    their own scanty store; others were sympathising with the greatest
    volubility. The gentlemen prisoners, feeling themselves at a
    disadvantage, had for the most part retired, not to say sneaked,
    to their rooms; from the open windows of which some of them now
    complimented the doctor with whistles as he passed below, while others,
    with several stories between them, interchanged sarcastic references to
    the prevalent excitement.

    It was a hot summer day, and the prison rooms were baking between the
    high walls. In the debtor's confined chamber, Mrs Bangham, charwoman and
    messenger, who was not a prisoner (though she had been once), but
    was the popular medium of communication with the outer world, had
    volunteered her services as fly-catcher and general attendant. The walls
    and ceiling were blackened with flies. Mrs Bangham, expert in sudden
    device, with one hand fanned the patient with a cabbage leaf, and with
    the other set traps of vinegar and sugar in gallipots; at the same time
    enunciating sentiments of an encouraging and congratulatory nature,
    adapted to the occasion.

    'The flies trouble you, don't they, my dear?' said Mrs Bangham. 'But
    p'raps they'll take your mind off of it, and do you good. What between
    the buryin ground, the grocer's, the waggon-stables, and the paunch
    trade, the Marshalsea flies gets very large. P'raps they're sent as a
    consolation, if we only know'd it. How are you now, my dear? No better?
    No, my dear, it ain't to be expected; you'll be worse before you're
    better, and you know it, don't you? Yes. That's right! And to think of
    a sweet little cherub being born inside the lock! Now ain't it pretty,
    ain't _that_ something to carry you through it pleasant? Why, we ain't
    had such a thing happen here, my dear, not for I couldn't name the time
    when. And you a crying too?' said Mrs Bangham, to rally the patient more
    and more. 'You! Making yourself so famous! With the flies a falling into
    the gallipots by fifties! And everything a going on so well! And here if
    there ain't,' said Mrs Bangham as the door opened, 'if there ain't your
    dear gentleman along with Dr Haggage! And now indeed we _are_ complete, I
    _think_!'

    The doctor was scarcely the kind of apparition to inspire a patient
    with a sense of absolute completeness, but as he presently delivered the
    opinion, 'We are as right as we can be, Mrs Bangham, and we shall
    come out of this like a house afire;' and as he and Mrs Bangham took
    possession of the poor helpless pair, as everybody else and anybody else
    had always done, the means at hand were as good on the whole as better
    would have been. The special feature in Dr Haggage's treatment of the
    case, was his determination to keep Mrs Bangham up to the mark. As thus:

    'Mrs Bangham,' said the doctor, before he had been there twenty minutes,
    'go outside and fetch a little brandy, or we shall have you giving in.'

    'Thank you, sir. But none on my accounts,' said Mrs Bangham.

    'Mrs Bangham,' returned the doctor, 'I am in professional attendance
    on this lady, and don't choose to allow any discussion on your part. Go
    outside and fetch a little brandy, or I foresee that you'll break down.'

    'You're to be obeyed, sir,' said Mrs Bangham, rising. 'If you was to put
    your own lips to it, I think you wouldn't be the worse, for you look but
    poorly, sir.'

    'Mrs Bangham,' returned the doctor, 'I am not your business, thank you,
    but you are mine. Never you mind _me_, if you please. What you have got to
    do, is, to do as you are told, and to go and get what I bid you.'

    Mrs Bangham submitted; and the doctor, having administered her
    potion, took his own. He repeated the treatment every hour, being very
    determined with Mrs Bangham. Three or four hours passed; the flies
    fell into the traps by hundreds; and at length one little life, hardly
    stronger than theirs, appeared among the multitude of lesser deaths.

    'A very nice little girl indeed,' said the doctor; 'little, but
    well-formed. Halloa, Mrs Bangham! You're looking queer! You be off,
    ma'am, this minute, and fetch a little more brandy, or we shall have you
    in hysterics.'

    By this time, the rings had begun to fall from the debtor's irresolute
    hands, like leaves from a wintry tree. Not one was left upon them that
    night, when he put something that chinked into the doctor's greasy palm.
    In the meantime Mrs Bangham had been out on an errand to a neighbouring
    establishment decorated with three golden balls, where she was very well
    known.

    'Thank you,' said the doctor, 'thank you. Your good lady is quite
    composed. Doing charmingly.'

    'I am very happy and very thankful to know it,' said the debtor, 'though
    I little thought once, that--'

    'That a child would be born to you in a place like this?' said the
    doctor. 'Bah, bah, sir, what does it signify? A little more elbow-room
    is all we want here. We are quiet here; we don't get badgered here;
    there's no knocker here, sir, to be hammered at by creditors and bring a
    man's heart into his mouth. Nobody comes here to ask if a man's at
    home, and to say he'll stand on the door mat till he is. Nobody writes
    threatening letters about money to this place. It's freedom, sir, it's
    freedom! I have had to-day's practice at home and abroad, on a march,
    and aboard ship, and I'll tell you this: I don't know that I have ever
    pursued it under such quiet circumstances as here this day. Elsewhere,
    people are restless, worried, hurried about, anxious respecting one
    thing, anxious respecting another. Nothing of the kind here, sir. We
    have done all that--we know the worst of it; we have got to the bottom,
    we can't fall, and what have we found? Peace. That's the word for
    it. Peace.' With this profession of faith, the doctor, who was an old
    jail-bird, and was more sodden than usual, and had the additional and
    unusual stimulus of money in his pocket, returned to his associate and
    chum in hoarseness, puffiness, red-facedness, all-fours, tobacco, dirt,
    and brandy.

    Now, the debtor was a very different man from the doctor, but he had
    already begun to travel, by his opposite segment of the circle, to the
    same point. Crushed at first by his imprisonment, he had soon found a
    dull relief in it. He was under lock and key; but the lock and key that
    kept him in, kept numbers of his troubles out. If he had been a man with
    strength of purpose to face those troubles and fight them, he might have
    broken the net that held him, or broken his heart; but being what he
    was, he languidly slipped into this smooth descent, and never more took
    one step upward.

    When he was relieved of the perplexed affairs that nothing would make
    plain, through having them returned upon his hands by a dozen agents in
    succession who could make neither beginning, middle, nor end of them or
    him, he found his miserable place of refuge a quieter refuge than it
    had been before. He had unpacked the portmanteau long ago; and his elder
    children now played regularly about the yard, and everybody knew the
    baby, and claimed a kind of proprietorship in her.

    'Why, I'm getting proud of you,' said his friend the turnkey, one day.
    'You'll be the oldest inhabitant soon. The Marshalsea wouldn't be like
    the Marshalsea now, without you and your family.'

    The turnkey really was proud of him. He would mention him in laudatory
    terms to new-comers, when his back was turned. 'You took notice of him,'
    he would say, 'that went out of the lodge just now?'

    New-comer would probably answer Yes.

    'Brought up as a gentleman, he was, if ever a man was. Ed'cated at no
    end of expense. Went into the Marshal's house once to try a new piano
    for him. Played it, I understand, like one o'clock--beautiful! As to
    languages--speaks anything. We've had a Frenchman here in his time, and
    it's my opinion he knowed more French than the Frenchman did. We've had
    an Italian here in his time, and he shut _him_ up in about half a minute.
    You'll find some characters behind other locks, I don't say you won't;
    but if you want the top sawyer in such respects as I've mentioned, you
    must come to the Marshalsea.'

    When his youngest child was eight years old, his wife, who had long been
    languishing away--of her own inherent weakness, not that she retained
    any greater sensitiveness as to her place of abode than he did--went
    upon a visit to a poor friend and old nurse in the country, and died
    there. He remained shut up in his room for a fortnight afterwards;
    and an attorney's clerk, who was going through the Insolvent Court,
    engrossed an address of condolence to him, which looked like a Lease,
    and which all the prisoners signed. When he appeared again he was
    greyer (he had soon begun to turn grey); and the turnkey noticed that
    his hands went often to his trembling lips again, as they had used to do
    when he first came in. But he got pretty well over it in a month or
    two; and in the meantime the children played about the yard as regularly
    as ever, but in black.

    Then Mrs Bangham, long popular medium of communication with the outer
    world, began to be infirm, and to be found oftener than usual comatose
    on pavements, with her basket of purchases spilt, and the change of her
    clients ninepence short. His son began to supersede Mrs Bangham, and
    to execute commissions in a knowing manner, and to be of the prison
    prisonous, of the streets streety.

    Time went on, and the turnkey began to fail. His chest swelled, and his
    legs got weak, and he was short of breath. The well-worn wooden stool
    was 'beyond him,' he complained. He sat in an arm-chair with a cushion,
    and sometimes wheezed so, for minutes together, that he couldn't turn
    the key. When he was overpowered by these fits, the debtor often turned
    it for him.

    'You and me,' said the turnkey, one snowy winter's night when the lodge,
    with a bright fire in it, was pretty full of company, 'is the oldest
    inhabitants. I wasn't here myself above seven year before you. I shan't
    last long. When I'm off the lock for good and all, you'll be the Father
    of the Marshalsea.'

    The turnkey went off the lock of this world next day. His words were
    remembered and repeated; and tradition afterwards handed down from
    generation to generation--a Marshalsea generation might be calculated as
    about three months--that the shabby old debtor with the soft manner and
    the white hair, was the Father of the Marshalsea.

    And he grew to be proud of the title. If any impostor had arisen to
    claim it, he would have shed tears in resentment of the attempt to
    deprive him of his rights. A disposition began to be perceived in him
    to exaggerate the number of years he had been there; it was generally
    understood that you must deduct a few from his account; he was vain, the
    fleeting generations of debtors said.

    All new-comers were presented to him. He was punctilious in the exaction
    of this ceremony. The wits would perform the office of introduction with
    overcharged pomp and politeness, but they could not easily overstep his
    sense of its gravity. He received them in his poor room (he disliked an
            introduction in the mere yard, as informal--a thing that might happen
            to anybody), with a kind of bowed-down beneficence. They were welcome to
    the Marshalsea, he would tell them. Yes, he was the Father of the place.
    So the world was kind enough to call him; and so he was, if more than
    twenty years of residence gave him a claim to the title. It looked
    small at first, but there was very good company there--among a
    mixture--necessarily a mixture--and very good air.

    It became a not unusual circumstance for letters to be put under his
    door at night, enclosing half-a-crown, two half-crowns, now and then at
    long intervals even half-a-sovereign, for the Father of the Marshalsea.
    'With the compliments of a collegian taking leave.' He received the
    gifts as tributes, from admirers, to a public character. Sometimes
    these correspondents assumed facetious names, as the Brick, Bellows, Old
    Gooseberry, Wideawake, Snooks, Mops, Cutaway, the Dogs-meat Man; but he
    considered this in bad taste, and was always a little hurt by it.

    In the fulness of time, this correspondence showing signs of wearing
    out, and seeming to require an effort on the part of the correspondents
    to which in the hurried circumstances of departure many of them might
    not be equal, he established the custom of attending collegians of
    a certain standing, to the gate, and taking leave of them there. The
    collegian under treatment, after shaking hands, would occasionally
    stop to wrap up something in a bit of paper, and would come back again
    calling 'Hi!'

    He would look round surprised.'Me?' he would say, with a smile.

    By this time the collegian would be up with him, and he would paternally
    add,'What have you forgotten? What can I do for you?'

    'I forgot to leave this,' the collegian would usually return, 'for the
    Father of the Marshalsea.'

    'My good sir,' he would rejoin, 'he is infinitely obliged to you.' But,
    to the last, the irresolute hand of old would remain in the pocket into
    which he had slipped the money during two or three turns about the yard,
    lest the transaction should be too conspicuous to the general body of
    collegians.

    One afternoon he had been doing the honours of the place to a rather
    large party of collegians, who happened to be going out, when, as he was
    coming back, he encountered one from the poor side who had been taken in
    execution for a small sum a week before, had 'settled' in the course of
    that afternoon, and was going out too. The man was a mere Plasterer in
    his working dress; had his wife with him, and a bundle; and was in high
    spirits.

    'God bless you, sir,' he said in passing.

    'And you,' benignantly returned the Father of the Marshalsea.

    They were pretty far divided, going their several ways, when the
    Plasterer called out, 'I say!--sir!' and came back to him.

    'It ain't much,' said the Plasterer, putting a little pile of halfpence
    in his hand, 'but it's well meant.'

    The Father of the Marshalsea had never been offered tribute in copper
    yet. His children often had, and with his perfect acquiescence it had
    gone into the common purse to buy meat that he had eaten, and drink that
    he had drunk; but fustian splashed with white lime, bestowing halfpence
    on him, front to front, was new.

    'How dare you!' he said to the man, and feebly burst into tears.

    The Plasterer turned him towards the wall, that his face might not be
    seen; and the action was so delicate, and the man was so penetrated with
    repentance, and asked pardon so honestly, that he could make him no less
    acknowledgment than, 'I know you meant it kindly. Say no more.'

    'Bless your soul, sir,' urged the Plasterer, 'I did indeed. I'd do more
    by you than the rest of 'em do, I fancy.'

    'What would you do?' he asked.

    'I'd come back to see you, after I was let out.'

    'Give me the money again,' said the other, eagerly, 'and I'll keep it,
    and never spend it. Thank you for it, thank you! I shall see you again?'

    'If I live a week you shall.'

    They shook hands and parted. The collegians, assembled in Symposium in
    the Snuggery that night, marvelled what had happened to their Father; he
    walked so late in the shadows of the yard, and seemed so downcast.




The baby whose first draught of air had been tinctured with Doctor
Haggage's brandy, was handed down among the generations of collegians,
    like the tradition of their common parent. In the earlier stages of her
    existence, she was handed down in a literal and prosaic sense; it being
    almost a part of the entrance footing of every new collegian to nurse
    the child who had been born in the college.

    'By rights,' remarked the turnkey when she was first shown to him, 'I
    ought to be her godfather.'

    The debtor irresolutely thought of it for a minute, and said, 'Perhaps
    you wouldn't object to really being her godfather?'

    'Oh! _I_ don't object,' replied the turnkey, 'if you don't.'

    Thus it came to pass that she was christened one Sunday afternoon, when
    the turnkey, being relieved, was off the lock; and that the turnkey
    went up to the font of Saint George's Church, and promised and vowed and
    renounced on her behalf, as he himself related when he came back, 'like
    a good 'un.'

    This invested the turnkey with a new proprietary share in the child,
    over and above his former official one. When she began to walk and talk,
    he became fond of her; bought a little arm-chair and stood it by the
    high fender of the lodge fire-place; liked to have her company when he
    was on the lock; and used to bribe her with cheap toys to come and talk
    to him. The child, for her part, soon grew so fond of the turnkey that
    she would come climbing up the lodge-steps of her own accord at all
    hours of the day. When she fell asleep in the little armchair by the
    high fender, the turnkey would cover her with his pocket-handkerchief;
    and when she sat in it dressing and undressing a doll which soon came
    to be unlike dolls on the other side of the lock, and to bear a horrible
    family resemblance to Mrs Bangham--he would contemplate her from the
    top of his stool with exceeding gentleness. Witnessing these things,
    the collegians would express an opinion that the turnkey, who was a
    bachelor, had been cut out by nature for a family man. But the turnkey
    thanked them, and said, 'No, on the whole it was enough to see other
    people's children there.'

    At what period of her early life the little creature began to perceive
    that it was not the habit of all the world to live locked up in narrow
    yards surrounded by high walls with spikes at the top, would be a
    difficult question to settle. But she was a very, very little creature
    indeed, when she had somehow gained the knowledge that her clasp of her
    father's hand was to be always loosened at the door which the great key
    opened; and that while her own light steps were free to pass beyond it,
    his feet must never cross that line. A pitiful and plaintive look, with
    which she had begun to regard him when she was still extremely young,
    was perhaps a part of this discovery.

    With a pitiful and plaintive look for everything, indeed, but with
    something in it for only him that was like protection, this Child of
    the Marshalsea and the child of the Father of the Marshalsea, sat by her
    friend the turnkey in the lodge, kept the family room, or wandered about
    the prison-yard, for the first eight years of her life. With a pitiful
    and plaintive look for her wayward sister; for her idle brother; for the
    high blank walls; for the faded crowd they shut in; for the games of the
    prison children as they whooped and ran, and played at hide-and-seek,
    and made the iron bars of the inner gateway 'Home.'

    Wistful and wondering, she would sit in summer weather by the high
    fender in the lodge, looking up at the sky through the barred window,
    until, when she turned her eyes away, bars of light would arise between
    her and her friend, and she would see him through a grating, too.

    'Thinking of the fields,' the turnkey said once, after watching her,
    'ain't you?'

    'Where are they?' she inquired.

    'Why, they're--over there, my dear,' said the turnkey, with a vague
    flourish of his key. 'Just about there.'

    'Does anybody open them, and shut them? Are they locked?'

    The turnkey was discomfited. 'Well,' he said. 'Not in general.'

    'Are they very pretty, Bob?' She called him Bob, by his own particular
    request and instruction.

    'Lovely. Full of flowers. There's buttercups, and there's daisies,
    and there's'--the turnkey hesitated, being short of floral
    nomenclature--'there's dandelions, and all manner of games.'

    'Is it very pleasant to be there, Bob?'

    'Prime,' said the turnkey.

    'Was father ever there?'

    'Hem!' coughed the turnkey. 'O yes, he was there, sometimes.'

    'Is he sorry not to be there now?'

    'N-not particular,' said the turnkey.

    'Nor any of the people?' she asked, glancing at the listless crowd
    within. 'O are you quite sure and certain, Bob?'

    At this difficult point of the conversation Bob gave in, and changed the
    subject to hard-bake: always his last resource when he found his little
    friend getting him into a political, social, or theological corner.
    But this was the origin of a series of Sunday excursions that these two
    curious companions made together. They used to issue from the lodge on
    alternate Sunday afternoons with great gravity, bound for some meadows
    or green lanes that had been elaborately appointed by the turnkey in
    the course of the week; and there she picked grass and flowers to bring
    home, while he smoked his pipe. Afterwards, there were tea-gardens,
    shrimps, ale, and other delicacies; and then they would come back hand
    in hand, unless she was more than usually tired, and had fallen asleep
    on his shoulder.

    In those early days, the turnkey first began profoundly to consider
    a question which cost him so much mental labour, that it remained
    undetermined on the day of his death. He decided to will and bequeath
    his little property of savings to his godchild, and the point arose how
    could it be so 'tied up' as that only she should have the benefit of
    it? His experience on the lock gave him such an acute perception of the
    enormous difficulty of 'tying up' money with any approach to tightness,
    and contrariwise of the remarkable ease with which it got loose, that
    through a series of years he regularly propounded this knotty point to
    every new insolvent agent and other professional gentleman who passed in
    and out.

    'Supposing,' he would say, stating the case with his key on the
    professional gentleman's waistcoat; 'supposing a man wanted to leave his
    property to a young female, and wanted to tie it up so that nobody else
    should ever be able to make a grab at it; how would you tie up that
    property?'

    'Settle it strictly on herself,' the professional gentleman would
    complacently answer.

    'But look here,' quoth the turnkey. 'Supposing she had, say a brother,
    say a father, say a husband, who would be likely to make a grab at that
    property when she came into it--how about that?'

    'It would be settled on herself, and they would have no more legal claim
    on it than you,' would be the professional answer.

    'Stop a bit,' said the turnkey. 'Supposing she was tender-hearted, and
    they came over her. Where's your law for tying it up then?'

    The deepest character whom the turnkey sounded, was unable to produce
    his law for tying such a knot as that. So, the turnkey thought about it
    all his life, and died intestate after all.

    But that was long afterwards, when his god-daughter was past sixteen.
    The first half of that space of her life was only just accomplished,
    when her pitiful and plaintive look saw her father a widower. From that
    time the protection that her wondering eyes had expressed towards him,
    became embodied in action, and the Child of the Marshalsea took upon
    herself a new relation towards the Father.

    At first, such a baby could do little more than sit with him, deserting
    her livelier place by the high fender, and quietly watching him. But
    this made her so far necessary to him that he became accustomed to her,
    and began to be sensible of missing her when she was not there. Through
    this little gate, she passed out of childhood into the care-laden world.

    What her pitiful look saw, at that early time, in her father, in her
    sister, in her brother, in the jail; how much, or how little of the
    wretched truth it pleased God to make visible to her; lies hidden with
    many mysteries. It is enough that she was inspired to be something which
    was not what the rest were, and to be that something, different and
    laborious, for the sake of the rest. Inspired? Yes. Shall we speak of
    the inspiration of a poet or a priest, and not of the heart impelled by
    love and self-devotion to the lowliest work in the lowliest way of life!

    With no earthly friend to help her, or so much as to see her, but the
    one so strangely assorted; with no knowledge even of the common daily
    tone and habits of the common members of the free community who are not
    shut up in prisons; born and bred in a social condition, false even with
    a reference to the falsest condition outside the walls; drinking from
    infancy of a well whose waters had their own peculiar stain, their own
    unwholesome and unnatural taste; the Child of the Marshalsea began her
    womanly life.

    No matter through what mistakes and discouragements, what ridicule (not
            unkindly meant, but deeply felt) of her youth and little figure, what
    humble consciousness of her own babyhood and want of strength, even
    in the matter of lifting and carrying; through how much weariness
    and hopelessness, and how many secret tears; she drudged on, until
    recognised as useful, even indispensable. That time came. She took the
    place of eldest of the three, in all things but precedence; was the
    head of the fallen family; and bore, in her own heart, its anxieties and
    shames.

    At thirteen, she could read and keep accounts, that is, could put down
    in words and figures how much the bare necessaries that they wanted
    would cost, and how much less they had to buy them with. She had been,
    by snatches of a few weeks at a time, to an evening school outside,
    and got her sister and brother sent to day-schools by desultory starts,
    during three or four years. There was no instruction for any of them at
    home; but she knew well--no one better--that a man so broken as to be
    the Father of the Marshalsea, could be no father to his own children.

    To these scanty means of improvement, she added another of her own
    contriving. Once, among the heterogeneous crowd of inmates there
    appeared a dancing-master. Her sister had a great desire to learn the
    dancing-master's art, and seemed to have a taste that way. At thirteen
    years old, the Child of the Marshalsea presented herself to the
    dancing-master, with a little bag in her hand, and preferred her humble
    petition.

    'If you please, I was born here, sir.'

    'Oh! You are the young lady, are you?' said the dancing-master,
    surveying the small figure and uplifted face.

    'Yes, sir.'

    'And what can I do for you?' said the dancing-master.

    'Nothing for me, sir, thank you,' anxiously undrawing the strings of
    the little bag; 'but if, while you stay here, you could be so kind as to
    teach my sister cheap--'

    'My child, I'll teach her for nothing,' said the dancing-master,
    shutting up the bag. He was as good-natured a dancing-master as ever
    danced to the Insolvent Court, and he kept his word. The sister was so
    apt a pupil, and the dancing-master had such abundant leisure to bestow
    upon her (for it took him a matter of ten weeks to set to his creditors,
            lead off, turn the Commissioners, and right and left back to his
            professional pursuits), that wonderful progress was made. Indeed the
    dancing-master was so proud of it, and so wishful to display it before
    he left to a few select friends among the collegians, that at six
    o'clock on a certain fine morning, a minuet de la cour came off in
    the yard--the college-rooms being of too confined proportions for the
    purpose--in which so much ground was covered, and the steps were so
    conscientiously executed, that the dancing-master, having to play the
    kit besides, was thoroughly blown.

    The success of this beginning, which led to the dancing-master's
    continuing his instruction after his release, emboldened the poor child
    to try again. She watched and waited months for a seamstress. In the
    fulness of time a milliner came in, and to her she repaired on her own
    behalf.

    'I beg your pardon, ma'am,' she said, looking timidly round the door of
    the milliner, whom she found in tears and in bed: 'but I was born here.'

    Everybody seemed to hear of her as soon as they arrived; for the
    milliner sat up in bed, drying her eyes, and said, just as the
    dancing-master had said:

    'Oh! _You_ are the child, are you?'

    'Yes, ma'am.'

    'I am sorry I haven't got anything for you,' said the milliner, shaking
    her head.

    'It's not that, ma'am. If you please I want to learn needle-work.'

    'Why should you do that,' returned the milliner, 'with me before you? It
    has not done me much good.'

    'Nothing--whatever it is--seems to have done anybody much good who comes
    here,' she returned in all simplicity; 'but I want to learn just the
    same.'

    'I am afraid you are so weak, you see,' the milliner objected.

    'I don't think I am weak, ma'am.'

    'And you are so very, very little, you see,' the milliner objected.

    'Yes, I am afraid I am very little indeed,' returned the Child of the
    Marshalsea; and so began to sob over that unfortunate defect of hers,
    which came so often in her way. The milliner--who was not morose or
    hard-hearted, only newly insolvent--was touched, took her in hand with
    goodwill, found her the most patient and earnest of pupils, and made her
    a cunning work-woman in course of time.

    In course of time, and in the very self-same course of time, the Father
    of the Marshalsea gradually developed a new flower of character. The
    more Fatherly he grew as to the Marshalsea, and the more dependent he
    became on the contributions of his changing family, the greater stand
    he made by his forlorn gentility. With the same hand that he pocketed
    a collegian's half-crown half an hour ago, he would wipe away the
    tears that streamed over his cheeks if any reference were made to his
    daughters' earning their bread. So, over and above other daily cares,
    the Child of the Marshalsea had always upon her the care of preserving
    the genteel fiction that they were all idle beggars together.

    The sister became a dancer. There was a ruined uncle in the family
    group--ruined by his brother, the Father of the Marshalsea, and knowing
    no more how than his ruiner did, but accepting the fact as an inevitable
    certainty--on whom her protection devolved. Naturally a retired and
    simple man, he had shown no particular sense of being ruined at the time
    when that calamity fell upon him, further than that he left off washing
    himself when the shock was announced, and never took to that luxury any
    more. He had been a very indifferent musical amateur in his better days;
    and when he fell with his brother, resorted for support to playing a
    clarionet as dirty as himself in a small Theatre Orchestra. It was the
    theatre in which his niece became a dancer; he had been a fixture there
    a long time when she took her poor station in it; and he accepted
    the task of serving as her escort and guardian, just as he would have
    accepted an illness, a legacy, a feast, starvation--anything but soap.

    To enable this girl to earn her few weekly shillings, it was necessary
    for the Child of the Marshalsea to go through an elaborate form with the
    Father.

    'Fanny is not going to live with us just now, father. She will be here a
    good deal in the day, but she is going to live outside with uncle.'

    'You surprise me. Why?'

    'I think uncle wants a companion, father. He should be attended to, and
    looked after.'

    'A companion? He passes much of his time here. And you attend to him and
    look after him, Amy, a great deal more than ever your sister will. You
    all go out so much; you all go out so much.'

    This was to keep up the ceremony and pretence of his having no idea that
    Amy herself went out by the day to work.

    'But we are always glad to come home, father; now, are we not? And as to
    Fanny, perhaps besides keeping uncle company and taking care of him, it
    may be as well for her not quite to live here, always. She was not born
    here as I was, you know, father.'

    'Well, Amy, well. I don't quite follow you, but it's natural I suppose
    that Fanny should prefer to be outside, and even that you often should,
    too. So, you and Fanny and your uncle, my dear, shall have your own way.
    Good, good. I'll not meddle; don't mind me.'

    To get her brother out of the prison; out of the succession to Mrs
    Bangham in executing commissions, and out of the slang interchange with
    very doubtful companions consequent upon both; was her hardest task. At
    eighteen he would have dragged on from hand to mouth, from hour to hour,
    from penny to penny, until eighty. Nobody got into the prison from whom
    he derived anything useful or good, and she could find no patron for him
    but her old friend and godfather.

    'Dear Bob,' said she, 'what is to become of poor Tip?' His name was
    Edward, and Ted had been transformed into Tip, within the walls.

    The turnkey had strong private opinions as to what would become of
    poor Tip, and had even gone so far with the view of averting their
    fulfilment, as to sound Tip in reference to the expediency of running
    away and going to serve his country. But Tip had thanked him, and said
    he didn't seem to care for his country.

    'Well, my dear,' said the turnkey, 'something ought to be done with him.
    Suppose I try and get him into the law?'

    'That would be so good of you, Bob!'

    The turnkey had now two points to put to the professional gentlemen as
    they passed in and out. He put this second one so perseveringly that
    a stool and twelve shillings a week were at last found for Tip in the
    office of an attorney in a great National Palladium called the Palace
    Court; at that time one of a considerable list of everlasting bulwarks
    to the dignity and safety of Albion, whose places know them no more.

    Tip languished in Clifford's Inns for six months, and at the expiration
    of that term sauntered back one evening with his hands in his pockets,
    and incidentally observed to his sister that he was not going back
    again.

    'Not going back again?' said the poor little anxious Child of the
    Marshalsea, always calculating and planning for Tip, in the front rank
    of her charges.

    'I am so tired of it,' said Tip, 'that I have cut it.'

    Tip tired of everything. With intervals of Marshalsea lounging, and Mrs
    Bangham succession, his small second mother, aided by her trusty friend,
    got him into a warehouse, into a market garden, into the hop trade,
    into the law again, into an auctioneers, into a brewery, into a
    stockbroker's, into the law again, into a coach office, into a waggon
    office, into the law again, into a general dealer's, into a distillery,
    into the law again, into a wool house, into a dry goods house, into the
    Billingsgate trade, into the foreign fruit trade, and into the docks.
    But whatever Tip went into, he came out of tired, announcing that he
    had cut it. Wherever he went, this foredoomed Tip appeared to take the
    prison walls with him, and to set them up in such trade or calling;
    and to prowl about within their narrow limits in the old slip-shod,
    purposeless, down-at-heel way; until the real immovable Marshalsea walls
    asserted their fascination over him, and brought him back.

    Nevertheless, the brave little creature did so fix her heart on her
    brother's rescue, that while he was ringing out these doleful changes,
    she pinched and scraped enough together to ship him for Canada. When he
    was tired of nothing to do, and disposed in its turn to cut even that,
    he graciously consented to go to Canada. And there was grief in her
    bosom over parting with him, and joy in the hope of his being put in a
    straight course at last.

    'God bless you, dear Tip. Don't be too proud to come and see us, when
    you have made your fortune.'

    'All right!' said Tip, and went.

    But not all the way to Canada; in fact, not further than Liverpool.
    After making the voyage to that port from London, he found himself
    so strongly impelled to cut the vessel, that he resolved to walk back
    again. Carrying out which intention, he presented himself before her at
    the expiration of a month, in rags, without shoes, and much more tired
    than ever.

    At length, after another interval of successorship to Mrs Bangham, he
    found a pursuit for himself, and announced it.

    'Amy, I have got a situation.'

    'Have you really and truly, Tip?'

    'All right. I shall do now. You needn't look anxious about me any more,
    old girl.'

    'What is it, Tip?'

    'Why, you know Slingo by sight?'

    'Not the man they call the dealer?'

    'That's the chap. He'll be out on Monday, and he's going to give me a
    berth.'

    'What is he a dealer in, Tip?'

    'Horses. All right! I shall do now, Amy.'

    She lost sight of him for months afterwards, and only heard from him
    once. A whisper passed among the elder collegians that he had been seen
    at a mock auction in Moorfields, pretending to buy plated articles for
    massive silver, and paying for them with the greatest liberality in
    bank notes; but it never reached her ears. One evening she was alone at
    work--standing up at the window, to save the twilight lingering above
    the wall--when he opened the door and walked in.

    She kissed and welcomed him; but was afraid to ask him any questions. He
    saw how anxious and timid she was, and appeared sorry.

    'I am afraid, Amy, you'll be vexed this time. Upon my life I am!'

    'I am very sorry to hear you say so, Tip. Have you come back?'

    'Why--yes.'

    'Not expecting this time that what you had found would answer very well,
    I am less surprised and sorry than I might have been, Tip.'

    'Ah! But that's not the worst of it.'

    'Not the worst of it?'

    'Don't look so startled. No, Amy, not the worst of it. I have come back,
    you see; but--_don't_ look so startled--I have come back in what I may
    call a new way. I am off the volunteer list altogether. I am in now, as
    one of the regulars.'

    'Oh! Don't say you are a prisoner, Tip! Don't, don't!'

    'Well, I don't want to say it,' he returned in a reluctant tone; 'but if
    you can't understand me without my saying it, what am I to do? I am in
    for forty pound odd.'

    For the first time in all those years, she sunk under her cares. She
    cried, with her clasped hands lifted above her head, that it would kill
    their father if he ever knew it; and fell down at Tip's graceless feet.

    It was easier for Tip to bring her to her senses than for her to bring
    _him_ to understand that the Father of the Marshalsea would be beside
    himself if he knew the truth. The thing was incomprehensible to Tip, and
    altogether a fanciful notion. He yielded to it in that light only, when
    he submitted to her entreaties, backed by those of his uncle and sister.
    There was no want of precedent for his return; it was accounted for
    to the father in the usual way; and the collegians, with a better
    comprehension of the pious fraud than Tip, supported it loyally.

    This was the life, and this the history, of the child of the Marshalsea
    at twenty-two. With a still surviving attachment to the one miserable
    yard and block of houses as her birthplace and home, she passed to and
    fro in it shrinkingly now, with a womanly consciousness that she was
    pointed out to every one. Since she had begun to work beyond the walls,
    she had found it necessary to conceal where she lived, and to come and
    go as secretly as she could, between the free city and the iron gates,
    outside of which she had never slept in her life. Her original timidity
    had grown with this concealment, and her light step and her little
    figure shunned the thronged streets while they passed along them.

    Worldly wise in hard and poor necessities, she was innocent in all
    things else. Innocent, in the mist through which she saw her father,
    and the prison, and the turbid living river that flowed through it and
    flowed on.

    This was the life, and this the history, of Little Dorrit; now going
    home upon a dull September evening, observed at a distance by Arthur
    Clennam. This was the life, and this the history, of Little Dorrit;
    turning at the end of London Bridge, recrossing it, going back again,
    passing on to Saint George's Church, turning back suddenly once more,
    and flitting in at the open outer gate and little court-yard of the
    Marshalsea.


