In the autumn of the year, Darkness and Night were creeping up to the
highest ridges of the Alps.

It was vintage time in the valleys on the Swiss side of the Pass of the
Great Saint Bernard, and along the banks of the Lake of Geneva.
The air there was charged with the scent of gathered grapes. Baskets,
    troughs, and tubs of grapes stood in the dim village doorways, stopped
    the steep and narrow village streets, and had been carrying all day
    along the roads and lanes. Grapes, split and crushed under foot, lay
    about everywhere. The child carried in a sling by the laden peasant
    woman toiling home, was quieted with picked-up grapes; the idiot sunning
    his big goitre under the leaves of the wooden chalet by the way to the
    Waterfall, sat munching grapes; the breath of the cows and goats was
    redolent of leaves and stalks of grapes; the company in every little
    cabaret were eating, drinking, talking grapes. A pity that no ripe touch
    of this generous abundance could be given to the thin, hard, stony wine,
    which after all was made from the grapes!

    The air had been warm and transparent through the whole of the bright
    day. Shining metal spires and church-roofs, distant and rarely seen, had
    sparkled in the view; and the snowy mountain-tops had been so clear that
    unaccustomed eyes, cancelling the intervening country, and slighting
    their rugged heights for something fabulous, would have measured them as
    within a few hours easy reach. Mountain-peaks of great celebrity in the
    valleys, whence no trace of their existence was visible sometimes for
    months together, had been since morning plain and near in the blue sky.
    And now, when it was dark below, though they seemed solemnly to recede,
    like spectres who were going to vanish, as the red dye of the sunset
    faded out of them and left them coldly white, they were yet distinctly
    defined in their loneliness above the mists and shadows.

    Seen from these solitudes, and from the Pass of the Great Saint Bernard,
    which was one of them, the ascending Night came up the mountain like a
    rising water. When it at last rose to the walls of the convent of the
    Great Saint Bernard, it was as if that weather-beaten structure were
    another Ark, and floated on the shadowy waves.

    Darkness, outstripping some visitors on mules, had risen thus to
    the rough convent walls, when those travellers were yet climbing the
    mountain. As the heat of the glowing day when they had stopped to drink
    at the streams of melted ice and snow, was changed to the searching cold
    of the frosty rarefied night air at a great height, so the fresh beauty
    of the lower journey had yielded to barrenness and desolation. A craggy
    track, up which the mules in single file scrambled and turned from
    block to block, as though they were ascending the broken staircase of
    a gigantic ruin, was their way now. No trees were to be seen, nor any
    vegetable growth save a poor brown scrubby moss, freezing in the chinks
    of rock. Blackened skeleton arms of wood by the wayside pointed upward
    to the convent as if the ghosts of former travellers overwhelmed by the
    snow haunted the scene of their distress. Icicle-hung caves and cellars
    built for refuges from sudden storms, were like so many whispers of the
    perils of the place; never-resting wreaths and mazes of mist wandered
    about, hunted by a moaning wind; and snow, the besetting danger of the
    mountain, against which all its defences were taken, drifted sharply
    down.

    The file of mules, jaded by their day's work, turned and wound slowly
    up the deep ascent; the foremost led by a guide on foot, in his
    broad-brimmed hat and round jacket, carrying a mountain staff or two
    upon his shoulder, with whom another guide conversed. There was no
    speaking among the string of riders. The sharp cold, the fatigue of the
    journey, and a new sensation of a catching in the breath, partly as if
    they had just emerged from very clear crisp water, and partly as if they
    had been sobbing, kept them silent.

    At length, a light on the summit of the rocky staircase gleamed through
    the snow and mist. The guides called to the mules, the mules pricked up
    their drooping heads, the travellers' tongues were loosened, and in a
    sudden burst of slipping, climbing, jingling, clinking, and talking,
    they arrived at the convent door.

    Other mules had arrived not long before, some with peasant riders and
    some with goods, and had trodden the snow about the door into a pool
    of mud. Riding-saddles and bridles, pack-saddles and strings of bells,
    mules and men, lanterns, torches, sacks, provender, barrels, cheeses,
    kegs of honey and butter, straw bundles and packages of many shapes,
    were crowded confusedly together in this thawed quagmire and about the
    steps. Up here in the clouds, everything was seen through cloud, and
    seemed dissolving into cloud. The breath of the men was cloud, the
    breath of the mules was cloud, the lights were encircled by cloud,
    speakers close at hand were not seen for cloud, though their voices and
    all other sounds were surprisingly clear. Of the cloudy line of mules
    hastily tied to rings in the wall, one would bite another, or kick
    another, and then the whole mist would be disturbed: with men diving
    into it, and cries of men and beasts coming out of it, and no bystander
    discerning what was wrong. In the midst of this, the great stable of the
    convent, occupying the basement story and entered by the basement door,
    outside which all the disorder was, poured forth its contribution of
    cloud, as if the whole rugged edifice were filled with nothing else,
    and would collapse as soon as it had emptied itself, leaving the snow to
    fall upon the bare mountain summit.

    While all this noise and hurry were rife among the living travellers,
    there, too, silently assembled in a grated house half-a-dozen paces
    removed, with the same cloud enfolding them and the same snow flakes
    drifting in upon them, were the dead travellers found upon the mountain.
    The mother, storm-belated many winters ago, still standing in the corner
    with her baby at her breast; the man who had frozen with his arm raised
    to his mouth in fear or hunger, still pressing it with his dry lips
    after years and years. An awful company, mysteriously come together! A
    wild destiny for that mother to have foreseen! 'Surrounded by so many
    and such companions upon whom I never looked, and never shall look,
    I and my child will dwell together inseparable, on the Great Saint
    Bernard, outlasting generations who will come to see us, and will never
    know our name, or one word of our story but the end.'

    The living travellers thought little or nothing of the dead just then.
    They thought much more of alighting at the convent door, and warming
    themselves at the convent fire. Disengaged from the turmoil, which was
    already calming down as the crowd of mules began to be bestowed in the
    stable, they hurried shivering up the steps and into the building. There
    was a smell within, coming up from the floor, of tethered beasts, like
    the smell of a menagerie of wild animals. There were strong arched
    galleries within, huge stone piers, great staircases, and thick walls
    pierced with small sunken windows--fortifications against the mountain
    storms, as if they had been human enemies. There were gloomy vaulted
    sleeping-rooms within, intensely cold, but clean and hospitably prepared
    for guests. Finally, there was a parlour for guests to sit in and sup
    in, where a table was already laid, and where a blazing fire shone red
    and high.

    In this room, after having had their quarters for the night allotted
    to them by two young Fathers, the travellers presently drew round the
    hearth. They were in three parties; of whom the first, as the most
    numerous and important, was the slowest, and had been overtaken by
    one of the others on the way up. It consisted of an elderly lady, two
    grey-haired gentlemen, two young ladies, and their brother. These were
    attended (not to mention four guides), by a courier, two footmen, and
    two waiting-maids: which strong body of inconvenience was accommodated
    elsewhere under the same roof. The party that had overtaken them, and
    followed in their train, consisted of only three members: one lady and
    two gentlemen. The third party, which had ascended from the valley
    on the Italian side of the Pass, and had arrived first, were four in
    number: a plethoric, hungry, and silent German tutor in spectacles, on
    a tour with three young men, his pupils, all plethoric, hungry, and
    silent, and all in spectacles.

    These three groups sat round the fire eyeing each other drily, and
    waiting for supper. Only one among them, one of the gentlemen belonging
    to the party of three, made advances towards conversation. Throwing out
    his lines for the Chief of the important tribe, while addressing himself
    to his own companions, he remarked, in a tone of voice which included
    all the company if they chose to be included, that it had been a long
    day, and that he felt for the ladies. That he feared one of the
    young ladies was not a strong or accustomed traveller, and had been
    over-fatigued two or three hours ago. That he had observed, from his
    station in the rear, that she sat her mule as if she were exhausted.
    That he had, twice or thrice afterwards, done himself the honour of
    inquiring of one of the guides, when he fell behind, how the lady did.
    That he had been enchanted to learn that she had recovered her spirits,
    and that it had been but a passing discomfort. That he trusted (by this
            time he had secured the eyes of the Chief, and addressed him) he might
    be permitted to express his hope that she was now none the worse, and
    that she would not regret having made the journey.

    'My daughter, I am obliged to you, sir,' returned the Chief, 'is quite
    restored, and has been greatly interested.'

    'New to mountains, perhaps?' said the insinuating traveller.

    'New to--ha--to mountains,' said the Chief.

    'But you are familiar with them, sir?' the insinuating traveller
    assumed.

    'I am--hum--tolerably familiar. Not of late years. Not of late years,'
    replied the Chief, with a flourish of his hand.

    The insinuating traveller, acknowledging the flourish with an
    inclination of his head, passed from the Chief to the second young lady,
    who had not yet been referred to otherwise than as one of the ladies in
    whose behalf he felt so sensitive an interest.

    He hoped she was not incommoded by the fatigues of the day.

    'Incommoded, certainly,' returned the young lady, 'but not tired.'

    The insinuating traveller complimented her on the justice of the
    distinction. It was what he had meant to say. Every lady must doubtless
    be incommoded by having to do with that proverbially unaccommodating
    animal, the mule.

    'We have had, of course,' said the young lady, who was rather reserved
    and haughty, 'to leave the carriages and fourgon at Martigny. And the
    impossibility of bringing anything that one wants to this inaccessible
    place, and the necessity of leaving every comfort behind, is not
    convenient.'

    'A savage place indeed,' said the insinuating traveller.

    The elderly lady, who was a model of accurate dressing, and whose manner
    was perfect, considered as a piece of machinery, here interposed a
    remark in a low soft voice.

    'But, like other inconvenient places,' she observed, 'it must be seen.
    As a place much spoken of, it is necessary to see it.'

    'O! I have not the least objection to seeing it, I assure you, Mrs
    General,' returned the other, carelessly.

    'You, madam,' said the insinuating traveller, 'have visited this spot
    before?'

    'Yes,' returned Mrs General. 'I have been here before. Let me
    commend you, my dear,' to the former young lady, 'to shade your face
    from the hot wood, after exposure to the mountain air and snow. You,
    too, my dear,' to the other and younger lady, who immediately did so;
while the former merely said, 'Thank you, Mrs General, I am Perfectly
comfortable, and prefer remaining as I am.'

The brother, who had left his chair to open a piano that stood in
the room, and who had whistled into it and shut it up again, now came
strolling back to the fire with his glass in his eye. He was dressed in
the very fullest and completest travelling trim. The world seemed hardly
large enough to yield him an amount of travel proportionate to his
equipment.

'These fellows are an immense time with supper,' he drawled. 'I wonder
what they'll give us! Has anybody any idea?'

'Not roast man, I believe,' replied the voice of the second gentleman of
the party of three.

'I suppose not. What d'ye mean?' he inquired.

'That, as you are not to be served for the general supper, perhaps you
will do us the favour of not cooking yourself at the general fire,'
returned the other.

The young gentleman who was standing in an easy attitude on the hearth,
    cocking his glass at the company, with his back to the blaze and his
    coat tucked under his arms, something as if he were Of the Poultry
    species and were trussed for roasting, lost countenance at this
    reply; he seemed about to demand further explanation, when it was
    discovered--through all eyes turning on the speaker--that the lady with
    him, who was young and beautiful, had not heard what had passed through
    having fainted with her head upon his shoulder.

    'I think,' said the gentleman in a subdued tone, 'I had best carry
    her straight to her room. Will you call to some one to bring a light?'
    addressing his companion, 'and to show the way? In this strange rambling
    place I don't know that I could find it.'

    'Pray, let me call my maid,' cried the taller of the young ladies.

    'Pray, let me put this water to her lips,' said the shorter, who had not
    spoken yet.

    Each doing what she suggested, there was no want of assistance. Indeed,
    when the two maids came in (escorted by the courier, lest any one should
            strike them dumb by addressing a foreign language to them on the road),
    there was a prospect of too much assistance. Seeing this, and saying as
    much in a few words to the slighter and younger of the two ladies,
    the gentleman put his wife's arm over his shoulder, lifted her up, and
    carried her away.

    His friend, being left alone with the other visitors, walked slowly up
    and down the room without coming to the fire again, pulling his black
    moustache in a contemplative manner, as if he felt himself committed
    to the late retort. While the subject of it was breathing injury in a
    corner, the Chief loftily addressed this gentleman.

    'Your friend, sir,' said he, 'is--ha--is a little impatient; and, in
    his impatience, is not perhaps fully sensible of what he owes
    to--hum--to--but we will waive that, we will waive that. Your friend is
    a little impatient, sir.'

    'It may be so, sir,' returned the other. 'But having had the honour of
    making that gentleman's acquaintance at the hotel at Geneva, where we
    and much good company met some time ago, and having had the honour
    of exchanging company and conversation with that gentleman on several
    subsequent excursions, I can hear nothing--no, not even from one of your
    appearance and station, sir--detrimental to that gentleman.'

    'You are in no danger, sir, of hearing any such thing from me. In
    remarking that your friend has shown impatience, I say no such thing. I
    make that remark, because it is not to be doubted that my son, being by
    birth and by--ha--by education a--hum--a gentleman, would have readily
    adapted himself to any obligingly expressed wish on the subject of the
    fire being equally accessible to the whole of the present circle. Which,
    in principle, I--ha--for all are--hum--equal on these occasions--I
    consider right.'

    'Good,' was the reply. 'And there it ends! I am your son's obedient
    servant. I beg your son to receive the assurance of my profound
    consideration. And now, sir, I may admit, freely admit, that my friend
    is sometimes of a sarcastic temper.'

    'The lady is your friend's wife, sir?'

    'The lady is my friend's wife, sir.'

    'She is very handsome.'

    'Sir, she is peerless. They are still in the first year of their
    marriage. They are still partly on a marriage, and partly on an
    artistic, tour.'

    'Your friend is an artist, sir?'

    The gentleman replied by kissing the fingers of his right hand, and
    wafting the kiss the length of his arm towards Heaven. As who should
    say, I devote him to the celestial Powers as an immortal artist!

    'But he is a man of family,' he added. 'His connections are of the best.
    He is more than an artist: he is highly connected. He may, in effect,
    have repudiated his connections, proudly, impatiently, sarcastically (I
            make the concession of both words); but he has them. Sparks that have
    been struck out during our intercourse have shown me this.'

    'Well! I hope,' said the lofty gentleman, with the air of finally
    disposing of the subject, 'that the lady's indisposition may be only
    temporary.'

    'Sir, I hope so.'

    'Mere fatigue, I dare say.'

    'Not altogether mere fatigue, sir, for her mule stumbled to-day, and
    she fell from the saddle. She fell lightly, and was up again without
    assistance, and rode from us laughing; but she complained towards
    evening of a slight bruise in the side. She spoke of it more than once,
    as we followed your party up the mountain.'

    The head of the large retinue, who was gracious but not familiar,
    appeared by this time to think that he had condescended more than
    enough. He said no more, and there was silence for some quarter of an
    hour until supper appeared.

    With the supper came one of the young Fathers (there seemed to be no
            old Fathers) to take the head of the table. It was like the supper of
    an ordinary Swiss hotel, and good red wine grown by the convent in more
    genial air was not wanting. The artist traveller calmly came and took
    his place at table when the rest sat down, with no apparent sense upon
    him of his late skirmish with the completely dressed traveller.

    'Pray,' he inquired of the host, over his soup, 'has your convent many
    of its famous dogs now?'

    'Monsieur, it has three.'

    'I saw three in the gallery below. Doubtless the three in question.'

    The host, a slender, bright-eyed, dark young man of polite manners,
    whose garment was a black gown with strips of white crossed over it like
    braces, and who no more resembled the conventional breed of Saint
    Bernard monks than he resembled the conventional breed of Saint Bernard
    dogs, replied, doubtless those were the three in question.

    'And I think,' said the artist traveller, 'I have seen one of them
    before.'

    It was possible. He was a dog sufficiently well known. Monsieur might
    have easily seen him in the valley or somewhere on the lake, when he
    (the dog) had gone down with one of the order to solicit aid for the
    convent.

    'Which is done in its regular season of the year, I think?'

    Monsieur was right.

    'And never without a dog. The dog is very important.'

    Again Monsieur was right. The dog was very important. People were justly
    interested in the dog. As one of the dogs celebrated everywhere,
    Ma'amselle would observe.

    Ma'amselle was a little slow to observe it, as though she were not yet
    well accustomed to the French tongue. Mrs General, however, observed it
    for her.

    'Ask him if he has saved many lives?' said, in his native English, the
    young man who had been put out of countenance.

    The host needed no translation of the question. He promptly replied in
    French, 'No. Not this one.'

    'Why not?' the same gentleman asked.

    'Pardon,' returned the host composedly, 'give him the opportunity and
    he will do it without doubt. For example, I am well convinced,' smiling
    sedately, as he cut up the dish of veal to be handed round, on the young
    man who had been put out of countenance, 'that if you, Monsieur, would
    give him the opportunity, he would hasten with great ardour to fulfil
    his duty.'

    The artist traveller laughed. The insinuating traveller (who evinced
            a provident anxiety to get his full share of the supper), wiping some
    drops of wine from his moustache with a piece of bread, joined the
    conversation.

    'It is becoming late in the year, my Father,' said he, 'for
    tourist-travellers, is it not?'

    'Yes, it is late. Yet two or three weeks, at most, and we shall be left
    to the winter snows.'

    'And then,' said the insinuating traveller, 'for the scratching dogs and
    the buried children, according to the pictures!'

    'Pardon,' said the host, not quite understanding the allusion. 'How,
    then the scratching dogs and the buried children according to the
    pictures?'

    The artist traveller struck in again before an answer could be given.

    'Don't you know,' he coldly inquired across the table of his companion,
    'that none but smugglers come this way in the winter or can have any
    possible business this way?'

    'Holy blue! No; never heard of it.'

    'So it is, I believe. And as they know the signs of the weather
    tolerably well, they don't give much employment to the dogs--who have
    consequently died out rather--though this house of entertainment is
    conveniently situated for themselves. Their young families, I am told,
    they usually leave at home. But it's a grand idea!' cried the artist
    traveller, unexpectedly rising into a tone of enthusiasm. 'It's a
    sublime idea. It's the finest idea in the world, and brings tears into
    a man's eyes, by Jupiter!' He then went on eating his veal with great
    composure.

    There was enough of mocking inconsistency at the bottom of this speech
    to make it rather discordant, though the manner was refined and the
    person well-favoured, and though the depreciatory part of it was so
    skilfully thrown off as to be very difficult for one not perfectly
    acquainted with the English language to understand, or, even
    understanding, to take offence at: so simple and dispassionate was its
    tone. After finishing his veal in the midst of silence, the speaker
    again addressed his friend.

    'Look,' said he, in his former tone, 'at this gentleman our host, not
    yet in the prime of life, who in so graceful a way and with such courtly
    urbanity and modesty presides over us! Manners fit for a crown! Dine
    with the Lord Mayor of London (if you can get an invitation) and observe
    the contrast. This dear fellow, with the finest cut face I ever saw, a
    face in perfect drawing, leaves some laborious life and comes up here
    I don't know how many feet above the level of the sea, for no other
    purpose on earth (except enjoying himself, I hope, in a capital
            refectory) than to keep an hotel for idle poor devils like you and
    me, and leave the bill to our consciences! Why, isn't it a beautiful
    sacrifice? What do we want more to touch us? Because rescued people of
    interesting appearance are not, for eight or nine months out of every
    twelve, holding on here round the necks of the most sagacious of dogs
    carrying wooden bottles, shall we disparage the place? No! Bless the
    place. It's a great place, a glorious place!'

    The chest of the grey-haired gentleman who was the Chief of the
    important party, had swelled as if with a protest against his being
    numbered among poor devils. No sooner had the artist traveller ceased
    speaking than he himself spoke with great dignity, as having it
    incumbent on him to take the lead in most places, and having deserted
    that duty for a little while.

    He weightily communicated his opinion to their host, that his life must
    be a very dreary life here in the winter.

    The host allowed to Monsieur that it was a little monotonous. The air
    was difficult to breathe for a length of time consecutively. The cold
    was very severe. One needed youth and strength to bear it. However,
    having them and the blessing of Heaven--

    Yes, that was very good. 'But the confinement,' said the grey-haired
    gentleman.

    There were many days, even in bad weather, when it was possible to
    walk about outside. It was the custom to beat a little track, and take
    exercise there.

    'But the space,' urged the grey-haired gentleman. 'So small.
    So--ha--very limited.'

    Monsieur would recall to himself that there were the refuges to visit,
    and that tracks had to be made to them also.

    Monsieur still urged, on the other hand, that the space was
    so--ha--hum--so very contracted. More than that, it was always the same,
    always the same.

    With a deprecating smile, the host gently raised and gently lowered his
    shoulders. That was true, he remarked, but permit him to say that almost
    all objects had their various points of view. Monsieur and he did not
    see this poor life of his from the same point of view. Monsieur was not
    used to confinement.

    'I--ha--yes, very true,' said the grey-haired gentleman. He seemed to
    receive quite a shock from the force of the argument.

    Monsieur, as an English traveller, surrounded by all means of travelling
    pleasantly; doubtless possessing fortune, carriages, and servants--

    'Perfectly, perfectly. Without doubt,' said the gentleman.

    Monsieur could not easily place himself in the position of a person who
    had not the power to choose, I will go here to-morrow, or there next
    day; I will pass these barriers, I will enlarge those bounds. Monsieur
    could not realise, perhaps, how the mind accommodated itself in such
    things to the force of necessity.

    'It is true,' said Monsieur. 'We will--ha--not pursue the subject.
    You are--hum--quite accurate, I have no doubt. We will say no more.'

    The supper having come to a close, he drew his chair away as he spoke,
    and moved back to his former place by the fire. As it was very cold
    at the greater part of the table, the other guests also resumed their
    former seats by the fire, designing to toast themselves well before
    going to bed. The host, when they rose from the table, bowed to all
    present, wished them good night, and withdrew. But first the insinuating
    traveller had asked him if they could have some wine made hot; and as
    he had answered Yes, and had presently afterwards sent it in, that
    traveller, seated in the centre of the group, and in the full heat of
    the fire, was soon engaged in serving it out to the rest.

    At this time, the younger of the two young ladies, who had been silently
    attentive in her dark corner (the fire-light was the chief light in the
            sombre room, the lamp being smoky and dull) to what had been said of the
    absent lady, glided out. She was at a loss which way to turn when she
    had softly closed the door; but, after a little hesitation among the
    sounding passages and the many ways, came to a room in a corner of the
    main gallery, where the servants were at their supper. From these she
    obtained a lamp, and a direction to the lady's room.

    It was up the great staircase on the story above. Here and there, the
    bare white walls were broken by an iron grate, and she thought as she
    went along that the place was something like a prison. The arched door
    of the lady's room, or cell, was not quite shut. After knocking at it
    two or three times without receiving an answer, she pushed it gently
    open, and looked in.

    The lady lay with closed eyes on the outside of the bed, protected from
    the cold by the blankets and wrappers with which she had been covered
    when she revived from her fainting fit. A dull light placed in the deep
    recess of the window, made little impression on the arched room. The
    visitor timidly stepped to the bed, and said, in a soft whisper, 'Are
    you better?'

    The lady had fallen into a slumber, and the whisper was too low to awake
    her. Her visitor, standing quite still, looked at her attentively.

    'She is very pretty,' she said to herself. 'I never saw so beautiful a
    face. O how unlike me!'

    It was a curious thing to say, but it had some hidden meaning, for it
    filled her eyes with tears.

    'I know I must be right. I know he spoke of her that evening. I could
    very easily be wrong on any other subject, but not on this, not on
    this!'

    With a quiet and tender hand she put aside a straying fold of the
    sleeper's hair, and then touched the hand that lay outside the covering.

    'I like to look at her,' she breathed to herself. 'I like to see what
    has affected him so much.'

    She had not withdrawn her hand, when the sleeper opened her eyes and
    started.

    'Pray don't be alarmed. I am only one of the travellers from
    down-stairs. I came to ask if you were better, and if I could do
    anything for you.'

    'I think you have already been so kind as to send your servants to my
    assistance?'

    'No, not I; that was my sister. Are you better?'

    'Much better. It is only a slight bruise, and has been well looked to,
    and is almost easy now. It made me giddy and faint in a moment. It had
    hurt me before; but at last it overpowered me all at once.'

    'May I stay with you until some one comes? Would you like it?'

    'I should like it, for it is lonely here; but I am afraid you will feel
    the cold too much.'

    'I don't mind cold. I am not delicate, if I look so.' She quickly moved
    one of the two rough chairs to the bedside, and sat down. The other as
    quickly moved a part of some travelling wrapper from herself, and drew
    it over her, so that her arm, in keeping it about her, rested on her
    shoulder.

    'You have so much the air of a kind nurse,' said the lady, smiling on
    her, 'that you seem as if you had come to me from home.'

    'I am very glad of it.'

    'I was dreaming of home when I woke just now. Of my old home, I mean,
    before I was married.'

    'And before you were so far away from it.'

    'I have been much farther away from it than this; but then I took
    the best part of it with me, and missed nothing. I felt solitary as I
    dropped asleep here, and, missing it a little, wandered back to it.'

    There was a sorrowfully affectionate and regretful sound in her voice,
    which made her visitor refrain from looking at her for the moment.

    'It is a curious chance which at last brings us together, under this
    covering in which you have wrapped me,' said the visitor after a
    pause; 'for do you know, I think I have been looking for you some time.'

    'Looking for me?'

    'I believe I have a little note here, which I was to give to you
    whenever I found you. This is it. Unless I greatly mistake, it is
    addressed to you? Is it not?'

    The lady took it, and said yes, and read it. Her visitor watched her as
    she did so. It was very short. She flushed a little as she put her lips
    to her visitor's cheek, and pressed her hand.

    'The dear young friend to whom he presents me, may be a comfort to me
    at some time, he says. She is truly a comfort to me the first time I see
    her.'

    'Perhaps you don't,' said the visitor, hesitating--'perhaps you don't
    know my story? Perhaps he never told you my story?'

    'No.'

    'Oh no, why should he! I have scarcely the right to tell it myself at
    present, because I have been entreated not to do so. There is not much
    in it, but it might account to you for my asking you not to say anything
    about the letter here. You saw my family with me, perhaps? Some of
    them--I only say this to you--are a little proud, a little prejudiced.'

    'You shall take it back again,' said the other; 'and then my husband is
    sure not to see it. He might see it and speak of it, otherwise, by some
    accident. Will you put it in your bosom again, to be certain?'

    She did so with great care. Her small, slight hand was still upon the
    letter, when they heard some one in the gallery outside.

    'I promised,' said the visitor, rising, 'that I would write to him after
    seeing you (I could hardly fail to see you sooner or later), and tell
    him if you were well and happy. I had better say you were well and
    happy.'

    'Yes, yes, yes! Say I was very well and very happy. And that I thanked
    him affectionately, and would never forget him.'

    'I shall see you in the morning. After that we are sure to meet again
    before very long. Good night!'

    'Good night. Thank you, thank you. Good night, my dear!'

    Both of them were hurried and fluttered as they exchanged this parting,
    and as the visitor came out of the door. She had expected to meet the
    lady's husband approaching it; but the person in the gallery was not
    he: it was the traveller who had wiped the wine-drops from his moustache
    with the piece of bread. When he heard the step behind him, he turned
    round--for he was walking away in the dark.

    His politeness, which was extreme, would not allow of the young lady's
    lighting herself down-stairs, or going down alone. He took her lamp,
    held it so as to throw the best light on the stone steps, and followed
    her all the way to the supper-room. She went down, not easily hiding how
    much she was inclined to shrink and tremble; for the appearance of this
    traveller was particularly disagreeable to her. She had sat in her quiet
    corner before supper imagining what he would have been in the scenes and
    places within her experience, until he inspired her with an aversion
    that made him little less than terrific.

    He followed her down with his smiling politeness, followed her in,
    and resumed his seat in the best place in the hearth. There with the
    wood-fire, which was beginning to burn low, rising and falling upon him
    in the dark room, he sat with his legs thrust out to warm, drinking the
    hot wine down to the lees, with a monstrous shadow imitating him on the
    wall and ceiling.

    The tired company had broken up, and all the rest were gone to bed
    except the young lady's father, who dozed in his chair by the fire.
    The traveller had been at the pains of going a long way up-stairs to his
    sleeping-room to fetch his pocket-flask of brandy. He told them so, as
    he poured its contents into what was left of the wine, and drank with a
    new relish.

    'May I ask, sir, if you are on your way to Italy?'

    The grey-haired gentleman had roused himself, and was preparing to
    withdraw. He answered in the affirmative.

    'I also!' said the traveller. 'I shall hope to have the honour
    of offering my compliments in fairer scenes, and under softer
    circumstances, than on this dismal mountain.'

    The gentleman bowed, distantly enough, and said he was obliged to him.

    'We poor gentlemen, sir,' said the traveller, pulling his moustache dry
    with his hand, for he had dipped it in the wine and brandy; 'we poor
    gentlemen do not travel like princes, but the courtesies and graces of
    life are precious to us. To your health, sir!'

    'Sir, I thank you.'

    'To the health of your distinguished family--of the fair ladies, your
    daughters!'

    'Sir, I thank you again, I wish you good night. My dear, are
    our--ha--our people in attendance?'

    'They are close by, father.'

    'Permit me!' said the traveller, rising and holding the door open, as
    the gentleman crossed the room towards it with his arm drawn through his
    daughter's. 'Good repose! To the pleasure of seeing you once more! To
    to-morrow!'

    As he kissed his hand, with his best manner and his daintiest smile,
    the young lady drew a little nearer to her father, and passed him with a
    dread of touching him.

    'Humph!' said the insinuating traveller, whose manner shrunk, and whose
    voice dropped when he was left alone. 'If they all go to bed, why I must
    go. They are in a devil of a hurry. One would think the night would be
    long enough, in this freezing silence and solitude, if one went to bed
    two hours hence.'

    Throwing back his head in emptying his glass, he cast his eyes upon the
    travellers' book, which lay on the piano, open, with pens and ink beside
    it, as if the night's names had been registered when he was absent.
    Taking it in his hand, he read these entries.


    William Dorrit, Esquire
    Frederick Dorrit, Esquire
    Edward Dorrit, Esquire
    Miss Dorrit
    Miss Amy Dorrit
    Mrs General
    and Suite.
    From France to Italy.

    Mr and Mrs Henry Gowan.
    From France to Italy.


    To which he added, in a small complicated hand, ending with a long lean
    flourish, not unlike a lasso thrown at all the rest of the names:


    Blandois.  Paris.
    From France to Italy.


    And then, with his nose coming down over his moustache and his moustache
    going up and under his nose, repaired to his allotted cell.




It is indispensable to present the accomplished lady who was of
sufficient importance in the suite of the Dorrit Family to have a line
to herself in the Travellers' Book.

Mrs General was the daughter of a clerical dignitary in a cathedral
town, where she had led the fashion until she was as near forty-five as
a single lady can be. A stiff commissariat officer of sixty, famous as a
martinet, had then become enamoured of the gravity with which she drove
the proprieties four-in-hand through the cathedral town society, and
had solicited to be taken beside her on the box of the cool coach of
ceremony to which that team was harnessed. His proposal of marriage
being accepted by the lady, the commissary took his seat behind
the proprieties with great decorum, and Mrs General drove until the
commissary died. In the course of their united journey, they ran over
several people who came in the way of the proprieties; but always in a
high style and with composure.

The commissary having been buried with all the decorations suitable to
the service (the whole team of proprieties were harnessed to his hearse,
        and they all had feathers and black velvet housings with his coat of
        arms in the corner), Mrs General began to inquire what quantity of dust
and ashes was deposited at the bankers'. It then transpired that the
commissary had so far stolen a march on Mrs General as to have bought
himself an annuity some years before his marriage, and to have reserved
that circumstance in mentioning, at the period of his proposal, that
his income was derived from the interest of his money. Mrs General
consequently found her means so much diminished, that, but for the
perfect regulation of her mind, she might have felt disposed to question
the accuracy of that portion of the late service which had declared that
the commissary could take nothing away with him.

In this state of affairs it occurred to Mrs General, that she might
'form the mind,' and eke the manners of some young lady of distinction.
Or, that she might harness the proprieties to the carriage of some rich
young heiress or widow, and become at once the driver and guard of such
vehicle through the social mazes. Mrs General's communication of this
idea to her clerical and commissariat connection was so warmly applauded
that, but for the lady's undoubted merit, it might have appeared as
though they wanted to get rid of her. Testimonials representing Mrs
General as a prodigy of piety, learning, virtue, and gentility, were
lavishly contributed from influential quarters; and one venerable
archdeacon even shed tears in recording his testimony to her perfections
(described to him by persons on whom he could rely), though he had never
had the honour and moral gratification of setting eyes on Mrs General in
all his life.

Thus delegated on her mission, as it were by Church and State, Mrs
General, who had always occupied high ground, felt in a condition to
keep it, and began by putting herself up at a very high figure. An
interval of some duration elapsed, in which there was no bid for Mrs
General. At length a county-widower, with a daughter of fourteen, opened
negotiations with the lady; and as it was a part either of the native
dignity or of the artificial policy of Mrs General (but certainly one
        or the other) to comport herself as if she were much more sought than
seeking, the widower pursued Mrs General until he prevailed upon her to
form his daughter's mind and manners.

The execution of this trust occupied Mrs General about seven years, in
the course of which time she made the tour of Europe, and saw most of
that extensive miscellany of objects which it is essential that all
persons of polite cultivation should see with other people's eyes,
        and never with their own. When her charge was at length formed, the
        marriage, not only of the young lady, but likewise of her father, the
        widower, was resolved on. The widower then finding Mrs General both
        inconvenient and expensive, became of a sudden almost as much affected
        by her merits as the archdeacon had been, and circulated such praises
        of her surpassing worth, in all quarters where he thought an opportunity
        might arise of transferring the blessing to somebody else, that Mrs
        General was a name more honourable than ever.

        The phoenix was to let, on this elevated perch, when Mr Dorrit, who
        had lately succeeded to his property, mentioned to his bankers that he
        wished to discover a lady, well-bred, accomplished, well connected, well
        accustomed to good society, who was qualified at once to complete the
        education of his daughters, and to be their matron or chaperon. Mr
        Dorrit's bankers, as bankers of the county-widower, instantly said, 'Mrs
        General.'

        Pursuing the light so fortunately hit upon, and finding the concurrent
        testimony of the whole of Mrs General's acquaintance to be of the
        pathetic nature already recorded, Mr Dorrit took the trouble of going
        down to the county of the county-widower to see Mrs General, in whom he
        found a lady of a quality superior to his highest expectations.

        'Might I be excused,' said Mr Dorrit, 'if I inquired--ha--what remune--'

        'Why, indeed,' returned Mrs General, stopping the word, 'it is a subject
        on which I prefer to avoid entering. I have never entered on it with my
        friends here; and I cannot overcome the delicacy, Mr Dorrit, with
        which I have always regarded it. I am not, as I hope you are aware, a
        governess--'

        'O dear no!' said Mr Dorrit. 'Pray, madam, do not imagine for a moment
        that I think so.' He really blushed to be suspected of it.

        Mrs General gravely inclined her head. 'I cannot, therefore, put a price
        upon services which it is a pleasure to me to render if I can render
        them spontaneously, but which I could not render in mere return for any
        consideration. Neither do I know how, or where, to find a case parallel
        to my own. It is peculiar.'

        No doubt. But how then (Mr Dorrit not unnaturally hinted) could the
        subject be approached?

        'I cannot object,' said Mrs General--'though even that is disagreeable
        to me--to Mr Dorrit's inquiring, in confidence of my friends here, what
        amount they have been accustomed, at quarterly intervals, to pay to my
        credit at my bankers'.'

        Mr Dorrit bowed his acknowledgements.

        'Permit me to add,' said Mrs General, 'that beyond this, I can never
        resume the topic. Also that I can accept no second or inferior position.
        If the honour were proposed to me of becoming known to Mr Dorrit's
        family--I think two daughters were mentioned?--'

        'Two daughters.'

        'I could only accept it on terms of perfect equality, as a companion,
        protector, Mentor, and friend.'

        Mr Dorrit, in spite of his sense of his importance, felt as if it would
        be quite a kindness in her to accept it on any conditions. He almost
        said as much.

        'I think,' repeated Mrs General, 'two daughters were mentioned?'

        'Two daughters,' said Mr Dorrit again.

        'It would therefore,' said Mrs General, 'be necessary to add a third
        more to the payment (whatever its amount may prove to be), which my
        friends here have been accustomed to make to my bankers'.'

        Mr Dorrit lost no time in referring the delicate question to the
        county-widower, and finding that he had been accustomed to pay three
        hundred pounds a-year to the credit of Mrs General, arrived, without any
        severe strain on his arithmetic, at the conclusion that he himself must
        pay four. Mrs General being an article of that lustrous surface which
        suggests that it is worth any money, he made a formal proposal to be
        allowed to have the honour and pleasure of regarding her as a member of
        his family. Mrs General conceded that high privilege, and here she was.

        In person, Mrs General, including her skirts which had much to do with
        it, was of a dignified and imposing appearance; ample, rustling, gravely
        voluminous; always upright behind the proprieties. She might have
        been taken--had been taken--to the top of the Alps and the bottom of
        Herculaneum, without disarranging a fold in her dress, or displacing
        a pin. If her countenance and hair had rather a floury appearance, as
        though from living in some transcendently genteel Mill, it was rather
        because she was a chalky creation altogether, than because she mended
        her complexion with violet powder, or had turned grey. If her eyes had
        no expression, it was probably because they had nothing to express. If
        she had few wrinkles, it was because her mind had never traced its name
        or any other inscription on her face. A cool, waxy, blown-out woman, who
        had never lighted well.

        Mrs General had no opinions. Her way of forming a mind was to prevent it
        from forming opinions. She had a little circular set of mental grooves
        or rails on which she started little trains of other people's opinions,
        which never overtook one another, and never got anywhere. Even her
        propriety could not dispute that there was impropriety in the world; but
        Mrs General's way of getting rid of it was to put it out of sight, and
        make believe that there was no such thing. This was another of her ways
        of forming a mind--to cram all articles of difficulty into cupboards,
        lock them up, and say they had no existence. It was the easiest way,
        and, beyond all comparison, the properest.

        Mrs General was not to be told of anything shocking. Accidents,
        miseries, and offences, were never to be mentioned before her. Passion
        was to go to sleep in the presence of Mrs General, and blood was to
        change to milk and water. The little that was left in the world,
        when all these deductions were made, it was Mrs General's province to
        varnish. In that formation process of hers, she dipped the smallest of
        brushes into the largest of pots, and varnished the surface of every
        object that came under consideration. The more cracked it was, the more
        Mrs General varnished it.

        There was varnish in Mrs General's voice, varnish in Mrs General's
        touch, an atmosphere of varnish round Mrs General's figure. Mrs
        General's dreams ought to have been varnished--if she had any--lying
        asleep in the arms of the good Saint Bernard, with the feathery snow
        falling on his house-top.




The bright morning sun dazzled the eyes, the snow had ceased, the mists
had vanished, the mountain air was so clear and light that the
new sensation of breathing it was like the having entered on a new
existence. To help the delusion, the solid ground itself seemed gone,
    and the mountain, a shining waste of immense white heaps and masses, to
    be a region of cloud floating between the blue sky above and the earth
    far below.

    Some dark specks in the snow, like knots upon a little thread, beginning
    at the convent door and winding away down the descent in broken lengths
    which were not yet pieced together, showed where the Brethren were at
    work in several places clearing the track. Already the snow had begun to
    be foot-thawed again about the door. Mules were busily brought out, tied
    to the rings in the wall, and laden; strings of bells were buckled
    on, burdens were adjusted, the voices of drivers and riders sounded
    musically. Some of the earliest had even already resumed their journey;
    and, both on the level summit by the dark water near the convent, and on
    the downward way of yesterday's ascent, little moving figures of men and
    mules, reduced to miniatures by the immensity around, went with a clear
    tinkling of bells and a pleasant harmony of tongues.

    In the supper-room of last night, a new fire, piled upon the feathery
    ashes of the old one, shone upon a homely breakfast of loaves, butter,
    and milk. It also shone on the courier of the Dorrit family, making tea
    for his party from a supply he had brought up with him, together with
    several other small stores which were chiefly laid in for the use of the
    strong body of inconvenience. Mr Gowan and Blandois of Paris had already
    breakfasted, and were walking up and down by the lake, smoking their
    cigars.

    'Gowan, eh?' muttered Tip, otherwise Edward Dorrit, Esquire, turning
    over the leaves of the book, when the courier had left them to
    breakfast. 'Then Gowan is the name of a puppy, that's all I have got to
    say! If it was worth my while, I'd pull his nose. But it isn't worth my
    while--fortunately for him. How's his wife, Amy? I suppose you know.
    You generally know things of that sort.'

    'She is better, Edward. But they are not going to-day.'

    'Oh! They are not going to-day! Fortunately for that fellow too,' said
    Tip, 'or he and I might have come into collision.'

    'It is thought better here that she should lie quiet to-day, and not be
    fatigued and shaken by the ride down until to-morrow.'

    'With all my heart. But you talk as if you had been nursing her. You
    haven't been relapsing into (Mrs General is not here) into old habits,
    have you, Amy?'

    He asked her the question with a sly glance of observation at Miss
    Fanny, and at his father too.

    'I have only been in to ask her if I could do anything for her, Tip,'
    said Little Dorrit.

    'You needn't call me Tip, Amy child,' returned that young gentleman
    with a frown; 'because that's an old habit, and one you may as well lay
    aside.'

    'I didn't mean to say so, Edward dear. I forgot. It was so natural once,
    that it seemed at the moment the right word.'

    'Oh yes!' Miss Fanny struck in. 'Natural, and right word, and once, and
    all the rest of it! Nonsense, you little thing! I know perfectly well
    why you have been taking such an interest in this Mrs Gowan. You can't
    blind _me_.'

    'I will not try to, Fanny. Don't be angry.'

    'Oh! angry!' returned that young lady with a flounce. 'I have no
    patience' (which indeed was the truth).

    'Pray, Fanny,' said Mr Dorrit, raising his eyebrows, 'what do you mean?
    Explain yourself.'

    'Oh! Never mind, Pa,' replied Miss Fanny, 'it's no great matter.
    Amy will understand me. She knew, or knew of, this Mrs Gowan before
    yesterday, and she may as well admit that she did.'

    'My child,' said Mr Dorrit, turning to his younger daughter, 'has your
    sister--any--ha--authority for this curious statement?'

    'However meek we are,' Miss Fanny struck in before she could answer, 'we
    don't go creeping into people's rooms on the tops of cold mountains,
    and sitting perishing in the frost with people, unless we know something
    about them beforehand. It's not very hard to divine whose friend Mrs
    Gowan is.'

    'Whose friend?' inquired her father.

    'Pa, I am sorry to say,' returned Miss Fanny, who had by this time
    succeeded in goading herself into a state of much ill-usage and
    grievance, which she was often at great pains to do: 'that I believe her
    to be a friend of that very objectionable and unpleasant person, who,
    with a total absence of all delicacy, which our experience might have
    led us to expect from him, insulted us and outraged our feelings in
    so public and wilful a manner on an occasion to which it is understood
    among us that we will not more pointedly allude.'

    'Amy, my child,' said Mr Dorrit, tempering a bland severity with a
    dignified affection, 'is this the case?'

    Little Dorrit mildly answered, yes it was.

    'Yes it is!' cried Miss Fanny. 'Of course! I said so! And now, Pa, I do
    declare once for all'--this young lady was in the habit of declaring the
    same thing once for all every day of her life, and even several times in
    a day--'that this is shameful! I do declare once for all that it ought
    to be put a stop to. Is it not enough that we have gone through what
    is only known to ourselves, but are we to have it thrown in our faces,
    perseveringly and systematically, by the very person who should spare
    our feelings most? Are we to be exposed to this unnatural conduct every
    moment of our lives? Are we never to be permitted to forget? I say
    again, it is absolutely infamous!'

    'Well, Amy,' observed her brother, shaking his head, 'you know I stand
    by you whenever I can, and on most occasions. But I must say, that, upon
    my soul, I do consider it rather an unaccountable mode of showing your
    sisterly affection, that you should back up a man who treated me in the
    most ungentlemanly way in which one man can treat another. And who,' he
    added convincingly, 'must be a low-minded thief, you know, or he never
    could have conducted himself as he did.'

    'And see,' said Miss Fanny, 'see what is involved in this! Can we ever
    hope to be respected by our servants? Never. Here are our two women, and
    Pa's valet, and a footman, and a courier, and all sorts of dependents,
    and yet in the midst of these, we are to have one of ourselves rushing
    about with tumblers of cold water, like a menial! Why, a policeman,'
    said Miss Fanny, 'if a beggar had a fit in the street, could but go
    plunging about with tumblers, as this very Amy did in this very room
    before our very eyes last night!'

    'I don't so much mind that, once in a way,' remarked Mr Edward; 'but
    your Clennam, as he thinks proper to call himself, is another thing.'

    'He is part of the same thing,' returned Miss Fanny, 'and of a piece
    with all the rest. He obtruded himself upon us in the first instance.
    We never wanted him. I always showed him, for one, that I could
    have dispensed with his company with the greatest pleasure.
    He then commits that gross outrage upon our feelings, which he never
    could or would have committed but for the delight he took in exposing
    us; and then we are to be demeaned for the service of his friends! Why,
    I don't wonder at this Mr Gowan's conduct towards you. What else was
    to be expected when he was enjoying our past misfortunes--gloating over
    them at the moment!'

    'Father--Edward--no indeed!' pleaded Little Dorrit. 'Neither Mr nor Mrs
    Gowan had ever heard our name. They were, and they are, quite ignorant
    of our history.'

    'So much the worse,' retorted Fanny, determined not to admit anything in
    extenuation, 'for then you have no excuse. If they had known about us,
    you might have felt yourself called upon to conciliate them. That would
    have been a weak and ridiculous mistake, but I can respect a mistake,
    whereas I can't respect a wilful and deliberate abasing of those who
    should be nearest and dearest to us. No. I can't respect that. I can do
    nothing but denounce that.'

    'I never offend you wilfully, Fanny,' said Little Dorrit, 'though you
    are so hard with me.'

    'Then you should be more careful, Amy,' returned her sister. 'If you do
    such things by accident, you should be more careful. If I happened to
    have been born in a peculiar place, and under peculiar circumstances
    that blunted my knowledge of propriety, I fancy I should think myself
    bound to consider at every step, "Am I going, ignorantly, to compromise
    any near and dear relations?" That is what I fancy _I_ should do, if it
    was _my_ case.'

    Mr Dorrit now interposed, at once to stop these painful subjects by his
    authority, and to point their moral by his wisdom.

    'My dear,' said he to his younger daughter, 'I beg you to--ha--to say
    no more. Your sister Fanny expresses herself strongly, but not without
    considerable reason. You have now a--hum--a great position to support.
    That great position is not occupied by yourself alone, but by--ha--by
    me, and--ha hum--by us. Us. Now, it is incumbent upon all people in an
    exalted position, but it is particularly so on this family, for reasons
    which I--ha--will not dwell upon, to make themselves respected. To be
    vigilant in making themselves respected. Dependants, to respect us, must
    be--ha--kept at a distance and--hum--kept down. Down. Therefore, your
    not exposing yourself to the remarks of our attendants by appearing to
    have at any time dispensed with their services and performed them for
    yourself, is--ha--highly important.'

    'Why, who can doubt it?' cried Miss Fanny. 'It's the essence of
    everything.'

    'Fanny,' returned her father, grandiloquently, 'give me leave, my dear.
    We then come to--ha--to Mr Clennam. I am free to say that I do not, Amy,
    share your sister's sentiments--that is to say altogether--hum--
    altogether--in reference to Mr Clennam. I am content to regard that
    individual in the light of--ha--generally--a well-behaved person. Hum.
    A well-behaved person. Nor will I inquire whether Mr Clennam did, at any
    time, obtrude himself on--ha--my society. He knew my society to
    be--hum--sought, and his plea might be that he regarded me in the light
    of a public character. But there were circumstances attending
    my--ha--slight knowledge of Mr Clennam (it was very slight), which,'
    here Mr Dorrit became extremely grave and impressive, 'would render it
    highly indelicate in Mr Clennam to--ha--to seek to renew communication
    with me or with any member of my family under existing circumstances.
    If Mr Clennam has sufficient delicacy to perceive the impropriety of
    any such attempt, I am bound as a responsible gentleman to--ha--defer
    to that delicacy on his part. If, on the other hand, Mr Clennam has not
    that delicacy, I cannot for a moment--ha--hold any correspondence with
    so--hum--coarse a mind. In either case, it would appear that Mr Clennam
    is put altogether out of the question, and that we have nothing to do
    with him or he with us. Ha--Mrs General!'

    The entrance of the lady whom he announced, to take her place at the
    breakfast-table, terminated the discussion. Shortly afterwards, the
    courier announced that the valet, and the footman, and the two maids,
    and the four guides, and the fourteen mules, were in readiness; so the
    breakfast party went out to the convent door to join the cavalcade.

    Mr Gowan stood aloof with his cigar and pencil, but Mr Blandois was on
    the spot to pay his respects to the ladies. When he gallantly pulled
    off his slouched hat to Little Dorrit, she thought he had even a more
    sinister look, standing swart and cloaked in the snow, than he had
    in the fire-light over-night. But, as both her father and her sister
    received his homage with some favour, she refrained from expressing any
    distrust of him, lest it should prove to be a new blemish derived from
    her prison birth.

    Nevertheless, as they wound down the rugged way while the convent was
    yet in sight, she more than once looked round, and descried Mr Blandois,
    backed by the convent smoke which rose straight and high from the
    chimneys in a golden film, always standing on one jutting point looking
    down after them. Long after he was a mere black stick in the snow, she
    felt as though she could yet see that smile of his, that high nose, and
    those eyes that were too near it. And even after that, when the convent
    was gone and some light morning clouds veiled the pass below it, the
    ghastly skeleton arms by the wayside seemed to be all pointing up at
    him.

    More treacherous than snow, perhaps, colder at heart, and harder to
    melt, Blandois of Paris by degrees passed out of her mind, as they came
    down into the softer regions. Again the sun was warm, again the streams
    descending from glaciers and snowy caverns were refreshing to drink at,
    again they came among the pine-trees, the rocky rivulets, the verdant
    heights and dales, the wooden chalets and rough zigzag fences of Swiss
    country. Sometimes the way so widened that she and her father could
    ride abreast. And then to look at him, handsomely clothed in his fur and
    broadcloths, rich, free, numerously served and attended, his eyes roving
    far away among the glories of the landscape, no miserable screen before
    them to darken his sight and cast its shadow on him, was enough.

    Her uncle was so far rescued from that shadow of old, that he wore the
    clothes they gave him, and performed some ablutions as a sacrifice to
    the family credit, and went where he was taken, with a certain patient
    animal enjoyment, which seemed to express that the air and change did
    him good. In all other respects, save one, he shone with no light but
    such as was reflected from his brother. His brother's greatness, wealth,
    freedom, and grandeur, pleased him without any reference to himself.
    Silent and retiring, he had no use for speech when he could hear his
    brother speak; no desire to be waited on, so that the servants devoted
    themselves to his brother. The only noticeable change he originated in
    himself, was an alteration in his manner to his younger niece. Every day
    it refined more and more into a marked respect, very rarely shown by age
    to youth, and still more rarely susceptible, one would have said, of the
    fitness with which he invested it. On those occasions when Miss Fanny
    did declare once for all, he would take the next opportunity of baring
    his grey head before his younger niece, and of helping her to alight,
    or handing her to the carriage, or showing her any other attention, with
    the profoundest deference. Yet it never appeared misplaced or forced,
    being always heartily simple, spontaneous, and genuine. Neither would he
    ever consent, even at his brother's request, to be helped to any place
    before her, or to take precedence of her in anything. So jealous was he
    of her being respected, that, on this very journey down from the Great
    Saint Bernard, he took sudden and violent umbrage at the footman's being
    remiss to hold her stirrup, though standing near when she dismounted;
    and unspeakably astonished the whole retinue by charging at him on a
    hard-headed mule, riding him into a corner, and threatening to trample
    him to death.

    They were a goodly company, and the Innkeepers all but worshipped them.
    Wherever they went, their importance preceded them in the person of the
    courier riding before, to see that the rooms of state were ready. He was
    the herald of the family procession. The great travelling-carriage came
    next: containing, inside, Mr Dorrit, Miss Dorrit, Miss Amy Dorrit,
    and Mrs General; outside, some of the retainers, and (in fine weather)
    Edward Dorrit, Esquire, for whom the box was reserved. Then came
    the chariot containing Frederick Dorrit, Esquire, and an empty place
    occupied by Edward Dorrit, Esquire, in wet weather. Then came the
    fourgon with the rest of the retainers, the heavy baggage, and as much
    as it could carry of the mud and dust which the other vehicles left
    behind.

    These equipages adorned the yard of the hotel at Martigny, on the return
    of the family from their mountain excursion. Other vehicles were there,
    much company being on the road, from the patched Italian Vettura--like
    the body of a swing from an English fair put upon a wooden tray on
    wheels, and having another wooden tray without wheels put atop of it--to
    the trim English carriage. But there was another adornment of the
    hotel which Mr Dorrit had not bargained for. Two strange travellers
    embellished one of his rooms.

    The Innkeeper, hat in hand in the yard, swore to the courier that he was
    blighted, that he was desolated, that he was profoundly afflicted, that
    he was the most miserable and unfortunate of beasts, that he had the
    head of a wooden pig. He ought never to have made the concession, he
    said, but the very genteel lady had so passionately prayed him for the
    accommodation of that room to dine in, only for a little half-hour, that
    he had been vanquished. The little half-hour was expired, the lady and
    gentleman were taking their little dessert and half-cup of coffee, the
    note was paid, the horses were ordered, they would depart immediately;
    but, owing to an unhappy destiny and the curse of Heaven, they were not
    yet gone.

    Nothing could exceed Mr Dorrit's indignation, as he turned at the foot
    of the staircase on hearing these apologies. He felt that the family
    dignity was struck at by an assassin's hand. He had a sense of his
    dignity, which was of the most exquisite nature. He could detect a
    design upon it when nobody else had any perception of the fact. His
    life was made an agony by the number of fine scalpels that he felt to be
    incessantly engaged in dissecting his dignity.

    'Is it possible, sir,' said Mr Dorrit, reddening excessively, 'that you
    have--ha--had the audacity to place one of my rooms at the disposition
    of any other person?'

    Thousands of pardons! It was the host's profound misfortune to have been
    overcome by that too genteel lady. He besought Monseigneur not to enrage
    himself. He threw himself on Monseigneur for clemency. If Monseigneur
    would have the distinguished goodness to occupy the other salon
    especially reserved for him, for but five minutes, all would go well.

    'No, sir,' said Mr Dorrit. 'I will not occupy any salon. I will leave
    your house without eating or drinking, or setting foot in it. How do
    you dare to act like this? Who am I that you--ha--separate me from other
    gentlemen?'

    Alas! The host called all the universe to witness that Monseigneur was
    the most amiable of the whole body of nobility, the most important,
    the most estimable, the most honoured. If he separated Monseigneur from
    others, it was only because he was more distinguished, more cherished,
    more generous, more renowned.

    'Don't tell me so, sir,' returned Mr Dorrit, in a mighty heat. 'You have
    affronted me. You have heaped insults upon me. How dare you? Explain
    yourself.'

    Ah, just Heaven, then, how could the host explain himself when he had
    nothing more to explain; when he had only to apologise, and confide
    himself to the so well-known magnanimity of Monseigneur!

    'I tell you, sir,' said Mr Dorrit, panting with anger, 'that you
    separate me--ha--from other gentlemen; that you make distinctions
    between me and other gentlemen of fortune and station. I demand of you,
    why? I wish to know on--ha--what authority, on whose authority. Reply
    sir. Explain. Answer why.'

    Permit the landlord humbly to submit to Monsieur the Courier then, that
    Monseigneur, ordinarily so gracious, enraged himself without cause.
    There was no why. Monsieur the Courier would represent to Monseigneur,
    that he deceived himself in suspecting that there was any why, but the
    why his devoted servant had already had the honour to present to him.
    The very genteel lady--

    'Silence!' cried Mr Dorrit. 'Hold your tongue! I will hear no more
    of the very genteel lady; I will hear no more of you. Look at this
    family--my family--a family more genteel than any lady. You have treated
    this family with disrespect; you have been insolent to this family. I'll
    ruin you. Ha--send for the horses, pack the carriages, I'll not set foot
    in this man's house again!'

    No one had interfered in the dispute, which was beyond the French
    colloquial powers of Edward Dorrit, Esquire, and scarcely within the
    province of the ladies. Miss Fanny, however, now supported her father
    with great bitterness; declaring, in her native tongue, that it was
    quite clear there was something special in this man's impertinence;
    and that she considered it important that he should be, by some means,
    forced to give up his authority for making distinctions between that
    family and other wealthy families. What the reasons of his presumption
    could be, she was at a loss to imagine; but reasons he must have, and
    they ought to be torn from him.

    All the guides, mule-drivers, and idlers in the yard, had made
    themselves parties to the angry conference, and were much impressed by
    the courier's now bestirring himself to get the carriages out. With the
    aid of some dozen people to each wheel, this was done at a great cost of
    noise; and then the loading was proceeded with, pending the arrival of
    the horses from the post-house.

    But the very genteel lady's English chariot being already horsed and at
    the inn-door, the landlord had slipped up-stairs to represent his hard
    case. This was notified to the yard by his now coming down the staircase
    in attendance on the gentleman and the lady, and by his pointing out the
    offended majesty of Mr Dorrit to them with a significant motion of his
    hand.

    'Beg your pardon,' said the gentleman, detaching himself from the
    lady, and coming forward. 'I am a man of few words and a bad hand at an
    explanation--but lady here is extremely anxious that there should be no
    Row. Lady--a mother of mine, in point of fact--wishes me to say that she
    hopes no Row.'

    Mr Dorrit, still panting under his injury, saluted the gentleman, and
    saluted the lady, in a distant, final, and invincible manner.

    'No, but really--here, old feller; you!' This was the gentleman's way of
    appealing to Edward Dorrit, Esquire, on whom he pounced as a great and
    providential relief. 'Let you and I try to make this all right. Lady so
    very much wishes no Row.'

    Edward Dorrit, Esquire, led a little apart by the button, assumed a
    diplomatic expression of countenance in replying, 'Why you must confess,
    that when you bespeak a lot of rooms beforehand, and they belong to you,
    it's not pleasant to find other people in 'em.'

    'No,' said the other, 'I know it isn't. I admit it. Still, let you and I
    try to make it all right, and avoid Row. The fault is not this chap's
    at all, but my mother's. Being a remarkably fine woman with no bigodd
    nonsense about her--well educated, too--she was too many for this chap.
    Regularly pocketed him.'

    'If that's the case--' Edward Dorrit, Esquire, began.

    'Assure you 'pon my soul 'tis the case. Consequently,' said the other
    gentleman, retiring on his main position, 'why Row?'

    'Edmund,' said the lady from the doorway, 'I hope you have explained,
    or are explaining, to the satisfaction of this gentleman and his family
    that the civil landlord is not to blame?'

    'Assure you, ma'am,' returned Edmund, 'perfectly paralysing myself with
    trying it on.' He then looked steadfastly at Edward Dorrit, Esquire, for
    some seconds, and suddenly added, in a burst of confidence, 'Old feller!
    _Is_ it all right?'

    'I don't know, after all,' said the lady, gracefully advancing a step or
    two towards Mr Dorrit, 'but that I had better say myself, at once,
    that I assured this good man I took all the consequences on myself of
    occupying one of a stranger's suite of rooms during his absence, for
    just as much (or as little) time as I could dine in. I had no idea the
    rightful owner would come back so soon, nor had I any idea that he
    had come back, or I should have hastened to make restoration of my
    ill-gotten chamber, and to have offered my explanation and apology. I
    trust in saying this--'

    For a moment the lady, with a glass at her eye, stood transfixed and
    speechless before the two Miss Dorrits. At the same moment, Miss Fanny,
    in the foreground of a grand pictorial composition, formed by the
    family, the family equipages, and the family servants, held her sister
    tight under one arm to detain her on the spot, and with the other arm
    fanned herself with a distinguished air, and negligently surveyed the
    lady from head to foot.

    The lady, recovering herself quickly--for it was Mrs Merdle and she was
    not easily dashed--went on to add that she trusted in saying this, she
    apologised for her boldness, and restored this well-behaved landlord to
    the favour that was so very valuable to him. Mr Dorrit, on the altar of
    whose dignity all this was incense, made a gracious reply; and said
    that his people should--ha--countermand his horses, and he
    would--hum--overlook what he had at first supposed to be an affront,
    but now regarded as an honour. Upon this the bosom bent to him; and its
    owner, with a wonderful command of feature, addressed a winning smile of
    adieu to the two sisters, as young ladies of fortune in whose favour she
    was much prepossessed, and whom she had never had the gratification of
    seeing before.

    Not so, however, Mr Sparkler. This gentleman, becoming transfixed at
    the same moment as his lady-mother, could not by any means unfix himself
    again, but stood stiffly staring at the whole composition with Miss
    Fanny in the Foreground. On his mother saying, 'Edmund, we are quite
    ready; will you give me your arm?' he seemed, by the motion of his lips,
    to reply with some remark comprehending the form of words in which his
    shining talents found the most frequent utterance, but he relaxed no
    muscle. So fixed was his figure, that it would have been matter of some
    difficulty to bend him sufficiently to get him in the carriage-door,
    if he had not received the timely assistance of a maternal pull from
    within. He was no sooner within than the pad of the little window in the
    back of the chariot disappeared, and his eye usurped its place. There
    it remained as long as so small an object was discernible, and probably
    much longer, staring (as though something inexpressibly surprising
            should happen to a codfish) like an ill-executed eye in a large locket.

    This encounter was so highly agreeable to Miss Fanny, and gave her
    so much to think of with triumph afterwards, that it softened her
    asperities exceedingly. When the procession was again in motion next
    day, she occupied her place in it with a new gaiety; and showed such a
    flow of spirits indeed, that Mrs General looked rather surprised.

    Little Dorrit was glad to be found no fault with, and to see that Fanny
    was pleased; but her part in the procession was a musing part, and a
    quiet one. Sitting opposite her father in the travelling-carriage, and
    recalling the old Marshalsea room, her present existence was a dream.
    All that she saw was new and wonderful, but it was not real; it seemed
    to her as if those visions of mountains and picturesque countries might
    melt away at any moment, and the carriage, turning some abrupt corner,
    bring up with a jolt at the old Marshalsea gate.

    To have no work to do was strange, but not half so strange as having
    glided into a corner where she had no one to think for, nothing to plan
    and contrive, no cares of others to load herself with. Strange as that
    was, it was far stranger yet to find a space between herself and her
    father, where others occupied themselves in taking care of him, and
    where she was never expected to be. At first, this was so much more
    unlike her old experience than even the mountains themselves, that she
    had been unable to resign herself to it, and had tried to retain her
    old place about him. But he had spoken to her alone, and had said that
    people--ha--people in an exalted position, my dear, must scrupulously
    exact respect from their dependents; and that for her, his daughter,
    Miss Amy Dorrit, of the sole remaining branch of the Dorrits of
    Dorsetshire, to be known to--hum--to occupy herself in fulfilling the
    functions of--ha hum--a valet, would be incompatible with that respect.
    Therefore, my dear, he--ha--he laid his parental injunctions upon
    her, to remember that she was a lady, who had now to conduct herself
    with--hum--a proper pride, and to preserve the rank of a lady;
    and consequently he requested her to abstain from doing what would
    occasion--ha--unpleasant and derogatory remarks. She had obeyed without
    a murmur. Thus it had been brought about that she now sat in her corner
    of the luxurious carriage with her little patient hands folded before
    her, quite displaced even from the last point of the old standing ground
    in life on which her feet had lingered.

    It was from this position that all she saw appeared unreal; the more
    surprising the scenes, the more they resembled the unreality of her
    own inner life as she went through its vacant places all day long. The
    gorges of the Simplon, its enormous depths and thundering waterfalls,
    the wonderful road, the points of danger where a loose wheel or a
    faltering horse would have been destruction, the descent into Italy, the
    opening of that beautiful land as the rugged mountain-chasm widened and
    let them out from a gloomy and dark imprisonment--all a dream--only the
    old mean Marshalsea a reality. Nay, even the old mean Marshalsea was
    shaken to its foundations when she pictured it without her father. She
    could scarcely believe that the prisoners were still lingering in the
    close yard, that the mean rooms were still every one tenanted, and that
    the turnkey still stood in the Lodge letting people in and out, all just
    as she well knew it to be.

    With a remembrance of her father's old life in prison hanging about her
    like the burden of a sorrowful tune, Little Dorrit would wake from a
    dream of her birth-place into a whole day's dream. The painted room in
    which she awoke, often a humbled state-chamber in a dilapidated palace,
    would begin it; with its wild red autumnal vine-leaves overhanging the
    glass, its orange-trees on the cracked white terrace outside the window,
    a group of monks and peasants in the little street below, misery and
    magnificence wrestling with each other upon every rood of ground in
    the prospect, no matter how widely diversified, and misery throwing
    magnificence with the strength of fate. To this would succeed a
    labyrinth of bare passages and pillared galleries, with the family
    procession already preparing in the quadrangle below, through the
    carriages and luggage being brought together by the servants for the
    day's journey. Then breakfast in another painted chamber, damp-stained
    and of desolate proportions; and then the departure, which, to her
    timidity and sense of not being grand enough for her place in the
    ceremonies, was always an uneasy thing. For then the courier (who
            himself would have been a foreign gentleman of high mark in the
            Marshalsea) would present himself to report that all was ready; and then
    her father's valet would pompously induct him into his travelling-cloak;
    and then Fanny's maid, and her own maid (who was a weight on Little
            Dorrit's mind--absolutely made her cry at first, she knew so little
            what to do with her), would be in attendance; and then her brother's man
    would complete his master's equipment; and then her father would give
    his arm to Mrs General, and her uncle would give his to her, and,
    escorted by the landlord and Inn servants, they would swoop down-stairs.
    There, a crowd would be collected to see them enter their carriages,
    which, amidst much bowing, and begging, and prancing, and lashing, and
    clattering, they would do; and so they would be driven madly through
    narrow unsavoury streets, and jerked out at the town gate.

    Among the day's unrealities would be roads where the bright red vines
    were looped and garlanded together on trees for many miles; woods of
    olives; white villages and towns on hill-sides, lovely without, but
    frightful in their dirt and poverty within; crosses by the way; deep
    blue lakes with fairy islands, and clustering boats with awnings of
    bright colours and sails of beautiful forms; vast piles of building
    mouldering to dust; hanging-gardens where the weeds had grown so strong
    that their stems, like wedges driven home, had split the arch and rent
    the wall; stone-terraced lanes, with the lizards running into and out
    of every chink; beggars of all sorts everywhere: pitiful, picturesque,
    hungry, merry; children beggars and aged beggars. Often at
    posting-houses and other halting places, these miserable creatures would
    appear to her the only realities of the day; and many a time, when the
    money she had brought to give them was all given away, she would sit
    with her folded hands, thoughtfully looking after some diminutive girl
    leading her grey father, as if the sight reminded her of something in
    the days that were gone.

    Again, there would be places where they stayed the week together in
    splendid rooms, had banquets every day, rode out among heaps of wonders,
    walked through miles of palaces, and rested in dark corners of great
    churches; where there were winking lamps of gold and silver among
    pillars and arches, kneeling figures dotted about at confessionals and
    on the pavements; where there was the mist and scent of incense; where
    there were pictures, fantastic images, gaudy altars, great heights and
    distances, all softly lighted through stained glass, and the massive
    curtains that hung in the doorways. From these cities they would go on
    again, by the roads of vines and olives, through squalid villages, where
    there was not a hovel without a gap in its filthy walls, not a window
    with a whole inch of glass or paper; where there seemed to be nothing to
    support life, nothing to eat, nothing to make, nothing to grow, nothing
    to hope, nothing to do but die.

    Again they would come to whole towns of palaces, whose proper inmates
    were all banished, and which were all changed into barracks: troops
    of idle soldiers leaning out of the state windows, where their
    accoutrements hung drying on the marble architecture, and showing to the
    mind like hosts of rats who were (happily) eating away the props of the
    edifices that supported them, and must soon, with them, be smashed on
    the heads of the other swarms of soldiers and the swarms of priests, and
    the swarms of spies, who were all the ill-looking population left to be
    ruined, in the streets below.

    Through such scenes, the family procession moved on to Venice. And here
    it dispersed for a time, as they were to live in Venice some few months
    in a palace (itself six times as big as the whole Marshalsea) on the
    Grand Canal.

    In this crowning unreality, where all the streets were paved with water,
    and where the deathlike stillness of the days and nights was broken by
    no sound but the softened ringing of church-bells, the rippling of
    the current, and the cry of the gondoliers turning the corners of the
    flowing streets, Little Dorrit, quite lost by her task being done, sat
    down to muse. The family began a gay life, went here and there, and
    turned night into day; but she was timid of joining in their gaieties,
    and only asked leave to be left alone.

    Sometimes she would step into one of the gondolas that were always kept
    in waiting, moored to painted posts at the door--when she could escape
    from the attendance of that oppressive maid, who was her mistress, and
    a very hard one--and would be taken all over the strange city. Social
    people in other gondolas began to ask each other who the little solitary
    girl was whom they passed, sitting in her boat with folded hands,
    looking so pensively and wonderingly about her. Never thinking that
    it would be worth anybody's while to notice her or her doings, Little
    Dorrit, in her quiet, scared, lost manner, went about the city none the
    less.

    But her favourite station was the balcony of her own room, overhanging
    the canal, with other balconies below, and none above. It was of massive
    stone darkened by ages, built in a wild fancy which came from the East
    to that collection of wild fancies; and Little Dorrit was little indeed,
    leaning on the broad-cushioned ledge, and looking over. As she liked no
    place of an evening half so well, she soon began to be watched for, and
    many eyes in passing gondolas were raised, and many people said, There
    was the little figure of the English girl who was always alone.

    Such people were not realities to the little figure of the English girl;
    such people were all unknown to her. She would watch the sunset, in its
    long low lines of purple and red, and its burning flush high up into
    the sky: so glowing on the buildings, and so lightening their structure,
    that it made them look as if their strong walls were transparent, and
    they shone from within. She would watch those glories expire; and then,
    after looking at the black gondolas underneath, taking guests to music
    and dancing, would raise her eyes to the shining stars. Was there no
    party of her own, in other times, on which the stars had shone? To think
    of that old gate now!

    She would think of that old gate, and of herself sitting at it in the
    dead of the night, pillowing Maggy's head; and of other places and of
    other scenes associated with those different times. And then she would
    lean upon her balcony, and look over at the water, as though they all
    lay underneath it. When she got to that, she would musingly watch its
    running, as if, in the general vision, it might run dry, and show her
    the prison again, and herself, and the old room, and the old inmates,
    and the old visitors: all lasting realities that had never changed.




Dear Mr Clennam,

     I write to you from my own room at Venice, thinking you will be glad to
     hear from me. But I know you cannot be so glad to hear from me as I am
     to write to you; for everything about you is as you have been accustomed
     to see it, and you miss nothing--unless it should be me, which can only
     be for a very little while together and very seldom--while everything in
     my life is so strange, and I miss so much.

     When we were in Switzerland, which appears to have been years ago,
     though it was only weeks, I met young Mrs Gowan, who was on a mountain
     excursion like ourselves. She told me she was very well and very happy.
     She sent you the message, by me, that she thanked you affectionately and
     would never forget you. She was quite confiding with me, and I loved her
     almost as soon as I spoke to her. But there is nothing singular in that;
     who could help loving so beautiful and winning a creature! I could not
     wonder at any one loving her. No indeed.

     It will not make you uneasy on Mrs Gowan's account, I hope--for I
     remember that you said you had the interest of a true friend in her--if
     I tell you that I wish she could have married some one better suited to
     her. Mr Gowan seems fond of her, and of course she is very fond of him,
     but I thought he was not earnest enough--I don't mean in that respect--I
     mean in anything. I could not keep it out of my mind that if I was Mrs
     Gowan (what a change that would be, and how I must alter to become like
             her!) I should feel that I was rather lonely and lost, for the want of
     some one who was steadfast and firm in purpose. I even thought she felt
     this want a little, almost without knowing it. But mind you are not made
     uneasy by this, for she was 'very well and very happy.' And she looked
     most beautiful.

     I expect to meet her again before long, and indeed have been expecting
     for some days past to see her here. I will ever be as good a friend to
     her as I can for your sake. Dear Mr Clennam, I dare say you think little
     of having been a friend to me when I had no other (not that I have any
             other now, for I have made no new friends), but I think much of it, and
     I never can forget it.

     I wish I knew--but it is best for no one to write to me--how Mr and Mrs
     Plornish prosper in the business which my dear father bought for them,
     and that old Mr Nandy lives happily with them and his two grandchildren,
     and sings all his songs over and over again. I cannot quite keep back
     the tears from my eyes when I think of my poor Maggy, and of the blank
     she must have felt at first, however kind they all are to her, without
     her Little Mother. Will you go and tell her, as a strict secret, with my
     love, that she never can have regretted our separation more than I have
     regretted it? And will you tell them all that I have thought of them
     every day, and that my heart is faithful to them everywhere? O, if you
     could know how faithful, you would almost pity me for being so far away
     and being so grand!

     You will be glad, I am sure, to know that my dear father is very well
     in health, and that all these changes are highly beneficial to him, and
     that he is very different indeed from what he used to be when you used
     to see him. There is an improvement in my uncle too, I think, though he
     never complained of old, and never exults now. Fanny is very graceful,
     quick, and clever. It is natural to her to be a lady; she has adapted
     herself to our new fortunes with wonderful ease.

     This reminds me that I have not been able to do so, and that I sometimes
     almost despair of ever being able to do so. I find that I cannot learn.
     Mrs General is always with us, and we speak French and speak Italian,
     and she takes pains to form us in many ways. When I say we speak French
     and Italian, I mean they do. As for me, I am so slow that I scarcely
     get on at all. As soon as I begin to plan, and think, and try, all my
     planning, thinking, and trying go in old directions, and I begin to feel
     careful again about the expenses of the day, and about my dear father,
     and about my work, and then I remember with a start that there are no
     such cares left, and that in itself is so new and improbable that it
     sets me wandering again. I should not have the courage to mention this
     to any one but you.

     It is the same with all these new countries and wonderful sights.
     They are very beautiful, and they astonish me, but I am not collected
     enough--not familiar enough with myself, if you can quite understand
     what I mean--to have all the pleasure in them that I might have. What
     I knew before them, blends with them, too, so curiously. For instance,
     when we were among the mountains, I often felt (I hesitate to tell such
             an idle thing, dear Mr Clennam, even to you) as if the Marshalsea must
     be behind that great rock; or as if Mrs Clennam's room where I have
     worked so many days, and where I first saw you, must be just beyond that
     snow. Do you remember one night when I came with Maggy to your lodging
     in Covent Garden? That room I have often and often fancied I have seen
     before me, travelling along for miles by the side of our carriage, when
     I have looked out of the carriage-window after dark. We were shut out
     that night, and sat at the iron gate, and walked about till morning.
     I often look up at the stars, even from the balcony of this room, and
     believe that I am in the street again, shut out with Maggy. It is the
     same with people that I left in England.

     When I go about here in a gondola, I surprise myself looking into other
     gondolas as if I hoped to see them. It would overcome me with joy to
     see them, but I don't think it would surprise me much, at first. In my
     fanciful times, I fancy that they might be anywhere; and I almost expect
     to see their dear faces on the bridges or the quays.

     Another difficulty that I have will seem very strange to you. It must
     seem very strange to any one but me, and does even to me: I often feel
     the old sad pity for--I need not write the word--for him. Changed as he
     is, and inexpressibly blest and thankful as I always am to know it, the
     old sorrowful feeling of compassion comes upon me sometimes with such
     strength that I want to put my arms round his neck, tell him how I love
     him, and cry a little on his breast. I should be glad after that, and
     proud and happy. But I know that I must not do this; that he would not
     like it, that Fanny would be angry, that Mrs General would be amazed;
     and so I quiet myself. Yet in doing so, I struggle with the feeling that
     I have come to be at a distance from him; and that even in the midst of
     all the servants and attendants, he is deserted, and in want of me.

     Dear Mr Clennam, I have written a great deal about myself, but I must
     write a little more still, or what I wanted most of all to say in this
     weak letter would be left out of it. In all these foolish thoughts of
     mine, which I have been so hardy as to confess to you because I know you
     will understand me if anybody can, and will make more allowance for me
     than anybody else would if you cannot--in all these thoughts, there is
     one thought scarcely ever--never--out of my memory, and that is that
     I hope you sometimes, in a quiet moment, have a thought for me. I must
     tell you that as to this, I have felt, ever since I have been away, an
     anxiety which I am very anxious to relieve. I have been afraid that you
     may think of me in a new light, or a new character. Don't do that, I
     could not bear that--it would make me more unhappy than you can suppose.
     It would break my heart to believe that you thought of me in any way
     that would make me stranger to you than I was when you were so good to
     me. What I have to pray and entreat of you is, that you will never think
     of me as the daughter of a rich person; that you will never think of me
     as dressing any better, or living any better, than when you first
     knew me. That you will remember me only as the little shabby girl you
     protected with so much tenderness, from whose threadbare dress you have
     kept away the rain, and whose wet feet you have dried at your fire.
     That you will think of me (when you think of me at all), and of my true
     affection and devoted gratitude, always without change, as of


     Your poor child,

     LITTLE DORRIT.


     P.S.--Particularly remember that you are not to be uneasy about Mrs
     Gowan. Her words were, 'Very well and very happy.' And she looked most
     beautiful.




The family had been a month or two at Venice, when Mr Dorrit, who was
much among Counts and Marquises, and had but scant leisure, set an hour
of one day apart, beforehand, for the purpose of holding some conference
with Mrs General.

The time he had reserved in his mind arriving, he sent Mr Tinkler, his
valet, to Mrs General's apartment (which would have absorbed about a
        third of the area of the Marshalsea), to present his compliments to that
lady, and represent him as desiring the favour of an interview. It being
that period of the forenoon when the various members of the family had
coffee in their own chambers, some couple of hours before assembling at
breakfast in a faded hall which had once been sumptuous, but was now
the prey of watery vapours and a settled melancholy, Mrs General was
accessible to the valet. That envoy found her on a little square of
carpet, so extremely diminutive in reference to the size of her stone
and marble floor that she looked as if she might have had it spread for
the trying on of a ready-made pair of shoes; or as if she had come into
possession of the enchanted piece of carpet, bought for forty purses by
one of the three princes in the Arabian Nights, and had that moment been
transported on it, at a wish, into a palatial saloon with which it had
no connection.

Mrs General, replying to the envoy, as she set down her empty
coffee-cup, that she was willing at once to proceed to Mr Dorrit's
apartment, and spare him the trouble of coming to her (which, in his
        gallantry, he had proposed), the envoy threw open the door, and
escorted Mrs General to the presence. It was quite a walk, by mysterious
staircases and corridors, from Mrs General's apartment,--hoodwinked by
a narrow side street with a low gloomy bridge in it, and dungeon-like
opposite tenements, their walls besmeared with a thousand downward
stains and streaks, as if every crazy aperture in them had been weeping
tears of rust into the Adriatic for centuries--to Mr Dorrit's apartment:
with a whole English house-front of window, a prospect of beautiful
church-domes rising into the blue sky sheer out of the water which
reflected them, and a hushed murmur of the Grand Canal laving the
doorways below, where his gondolas and gondoliers attended his pleasure,
         drowsily swinging in a little forest of piles.

         Mr Dorrit, in a resplendent dressing-gown and cap--the dormant grub that
         had so long bided its time among the Collegians had burst into a rare
         butterfly--rose to receive Mrs General. A chair to Mrs General. An
         easier chair, sir; what are you doing, what are you about, what do you
         mean? Now, leave us!

         'Mrs General,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I took the liberty--'

         'By no means,' Mrs General interposed. 'I was quite at your disposition.
         I had had my coffee.'

         '--I took the liberty,' said Mr Dorrit again, with the magnificent
         placidity of one who was above correction, 'to solicit the favour of
         a little private conversation with you, because I feel rather worried
         respecting my--ha--my younger daughter. You will have observed a great
         difference of temperament, madam, between my two daughters?'

         Said Mrs General in response, crossing her gloved hands (she was never
                 without gloves, and they never creased and always fitted), 'There is a
         great difference.'

         'May I ask to be favoured with your view of it?' said Mr Dorrit, with a
         deference not incompatible with majestic serenity.

         'Fanny,' returned Mrs General, 'has force of character and
         self-reliance. Amy, none.'

         None? O Mrs General, ask the Marshalsea stones and bars. O Mrs General,
         ask the milliner who taught her to work, and the dancing-master who
         taught her sister to dance. O Mrs General, Mrs General, ask me, her
         father, what I owe her; and hear my testimony touching the life of this
         slighted little creature from her childhood up!

         No such adjuration entered Mr. Dorrit's head. He looked at Mrs
         General, seated in her usual erect attitude on her coach-box behind the
         proprieties, and he said in a thoughtful manner, 'True, madam.'

         'I would not,' said Mrs General, 'be understood to say, observe,
         that there is nothing to improve in Fanny. But there is material
         there--perhaps, indeed, a little too much.'

         'Will you be kind enough, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'to be--ha--more
         explicit? I do not quite understand my elder daughter's having--hum--too
         much material. What material?'

         'Fanny,' returned Mrs General, 'at present forms too many opinions.
         Perfect breeding forms none, and is never demonstrative.'

         Lest he himself should be found deficient in perfect breeding, Mr Dorrit
         hastened to reply, 'Unquestionably, madam, you are right.' Mrs General
         returned, in her emotionless and expressionless manner, 'I believe so.'

         'But you are aware, my dear madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'that my daughters
         had the misfortune to lose their lamented mother when they were very
         young; and that, in consequence of my not having been until lately
         the recognised heir to my property, they have lived with me as
         a comparatively poor, though always proud, gentleman, in--ha
         hum--retirement!'

         'I do not,' said Mrs General, 'lose sight of the circumstance.'

         'Madam,' pursued Mr Dorrit, 'of my daughter Fanny, under her present
         guidance and with such an example constantly before her--'

(Mrs General shut her eyes.)

    --'I have no misgivings. There is adaptability of character in Fanny.
    But my younger daughter, Mrs General, rather worries and vexes my
    thoughts. I must inform you that she has always been my favourite.'

    'There is no accounting,' said Mrs General, 'for these partialities.'

    'Ha--no,' assented Mr Dorrit. 'No. Now, madam, I am troubled by noticing
    that Amy is not, so to speak, one of ourselves. She does not care to go
    about with us; she is lost in the society we have here; our tastes
    are evidently not her tastes. Which,' said Mr Dorrit, summing up with
    judicial gravity, 'is to say, in other words, that there is something
    wrong in--ha--Amy.'

    'May we incline to the supposition,' said Mrs General, with a little
    touch of varnish, 'that something is referable to the novelty of the
    position?'

    'Excuse me, madam,' observed Mr Dorrit, rather quickly. 'The daughter
    of a gentleman, though--ha--himself at one time comparatively far from
    affluent--comparatively--and herself reared in--hum--retirement, need
    not of necessity find this position so very novel.'

    'True,' said Mrs General, 'true.'

    'Therefore, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I took the liberty' (he laid an
            emphasis on the phrase and repeated it, as though he stipulated, with
            urbane firmness, that he must not be contradicted again), 'I took the
    liberty of requesting this interview, in order that I might mention the
    topic to you, and inquire how you would advise me?'

    'Mr Dorrit,' returned Mrs General, 'I have conversed with Amy several
    times since we have been residing here, on the general subject of the
    formation of a demeanour. She has expressed herself to me as wondering
    exceedingly at Venice. I have mentioned to her that it is better not to
    wonder. I have pointed out to her that the celebrated Mr Eustace, the
    classical tourist, did not think much of it; and that he compared the
    Rialto, greatly to its disadvantage, with Westminster and Blackfriars
    Bridges. I need not add, after what you have said, that I have not yet
    found my arguments successful. You do me the honour to ask me what to
    advise. It always appears to me (if this should prove to be a baseless
            assumption, I shall be pardoned), that Mr Dorrit has been accustomed to
    exercise influence over the minds of others.'

    'Hum--madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I have been at the head of--ha of
    a considerable community. You are right in supposing that I am not
    unaccustomed to--an influential position.'

    'I am happy,' returned Mrs General, 'to be so corroborated. I would
    therefore the more confidently recommend that Mr Dorrit should speak to
    Amy himself, and make his observations and wishes known to her. Being
    his favourite, besides, and no doubt attached to him, she is all the
    more likely to yield to his influence.'

    'I had anticipated your suggestion, madam,' said Mr Dorrit,
    'but--ha--was not sure that I might--hum--not encroach on--'

    'On my province, Mr Dorrit?' said Mrs General, graciously. 'Do not
    mention it.'

    'Then, with your leave, madam,' resumed Mr Dorrit, ringing his little
    bell to summon his valet, 'I will send for her at once.'

    'Does Mr Dorrit wish me to remain?'

    'Perhaps, if you have no other engagement, you would not object for a
    minute or two--'

    'Not at all.'

    So, Tinkler the valet was instructed to find Miss Amy's maid, and to
    request that subordinate to inform Miss Amy that Mr Dorrit wished to
    see her in his own room. In delivering this charge to Tinkler, Mr Dorrit
    looked severely at him, and also kept a jealous eye upon him until he
    went out at the door, mistrusting that he might have something in his
    mind prejudicial to the family dignity; that he might have even got wind
    of some Collegiate joke before he came into the service, and might be
    derisively reviving its remembrance at the present moment. If Tinkler
    had happened to smile, however faintly and innocently, nothing would
    have persuaded Mr Dorrit, to the hour of his death, but that this was
    the case. As Tinkler happened, however, very fortunately for himself, to
    be of a serious and composed countenance, he escaped the secret danger
    that threatened him. And as on his return--when Mr Dorrit eyed him
    again--he announced Miss Amy as if she had come to a funeral, he left a
    vague impression on Mr Dorrit's mind that he was a well-conducted young
    fellow, who had been brought up in the study of his Catechism by a
    widowed mother.

    'Amy,' said Mr Dorrit, 'you have just now been the subject of some
    conversation between myself and Mrs General. We agree that you scarcely
    seem at home here. Ha--how is this?'

    A pause.

    'I think, father, I require a little time.'

    'Papa is a preferable mode of address,' observed Mrs General. 'Father is
    rather vulgar, my dear. The word Papa, besides, gives a pretty form to
    the lips. Papa, potatoes, poultry, prunes, and prism are all very
    good words for the lips: especially prunes and prism. You will find it
    serviceable, in the formation of a demeanour, if you sometimes say to
    yourself in company--on entering a room, for instance--Papa, potatoes,
    poultry, prunes and prism, prunes and prism.'

    'Pray, my child,' said Mr Dorrit, 'attend to the--hum--precepts of Mrs
    General.'

    Poor Little Dorrit, with a rather forlorn glance at that eminent
    varnisher, promised to try.

    'You say, Amy,' pursued Mr Dorrit, 'that you think you require time.
    Time for what?'

    Another pause.

    'To become accustomed to the novelty of my life, was all I meant,' said
    Little Dorrit, with her loving eyes upon her father; whom she had very
    nearly addressed as poultry, if not prunes and prism too, in her desire
    to submit herself to Mrs General and please him.

    Mr Dorrit frowned, and looked anything but pleased. 'Amy,' he returned,
    'it appears to me, I must say, that you have had abundance of time for
    that. Ha--you surprise me. You disappoint me. Fanny has conquered any
    such little difficulties, and--hum--why not you?'

    'I hope I shall do better soon,' said Little Dorrit.

    'I hope so,' returned her father. 'I--ha--I most devoutly hope so, Amy.
    I sent for you, in order that I might say--hum--impressively say, in
    the presence of Mrs General, to whom we are all so much indebted
    for obligingly being present among us, on--ha--on this or any other
    occasion,' Mrs General shut her eyes, 'that I--ha hum--am not pleased
    with you. You make Mrs General's a thankless task. You--ha--embarrass
    me very much. You have always (as I have informed Mrs General) been my
    favourite child; I have always made you a--hum--a friend and companion;
    in return, I beg--I--ha--I _do_ beg, that you accommodate yourself
    better to--hum--circumstances, and dutifully do what becomes your--your
    station.'

    Mr Dorrit was even a little more fragmentary than usual, being excited
    on the subject and anxious to make himself particularly emphatic.

    'I do beg,' he repeated, 'that this may be attended to, and that you
    will seriously take pains and try to conduct yourself in a manner both
    becoming your position as--ha--Miss Amy Dorrit, and satisfactory to
    myself and Mrs General.'

    That lady shut her eyes again, on being again referred to; then, slowly
    opening them and rising, added these words:

    'If Miss Amy Dorrit will direct her own attention to, and will accept of
    my poor assistance in, the formation of a surface, Mr. Dorrit will have
    no further cause of anxiety. May I take this opportunity of remarking,
    as an instance in point, that it is scarcely delicate to look at
    vagrants with the attention which I have seen bestowed upon them by a
    very dear young friend of mine? They should not be looked at. Nothing
    disagreeable should ever be looked at. Apart from such a habit standing
    in the way of that graceful equanimity of surface which is so expressive
    of good breeding, it hardly seems compatible with refinement of mind. A
    truly refined mind will seem to be ignorant of the existence of anything
    that is not perfectly proper, placid, and pleasant.' Having delivered
    this exalted sentiment, Mrs General made a sweeping obeisance, and
    retired with an expression of mouth indicative of Prunes and Prism.

    Little Dorrit, whether speaking or silent, had preserved her quiet
    earnestness and her loving look. It had not been clouded, except for a
    passing moment, until now. But now that she was left alone with him
    the fingers of her lightly folded hands were agitated, and there was
    repressed emotion in her face.

    Not for herself. She might feel a little wounded, but her care was not
    for herself. Her thoughts still turned, as they always had turned, to
    him. A faint misgiving, which had hung about her since their accession
    to fortune, that even now she could never see him as he used to be
    before the prison days, had gradually begun to assume form in her mind.
    She felt that, in what he had just now said to her and in his whole
    bearing towards her, there was the well-known shadow of the Marshalsea
    wall. It took a new shape, but it was the old sad shadow. She began
    with sorrowful unwillingness to acknowledge to herself that she was
    not strong enough to keep off the fear that no space in the life of man
    could overcome that quarter of a century behind the prison bars. She had
    no blame to bestow upon him, therefore: nothing to reproach him with,
    no emotions in her faithful heart but great compassion and unbounded
    tenderness.

    This is why it was, that, even as he sat before her on his sofa, in the
    brilliant light of a bright Italian day, the wonderful city without and
    the splendours of an old palace within, she saw him at the moment in the
    long-familiar gloom of his Marshalsea lodging, and wished to take her
    seat beside him, and comfort him, and be again full of confidence with
    him, and of usefulness to him. If he divined what was in her thoughts,
    his own were not in tune with it. After some uneasy moving in his seat,
    he got up and walked about, looking very much dissatisfied.

    'Is there anything else you wish to say to me, dear father?'

    'No, no. Nothing else.'

    'I am sorry you have not been pleased with me, dear. I hope you will not
    think of me with displeasure now. I am going to try, more than ever, to
    adapt myself as you wish to what surrounds me--for indeed I have tried
    all along, though I have failed, I know.'

    'Amy,' he returned, turning short upon her. 'You--ha--habitually hurt
    me.'

    'Hurt you, father! I!'

    'There is a--hum--a topic,' said Mr Dorrit, looking all about the
    ceiling of the room, and never at the attentive, uncomplainingly shocked
    face, 'a painful topic, a series of events which I wish--ha--altogether
    to obliterate. This is understood by your sister, who has already
    remonstrated with you in my presence; it is understood by your brother;
    it is understood by--ha hum--by every one of delicacy and sensitiveness
    except yourself--ha--I am sorry to say, except yourself. You,
    Amy--hum--you alone and only you--constantly revive the topic, though
    not in words.'

    She laid her hand on his arm. She did nothing more. She gently touched
    him. The trembling hand may have said, with some expression, 'Think of
    me, think how I have worked, think of my many cares!' But she said not a
    syllable herself.

    There was a reproach in the touch so addressed to him that she had
    not foreseen, or she would have withheld her hand. He began to justify
    himself in a heated, stumbling, angry manner, which made nothing of it.

    'I was there all those years. I was--ha--universally acknowledged as
    the head of the place. I--hum--I caused you to be respected there, Amy.
    I--ha hum--I gave my family a position there. I deserve a return. I
    claim a return. I say, sweep it off the face of the earth and begin
    afresh. Is that much? I ask, is _that_ much?'

    He did not once look at her, as he rambled on in this way; but
    gesticulated at, and appealed to, the empty air.

    'I have suffered. Probably I know how much I have suffered better than
    any one--ha--I say than any one! If _I_ can put that aside, if _I_ can
    eradicate the marks of what I have endured, and can emerge before the
    world--a--ha--gentleman unspoiled, unspotted--is it a great deal to
    expect--I say again, is it a great deal to expect--that my children
    should--hum--do the same and sweep that accursed experience off the face
    of the earth?'

    In spite of his flustered state, he made all these exclamations in a
    carefully suppressed voice, lest the valet should overhear anything.

    'Accordingly, they do it. Your sister does it. Your brother does it. You
    alone, my favourite child, whom I made the friend and companion of my
    life when you were a mere--hum--Baby, do not do it. You alone say you
    can't do it. I provide you with valuable assistance to do it. I attach
    an accomplished and highly bred lady--ha--Mrs General, to you, for the
    purpose of doing it. Is it surprising that I should be displeased? Is it
    necessary that I should defend myself for expressing my displeasure?
    No!'

    Notwithstanding which, he continued to defend himself, without any
    abatement of his flushed mood.

    'I am careful to appeal to that lady for confirmation, before I express
    any displeasure at all. I--hum--I necessarily make that appeal within
    limited bounds, or I--ha--should render legible, by that lady, what I
    desire to be blotted out. Am I selfish? Do I complain for my own sake?
    No. No. Principally for--ha hum--your sake, Amy.'

    This last consideration plainly appeared, from his manner of pursuing
    it, to have just that instant come into his head.

    'I said I was hurt. So I am. So I--ha--am determined to be, whatever
    is advanced to the contrary. I am hurt that my daughter, seated in
    the--hum--lap of fortune, should mope and retire and proclaim herself
    unequal to her destiny. I am hurt that she should--ha--systematically
    reproduce what the rest of us blot out; and seem--hum--I had almost said
    positively anxious--to announce to wealthy and distinguished society
    that she was born and bred in--ha hum--a place that I myself decline to
    name. But there is no inconsistency--ha--not the least, in my feeling
    hurt, and yet complaining principally for your sake, Amy. I do; I say
    again, I do. It is for your sake that I wish you, under the auspices of
    Mrs General, to form a--hum--a surface. It is for your sake that I wish
    you to have a--ha--truly refined mind, and (in the striking words of
            Mrs General) to be ignorant of everything that is not perfectly proper,
    placid, and pleasant.'

    He had been running down by jerks, during his last speech, like a
    sort of ill-adjusted alarum. The touch was still upon his arm. He fell
    silent; and after looking about the ceiling again for a little while,
    looked down at her. Her head drooped, and he could not see her face; but
    her touch was tender and quiet, and in the expression of her dejected
    figure there was no blame--nothing but love. He began to whimper, just
    as he had done that night in the prison when she afterwards sat at
    his bedside till morning; exclaimed that he was a poor ruin and a poor
    wretch in the midst of his wealth; and clasped her in his arms. 'Hush,
    hush, my own dear! Kiss me!' was all she said to him. His tears
    were soon dried, much sooner than on the former occasion; and he was
    presently afterwards very high with his valet, as a way of righting
    himself for having shed any.

    With one remarkable exception, to be recorded in its place, this was
    the only time, in his life of freedom and fortune, when he spoke to his
    daughter Amy of the old days.

    But, now, the breakfast hour arrived; and with it Miss Fanny from her
    apartment, and Mr Edward from his apartment. Both these young persons of
    distinction were something the worse for late hours. As to Miss Fanny,
    she had become the victim of an insatiate mania for what she called
    'going into society;'and would have gone into it head-foremost fifty
    times between sunset and sunrise, if so many opportunities had been at
    her disposal. As to Mr Edward, he, too, had a large acquaintance, and
    was generally engaged (for the most part, in diceing circles, or others
            of a kindred nature), during the greater part of every night. For this
    gentleman, when his fortunes changed, had stood at the great advantage
    of being already prepared for the highest associates, and having little
    to learn: so much was he indebted to the happy accidents which had made
    him acquainted with horse-dealing and billiard-marking.

    At breakfast, Mr Frederick Dorrit likewise appeared. As the old
    gentleman inhabited the highest story of the palace, where he might have
    practised pistol-shooting without much chance of discovery by the other
    inmates, his younger niece had taken courage to propose the restoration
    to him of his clarionet, which Mr Dorrit had ordered to be confiscated,
    but which she had ventured to preserve. Notwithstanding some objections
    from Miss Fanny, that it was a low instrument, and that she detested the
    sound of it, the concession had been made. But it was then discovered
    that he had had enough of it, and never played it, now that it was no
    longer his means of getting bread. He had insensibly acquired a new
    habit of shuffling into the picture-galleries, always with his twisted
    paper of snuff in his hand (much to the indignation of Miss Fanny, who
            had proposed the purchase of a gold box for him that the family might
            not be discredited, which he had absolutely refused to carry when it was
            bought); and of passing hours and hours before the portraits of renowned
    Venetians. It was never made out what his dazed eyes saw in them;
    whether he had an interest in them merely as pictures, or whether he
    confusedly identified them with a glory that was departed, like the
    strength of his own mind. But he paid his court to them with great
    exactness, and clearly derived pleasure from the pursuit. After the
    first few days, Little Dorrit happened one morning to assist at these
    attentions. It so evidently heightened his gratification that she often
    accompanied him afterwards, and the greatest delight of which the old
    man had shown himself susceptible since his ruin, arose out of these
    excursions, when he would carry a chair about for her from picture
    to picture, and stand behind it, in spite of all her remonstrances,
    silently presenting her to the noble Venetians.

    It fell out that, at this family breakfast, he referred to their having
    seen in a gallery, on the previous day, the lady and gentleman whom they
    had encountered on the Great Saint Bernard, 'I forget the name,' said
    he. 'I dare say you remember them, William? I dare say you do, Edward?'

    '_I_ remember 'em well enough,' said the latter.

    'I should think so,' observed Miss Fanny, with a toss of her head and
    a glance at her sister. 'But they would not have been recalled to our
    remembrance, I suspect, if Uncle hadn't tumbled over the subject.'

    'My dear, what a curious phrase,' said Mrs General. 'Would not
    inadvertently lighted upon, or accidentally referred to, be better?'

    'Thank you very much, Mrs General,' returned the young lady, 'no, I
    think not. On the whole I prefer my own expression.'

    This was always Miss Fanny's way of receiving a suggestion from Mrs
    General. But she always stored it up in her mind, and adopted it at
    another time.

    'I should have mentioned our having met Mr and Mrs Gowan, Fanny,' said
    Little Dorrit, 'even if Uncle had not. I have scarcely seen you since,
    you know. I meant to have spoken of it at breakfast; because I should
    like to pay a visit to Mrs Gowan, and to become better acquainted with
    her, if Papa and Mrs General do not object.'

    'Well, Amy,' said Fanny, 'I am sure I am glad to find you at last
    expressing a wish to become better acquainted with anybody in Venice.
    Though whether Mr and Mrs Gowan are desirable acquaintances, remains to
    be determined.'

    'Mrs Gowan I spoke of, dear.'

    'No doubt,' said Fanny. 'But you can't separate her from her husband, I
    believe, without an Act of Parliament.'

    'Do you think, Papa,' inquired Little Dorrit, with diffidence and
    hesitation, 'there is any objection to my making this visit?'

    'Really,' he replied, 'I--ha--what is Mrs General's view?'

    Mrs General's view was, that not having the honour of any acquaintance
    with the lady and gentleman referred to, she was not in a position
    to varnish the present article. She could only remark, as a general
    principle observed in the varnishing trade, that much depended on the
    quarter from which the lady under consideration was accredited to a
    family so conspicuously niched in the social temple as the family of
    Dorrit.

    At this remark the face of Mr Dorrit gloomed considerably. He was about
    (connecting the accrediting with an obtrusive person of the name
     of Clennam, whom he imperfectly remembered in some former state of
     existence) to black-ball the name of Gowan finally, when Edward Dorrit,
    Esquire, came into the conversation, with his glass in his eye, and the
    preliminary remark of 'I say--you there! Go out, will you!'--which was
    addressed to a couple of men who were handing the dishes round, as a
    courteous intimation that their services could be temporarily dispensed
    with.

    Those menials having obeyed the mandate, Edward Dorrit, Esquire,
    proceeded.

    'Perhaps it's a matter of policy to let you all know that these
    Gowans--in whose favour, or at least the gentleman's, I can't be
    supposed to be much prepossessed myself--are known to people of
    importance, if that makes any difference.'

    'That, I would say,' observed the fair varnisher, 'Makes the greatest
    difference. The connection in question, being really people of
    importance and consideration--'

    'As to that,' said Edward Dorrit, Esquire, 'I'll give you the means of
    judging for yourself. You are acquainted, perhaps, with the famous name
    of Merdle?'

    'The great Merdle!' exclaimed Mrs General.

    '_The_ Merdle,' said Edward Dorrit, Esquire. 'They are known to him.
    Mrs Gowan--I mean the dowager, my polite friend's mother--is intimate
    with Mrs Merdle, and I know these two to be on their visiting list.'

    'If so, a more undeniable guarantee could not be given,' said Mrs
    General to Mr Dorrit, raising her gloves and bowing her head, as if she
    were doing homage to some visible graven image.

    'I beg to ask my son, from motives of--ah--curiosity,' Mr Dorrit
    observed, with a decided change in his manner, 'how he becomes possessed
    of this--hum--timely information?'

    'It's not a long story, sir,' returned Edward Dorrit, Esquire, 'and you
    shall have it out of hand. To begin with, Mrs Merdle is the lady you had
    the parley with at what's-his-name place.'

    'Martigny,' interposed Miss Fanny with an air of infinite languor.

    'Martigny,' assented her brother, with a slight nod and a slight wink;
    in acknowledgment of which, Miss Fanny looked surprised, and laughed and
    reddened.

    'How can that be, Edward?' said Mr Dorrit. 'You informed me that the
    name of the gentleman with whom you conferred was--ha--Sparkler. Indeed,
    you showed me his card. Hum. Sparkler.'

    'No doubt of it, father; but it doesn't follow that his mother's name
    must be the same. Mrs Merdle was married before, and he is her son. She
    is in Rome now; where probably we shall know more of her, as you decide
    to winter there. Sparkler is just come here. I passed last evening in
    company with Sparkler. Sparkler is a very good fellow on the
    whole, though rather a bore on one subject, in consequence of being
    tremendously smitten with a certain young lady.' Here Edward Dorrit,
    Esquire, eyed Miss Fanny through his glass across the table. 'We
    happened last night to compare notes about our travels, and I had the
    information I have given you from Sparkler himself.' Here he ceased;
    continuing to eye Miss Fanny through his glass, with a face much
    twisted, and not ornamentally so, in part by the action of keeping his
    glass in his eye, and in part by the great subtlety of his smile.

    'Under these circumstances,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I believe I express the
    sentiments of--ha--Mrs General, no less than my own, when I say
    that there is no objection, but--ha hum--quite the contrary--to your
    gratifying your desire, Amy. I trust I may--ha--hail--this desire,' said
    Mr Dorrit, in an encouraging and forgiving manner, 'as an auspicious
    omen. It is quite right to know these people. It is a very proper
    thing. Mr Merdle's is a name of--ha--world-wide repute. Mr Merdle's
    undertakings are immense. They bring him in such vast sums of money that
    they are regarded as--hum--national benefits. Mr Merdle is the man of
    this time. The name of Merdle is the name of the age. Pray do everything
    on my behalf that is civil to Mr and Mrs Gowan, for we will--ha--we will
    certainly notice them.'

    This magnificent accordance of Mr Dorrit's recognition settled the
    matter. It was not observed that Uncle had pushed away his plate, and
    forgotten his breakfast; but he was not much observed at any time,
    except by Little Dorrit. The servants were recalled, and the meal
    proceeded to its conclusion. Mrs General rose and left the table.
    Little Dorrit rose and left the table. When Edward and Fanny remained
    whispering together across it, and when Mr Dorrit remained eating figs
    and reading a French newspaper, Uncle suddenly fixed the attention of
    all three by rising out of his chair, striking his hand upon the table,
    and saying, 'Brother! I protest against it!'

    If he had made a proclamation in an unknown tongue, and given up the
    ghost immediately afterwards, he could not have astounded his audience
    more. The paper fell from Mr Dorrit's hand, and he sat petrified, with a
    fig half way to his mouth.

    'Brother!' said the old man, conveying a surprising energy into his
    trembling voice, 'I protest against it! I love you; you know I love you
    dearly. In these many years I have never been untrue to you in a single
    thought. Weak as I am, I would at any time have struck any man who spoke
    ill of you. But, brother, brother, brother, I protest against it!'

    It was extraordinary to see of what a burst of earnestness such a
    decrepit man was capable. His eyes became bright, his grey hair rose on
    his head, markings of purpose on his brow and face which had faded from
    them for five-and-twenty years, started out again, and there was an
    energy in his hand that made its action nervous once more.

    'My dear Frederick!' exclaimed Mr Dorrit faintly. 'What is wrong? What
    is the matter?'

    'How dare you,' said the old man, turning round on Fanny, 'how dare you
    do it? Have you no memory? Have you no heart?'

    'Uncle?' cried Fanny, affrighted and bursting into tears, 'why do you
    attack me in this cruel manner? What have I done?'

    'Done?' returned the old man, pointing to her sister's place, 'where's
    your affectionate invaluable friend? Where's your devoted guardian?
    Where's your more than mother? How dare you set up superiorities against
    all these characters combined in your sister? For shame, you false girl,
    for shame!'

    'I love Amy,' cried Miss Fanny, sobbing and weeping, 'as well as I love
    my life--better than I love my life. I don't deserve to be so treated. I
    am as grateful to Amy, and as fond of Amy, as it's possible for any
    human being to be. I wish I was dead. I never was so wickedly wronged.
    And only because I am anxious for the family credit.'

    'To the winds with the family credit!' cried the old man, with great
    scorn and indignation. 'Brother, I protest against pride. I protest
    against ingratitude. I protest against any one of us here who have known
    what we have known, and have seen what we have seen, setting up any
    pretension that puts Amy at a moment's disadvantage, or to the cost of
    a moment's pain. We may know that it's a base pretension by its having
    that effect. It ought to bring a judgment on us. Brother, I protest
    against it in the sight of God!'

    As his hand went up above his head and came down on the table, it might
    have been a blacksmith's. After a few moments' silence, it had relaxed
    into its usual weak condition. He went round to his brother with his
    ordinary shuffling step, put the hand on his shoulder, and said, in a
    softened voice, 'William, my dear, I felt obliged to say it; forgive me,
    for I felt obliged to say it!' and then went, in his bowed way, out of
    the palace hall, just as he might have gone out of the Marshalsea room.

    All this time Fanny had been sobbing and crying, and still continued to
    do so. Edward, beyond opening his mouth in amazement, had not opened his
    lips, and had done nothing but stare. Mr Dorrit also had been utterly
    discomfited, and quite unable to assert himself in any way. Fanny was
    now the first to speak.

    'I never, never, never was so used!' she sobbed. 'There never was
    anything so harsh and unjustifiable, so disgracefully violent and cruel!
    Dear, kind, quiet little Amy, too, what would she feel if she could know
    that she had been innocently the means of exposing me to such treatment!
    But I'll never tell her! No, good darling, I'll never tell her!'

    This helped Mr Dorrit to break his silence.

    'My dear,' said he, 'I--ha--approve of your resolution. It will be--ha
    hum--much better not to speak of this to Amy. It might--hum--it
    might distress her. Ha. No doubt it would distress her greatly. It
    is considerate and right to avoid doing so. We will--ha--keep this to
    ourselves.'

    'But the cruelty of Uncle!' cried Miss Fanny. 'O, I never can forgive
    the wanton cruelty of Uncle!'

    'My dear,' said Mr Dorrit, recovering his tone, though he remained
    unusually pale, 'I must request you not to say so. You must remember
    that your uncle is--ha--not what he formerly was. You must remember
    that your uncle's state requires--hum--great forbearance from us, great
    forbearance.'

    'I am sure,' cried Fanny, piteously, 'it is only charitable to suppose
    that there must be something wrong in him somewhere, or he never could
    have so attacked Me, of all the people in the world.'

    'Fanny,' returned Mr Dorrit in a deeply fraternal tone, 'you know, with
    his innumerable good points, what a--hum--wreck your uncle is; and, I
    entreat you by the fondness that I have for him, and by the fidelity
    that you know I have always shown him, to--ha--to draw your own
    conclusions, and to spare my brotherly feelings.'

    This ended the scene; Edward Dorrit, Esquire, saying nothing throughout,
    but looking, to the last, perplexed and doubtful. Miss Fanny awakened
    much affectionate uneasiness in her sister's mind that day by passing
    the greater part of it in violent fits of embracing her, and in
    alternately giving her brooches, and wishing herself dead.




To be in the halting state of Mr Henry Gowan; to have left one of two
powers in disgust; to want the necessary qualifications for finding
promotion with another, and to be loitering moodily about on neutral
ground, cursing both; is to be in a situation unwholesome for the mind,
    which time is not likely to improve. The worst class of sum worked in
    the every-day world is cyphered by the diseased arithmeticians who are
    always in the rule of Subtraction as to the merits and successes of
    others, and never in Addition as to their own.

    The habit, too, of seeking some sort of recompense in the discontented
    boast of being disappointed, is a habit fraught with degeneracy. A
    certain idle carelessness and recklessness of consistency soon comes of
    it. To bring deserving things down by setting undeserving things up is
    one of its perverted delights; and there is no playing fast and loose
    with the truth, in any game, without growing the worse for it.

    In his expressed opinions of all performances in the Art of painting
    that were completely destitute of merit, Gowan was the most liberal
    fellow on earth. He would declare such a man to have more power in his
    little finger (provided he had none), than such another had (provided he
            had much) in his whole mind and body. If the objection were taken that
    the thing commended was trash, he would reply, on behalf of his art, 'My
    good fellow, what do we all turn out but trash? _I_ turn out nothing else,
    and I make you a present of the confession.'

    To make a vaunt of being poor was another of the incidents of his
    splenetic state, though this may have had the design in it of showing
    that he ought to be rich; just as he would publicly laud and decry the
    Barnacles, lest it should be forgotten that he belonged to the family.
    Howbeit, these two subjects were very often on his lips; and he managed
    them so well that he might have praised himself by the month together,
    and not have made himself out half so important a man as he did by his
    light disparagement of his claims on anybody's consideration.

    Out of this same airy talk of his, it always soon came to be understood,
    wherever he and his wife went, that he had married against the wishes
    of his exalted relations, and had had much ado to prevail on them to
    countenance her. He never made the representation, on the contrary
    seemed to laugh the idea to scorn; but it did happen that, with all his
    pains to depreciate himself, he was always in the superior position.
    From the days of their honeymoon, Minnie Gowan felt sensible of being
    usually regarded as the wife of a man who had made a descent in marrying
    her, but whose chivalrous love for her had cancelled that inequality.

    To Venice they had been accompanied by Monsieur Blandois of Paris, and
    at Venice Monsieur Blandois of Paris was very much in the society of
    Gowan. When they had first met this gallant gentleman at Geneva,
    Gowan had been undecided whether to kick him or encourage him; and had
    remained for about four-and-twenty hours, so troubled to settle
    the point to his satisfaction, that he had thought of tossing up a
    five-franc piece on the terms, 'Tails, kick; heads, encourage,' and
    abiding by the voice of the oracle. It chanced, however, that his wife
    expressed a dislike to the engaging Blandois, and that the balance
    of feeling in the hotel was against him. Upon it, Gowan resolved to
    encourage him.

    Why this perversity, if it were not in a generous fit?--which it was
    not. Why should Gowan, very much the superior of Blandois of Paris, and
    very well able to pull that prepossessing gentleman to pieces and find
    out the stuff he was made of, take up with such a man? In the first
    place, he opposed the first separate wish he observed in his wife,
    because her father had paid his debts and it was desirable to take an
    early opportunity of asserting his independence. In the second place,
    he opposed the prevalent feeling, because with many capacities of
    being otherwise, he was an ill-conditioned man. He found a pleasure in
    declaring that a courtier with the refined manners of Blandois ought
    to rise to the greatest distinction in any polished country. He found a
    pleasure in setting up Blandois as the type of elegance, and making
    him a satire upon others who piqued themselves on personal graces.
    He seriously protested that the bow of Blandois was perfect, that the
    address of Blandois was irresistible, and that the picturesque ease
    of Blandois would be cheaply purchased (if it were not a gift, and
            unpurchasable) for a hundred thousand francs. That exaggeration in the
    manner of the man which has been noticed as appertaining to him and to
    every such man, whatever his original breeding, as certainly as the sun
    belongs to this system, was acceptable to Gowan as a caricature, which
    he found it a humorous resource to have at hand for the ridiculing of
    numbers of people who necessarily did more or less of what Blandois
    overdid. Thus he had taken up with him; and thus, negligently
    strengthening these inclinations with habit, and idly deriving some
    amusement from his talk, he had glided into a way of having him for
    a companion. This, though he supposed him to live by his wits at
    play-tables and the like; though he suspected him to be a coward, while
    he himself was daring and courageous; though he thoroughly knew him to
    be disliked by Minnie; and though he cared so little for him, after all,
    that if he had given her any tangible personal cause to regard him with
    aversion, he would have had no compunction whatever in flinging him out
    of the highest window in Venice into the deepest water of the city.

    Little Dorrit would have been glad to make her visit to Mrs Gowan,
    alone; but as Fanny, who had not yet recovered from her Uncle's protest,
    though it was four-and-twenty hours of age, pressingly offered her
    company, the two sisters stepped together into one of the gondolas under
    Mr Dorrit's window, and, with the courier in attendance, were taken in
    high state to Mrs Gowan's lodging. In truth, their state was rather too
    high for the lodging, which was, as Fanny complained, 'fearfully out of
    the way,' and which took them through a complexity of narrow streets of
    water, which the same lady disparaged as 'mere ditches.'

    The house, on a little desert island, looked as if it had broken
    away from somewhere else, and had floated by chance into its present
    anchorage in company with a vine almost as much in want of training as
    the poor wretches who were lying under its leaves. The features of the
    surrounding picture were, a church with hoarding and scaffolding about
    it, which had been under suppositious repair so long that the means of
    repair looked a hundred years old, and had themselves fallen into decay;
    a quantity of washed linen, spread to dry in the sun; a number of houses
    at odds with one another and grotesquely out of the perpendicular, like
    rotten pre-Adamite cheeses cut into fantastic shapes and full of mites;
    and a feverish bewilderment of windows, with their lattice-blinds all
    hanging askew, and something draggled and dirty dangling out of most of
    them.

    On the first-floor of the house was a Bank--a surprising experience for
    any gentleman of commercial pursuits bringing laws for all mankind from
    a British city--where two spare clerks, like dried dragoons, in green
    velvet caps adorned with golden tassels, stood, bearded, behind a small
    counter in a small room, containing no other visible objects than an
    empty iron-safe with the door open, a jug of water, and a papering of
    garland of roses; but who, on lawful requisition, by merely dipping
    their hands out of sight, could produce exhaustless mounds of five-franc
    pieces. Below the Bank was a suite of three or four rooms with barred
    windows, which had the appearance of a jail for criminal rats. Above the
    Bank was Mrs Gowan's residence.

    Notwithstanding that its walls were blotched, as if missionary maps were
    bursting out of them to impart geographical knowledge; notwithstanding
    that its weird furniture was forlornly faded and musty, and that the
    prevailing Venetian odour of bilge water and an ebb tide on a weedy
    shore was very strong; the place was better within, than it promised.
    The door was opened by a smiling man like a reformed assassin--a
    temporary servant--who ushered them into the room where Mrs Gowan sat,
    with the announcement that two beautiful English ladies were come to see
    the mistress.

    Mrs Gowan, who was engaged in needlework, put her work aside in a
    covered basket, and rose, a little hurriedly. Miss Fanny was excessively
    courteous to her, and said the usual nothings with the skill of a
    veteran.

    'Papa was extremely sorry,' proceeded Fanny, 'to be engaged to-day (he
            is so much engaged here, our acquaintance being so wretchedly large!);
    and particularly requested me to bring his card for Mr Gowan. That I may
    be sure to acquit myself of a commission which he impressed upon me at
    least a dozen times, allow me to relieve my conscience by placing it on
    the table at once.'

    Which she did with veteran ease.

    'We have been,' said Fanny, 'charmed to understand that you know the
    Merdles. We hope it may be another means of bringing us together.'

    'They are friends,' said Mrs Gowan, 'of Mr Gowan's family. I have not
    yet had the pleasure of a personal introduction to Mrs Merdle, but I
    suppose I shall be presented to her at Rome.'

    'Indeed?' returned Fanny, with an appearance of amiably quenching her
    own superiority. 'I think you'll like her.'

    'You know her very well?'

    'Why, you see,' said Fanny, with a frank action of her pretty shoulders,
    'in London one knows every one. We met her on our way here, and, to say
    the truth, papa was at first rather cross with her for taking one of the
    rooms that our people had ordered for us. However, of course, that soon
    blew over, and we were all good friends again.'

    Although the visit had as yet given Little Dorrit no opportunity of
    conversing with Mrs Gowan, there was a silent understanding between
    them, which did as well. She looked at Mrs Gowan with keen and unabated
    interest; the sound of her voice was thrilling to her; nothing that was
    near her, or about her, or at all concerned her, escaped Little Dorrit.
    She was quicker to perceive the slightest matter here, than in any other
    case--but one.

    'You have been quite well,' she now said, 'since that night?'

    'Quite, my dear. And you?'

    'Oh! I am always well,' said Little Dorrit, timidly. 'I--yes, thank you.'

    There was no reason for her faltering and breaking off, other than that
    Mrs Gowan had touched her hand in speaking to her, and their looks had
    met. Something thoughtfully apprehensive in the large, soft eyes, had
    checked Little Dorrit in an instant.

    'You don't know that you are a favourite of my husband's, and that I am
    almost bound to be jealous of you?' said Mrs Gowan.

    Little Dorrit, blushing, shook her head.

    'He will tell you, if he tells you what he tells me, that you are
    quieter and quicker of resource than any one he ever saw.'

    'He speaks far too well of me,' said Little Dorrit.

    'I doubt that; but I don't at all doubt that I must tell him you
    are here. I should never be forgiven, if I were to let you--and Miss
    Dorrit--go, without doing so. May I? You can excuse the disorder and
    discomfort of a painter's studio?'

    The inquiries were addressed to Miss Fanny, who graciously replied that
    she would be beyond anything interested and enchanted. Mrs Gowan went to
    a door, looked in beyond it, and came back. 'Do Henry the favour to come
    in,' said she, 'I knew he would be pleased!'

    The first object that confronted Little Dorrit, entering first, was
    Blandois of Paris in a great cloak and a furtive slouched hat, standing
    on a throne platform in a corner, as he had stood on the Great Saint
    Bernard, when the warning arms seemed to be all pointing up at him. She
    recoiled from this figure, as it smiled at her.

    'Don't be alarmed,' said Gowan, coming from his easel behind the door.
    'It's only Blandois. He is doing duty as a model to-day. I am making
    a study of him. It saves me money to turn him to some use. We poor
    painters have none to spare.'

    Blandois of Paris pulled off his slouched hat, and saluted the ladies
    without coming out of his corner.

    'A thousand pardons!' said he. 'But the Professore here is so inexorable
    with me, that I am afraid to stir.'

    'Don't stir, then,' said Gowan coolly, as the sisters approached the
    easel. 'Let the ladies at least see the original of the daub, that they
    may know what it's meant for. There he stands, you see. A bravo waiting
    for his prey, a distinguished noble waiting to save his country, the
    common enemy waiting to do somebody a bad turn, an angelic messenger
    waiting to do somebody a good turn--whatever you think he looks most
    like!'

    'Say, Professore Mio, a poor gentleman waiting to do homage to
    elegance and beauty,' remarked Blandois.

    'Or say, Cattivo Soggetto Mio,' returned Gowan, touching the painted
    face with his brush in the part where the real face had moved, 'a
    murderer after the fact. Show that white hand of yours, Blandois. Put it
    outside the cloak. Keep it still.'

    Blandois' hand was unsteady; but he laughed, and that would naturally
    shake it.

    'He was formerly in some scuffle with another murderer, or with a
    victim, you observe,' said Gowan, putting in the markings of the hand
    with a quick, impatient, unskilful touch, 'and these are the tokens of
    it. Outside the cloak, man!--Corpo di San Marco, what are you thinking
    of?'

    Blandois of Paris shook with a laugh again, so that his hand shook more;
    now he raised it to twist his moustache, which had a damp appearance;
    and now he stood in the required position, with a little new swagger.

    His face was so directed in reference to the spot where Little Dorrit
    stood by the easel, that throughout he looked at her. Once attracted by
    his peculiar eyes, she could not remove her own, and they had looked
    at each other all the time. She trembled now; Gowan, feeling it, and
    supposing her to be alarmed by the large dog beside him, whose head she
    caressed in her hand, and who had just uttered a low growl, glanced at
    her to say, 'He won't hurt you, Miss Dorrit.'

    'I am not afraid of him,' she returned in the same breath; 'but will you
    look at him?'

    In a moment Gowan had thrown down his brush, and seized the dog with
    both hands by the collar.

    'Blandois! How can you be such a fool as to provoke him! By Heaven, and
    the other place too, he'll tear you to bits! Lie down! Lion! Do you hear
    my voice, you rebel!'

    The great dog, regardless of being half-choked by his collar, was
    obdurately pulling with his dead weight against his master, resolved to
    get across the room. He had been crouching for a spring at the moment
    when his master caught him.

    'Lion! Lion!' He was up on his hind legs, and it was a wrestle between
    master and dog. 'Get back! Down, Lion! Get out of his sight, Blandois!
    What devil have you conjured into the dog?'

    'I have done nothing to him.'

    'Get out of his sight or I can't hold the wild beast! Get out of the
    room! By my soul, he'll kill you!'

    The dog, with a ferocious bark, made one other struggle as Blandois
    vanished; then, in the moment of the dog's submission, the master,
    little less angry than the dog, felled him with a blow on the head, and
    standing over him, struck him many times severely with the heel of his
    boot, so that his mouth was presently bloody.

    'Now get you into that corner and lie down,' said Gowan, 'or I'll take
    you out and shoot you.'

    Lion did as he was ordered, and lay down licking his mouth and chest.
    Lion's master stopped for a moment to take breath, and then, recovering
    his usual coolness of manner, turned to speak to his frightened wife
    and her visitors. Probably the whole occurrence had not occupied two
    minutes.

    'Come, come, Minnie! You know he is always good-humoured and tractable.
    Blandois must have irritated him,--made faces at him. The dog has his
    likings and dislikings, and Blandois is no great favourite of his; but
    I am sure you will give him a character, Minnie, for never having been
    like this before.'

    Minnie was too much disturbed to say anything connected in reply; Little
    Dorrit was already occupied in soothing her; Fanny, who had cried out
    twice or thrice, held Gowan's arm for protection; Lion, deeply ashamed
    of having caused them this alarm, came trailing himself along the ground
    to the feet of his mistress.

    'You furious brute,' said Gowan, striking him with his foot again. 'You
    shall do penance for this.' And he struck him again, and yet again.

    'O, pray don't punish him any more,' cried Little Dorrit. 'Don't hurt
    him. See how gentle he is!' At her entreaty, Gowan spared him; and he
    deserved her intercession, for truly he was as submissive, and as sorry,
    and as wretched as a dog could be.

    It was not easy to recover this shock and make the visit unrestrained,
    even though Fanny had not been, under the best of circumstances, the
    least trifle in the way. In such further communication as passed among
    them before the sisters took their departure, Little Dorrit fancied it
    was revealed to her that Mr Gowan treated his wife, even in his very
    fondness, too much like a beautiful child. He seemed so unsuspicious of
    the depths of feeling which she knew must lie below that surface, that
    she doubted if there could be any such depths in himself. She wondered
    whether his want of earnestness might be the natural result of his want
    of such qualities, and whether it was with people as with ships, that,
    in too shallow and rocky waters, their anchors had no hold, and they
    drifted anywhere.

    He attended them down the staircase, jocosely apologising for the
    poor quarters to which such poor fellows as himself were limited, and
    remarking that when the high and mighty Barnacles, his relatives, who
    would be dreadfully ashamed of them, presented him with better, he would
    live in better to oblige them. At the water's edge they were saluted by
    Blandois, who looked white enough after his late adventure, but who made
    very light of it notwithstanding,--laughing at the mention of Lion.

    Leaving the two together under the scrap of vine upon the causeway,
    Gowan idly scattering the leaves from it into the water, and Blandois
    lighting a cigarette, the sisters were paddled away in state as they had
    come. They had not glided on for many minutes, when Little Dorrit became
    aware that Fanny was more showy in manner than the occasion appeared to
    require, and, looking about for the cause through the window and through
    the open door, saw another gondola evidently in waiting on them.

    As this gondola attended their progress in various artful ways;
    sometimes shooting on a-head, and stopping to let them pass; sometimes,
    when the way was broad enough, skimming along side by side with them;
and sometimes following close astern; and as Fanny gradually made no
disguise that she was playing off graces upon somebody within it, of
whom she at the same time feigned to be unconscious; Little Dorrit at
length asked who it was?

To which Fanny made the short answer, 'That gaby.'

'Who?' said Little Dorrit.

'My dear child,' returned Fanny (in a tone suggesting that before her
        Uncle's protest she might have said, You little fool, instead), 'how
slow you are! Young Sparkler.'

She lowered the window on her side, and, leaning back and resting her
elbow on it negligently, fanned herself with a rich Spanish fan of black
and gold. The attendant gondola, having skimmed forward again, with some
swift trace of an eye in the window, Fanny laughed coquettishly and
said, 'Did you ever see such a fool, my love?'

'Do you think he means to follow you all the way?' asked Little Dorrit.

'My precious child,' returned Fanny, 'I can't possibly answer for what
an idiot in a state of desperation may do, but I should think it highly
probable. It's not such an enormous distance. All Venice would scarcely
be that, I imagine, if he's dying for a glimpse of me.'

'And is he?' asked Little Dorrit in perfect simplicity.

'Well, my love, that really is an awkward question for me to answer,'
said her sister. 'I believe he is. You had better ask Edward. He tells
Edward he is, I believe. I understand he makes a perfect spectacle of
himself at the Casino, and that sort of places, by going on about me.
But you had better ask Edward if you want to know.'

'I wonder he doesn't call,' said Little Dorrit after thinking a moment.

'My dear Amy, your wonder will soon cease, if I am rightly informed.
I should not be at all surprised if he called to-day. The creature has
only been waiting to get his courage up, I suspect.'

'Will you see him?'

'Indeed, my darling,' said Fanny, 'that's just as it may happen. Here he
is again. Look at him. O, you simpleton!'

Mr Sparkler had, undeniably, a weak appearance; with his eye in the
window like a knot in the glass, and no reason on earth for stopping his
bark suddenly, except the real reason.

'When you asked me if I will see him, my dear,' said Fanny, almost as
well composed in the graceful indifference of her attitude as Mrs Merdle
herself, 'what do you mean?'

'I mean,' said Little Dorrit--'I think I rather mean what do you mean,
    dear Fanny?'

    Fanny laughed again, in a manner at once condescending, arch, and
    affable; and said, putting her arm round her sister in a playfully
    affectionate way:

    'Now tell me, my little pet. When we saw that woman at Martigny, how
    did you think she carried it off? Did you see what she decided on in a
    moment?'

    'No, Fanny.'

    'Then I'll tell you, Amy. She settled with herself, now I'll never
    refer to that meeting under such different circumstances, and I'll never
    pretend to have any idea that these are the same girls. That's _her_ way
    out of a difficulty. What did I tell you when we came away from Harley
    Street that time? She is as insolent and false as any woman in the
    world. But in the first capacity, my love, she may find people who can
    match her.'

    A significant turn of the Spanish fan towards Fanny's bosom, indicated
    with great expression where one of these people was to be found.

    'Not only that,' pursued Fanny, 'but she gives the same charge to
    Young Sparkler; and doesn't let him come after me until she has got it
    thoroughly into his most ridiculous of all ridiculous noddles (for one
            really can't call it a head), that he is to pretend to have been first
    struck with me in that Inn Yard.'

    'Why?' asked Little Dorrit.

    'Why? Good gracious, my love!' (again very much in the tone of You
            stupid little creature) 'how can you ask? Don't you see that I may have
    become a rather desirable match for a noddle? And don't you see that she
    puts the deception upon us, and makes a pretence, while she shifts it
    from her own shoulders (very good shoulders they are too, I must say),'
    observed Miss Fanny, glancing complacently at herself, 'of considering
    our feelings?'

    'But we can always go back to the plain truth.'

    'Yes, but if you please we won't,' retorted Fanny. 'No; I am not going
    to have that done, Amy. The pretext is none of mine; it's hers, and she
    shall have enough of it.'

    In the triumphant exaltation of her feelings, Miss Fanny, using her
    Spanish fan with one hand, squeezed her sister's waist with the other,
    as if she were crushing Mrs Merdle.

    'No,' repeated Fanny. 'She shall find me go her way. She took it, and
    I'll follow it. And, with the blessing of fate and fortune, I'll go on
    improving that woman's acquaintance until I have given her maid,
    before her eyes, things from my dressmaker's ten times as handsome and
    expensive as she once gave me from hers!'

    Little Dorrit was silent; sensible that she was not to be heard on
    any question affecting the family dignity, and unwilling to lose to no
    purpose her sister's newly and unexpectedly restored favour. She could
    not concur, but she was silent. Fanny well knew what she was thinking
    of; so well, that she soon asked her.

    Her reply was, 'Do you mean to encourage Mr Sparkler, Fanny?'

    'Encourage him, my dear?' said her sister, smiling contemptuously, 'that
    depends upon what you call encourage. No, I don't mean to encourage him.
    But I'll make a slave of him.'

    Little Dorrit glanced seriously and doubtfully in her face, but Fanny
    was not to be so brought to a check. She furled her fan of black and
    gold, and used it to tap her sister's nose; with the air of a proud
    beauty and a great spirit, who toyed with and playfully instructed a
    homely companion.

    'I shall make him fetch and carry, my dear, and I shall make him subject
    to me. And if I don't make his mother subject to me, too, it shall not
    be my fault.'

    'Do you think--dear Fanny, don't be offended, we are so comfortable
    together now--that you can quite see the end of that course?'

    'I can't say I have so much as looked for it yet, my dear,' answered
    Fanny, with supreme indifference; 'all in good time. Such are my
    intentions. And really they have taken me so long to develop, that here
    we are at home. And Young Sparkler at the door, inquiring who is within.
    By the merest accident, of course!'

    In effect, the swain was standing up in his gondola, card-case in
    hand, affecting to put the question to a servant. This conjunction
    of circumstances led to his immediately afterwards presenting himself
    before the young ladies in a posture, which in ancient times would not
    have been considered one of favourable augury for his suit; since the
    gondoliers of the young ladies, having been put to some inconvenience
    by the chase, so neatly brought their own boat in the gentlest collision
    with the bark of Mr Sparkler, as to tip that gentleman over like a
    larger species of ninepin, and cause him to exhibit the soles of his
    shoes to the object of his dearest wishes: while the nobler portions of
    his anatomy struggled at the bottom of his boat in the arms of one of
    his men.

    However, as Miss Fanny called out with much concern, Was the gentleman
    hurt, Mr Sparkler rose more restored than might have been expected, and
    stammered for himself with blushes, 'Not at all so.' Miss Fanny had no
    recollection of having ever seen him before, and was passing on, with a
    distant inclination of her head, when he announced himself by name. Even
    then she was in a difficulty from being unable to call it to mind, until
    he explained that he had had the honour of seeing her at Martigny. Then
    she remembered him, and hoped his lady-mother was well.

    'Thank you,' stammered Mr Sparkler, 'she's uncommonly well--at least,
    poorly.'

    'In Venice?' said Miss Fanny.

    'In Rome,' Mr Sparkler answered. 'I am here by myself, myself. I came to
    call upon Mr Edward Dorrit myself. Indeed, upon Mr Dorrit likewise. In
    fact, upon the family.'

    Turning graciously to the attendants, Miss Fanny inquired whether her
    papa or brother was within? The reply being that they were both within,
    Mr Sparkler humbly offered his arm. Miss Fanny accepting it, was squired
    up the great staircase by Mr Sparkler, who, if he still believed (which
            there is not any reason to doubt) that she had no nonsense about her,
    rather deceived himself.

    Arrived in a mouldering reception-room, where the faded hangings, of a
    sad sea-green, had worn and withered until they looked as if they
    might have claimed kindred with the waifs of seaweed drifting under
    the windows, or clinging to the walls and weeping for their imprisoned
    relations, Miss Fanny despatched emissaries for her father and brother.
    Pending whose appearance, she showed to great advantage on a sofa,
    completing Mr Sparkler's conquest with some remarks upon Dante--known
    to that gentleman as an eccentric man in the nature of an Old File,
    who used to put leaves round his head, and sit upon a stool for some
    unaccountable purpose, outside the cathedral at Florence.

    Mr Dorrit welcomed the visitor with the highest urbanity, and most
    courtly manners. He inquired particularly after Mrs Merdle. He inquired
    particularly after Mr Merdle. Mr Sparkler said, or rather twitched out
    of himself in small pieces by the shirt-collar, that Mrs Merdle having
    completely used up her place in the country, and also her house at
    Brighton, and being, of course, unable, don't you see, to remain in
    London when there wasn't a soul there, and not feeling herself this year
    quite up to visiting about at people's places, had resolved to have
    a touch at Rome, where a woman like herself, with a proverbially fine
    appearance, and with no nonsense about her, couldn't fail to be a great
    acquisition. As to Mr Merdle, he was so much wanted by the men in the
    City and the rest of those places, and was such a doosed extraordinary
    phenomenon in Buying and Banking and that, that Mr Sparkler doubted if
    the monetary system of the country would be able to spare him; though
    that his work was occasionally one too many for him, and that he would
    be all the better for a temporary shy at an entirely new scene and
    climate, Mr Sparkler did not conceal. As to himself, Mr Sparkler
    conveyed to the Dorrit family that he was going, on rather particular
    business, wherever they were going.

    This immense conversational achievement required time, but was effected.
    Being effected, Mr Dorrit expressed his hope that Mr Sparkler would
    shortly dine with them. Mr Sparkler received the idea so kindly that Mr
    Dorrit asked what he was going to do that day, for instance? As he was
    going to do nothing that day (his usual occupation, and one for which he
            was particularly qualified), he was secured without postponement; being
    further bound over to accompany the ladies to the Opera in the evening.

    At dinner-time Mr Sparkler rose out of the sea, like Venus's son taking
    after his mother, and made a splendid appearance ascending the great
    staircase. If Fanny had been charming in the morning, she was now thrice
    charming, very becomingly dressed in her most suitable colours, and with
    an air of negligence upon her that doubled Mr Sparkler's fetters, and
    riveted them.

    'I hear you are acquainted, Mr Sparkler,' said his host at dinner,
    'with--ha--Mr Gowan. Mr Henry Gowan?'

    'Perfectly, sir,' returned Mr Sparkler. 'His mother and my mother are
    cronies in fact.'

    'If I had thought of it, Amy,' said Mr Dorrit, with a patronage as
    magnificent as that of Lord Decimus himself, 'you should have despatched
    a note to them, asking them to dine to-day. Some of our people could
    have--ha--fetched them, and taken them home. We could have spared
    a--hum--gondola for that purpose. I am sorry to have forgotten this.
    Pray remind me of them to-morrow.'

    Little Dorrit was not without doubts how Mr Henry Gowan might take their
    patronage; but she promised not to fail in the reminder.

    'Pray, does Mr Henry Gowan paint--ha--Portraits?' inquired Mr Dorrit.

    Mr Sparkler opined that he painted anything, if he could get the job.

    'He has no particular walk?' said Mr Dorrit.

    Mr Sparkler, stimulated by Love to brilliancy, replied that for a
    particular walk a man ought to have a particular pair of shoes; as, for
    example, shooting, shooting-shoes; cricket, cricket-shoes. Whereas, he
    believed that Henry Gowan had no particular pair of shoes.

    'No speciality?' said Mr Dorrit.

    This being a very long word for Mr Sparkler, and his mind being
    exhausted by his late effort, he replied, 'No, thank you. I seldom take
    it.'

    'Well!' said Mr Dorrit. 'It would be very agreeable to me to present
    a gentleman so connected, with some--ha--Testimonial of my desire to
    further his interests, and develop the--hum--germs of his genius. I
    think I must engage Mr Gowan to paint my picture. If the result should
    be--ha--mutually satisfactory, I might afterwards engage him to try his
    hand upon my family.'

    The exquisitely bold and original thought presented itself to Mr
    Sparkler, that there was an opening here for saying there were some of
    the family (emphasising 'some' in a marked manner) to whom no painter
    could render justice. But, for want of a form of words in which to
    express the idea, it returned to the skies.

    This was the more to be regretted as Miss Fanny greatly applauded the
    notion of the portrait, and urged her papa to act upon it. She surmised,
    she said, that Mr Gowan had lost better and higher opportunities by
    marrying his pretty wife; and Love in a cottage, painting pictures for
    dinner, was so delightfully interesting, that she begged her papa to
    give him the commission whether he could paint a likeness or not: though
    indeed both she and Amy knew he could, from having seen a speaking
    likeness on his easel that day, and having had the opportunity of
    comparing it with the original. These remarks made Mr Sparkler (as
            perhaps they were intended to do) nearly distracted; for while on
    the one hand they expressed Miss Fanny's susceptibility of the tender
    passion, she herself showed such an innocent unconsciousness of his
    admiration that his eyes goggled in his head with jealousy of an unknown
    rival.

    Descending into the sea again after dinner, and ascending out of it
    at the Opera staircase, preceded by one of their gondoliers, like an
    attendant Merman, with a great linen lantern, they entered their box,
    and Mr Sparkler entered on an evening of agony. The theatre being
    dark, and the box light, several visitors lounged in during the
    representation; in whom Fanny was so interested, and in conversation
    with whom she fell into such charming attitudes, as she had little
    confidences with them, and little disputes concerning the identity of
    people in distant boxes, that the wretched Sparkler hated all mankind.
    But he had two consolations at the close of the performance. She gave
    him her fan to hold while she adjusted her cloak, and it was his
    blessed privilege to give her his arm down-stairs again. These crumbs of
    encouragement, Mr Sparkler thought, would just keep him going; and it is
    not impossible that Miss Dorrit thought so too.

    The Merman with his light was ready at the box-door, and other Mermen
    with other lights were ready at many of the doors. The Dorrit Merman
    held his lantern low, to show the steps, and Mr Sparkler put on another
    heavy set of fetters over his former set, as he watched her radiant
    feet twinkling down the stairs beside him. Among the loiterers here, was
    Blandois of Paris. He spoke, and moved forward beside Fanny.

    Little Dorrit was in front with her brother and Mrs General (Mr Dorrit
            had remained at home), but on the brink of the quay they all came
    together. She started again to find Blandois close to her, handing Fanny
    into the boat.

    'Gowan has had a loss,' he said, 'since he was made happy to-day by a
    visit from fair ladies.'

    'A loss?' repeated Fanny, relinquished by the bereaved Sparkler, and
    taking her seat.

    'A loss,' said Blandois. 'His dog Lion.'

    Little Dorrit's hand was in his, as he spoke.


    'He is dead,' said Blandois.

    'Dead?' echoed Little Dorrit. 'That noble dog?'

    'Faith, dear ladies!' said Blandois, smiling and shrugging his
    shoulders, 'somebody has poisoned that noble dog. He is as dead as the
    Doges!'




Mrs General, always on her coach-box keeping the proprieties well
together, took pains to form a surface on her very dear young friend,
    and Mrs General's very dear young friend tried hard to receive it. Hard
    as she had tried in her laborious life to attain many ends, she had
    never tried harder than she did now, to be varnished by Mrs General. It
    made her anxious and ill at ease to be operated upon by that smoothing
    hand, it is true; but she submitted herself to the family want in
    its greatness as she had submitted herself to the family want in its
    littleness, and yielded to her own inclinations in this thing no more
    than she had yielded to her hunger itself, in the days when she had
    saved her dinner that her father might have his supper.

    One comfort that she had under the Ordeal by General was more
    sustaining to her, and made her more grateful than to a less devoted
    and affectionate spirit, not habituated to her struggles and sacrifices,
    might appear quite reasonable; and, indeed, it may often be observed in
    life, that spirits like Little Dorrit do not appear to reason half
    as carefully as the folks who get the better of them. The continued
    kindness of her sister was this comfort to Little Dorrit. It was nothing
    to her that the kindness took the form of tolerant patronage; she was
    used to that. It was nothing to her that it kept her in a tributary
    position, and showed her in attendance on the flaming car in which Miss
    Fanny sat on an elevated seat, exacting homage; she sought no better
    place. Always admiring Fanny's beauty, and grace, and readiness, and not
    now asking herself how much of her disposition to be strongly attached
    to Fanny was due to her own heart, and how much to Fanny's, she gave her
    all the sisterly fondness her great heart contained.

    The wholesale amount of Prunes and Prism which Mrs General infused into
    the family life, combined with the perpetual plunges made by Fanny into
    society, left but a very small residue of any natural deposit at the
    bottom of the mixture. This rendered confidences with Fanny doubly
    precious to Little Dorrit, and heightened the relief they afforded her.

    'Amy,' said Fanny to her one night when they were alone, after a day so
    tiring that Little Dorrit was quite worn out, though Fanny would have
    taken another dip into society with the greatest pleasure in life, 'I
    am going to put something into your little head. You won't guess what it
    is, I suspect.'

    'I don't think that's likely, dear,' said Little Dorrit.

    'Come, I'll give you a clue, child,' said Fanny. 'Mrs General.'

    Prunes and Prism, in a thousand combinations, having been wearily in the
    ascendant all day--everything having been surface and varnish and show
    without substance--Little Dorrit looked as if she had hoped that Mrs
    General was safely tucked up in bed for some hours.

    '_Now_, can you guess, Amy?' said Fanny.

    'No, dear. Unless I have done anything,' said Little Dorrit, rather
    alarmed, and meaning anything calculated to crack varnish and ruffle
    surface.

    Fanny was so very much amused by the misgiving, that she took up her
    favourite fan (being then seated at her dressing-table with her armoury
            of cruel instruments about her, most of them reeking from the heart
            of Sparkler), and tapped her sister frequently on the nose with it,
    laughing all the time.

    'Oh, our Amy, our Amy!' said Fanny. 'What a timid little goose our Amy
    is! But this is nothing to laugh at. On the contrary, I am very cross,
    my dear.'

    'As it is not with me, Fanny, I don't mind,' returned her sister,
    smiling.

    'Ah! But I do mind,' said Fanny, 'and so will you, Pet, when I enlighten
    you. Amy, has it never struck you that somebody is monstrously polite to
    Mrs General?'

    'Everybody is polite to Mrs General,' said Little Dorrit. 'Because--'

    'Because she freezes them into it?' interrupted Fanny. 'I don't mean
    that; quite different from that. Come! Has it never struck you, Amy,
    that Pa is monstrously polite to Mrs General.'

    Amy, murmuring 'No,' looked quite confounded.

    'No; I dare say not. But he is,' said Fanny. 'He is, Amy. And remember
    my words. Mrs General has designs on Pa!'

    'Dear Fanny, do you think it possible that Mrs General has designs on
    any one?'

    'Do I think it possible?' retorted Fanny. 'My love, I know it. I tell
    you she has designs on Pa. And more than that, I tell you Pa considers
    her such a wonder, such a paragon of accomplishment, and such an
    acquisition to our family, that he is ready to get himself into a state
    of perfect infatuation with her at any moment. And that opens a pretty
    picture of things, I hope? Think of me with Mrs General for a Mama!'

    Little Dorrit did not reply, 'Think of me with Mrs General for a Mama;'
    but she looked anxious, and seriously inquired what had led Fanny to
    these conclusions.

    'Lord, my darling,' said Fanny, tartly. 'You might as well ask me how
    I know when a man is struck with myself! But, of course I do know. It
    happens pretty often: but I always know it. I know this in much the same
    way, I suppose. At all events, I know it.'

    'You never heard Papa say anything?'

    'Say anything?' repeated Fanny. 'My dearest, darling child, what
    necessity has he had, yet awhile, to say anything?'

    'And you have never heard Mrs General say anything?'

    'My goodness me, Amy,' returned Fanny, 'is she the sort of woman to say
    anything? Isn't it perfectly plain and clear that she has nothing to do
    at present but to hold herself upright, keep her aggravating gloves on,
    and go sweeping about? Say anything! If she had the ace of trumps in her
    hand at whist, she wouldn't say anything, child. It would come out when
    she played it.'

    'At least, you may be mistaken, Fanny. Now, may you not?'

    'O yes, I _may_ be,' said Fanny, 'but I am not. However, I am glad you
    can contemplate such an escape, my dear, and I am glad that you can take
    this for the present with sufficient coolness to think of such a chance.
    It makes me hope that you may be able to bear the connection. I should
    not be able to bear it, and I should not try. I'd marry young Sparkler
    first.'

    'O, you would never marry him, Fanny, under any circumstances.'

    'Upon my word, my dear,' rejoined that young lady with exceeding
    indifference, 'I wouldn't positively answer even for that. There's
    no knowing what might happen. Especially as I should have many
    opportunities, afterwards, of treating that woman, his mother, in her
    own style. Which I most decidedly should not be slow to avail myself of,
    Amy.'

    No more passed between the sisters then; but what had passed gave the
    two subjects of Mrs General and Mr Sparkler great prominence in Little
    Dorrit's mind, and thenceforth she thought very much of both.

    Mrs General, having long ago formed her own surface to such perfection
    that it hid whatever was below it (if anything), no observation was to
    be made in that quarter. Mr Dorrit was undeniably very polite to her
    and had a high opinion of her; but Fanny, impetuous at most times, might
    easily be wrong for all that. Whereas, the Sparkler question was on the
    different footing that any one could see what was going on there, and
    Little Dorrit saw it and pondered on it with many doubts and wonderings.

    The devotion of Mr Sparkler was only to be equalled by the caprice
    and cruelty of his enslaver. Sometimes she would prefer him to such
    distinction of notice, that he would chuckle aloud with joy; next day,
    or next hour, she would overlook him so completely, and drop him into
    such an abyss of obscurity, that he would groan under a weak pretence of
    coughing. The constancy of his attendance never touched Fanny: though he
    was so inseparable from Edward, that, when that gentleman wished for
    a change of society, he was under the irksome necessity of gliding out
    like a conspirator in disguised boats and by secret doors and back ways;
    though he was so solicitous to know how Mr Dorrit was, that he called
    every other day to inquire, as if Mr Dorrit were the prey of an
    intermittent fever; though he was so constantly being paddled up and
    down before the principal windows, that he might have been supposed to
    have made a wager for a large stake to be paddled a thousand miles in
    a thousand hours; though whenever the gondola of his mistress left the
    gate, the gondola of Mr Sparkler shot out from some watery ambush
    and gave chase, as if she were a fair smuggler and he a custom-house
    officer. It was probably owing to this fortification of the natural
    strength of his constitution with so much exposure to the air, and the
    salt sea, that Mr Sparkler did not pine outwardly; but, whatever the
    cause, he was so far from having any prospect of moving his mistress by
    a languishing state of health, that he grew bluffer every day, and that
    peculiarity in his appearance of seeming rather a swelled boy than
    a young man, became developed to an extraordinary degree of ruddy
    puffiness.

    Blandois calling to pay his respects, Mr Dorrit received him with
    affability as the friend of Mr Gowan, and mentioned to him his idea of
    commissioning Mr Gowan to transmit him to posterity. Blandois highly
    extolling it, it occurred to Mr Dorrit that it might be agreeable to
    Blandois to communicate to his friend the great opportunity reserved
    for him. Blandois accepted the commission with his own free elegance of
    manner, and swore he would discharge it before he was an hour older. On
    his imparting the news to Gowan, that Master gave Mr Dorrit to the
    Devil with great liberality some round dozen of times (for he resented
            patronage almost as much as he resented the want of it), and was
    inclined to quarrel with his friend for bringing him the message.

    'It may be a defect in my mental vision, Blandois,' said he, 'but may I
    die if I see what you have to do with this.'

    'Death of my life,' replied Blandois, 'nor I neither, except that I
    thought I was serving my friend.'

    'By putting an upstart's hire in his pocket?' said Gowan, frowning.
    'Do you mean that? Tell your other friend to get his head painted for
    the sign of some public-house, and to get it done by a sign-painter. Who
    am I, and who is he?'

    'Professore,' returned the ambassador, 'and who is Blandois?'

    Without appearing at all interested in the latter question, Gowan
    angrily whistled Mr Dorrit away. But, next day, he resumed the subject
    by saying in his off-hand manner and with a slighting laugh, 'Well,
    Blandois, when shall we go to this Maecenas of yours? We journeymen must
    take jobs when we can get them. When shall we go and look after this
    job?'

    'When you will,' said the injured Blandois, 'as you please. What have I
    to do with it? What is it to me?'

    'I can tell you what it is to me,' said Gowan. 'Bread and cheese. One
    must eat! So come along, my Blandois.'

    Mr Dorrit received them in the presence of his daughters and of Mr
    Sparkler, who happened, by some surprising accident, to be calling
    there. 'How are you, Sparkler?' said Gowan carelessly. 'When you have
    to live by your mother wit, old boy, I hope you may get on better than I
    do.'

    Mr Dorrit then mentioned his proposal. 'Sir,' said Gowan, laughing,
    after receiving it gracefully enough, 'I am new to the trade, and not
    expert at its mysteries. I believe I ought to look at you in various
    lights, tell you you are a capital subject, and consider when I shall be
    sufficiently disengaged to devote myself with the necessary enthusiasm
    to the fine picture I mean to make of you. I assure you,' and he laughed
    again, 'I feel quite a traitor in the camp of those dear, gifted, good,
    noble fellows, my brother artists, by not doing the hocus-pocus better.
    But I have not been brought up to it, and it's too late to learn it.
    Now, the fact is, I am a very bad painter, but not much worse than the
    generality. If you are going to throw away a hundred guineas or so, I
    am as poor as a poor relation of great people usually is, and I shall be
    very much obliged to you, if you'll throw them away upon me. I'll do the
    best I can for the money; and if the best should be bad, why even then,
    you may probably have a bad picture with a small name to it, instead of
    a bad picture with a large name to it.'

    This tone, though not what he had expected, on the whole suited Mr
    Dorrit remarkably well. It showed that the gentleman, highly connected,
    and not a mere workman, would be under an obligation to him. He
    expressed his satisfaction in placing himself in Mr Gowan's hands, and
    trusted that he would have the pleasure, in their characters of private
    gentlemen, of improving his acquaintance.

    'You are very good,' said Gowan. 'I have not forsworn society since I
    joined the brotherhood of the brush (the most delightful fellows on the
            face of the earth), and am glad enough to smell the old fine gunpowder
    now and then, though it did blow me into mid-air and my present calling.
    You'll not think, Mr Dorrit,' and here he laughed again in the easiest
    way, 'that I am lapsing into the freemasonry of the craft--for it's not
    so; upon my life I can't help betraying it wherever I go, though, by
    Jupiter, I love and honour the craft with all my might--if I propose a
    stipulation as to time and place?'

    Ha! Mr Dorrit could erect no--hum--suspicion of that kind on Mr Gowan's
    frankness.

    'Again you are very good,' said Gowan. 'Mr Dorrit, I hear you are going
    to Rome. I am going to Rome, having friends there. Let me begin to do
    you the injustice I have conspired to do you, there--not here. We shall
    all be hurried during the rest of our stay here; and though there's not
    a poorer man with whole elbows in Venice, than myself, I have not quite
    got all the Amateur out of me yet--comprising the trade again, you
    see!--and can't fall on to order, in a hurry, for the mere sake of the
    sixpences.'

    These remarks were not less favourably received by Mr Dorrit than their
    predecessors. They were the prelude to the first reception of Mr and Mrs
    Gowan at dinner, and they skilfully placed Gowan on his usual ground in
    the new family.

    His wife, too, they placed on her usual ground. Miss Fanny understood,
    with particular distinctness, that Mrs Gowan's good looks had cost her
    husband very dear; that there had been a great disturbance about her
    in the Barnacle family; and that the Dowager Mrs Gowan, nearly
    heart-broken, had resolutely set her face against the marriage until
    overpowered by her maternal feelings. Mrs General likewise clearly
    understood that the attachment had occasioned much family grief and
    dissension. Of honest Mr Meagles no mention was made; except that it
    was natural enough that a person of that sort should wish to raise his
    daughter out of his own obscurity, and that no one could blame him for
    trying his best to do so.

    Little Dorrit's interest in the fair subject of this easily accepted
    belief was too earnest and watchful to fail in accurate observation. She
    could see that it had its part in throwing upon Mrs Gowan the touch of a
    shadow under which she lived, and she even had an instinctive knowledge
    that there was not the least truth in it. But it had an influence in
    placing obstacles in the way of her association with Mrs Gowan by making
    the Prunes and Prism school excessively polite to her, but not very
    intimate with her; and Little Dorrit, as an enforced sizar of that
    college, was obliged to submit herself humbly to its ordinances.

    Nevertheless, there was a sympathetic understanding already
    established between the two, which would have carried them over
    greater difficulties, and made a friendship out of a more restricted
    intercourse. As though accidents were determined to be favourable to
    it, they had a new assurance of congeniality in the aversion which each
    perceived that the other felt towards Blandois of Paris; an aversion
    amounting to the repugnance and horror of a natural antipathy towards an
    odious creature of the reptile kind.

    And there was a passive congeniality between them, besides this active
    one. To both of them, Blandois behaved in exactly the same manner; and
    to both of them his manner had uniformly something in it, which
    they both knew to be different from his bearing towards others. The
    difference was too minute in its expression to be perceived by others,
    but they knew it to be there. A mere trick of his evil eyes, a mere turn
    of his smooth white hand, a mere hair's-breadth of addition to the fall
    of his nose and the rise of the moustache in the most frequent movement
    of his face, conveyed to both of them, equally, a swagger personal to
    themselves. It was as if he had said, 'I have a secret power in this
    quarter. I know what I know.'

    This had never been felt by them both in so great a degree, and never
    by each so perfectly to the knowledge of the other, as on a day when he
    came to Mr Dorrit's to take his leave before quitting Venice. Mrs
    Gowan was herself there for the same purpose, and he came upon the
    two together; the rest of the family being out. The two had not been
    together five minutes, and the peculiar manner seemed to convey to them,
    'You were going to talk about me. Ha! Behold me here to prevent it!'

    'Gowan is coming here?' said Blandois, with a smile.

    Mrs Gowan replied he was not coming.

    'Not coming!' said Blandois. 'Permit your devoted servant, when you
    leave here, to escort you home.'

    'Thank you: I am not going home.'

    'Not going home!' said Blandois. 'Then I am forlorn.'

    That he might be; but he was not so forlorn as to roam away and leave
    them together. He sat entertaining them with his finest compliments, and
    his choicest conversation; but he conveyed to them, all the time, 'No,
    no, no, dear ladies. Behold me here expressly to prevent it!'

    He conveyed it to them with so much meaning, and he had such a
    diabolical persistency in him, that at length, Mrs Gowan rose to depart.
    On his offering his hand to Mrs Gowan to lead her down the staircase,
    she retained Little Dorrit's hand in hers, with a cautious pressure, and
    said, 'No, thank you. But, if you will please to see if my boatman is
    there, I shall be obliged to you.'

    It left him no choice but to go down before them. As he did so, hat in
    hand, Mrs Gowan whispered:

    'He killed the dog.'

    'Does Mr Gowan know it?' Little Dorrit whispered.

    'No one knows it. Don't look towards me; look towards him. He will turn
    his face in a moment. No one knows it, but I am sure he did. You are?'

    'I--I think so,' Little Dorrit answered.

    'Henry likes him, and he will not think ill of him; he is so generous
    and open himself. But you and I feel sure that we think of him as he
    deserves. He argued with Henry that the dog had been already poisoned
    when he changed so, and sprang at him. Henry believes it, but we do not.
    I see he is listening, but can't hear. Good-bye, my love! Good-bye!'

    The last words were spoken aloud, as the vigilant Blandois stopped,
    turned his head, and looked at them from the bottom of the staircase.
    Assuredly he did look then, though he looked his politest, as if any
    real philanthropist could have desired no better employment than to lash
    a great stone to his neck, and drop him into the water flowing beyond
    the dark arched gateway in which he stood. No such benefactor to mankind
    being on the spot, he handed Mrs Gowan to her boat, and stood there
    until it had shot out of the narrow view; when he handed himself into
    his own boat and followed.

    Little Dorrit had sometimes thought, and now thought again as she
    retraced her steps up the staircase, that he had made his way too easily
    into her father's house. But so many and such varieties of people did
    the same, through Mr Dorrit's participation in his elder daughter's
    society mania, that it was hardly an exceptional case. A perfect fury
    for making acquaintances on whom to impress their riches and importance,
    had seized the House of Dorrit.

    It appeared on the whole, to Little Dorrit herself, that this same
    society in which they lived, greatly resembled a superior sort of
    Marshalsea. Numbers of people seemed to come abroad, pretty much
    as people had come into the prison; through debt, through idleness,
    relationship, curiosity, and general unfitness for getting on at home.
    They were brought into these foreign towns in the custody of couriers
    and local followers, just as the debtors had been brought into the
    prison. They prowled about the churches and picture-galleries, much in
    the old, dreary, prison-yard manner. They were usually going away again
    to-morrow or next week, and rarely knew their own minds, and seldom did
    what they said they would do, or went where they said they would go: in
    all this again, very like the prison debtors. They paid high for poor
    accommodation, and disparaged a place while they pretended to like it:
    which was exactly the Marshalsea custom. They were envied when they went
    away by people left behind, feigning not to want to go: and that again
    was the Marshalsea habit invariably. A certain set of words and phrases,
    as much belonging to tourists as the College and the Snuggery belonged
    to the jail, was always in their mouths. They had precisely the same
    incapacity for settling down to anything, as the prisoners used to have;
    they rather deteriorated one another, as the prisoners used to do; and
    they wore untidy dresses, and fell into a slouching way of life: still,
    always like the people in the Marshalsea.

    The period of the family's stay at Venice came, in its course, to an
    end, and they moved, with their retinue, to Rome. Through a repetition
    of the former Italian scenes, growing more dirty and more haggard as
    they went on, and bringing them at length to where the very air was
    diseased, they passed to their destination. A fine residence had been
    taken for them on the Corso, and there they took up their abode, in a
    city where everything seemed to be trying to stand still for ever on
    the ruins of something else--except the water, which, following eternal
    laws, tumbled and rolled from its glorious multitude of fountains.

    Here it seemed to Little Dorrit that a change came over the Marshalsea
    spirit of their society, and that Prunes and Prism got the upper hand.
    Everybody was walking about St Peter's and the Vatican on somebody
    else's cork legs, and straining every visible object through somebody
    else's sieve. Nobody said what anything was, but everybody said what the
    Mrs Generals, Mr Eustace, or somebody else said it was. The whole body
    of travellers seemed to be a collection of voluntary human sacrifices,
    bound hand and foot, and delivered over to Mr Eustace and his
    attendants, to have the entrails of their intellects arranged according
    to the taste of that sacred priesthood. Through the rugged remains
    of temples and tombs and palaces and senate halls and theatres and
    amphitheatres of ancient days, hosts of tongue-tied and blindfolded
    moderns were carefully feeling their way, incessantly repeating Prunes
    and Prism in the endeavour to set their lips according to the received
    form. Mrs General was in her pure element. Nobody had an opinion. There
    was a formation of surface going on around her on an amazing scale, and
    it had not a flaw of courage or honest free speech in it.

    Another modification of Prunes and Prism insinuated itself on Little
    Dorrit's notice very shortly after their arrival. They received an early
    visit from Mrs Merdle, who led that extensive department of life in the
    Eternal City that winter; and the skilful manner in which she and Fanny
    fenced with one another on the occasion, almost made her quiet sister
    wink, like the glittering of small-swords.

    'So delighted,' said Mrs Merdle, 'to resume an acquaintance so
    inauspiciously begun at Martigny.'

    'At Martigny, of course,' said Fanny. 'Charmed, I am sure!'

    'I understand,' said Mrs Merdle, 'from my son Edmund Sparkler, that
    he has already improved that chance occasion. He has returned quite
    transported with Venice.'

    'Indeed?' returned the careless Fanny. 'Was he there long?'

    'I might refer that question to Mr Dorrit,' said Mrs Merdle, turning the
    bosom towards that gentleman; 'Edmund having been so much indebted to
    him for rendering his stay agreeable.'

    'Oh, pray don't speak of it,' returned Fanny. 'I believe Papa had the
    pleasure of inviting Mr Sparkler twice or thrice,--but it was nothing.
    We had so many people about us, and kept such open house, that if he had
    that pleasure, it was less than nothing.'

    'Except, my dear,' said Mr Dorrit, 'except--ha--as it afforded me
    unusual gratification to--hum--show by any means, however slight and
    worthless, the--ha, hum--high estimation in which, in--ha--common with
    the rest of the world, I hold so distinguished and princely a character
    as Mr Merdle's.'

    The bosom received this tribute in its most engaging manner. 'Mr
    Merdle,' observed Fanny, as a means of dismissing Mr Sparkler into the
    background, 'is quite a theme of Papa's, you must know, Mrs Merdle.'

    'I have been--ha--disappointed, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'to understand
    from Mr Sparkler that there is no great--hum--probability of Mr Merdle's
    coming abroad.'

    'Why, indeed,' said Mrs Merdle, 'he is so much engaged and in such
    request, that I fear not. He has not been able to get abroad for years.
    You, Miss Dorrit, I believe have been almost continually abroad for a
    long time.'

    'Oh dear yes,' drawled Fanny, with the greatest hardihood. 'An immense
    number of years.'

    'So I should have inferred,' said Mrs Merdle.

    'Exactly,' said Fanny.

    'I trust, however,' resumed Mr Dorrit, 'that if I have not
    the--hum--great advantage of becoming known to Mr Merdle on this side
    of the Alps or Mediterranean, I shall have that honour on returning to
    England. It is an honour I particularly desire and shall particularly
    esteem.'

    'Mr Merdle,' said Mrs Merdle, who had been looking admiringly at Fanny
    through her eye-glass, 'will esteem it, I am sure, no less.'

    Little Dorrit, still habitually thoughtful and solitary though no longer
    alone, at first supposed this to be mere Prunes and Prism. But as her
    father when they had been to a brilliant reception at Mrs Merdle's,
    harped at their own family breakfast-table on his wish to know Mr
    Merdle, with the contingent view of benefiting by the advice of that
    wonderful man in the disposal of his fortune, she began to think it had
    a real meaning, and to entertain a curiosity on her own part to see the
    shining light of the time.




