While the waters of Venice and the ruins of Rome were sunning themselves
for the pleasure of the Dorrit family, and were daily being sketched
out of all earthly proportion, lineament, and likeness, by travelling
pencils innumerable, the firm of Doyce and Clennam hammered away in
Bleeding Heart Yard, and the vigorous clink of iron upon iron was heard
there through the working hours.

The younger partner had, by this time, brought the business into sound
trim; and the elder, left free to follow his own ingenious devices, had
done much to enhance the character of the factory. As an ingenious man,
     he had necessarily to encounter every discouragement that the ruling
     powers for a length of time had been able by any means to put in the way
     of this class of culprits; but that was only reasonable self-defence in
     the powers, since How to do it must obviously be regarded as the natural
     and mortal enemy of How not to do it. In this was to be found the basis
     of the wise system, by tooth and nail upheld by the Circumlocution
     Office, of warning every ingenious British subject to be ingenious
     at his peril: of harassing him, obstructing him, inviting robbers (by
             making his remedy uncertain, and expensive) to plunder him, and at the
     best of confiscating his property after a short term of enjoyment, as
     though invention were on a par with felony. The system had uniformly
     found great favour with the Barnacles, and that was only reasonable,
     too; for one who worthily invents must be in earnest, and the Barnacles
     abhorred and dreaded nothing half so much. That again was very
     reasonable; since in a country suffering under the affliction of a great
     amount of earnestness, there might, in an exceeding short space of time,
     be not a single Barnacle left sticking to a post.

     Daniel Doyce faced his condition with its pains and penalties attached
     to it, and soberly worked on for the work's sake. Clennam cheering him
     with a hearty co-operation, was a moral support to him, besides doing
     good service in his business relation. The concern prospered, and the
     partners were fast friends.

     But Daniel could not forget the old design of so many years. It was not
     in reason to be expected that he should; if he could have lightly
     forgotten it, he could never have conceived it, or had the patience and
     perseverance to work it out. So Clennam thought, when he sometimes
     observed him of an evening looking over the models and drawings, and
     consoling himself by muttering with a sigh as he put them away again,
     that the thing was as true as it ever was.

     To show no sympathy with so much endeavour, and so much disappointment,
     would have been to fail in what Clennam regarded as among the implied
     obligations of his partnership. A revival of the passing interest in
     the subject which had been by chance awakened at the door of the
     Circumlocution Office, originated in this feeling. He asked his partner
     to explain the invention to him; 'having a lenient consideration,' he
     stipulated, 'for my being no workman, Doyce.'

     'No workman?' said Doyce. 'You would have been a thorough workman if you
     had given yourself to it. You have as good a head for understanding such
     things as I have met with.'

     'A totally uneducated one, I am sorry to add,' said Clennam.

     'I don't know that,' returned Doyce, 'and I wouldn't have you say
     that. No man of sense who has been generally improved, and has improved
     himself, can be called quite uneducated as to anything. I don't
     particularly favour mysteries. I would as soon, on a fair and clear
     explanation, be judged by one class of man as another, provided he had
     the qualification I have named.'

     'At all events,' said Clennam--'this sounds as if we were exchanging
     compliments, but we know we are not--I shall have the advantage of as
     plain an explanation as can be given.'

     'Well!' said Daniel, in his steady even way,'I'll try to make it so.'

     He had the power, often to be found in union with such a character, of
     explaining what he himself perceived, and meant, with the direct force
     and distinctness with which it struck his own mind. His manner of
     demonstration was so orderly and neat and simple, that it was not easy
     to mistake him. There was something almost ludicrous in the complete
     irreconcilability of a vague conventional notion that he must be a
     visionary man, with the precise, sagacious travelling of his eye and
     thumb over the plans, their patient stoppages at particular points,
     their careful returns to other points whence little channels of
     explanation had to be traced up, and his steady manner of making
     everything good and everything sound at each important stage, before
     taking his hearer on a line's-breadth further. His dismissal of himself
     from his description, was hardly less remarkable. He never said, I
     discovered this adaptation or invented that combination; but showed the
     whole thing as if the Divine artificer had made it, and he had happened
     to find it; so modest he was about it, such a pleasant touch of respect
     was mingled with his quiet admiration of it, and so calmly convinced he
     was that it was established on irrefragable laws.

     Not only that evening, but for several succeeding evenings, Clennam was
     quite charmed by this investigation. The more he pursued it, and the
     oftener he glanced at the grey head bending over it, and the shrewd eye
     kindling with pleasure in it and love of it--instrument for probing his
     heart though it had been made for twelve long years--the less he could
     reconcile it to his younger energy to let it go without one effort more.
     At length he said:

     'Doyce, it came to this at last--that the business was to be sunk with
     Heaven knows how many more wrecks, or begun all over again?'

     'Yes,' returned Doyce, 'that's what the noblemen and gentlemen made of
     it after a dozen years.'

     'And pretty fellows too!' said Clennam, bitterly.

     'The usual thing!' observed Doyce. 'I must not make a martyr of myself,
     when I am one of so large a company.'

     'Relinquish it, or begin it all over again?' mused Clennam.

     'That was exactly the long and the short of it,' said Doyce.

     'Then, my friend,' cried Clennam, starting up and taking his
     work-roughened hand, 'it shall be begun all over again!'

     Doyce looked alarmed, and replied in a hurry--for him, 'No, no. Better
     put it by. Far better put it by. It will be heard of, one day. I can
     put it by. You forget, my good Clennam; I _have_ put it by. It's all at an
     end.'

     'Yes, Doyce,' returned Clennam, 'at an end as far as your efforts and
     rebuffs are concerned, I admit, but not as far as mine are. I am younger
     than you: I have only once set foot in that precious office, and I am
     fresh game for them. Come! I'll try them. You shall do exactly as you
     have been doing since we have been together. I will add (as I easily
             can) to what I have been doing, the attempt to get public justice done
     to you; and, unless I have some success to report, you shall hear no
     more of it.'

     Daniel Doyce was still reluctant to consent, and again and again urged
     that they had better put it by. But it was natural that he should
     gradually allow himself to be over-persuaded by Clennam, and should
     yield. Yield he did. So Arthur resumed the long and hopeless labour of
     striving to make way with the Circumlocution Office.

     The waiting-rooms of that Department soon began to be familiar with his
     presence, and he was generally ushered into them by its janitors much
     as a pickpocket might be shown into a police-office; the principal
     difference being that the object of the latter class of public business
     is to keep the pickpocket, while the Circumlocution object was to
     get rid of Clennam. However, he was resolved to stick to the Great
     Department; and so the work of form-filling, corresponding, minuting,
     memorandum-making, signing, counter-signing, counter-counter-signing,
     referring backwards and forwards, and referring sideways, crosswise, and
     zig-zag, recommenced.

     Here arises a feature of the Circumlocution Office, not previously
     mentioned in the present record. When that admirable Department got
     into trouble, and was, by some infuriated members of Parliament whom
     the smaller Barnacles almost suspected of labouring under diabolic
     possession, attacked on the merits of no individual case, but as an
     Institution wholly abominable and Bedlamite; then the noble or right
     honourable Barnacle who represented it in the House, would smite that
     member and cleave him asunder, with a statement of the quantity of
     business (for the prevention of business) done by the Circumlocution
     Office. Then would that noble or right honourable Barnacle hold in his
     hand a paper containing a few figures, to which, with the permission
     of the House, he would entreat its attention. Then would the inferior
     Barnacles exclaim, obeying orders,'Hear, Hear, Hear!' and 'Read!' Then
     would the noble or right honourable Barnacle perceive, sir, from this
     little document, which he thought might carry conviction even to the
     perversest mind (Derisive laughter and cheering from the Barnacle fry),
     that within the short compass of the last financial half-year, this
     much-maligned Department (Cheers) had written and received fifteen
     thousand letters (Loud cheers), had written twenty-four thousand minutes
     (Louder cheers), and thirty-two thousand five hundred and seventeen
     memoranda (Vehement cheering). Nay, an ingenious gentleman connected
     with the Department, and himself a valuable public servant, had done
     him the favour to make a curious calculation of the amount of stationery
     consumed in it during the same period. It formed a part of this same
     short document; and he derived from it the remarkable fact that the
     sheets of foolscap paper it had devoted to the public service would pave
     the footways on both sides of Oxford Street from end to end, and leave
     nearly a quarter of a mile to spare for the park (Immense cheering and
             laughter); while of tape--red tape--it had used enough to stretch, in
     graceful festoons, from Hyde Park Corner to the General Post Office.
     Then, amidst a burst of official exultation, would the noble or right
     honourable Barnacle sit down, leaving the mutilated fragments of the
     Member on the field. No one, after that exemplary demolition of him,
     would have the hardihood to hint that the more the Circumlocution Office
     did, the less was done, and that the greatest blessing it could confer
     on an unhappy public would be to do nothing.

     With sufficient occupation on his hands, now that he had this additional
     task--such a task had many and many a serviceable man died of before his
     day--Arthur Clennam led a life of slight variety. Regular visits to his
     mother's dull sick room, and visits scarcely less regular to Mr Meagles
     at Twickenham, were its only changes during many months.

     He sadly and sorely missed Little Dorrit. He had been prepared to miss
     her very much, but not so much. He knew to the full extent only through
     experience, what a large place in his life was left blank when her
     familiar little figure went out of it. He felt, too, that he must
     relinquish the hope of its return, understanding the family character
     sufficiently well to be assured that he and she were divided by a broad
     ground of separation. The old interest he had had in her, and her old
     trusting reliance on him, were tinged with melancholy in his mind: so
     soon had change stolen over them, and so soon had they glided into the
     past with other secret tendernesses.

     When he received her letter he was greatly moved, but did not the less
     sensibly feel that she was far divided from him by more than distance.
     It helped him to a clearer and keener perception of the place assigned
     him by the family. He saw that he was cherished in her grateful
     remembrance secretly, and that they resented him with the jail and the
     rest of its belongings.

     Through all these meditations which every day of his life crowded about
     her, he thought of her otherwise in the old way. She was his innocent
     friend, his delicate child, his dear Little Dorrit. This very change
     of circumstances fitted curiously in with the habit, begun on the night
     when the roses floated away, of considering himself as a much older man
     than his years really made him. He regarded her from a point of view
     which in its remoteness, tender as it was, he little thought would have
     been unspeakable agony to her. He speculated about her future destiny,
     and about the husband she might have, with an affection for her which
     would have drained her heart of its dearest drop of hope, and broken it.

     Everything about him tended to confirm him in the custom of looking on
     himself as an elderly man, from whom such aspirations as he had combated
     in the case of Minnie Gowan (though that was not so long ago either,
             reckoning by months and seasons), were finally departed. His relations
     with her father and mother were like those on which a widower son-in-law
     might have stood. If the twin sister who was dead had lived to pass away
     in the bloom of womanhood, and he had been her husband, the nature of
     his intercourse with Mr and Mrs Meagles would probably have been just
     what it was. This imperceptibly helped to render habitual the impression
     within him, that he had done with, and dismissed that part of life.

     He invariably heard of Minnie from them, as telling them in her letters
     how happy she was, and how she loved her husband; but inseparable from
     that subject, he invariably saw the old cloud on Mr Meagles's face. Mr
     Meagles had never been quite so radiant since the marriage as before.
     He had never quite recovered the separation from Pet. He was the same
     good-humoured, open creature; but as if his face, from being much turned
     towards the pictures of his two children which could show him only one
     look, unconsciously adopted a characteristic from them, it always had
     now, through all its changes of expression, a look of loss in it.

     One wintry Saturday when Clennam was at the cottage, the Dowager Mrs
     Gowan drove up, in the Hampton Court equipage which pretended to be the
     exclusive equipage of so many individual proprietors. She descended, in
     her shady ambuscade of green fan, to favour Mr and Mrs Meagles with a
     call.

     'And how do you both do, Papa and Mama Meagles?' said she, encouraging
     her humble connections. 'And when did you last hear from or about my
     poor fellow?'

     My poor fellow was her son; and this mode of speaking of him politely
     kept alive, without any offence in the world, the pretence that he had
     fallen a victim to the Meagles' wiles.

     'And the dear pretty one?' said Mrs Gowan. 'Have you later news of her
     than I have?'

     Which also delicately implied that her son had been captured by mere
     beauty, and under its fascination had forgone all sorts of worldly
     advantages.

     'I am sure,' said Mrs Gowan, without straining her attention on the
     answers she received, 'it's an unspeakable comfort to know they continue
     happy. My poor fellow is of such a restless disposition, and has been
     so used to roving about, and to being inconstant and popular among all
     manner of people, that it's the greatest comfort in life. I suppose
     they're as poor as mice, Papa Meagles?'

     Mr Meagles, fidgety under the question, replied, 'I hope not, ma'am. I
     hope they will manage their little income.'

     'Oh! my dearest Meagles!' returned the lady, tapping him on the arm with
     the green fan and then adroitly interposing it between a yawn and
     the company, 'how can you, as a man of the world and one of the most
     business-like of human beings--for you know you are business-like, and a
     great deal too much for us who are not--'

     (Which went to the former purpose, by making Mr Meagles out to be an
      artful schemer.)

     '--How can you talk about their managing their little means? My poor
     dear fellow! The idea of his managing hundreds! And the sweet pretty
     creature too. The notion of her managing! Papa Meagles! Don't!'

     'Well, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, gravely, 'I am sorry to admit, then,
     that Henry certainly does anticipate his means.'

     'My dear good man--I use no ceremony with you, because we are a kind of
     relations;--positively, Mama Meagles,' exclaimed Mrs Gowan cheerfully,
     as if the absurd coincidence then flashed upon her for the first time,
     'a kind of relations! My dear good man, in this world none of us can
     have _everything_ our own way.'

     This again went to the former point, and showed Mr Meagles with all good
     breeding that, so far, he had been brilliantly successful in his deep
     designs. Mrs Gowan thought the hit so good a one, that she dwelt upon
     it; repeating 'Not _everything_. No, no; in this world we must not expect
     _everything_, Papa Meagles.'

     'And may I ask, ma'am,' retorted Mr Meagles, a little heightened in
     colour, 'who does expect everything?'

     'Oh, nobody, nobody!' said Mrs Gowan. 'I was going to say--but you put
     me out. You interrupting Papa, what was I going to say?'

     Drooping her large green fan, she looked musingly at Mr Meagles while
     she thought about it; a performance not tending to the cooling of that
     gentleman's rather heated spirits.

     'Ah! Yes, to be sure!' said Mrs Gowan. 'You must remember that my poor
     fellow has always been accustomed to expectations. They may have been
     realised, or they may not have been realised--'

     'Let us say, then, may not have been realised,' observed Mr Meagles.

     The Dowager for a moment gave him an angry look; but tossed it off with
     her head and her fan, and pursued the tenor of her way in her former
     manner.

     'It makes no difference. My poor fellow has been accustomed to that
     sort of thing, and of course you knew it, and were prepared for the
     consequences. I myself always clearly foresaw the consequences, and am
     not surprised. And you must not be surprised. In fact, can't be
     surprised. Must have been prepared for it.'

     Mr Meagles looked at his wife and at Clennam; bit his lip; and coughed.

     'And now here's my poor fellow,' Mrs Gowan pursued, 'receiving notice
     that he is to hold himself in expectation of a baby, and all the
     expenses attendant on such an addition to his family! Poor Henry! But
     it can't be helped now; it's too late to help it now. Only don't talk of
     anticipating means, Papa Meagles, as a discovery; because that would be
     too much.'

     'Too much, ma'am?' said Mr Meagles, as seeking an explanation.

     'There, there!' said Mrs Gowan, putting him in his inferior place with
     an expressive action of her hand. 'Too much for my poor fellow's
     mother to bear at this time of day. They are fast married, and can't
     be unmarried. There, there! I know that! You needn't tell me that, Papa
     Meagles. I know it very well. What was it I said just now? That it was
     a great comfort they continued happy. It is to be hoped they will still
     continue happy. It is to be hoped Pretty One will do everything she
     can to make my poor fellow happy, and keep him contented. Papa and Mama
     Meagles, we had better say no more about it. We never did look at this
     subject from the same side, and we never shall. There, there! Now I am
     good.'

     Truly, having by this time said everything she could say in maintenance
     of her wonderfully mythical position, and in admonition to Mr Meagles
     that he must not expect to bear his honours of alliance too cheaply, Mrs
     Gowan was disposed to forgo the rest. If Mr Meagles had submitted to
     a glance of entreaty from Mrs Meagles, and an expressive gesture from
     Clennam, he would have left her in the undisturbed enjoyment of this
     state of mind. But Pet was the darling and pride of his heart; and if he
     could ever have championed her more devotedly, or loved her better, than
     in the days when she was the sunlight of his house, it would have been
     now, when, as its daily grace and delight, she was lost to it.

     'Mrs Gowan, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'I have been a plain man all my
     life. If I was to try--no matter whether on myself, on somebody else,
     or both--any genteel mystifications, I should probably not succeed in
     them.'

     'Papa Meagles,' returned the Dowager, with an affable smile, but with
     the bloom on her cheeks standing out a little more vividly than usual as
     the neighbouring surface became paler,'probably not.'

     'Therefore, my good madam,' said Mr Meagles, at great pains to
     restrain himself, 'I hope I may, without offence, ask to have no such
     mystification played off upon me.'

     'Mama Meagles,' observed Mrs Gowan, 'your good man is incomprehensible.'

     Her turning to that worthy lady was an artifice to bring her into the
     discussion, quarrel with her, and vanquish her. Mr Meagles interposed to
     prevent that consummation.

     'Mother,' said he, 'you are inexpert, my dear, and it is not a fair
     match. Let me beg of you to remain quiet. Come, Mrs Gowan, come! Let
     us try to be sensible; let us try to be good-natured; let us try to
     be fair. Don't you pity Henry, and I won't pity Pet. And don't be
     one-sided, my dear madam; it's not considerate, it's not kind. Don't
     let us say that we hope Pet will make Henry happy, or even that we hope
     Henry will make Pet happy,' (Mr Meagles himself did not look happy as he
             spoke the words,) 'but let us hope they will make each other happy.'

     'Yes, sure, and there leave it, father,' said Mrs Meagles the
     kind-hearted and comfortable.

     'Why, mother, no,' returned Mr Meagles, 'not exactly there. I can't
     quite leave it there; I must say just half-a-dozen words more. Mrs
     Gowan, I hope I am not over-sensitive. I believe I don't look it.'

     'Indeed you do not,' said Mrs Gowan, shaking her head and the great
     green fan together, for emphasis.

     'Thank you, ma'am; that's well. Notwithstanding which, I feel a
     little--I don't want to use a strong word--now shall I say hurt?'
     asked Mr Meagles at once with frankness and moderation, and with a
     conciliatory appeal in his tone.

     'Say what you like,' answered Mrs Gowan. 'It is perfectly indifferent to
     me.'

     'No, no, don't say that,' urged Mr Meagles, 'because that's not
     responding amiably. I feel a little hurt when I hear references made to
     consequences having been foreseen, and to its being too late now, and so
     forth.'

     '_Do_ you, Papa Meagles?' said Mrs Gowan. 'I am not surprised.'

     'Well, ma'am,' reasoned Mr Meagles, 'I was in hopes you would have been
     at least surprised, because to hurt me wilfully on so tender a subject
     is surely not generous.'

     'I am not responsible,' said Mrs Gowan, 'for your conscience, you know.'

     Poor Mr Meagles looked aghast with astonishment.

     'If I am unluckily obliged to carry a cap about with me, which is yours
     and fits you,' pursued Mrs Gowan, 'don't blame me for its pattern, Papa
     Meagles, I beg!'

     'Why, good Lord, ma'am!' Mr Meagles broke out, 'that's as much as to
     state--'

     'Now, Papa Meagles, Papa Meagles,' said Mrs Gowan, who became extremely
     deliberate and prepossessing in manner whenever that gentleman became at
     all warm, 'perhaps to prevent confusion, I had better speak for myself
     than trouble your kindness to speak for me. It's as much as to state,
     you begin. If you please, I will finish the sentence. It is as much as
     to state--not that I wish to press it or even recall it, for it is of no
     use now, and my only wish is to make the best of existing
     circumstances--that from the first to the last I always objected to this
     match of yours, and at a very late period yielded a most unwilling
     consent to it.'

     'Mother!' cried Mr Meagles. 'Do you hear this! Arthur! Do you hear
     this!'

     'The room being of a convenient size,' said Mrs Gowan, looking about
     as she fanned herself, 'and quite charmingly adapted in all respects to
     conversation, I should imagine I am audible in any part of it.'

     Some moments passed in silence, before Mr Meagles could hold himself in
     his chair with sufficient security to prevent his breaking out of it at
     the next word he spoke. At last he said: 'Ma'am, I am very unwilling to
     revive them, but I must remind you what my opinions and my course were,
     all along, on that unfortunate subject.'

     'O, my dear sir!' said Mrs Gowan, smiling and shaking her head with
     accusatory intelligence, 'they were well understood by me, I assure
     you.'

     'I never, ma'am,' said Mr Meagles, 'knew unhappiness before that time,
     I never knew anxiety before that time. It was a time of such distress to
     me that--' That Mr Meagles could really say no more about it, in short,
     but passed his handkerchief before his face.

     'I understood the whole affair,' said Mrs Gowan, composedly looking
     over her fan. 'As you have appealed to Mr Clennam, I may appeal to Mr
     Clennam, too. He knows whether I did or not.'

     'I am very unwilling,' said Clennam, looked to by all parties, 'to take
     any share in this discussion, more especially because I wish to preserve
     the best understanding and the clearest relations with Mr Henry Gowan.
     I have very strong reasons indeed, for entertaining that wish. Mrs Gowan
     attributed certain views of furthering the marriage to my friend here,
     in conversation with me before it took place; and I endeavoured to
     undeceive her. I represented that I knew him (as I did and do) to be
     strenuously opposed to it, both in opinion and action.'

     'You see?' said Mrs Gowan, turning the palms of her hands towards Mr
     Meagles, as if she were Justice herself, representing to him that he had
     better confess, for he had not a leg to stand on. 'You see? Very good!
     Now Papa and Mama Meagles both!' here she rose; 'allow me to take the
     liberty of putting an end to this rather formidable controversy. I will
     not say another word upon its merits. I will only say that it is an
     additional proof of what one knows from all experience; that this kind
     of thing never answers--as my poor fellow himself would say, that it
     never pays--in one word, that it never does.'

     Mr Meagles asked, What kind of thing?

     'It is in vain,' said Mrs Gowan, 'for people to attempt to get on
     together who have such extremely different antecedents; who are jumbled
     against each other in this accidental, matrimonial sort of way; and who
     cannot look at the untoward circumstance which has shaken them together
     in the same light. It never does.'

     Mr Meagles was beginning, 'Permit me to say, ma'am--'

     'No, don't,' returned Mrs Gowan. 'Why should you! It is an ascertained
     fact. It never does. I will therefore, if you please, go my way, leaving
     you to yours. I shall at all times be happy to receive my poor fellow's
     pretty wife, and I shall always make a point of being on the most
     affectionate terms with her. But as to these terms, semi-family and
     semi-stranger, semi-goring and semi-boring, they form a state of things
     quite amusing in its impracticability. I assure you it never does.'

     The Dowager here made a smiling obeisance, rather to the room than to
     any one in it, and therewith took a final farewell of Papa and Mama
     Meagles. Clennam stepped forward to hand her to the Pill-Box which was
     at the service of all the Pills in Hampton Court Palace; and she got
     into that vehicle with distinguished serenity, and was driven away.

     Thenceforth the Dowager, with a light and careless humour, often
     recounted to her particular acquaintance how, after a hard trial, she
     had found it impossible to know those people who belonged to Henry's
     wife, and who had made that desperate set to catch him. Whether she had
     come to the conclusion beforehand, that to get rid of them would give
     her favourite pretence a better air, might save her some occasional
     inconvenience, and could risk no loss (the pretty creature being fast
             married, and her father devoted to her), was best known to herself.
     Though this history has its opinion on that point too, and decidedly in
     the affirmative.




'Arthur, my dear boy,' said Mr Meagles, on the evening of the following
day, 'Mother and I have been talking this over, and we don't feel
comfortable in remaining as we are. That elegant connection of
ours--that dear lady who was here yesterday--'

'I understand,' said Arthur.

'Even that affable and condescending ornament of society,' pursued Mr
Meagles, 'may misrepresent us, we are afraid. We could bear a great
deal, Arthur, for her sake; but we think we would rather not bear that,
    if it was all the same to her.'

    'Good,' said Arthur. 'Go on.'

    'You see,' proceeded Mr Meagles 'it might put us wrong with our
    son-in-law, it might even put us wrong with our daughter, and it might
    lead to a great deal of domestic trouble. You see, don't you?'

    'Yes, indeed,' returned Arthur, 'there is much reason in what you say.'
    He had glanced at Mrs Meagles, who was always on the good and sensible
    side; and a petition had shone out of her honest face that he would
    support Mr Meagles in his present inclinings.

    'So we are very much disposed, are Mother and I,' said Mr Meagles, 'to
    pack up bags and baggage and go among the Allongers and Marshongers once
    more. I mean, we are very much disposed to be off, strike right through
    France into Italy, and see our Pet.'

    'And I don't think,' replied Arthur, touched by the motherly
    anticipation in the bright face of Mrs Meagles (she must have been very
            like her daughter, once), 'that you could do better. And if you ask me
    for my advice, it is that you set off to-morrow.'

    'Is it really, though?' said Mr Meagles. 'Mother, this is being backed
    in an idea!'

    Mother, with a look which thanked Clennam in a manner very agreeable to
    him, answered that it was indeed.

    'The fact is, besides, Arthur,' said Mr Meagles, the old cloud coming
    over his face, 'that my son-in-law is already in debt again, and that I
    suppose I must clear him again. It may be as well, even on this account,
    that I should step over there, and look him up in a friendly way. Then
    again, here's Mother foolishly anxious (and yet naturally too) about
    Pet's state of health, and that she should not be left to feel lonesome
    at the present time. It's undeniably a long way off, Arthur, and a
    strange place for the poor love under all the circumstances. Let her be
    as well cared for as any lady in that land, still it is a long way off.
    just as Home is Home though it's never so Homely, why you see,' said Mr
    Meagles, adding a new version to the proverb, 'Rome is Rome, though it's
    never so Romely.'

    'All perfectly true,' observed Arthur, 'and all sufficient reasons for
    going.'

    'I am glad you think so; it decides me. Mother, my dear, you may get
    ready. We have lost our pleasant interpreter (she spoke three foreign
            languages beautifully, Arthur; you have heard her many a time), and you
    must pull me through it, Mother, as well as you can. I require a deal
    of pulling through, Arthur,' said Mr Meagles, shaking his head, 'a deal
    of pulling through. I stick at everything beyond a noun-substantive--and
    I stick at him, if he's at all a tight one.'

    'Now I think of it,' returned Clennam, 'there's Cavalletto. He shall
    go with you, if you like. I could not afford to lose him, but you will
    bring him safe back.'

    'Well! I am much obliged to you, my boy,' said Mr Meagles, turning it
    over, 'but I think not. No, I think I'll be pulled through by Mother.
    Cavallooro (I stick at his very name to start with, and it sounds like
            the chorus to a comic song) is so necessary to you, that I don't like
    the thought of taking him away. More than that, there's no saying when
    we may come home again; and it would never do to take him away for
    an indefinite time. The cottage is not what it was. It only holds two
    little people less than it ever did, Pet, and her poor unfortunate maid
    Tattycoram; but it seems empty now. Once out of it, there's no knowing
    when we may come back to it. No, Arthur, I'll be pulled through by
    Mother.'

    They would do best by themselves perhaps, after all, Clennam thought;
    therefore did not press his proposal.

    'If you would come down and stay here for a change, when it wouldn't
    trouble you,' Mr Meagles resumed, 'I should be glad to think--and so
    would Mother too, I know--that you were brightening up the old place
    with a bit of life it was used to when it was full, and that the Babies
    on the wall there had a kind eye upon them sometimes. You so belong to
    the spot, and to them, Arthur, and we should every one of us have been
    so happy if it had fallen out--but, let us see--how's the weather for
    travelling now?' Mr Meagles broke off, cleared his throat, and got up to
    look out of the window.

    They agreed that the weather was of high promise; and Clennam kept the
    talk in that safe direction until it had become easy again, when he
    gently diverted it to Henry Gowan and his quick sense and agreeable
    qualities when he was delicately dealt with; he likewise dwelt on the
    indisputable affection he entertained for his wife. Clennam did not fail
    of his effect upon good Mr Meagles, whom these commendations greatly
    cheered; and who took Mother to witness that the single and cordial
    desire of his heart in reference to their daughter's husband, was
    harmoniously to exchange friendship for friendship, and confidence for
    confidence. Within a few hours the cottage furniture began to be wrapped
    up for preservation in the family absence--or, as Mr Meagles expressed
    it, the house began to put its hair in papers--and within a few days
    Father and Mother were gone, Mrs Tickit and Dr Buchan were posted, as of
    yore, behind the parlour blind, and Arthur's solitary feet were rustling
    among the dry fallen leaves in the garden walks.

    As he had a liking for the spot, he seldom let a week pass without
    paying a visit. Sometimes, he went down alone from Saturday to Monday;
    sometimes his partner accompanied him; sometimes, he merely strolled for
    an hour or two about the house and garden, saw that all was right, and
    returned to London again. At all times, and under all circumstances, Mrs
    Tickit, with her dark row of curls, and Dr Buchan, sat in the parlour
    window, looking out for the family return.

    On one of his visits Mrs Tickit received him with the words, 'I
    have something to tell you, Mr Clennam, that will surprise you.' So
    surprising was the something in question, that it actually brought Mrs
    Tickit out of the parlour window and produced her in the garden walk,
    when Clennam went in at the gate on its being opened for him.

    'What is it, Mrs Tickit?' said he.

    'Sir,' returned that faithful housekeeper, having taken him into the
    parlour and closed the door; 'if ever I saw the led away and deluded
    child in my life, I saw her identically in the dusk of yesterday
    evening.'

    'You don't mean Tatty--'

    'Coram yes I do!' quoth Mrs Tickit, clearing the disclosure at a leap.

    'Where?'

    'Mr Clennam,' returned Mrs Tickit, 'I was a little heavy in my eyes,
    being that I was waiting longer than customary for my cup of tea which
    was then preparing by Mary Jane. I was not sleeping, nor what a person
    would term correctly, dozing. I was more what a person would strictly
    call watching with my eyes closed.'

    Without entering upon an inquiry into this curious abnormal condition,
    Clennam said, 'Exactly. Well?'

    'Well, sir,' proceeded Mrs Tickit, 'I was thinking of one thing and
    thinking of another, just as you yourself might. Just as anybody might.'

    'Precisely so,' said Clennam. 'Well?'

    'And when I do think of one thing and do think of another,' pursued
    Mrs Tickit, 'I hardly need to tell you, Mr Clennam, that I think of the
    family. Because, dear me! a person's thoughts,' Mrs Tickit said this
    with an argumentative and philosophic air, 'however they may stray, will
    go more or less on what is uppermost in their minds. They _will_ do it,
    sir, and a person can't prevent them.'

    Arthur subscribed to this discovery with a nod.

    'You find it so yourself, sir, I'll be bold to say,' said Mrs Tickit,
    'and we all find it so. It an't our stations in life that changes us, Mr
    Clennam; thoughts is free!--As I was saying, I was thinking of one thing
    and thinking of another, and thinking very much of the family. Not of
    the family in the present times only, but in the past times too. For
    when a person does begin thinking of one thing and thinking of another
    in that manner, as it's getting dark, what I say is, that all times
    seem to be present, and a person must get out of that state and consider
    before they can say which is which.'

    He nodded again; afraid to utter a word, lest it should present any new
    opening to Mrs Tickit's conversational powers.

    'In consequence of which,' said Mrs Tickit, 'when I quivered my eyes and
    saw her actual form and figure looking in at the gate, I let them close
    again without so much as starting, for that actual form and figure came
    so pat to the time when it belonged to the house as much as mine or your
    own, that I never thought at the moment of its having gone away. But,
    sir, when I quivered my eyes again, and saw that it wasn't there, then
    it all flooded upon me with a fright, and I jumped up.'

    'You ran out directly?' said Clennam.

    'I ran out,' assented Mrs Tickit, 'as fast as ever my feet would carry
    me; and if you'll credit it, Mr Clennam, there wasn't in the whole
    shining Heavens, no not so much as a finger of that young woman.'

    Passing over the absence from the firmament of this novel constellation,
    Arthur inquired of Mrs Tickit if she herself went beyond the gate?

    'Went to and fro, and high and low,' said Mrs Tickit, 'and saw no sign
    of her!'

    He then asked Mrs Tickit how long a space of time she supposed there
    might have been between the two sets of ocular quiverings she had
    experienced? Mrs Tickit, though minutely circumstantial in her reply,
    had no settled opinion between five seconds and ten minutes. She was so
    plainly at sea on this part of the case, and had so clearly been
    startled out of slumber, that Clennam was much disposed to regard the
    appearance as a dream. Without hurting Mrs Tickit's feelings with that
    infidel solution of her mystery, he took it away from the cottage with
    him; and probably would have retained it ever afterwards if a
    circumstance had not soon happened to change his opinion.

    He was passing at nightfall along the Strand, and the lamp-lighter was
    going on before him, under whose hand the street-lamps, blurred by the
    foggy air, burst out one after another, like so many blazing sunflowers
    coming into full-blow all at once,--when a stoppage on the pavement,
    caused by a train of coal-waggons toiling up from the wharves at the
    river-side, brought him to a stand-still. He had been walking quickly,
    and going with some current of thought, and the sudden check given to
    both operations caused him to look freshly about him, as people under
    such circumstances usually do.

    Immediately, he saw in advance--a few people intervening, but still
    so near to him that he could have touched them by stretching out
    his arm--Tattycoram and a strange man of a remarkable appearance: a
    swaggering man, with a high nose, and a black moustache as false in its
    colour as his eyes were false in their expression, who wore his heavy
    cloak with the air of a foreigner. His dress and general appearance were
    those of a man on travel, and he seemed to have very recently joined
    the girl. In bending down (being much taller than she was), listening
    to whatever she said to him, he looked over his shoulder with the
    suspicious glance of one who was not unused to be mistrustful that his
    footsteps might be dogged. It was then that Clennam saw his face; as
    his eyes lowered on the people behind him in the aggregate, without
    particularly resting upon Clennam's face or any other.

    He had scarcely turned his head about again, and it was still bent down,
    listening to the girl, when the stoppage ceased, and the obstructed
    stream of people flowed on. Still bending his head and listening to the
    girl, he went on at her side, and Clennam followed them, resolved to
    play this unexpected play out, and see where they went.

    He had hardly made the determination (though he was not long about it),
    when he was again as suddenly brought up as he had been by the stoppage.
    They turned short into the Adelphi,--the girl evidently leading,--and
    went straight on, as if they were going to the Terrace which overhangs
    the river.

    There is always, to this day, a sudden pause in that place to the roar
    of the great thoroughfare. The many sounds become so deadened that the
    change is like putting cotton in the ears, or having the head thickly
    muffled. At that time the contrast was far greater; there being no small
    steam-boats on the river, no landing places but slippery wooden stairs
    and foot-causeways, no railroad on the opposite bank, no hanging bridge
    or fish-market near at hand, no traffic on the nearest bridge of stone,
    nothing moving on the stream but watermen's wherries and coal-lighters.
    Long and broad black tiers of the latter, moored fast in the mud as if
    they were never to move again, made the shore funereal and silent after
    dark; and kept what little water-movement there was, far out towards
    mid-stream. At any hour later than sunset, and not least at that hour
    when most of the people who have anything to eat at home are going home
    to eat it, and when most of those who have nothing have hardly yet slunk
    out to beg or steal, it was a deserted place and looked on a deserted
    scene.

    Such was the hour when Clennam stopped at the corner, observing the girl
    and the strange man as they went down the street. The man's footsteps
    were so noisy on the echoing stones that he was unwilling to add the
    sound of his own. But when they had passed the turning and were in the
    darkness of the dark corner leading to the terrace, he made after them
    with such indifferent appearance of being a casual passenger on his way,
    as he could assume.

    When he rounded the dark corner, they were walking along the terrace
    towards a figure which was coming towards them. If he had seen it by
    itself, under such conditions of gas-lamp, mist, and distance, he might
    not have known it at first sight, but with the figure of the girl to
    prompt him, he at once recognised Miss Wade.

    He stopped at the corner, seeming to look back expectantly up the street
    as if he had made an appointment with some one to meet him there; but he
    kept a careful eye on the three. When they came together, the man took
    off his hat, and made Miss Wade a bow. The girl appeared to say a few
    words as though she presented him, or accounted for his being late, or
    early, or what not; and then fell a pace or so behind, by herself. Miss
    Wade and the man then began to walk up and down; the man having the
    appearance of being extremely courteous and complimentary in manner;
    Miss Wade having the appearance of being extremely haughty.

    When they came down to the corner and turned, she was saying, 'If I
    pinch myself for it, sir, that is my business. Confine yourself to
    yours, and ask me no question.'

    'By Heaven, ma'am!' he replied, making her another bow. 'It was my
    profound respect for the strength of your character, and my admiration
    of your beauty.'

    'I want neither the one nor the other from any one,' said she, 'and
    certainly not from you of all creatures. Go on with your report.'

    'Am I pardoned?' he asked, with an air of half abashed gallantry.

    'You are paid,' she said, 'and that is all you want.'

    Whether the girl hung behind because she was not to hear the business,
    or as already knowing enough about it, Clennam could not determine. They
    turned and she turned. She looked away at the river, as she walked
    with her hands folded before her; and that was all he could make of
    her without showing his face. There happened, by good fortune, to be a
    lounger really waiting for some one; and he sometimes looked over the
    railing at the water, and sometimes came to the dark corner and looked
    up the street, rendering Arthur less conspicuous.

    When Miss Wade and the man came back again, she was saying, 'You must
    wait until to-morrow.'

    'A thousand pardons?' he returned. 'My faith! Then it's not convenient
    to-night?'

    'No. I tell you I must get it before I can give it to you.'

    She stopped in the roadway, as if to put an end to the conference. He of
    course stopped too. And the girl stopped.

    'It's a little inconvenient,' said the man. 'A little. But, Holy Blue!
    that's nothing in such a service. I am without money to-night, by
    chance. I have a good banker in this city, but I would not wish to draw
    upon the house until the time when I shall draw for a round sum.'

    'Harriet,' said Miss Wade, 'arrange with him--this gentleman here--for
    sending him some money to-morrow.' She said it with a slur of the word
    gentleman which was more contemptuous than any emphasis, and walked
    slowly on.

    The man bent his head again, and the girl spoke to him as they both
    followed her. Clennam ventured to look at the girl as they moved away.
    He could note that her rich black eyes were fastened upon the man with a
    scrutinising expression, and that she kept at a little distance from
    him, as they walked side by side to the further end of the terrace.

    A loud and altered clank upon the pavement warned him, before he could
    discern what was passing there, that the man was coming back alone.
    Clennam lounged into the road, towards the railing; and the man passed
    at a quick swing, with the end of his cloak thrown over his shoulder,
    singing a scrap of a French song.

    The whole vista had no one in it now but himself. The lounger had
    lounged out of view, and Miss Wade and Tattycoram were gone. More than
    ever bent on seeing what became of them, and on having some information
    to give his good friend, Mr Meagles, he went out at the further end of
    the terrace, looking cautiously about him. He rightly judged that, at
    first at all events, they would go in a contrary direction from their
    late companion. He soon saw them in a neighbouring bye-street, which was
    not a thoroughfare, evidently allowing time for the man to get well
    out of their way. They walked leisurely arm-in-arm down one side of the
    street, and returned on the opposite side. When they came back to the
    street-corner, they changed their pace for the pace of people with an
    object and a distance before them, and walked steadily away. Clennam, no
    less steadily, kept them in sight.

    They crossed the Strand, and passed through Covent Garden (under the
            windows of his old lodging where dear Little Dorrit had come that
            night), and slanted away north-east, until they passed the great
    building whence Tattycoram derived her name, and turned into the Gray's
    Inn Road. Clennam was quite at home here, in right of Flora, not to
    mention the Patriarch and Pancks, and kept them in view with ease. He
    was beginning to wonder where they might be going next, when that wonder
    was lost in the greater wonder with which he saw them turn into the
    Patriarchal street. That wonder was in its turn swallowed up on the
    greater wonder with which he saw them stop at the Patriarchal door. A
    low double knock at the bright brass knocker, a gleam of light into the
    road from the opened door, a brief pause for inquiry and answer and the
    door was shut, and they were housed.

    After looking at the surrounding objects for assurance that he was
    not in an odd dream, and after pacing a little while before the house,
    Arthur knocked at the door. It was opened by the usual maid-servant,
    and she showed him up at once, with her usual alacrity, to Flora's
    sitting-room.

    There was no one with Flora but Mr F.'s Aunt, which respectable
    gentlewoman, basking in a balmy atmosphere of tea and toast, was
    ensconced in an easy-chair by the fireside, with a little table at her
    elbow, and a clean white handkerchief spread over her lap on which
    two pieces of toast at that moment awaited consumption. Bending over
    a steaming vessel of tea, and looking through the steam, and breathing
    forth the steam, like a malignant Chinese enchantress engaged in the
    performance of unholy rites, Mr F.'s Aunt put down her great teacup and
    exclaimed, 'Drat him, if he an't come back again!'

    It would seem from the foregoing exclamation that this uncompromising
    relative of the lamented Mr F., measuring time by the acuteness of her
    sensations and not by the clock, supposed Clennam to have lately gone
    away; whereas at least a quarter of a year had elapsed since he had had
    the temerity to present himself before her.

    'My goodness Arthur!' cried Flora, rising to give him a cordial
    reception, 'Doyce and Clennam what a start and a surprise for though not
    far from the machinery and foundry business and surely might be taken
    sometimes if at no other time about mid-day when a glass of sherry and a
    humble sandwich of whatever cold meat in the larder might not come amiss
    nor taste the worse for being friendly for you know you buy it somewhere
    and wherever bought a profit must be made or they would never keep the
    place it stands to reason without a motive still never seen and learnt
    now not to be expected, for as Mr F. himself said if seeing is believing
    not seeing is believing too and when you don't see you may fully believe
    you're not remembered not that I expect you Arthur Doyce and Clennam to
    remember me why should I for the days are gone but bring another teacup
    here directly and tell her fresh toast and pray sit near the fire.'

    Arthur was in the greatest anxiety to explain the object of his
    visit; but was put off for the moment, in spite of himself, by what he
    understood of the reproachful purport of these words, and by the genuine
    pleasure she testified in seeing him.

    'And now pray tell me something all you know,' said Flora, drawing her
    chair near to his, 'about the good dear quiet little thing and all the
    changes of her fortunes carriage people now no doubt and horses without
    number most romantic, a coat of arms of course and wild beasts on their
    hind legs showing it as if it was a copy they had done with mouths from
    ear to ear good gracious, and has she her health which is the first
    consideration after all for what is wealth without it Mr F. himself so
    often saying when his twinges came that sixpence a day and find yourself
    and no gout so much preferable, not that he could have lived on anything
    like it being the last man or that the previous little thing though far
    too familiar an expression now had any tendency of that sort much too
    slight and small but looked so fragile bless her?'

    Mr F.'s Aunt, who had eaten a piece of toast down to the crust, here
    solemnly handed the crust to Flora, who ate it for her as a matter of
    business. Mr F.'s Aunt then moistened her ten fingers in slow succession
    at her lips, and wiped them in exactly the same order on the white
    handkerchief; then took the other piece of toast, and fell to work
    upon it. While pursuing this routine, she looked at Clennam with an
    expression of such intense severity that he felt obliged to look at her
    in return, against his personal inclinations.

    'She is in Italy, with all her family, Flora,' he said, when the dreaded
    lady was occupied again.

    'In Italy is she really?' said Flora, 'with the grapes growing
    everywhere and lava necklaces and bracelets too that land of poetry with
    burning mountains picturesque beyond belief though if the organ-boys
    come away from the neighbourhood not to be scorched nobody can wonder
    being so young and bringing their white mice with them most humane, and
    is she really in that favoured land with nothing but blue about her and
    dying gladiators and Belvederes though Mr F. himself did not believe
    for his objection when in spirits was that the images could not be true
    there being no medium between expensive quantities of linen badly got
    up and all in creases and none whatever, which certainly does not seem
    probable though perhaps in consequence of the extremes of rich and poor
    which may account for it.'

    Arthur tried to edge a word in, but Flora hurried on again.

    'Venice Preserved too,' said she, 'I think you have been there is it
    well or ill preserved for people differ so and Maccaroni if they really
    eat it like the conjurors why not cut it shorter, you are acquainted
    Arthur--dear Doyce and Clennam at least not dear and most assuredly
    not Doyce for I have not the pleasure but pray excuse me--acquainted I
    believe with Mantua what _has_ it got to do with Mantua-making for I never
    have been able to conceive?'

    'I believe there is no connection, Flora, between the two,' Arthur was
    beginning, when she caught him up again.

    'Upon your word no isn't there I never did but that's like me I run away
    with an idea and having none to spare I keep it, alas there was a time
    dear Arthur that is to say decidedly not dear nor Arthur neither but you
    understand me when one bright idea gilded the what's-his-name horizon of
    et cetera but it is darkly clouded now and all is over.'

    Arthur's increasing wish to speak of something very different was by
    this time so plainly written on his face, that Flora stopped in a tender
    look, and asked him what it was?

    'I have the greatest desire, Flora, to speak to some one who is now in
    this house--with Mr Casby no doubt. Some one whom I saw come in, and
    who, in a misguided and deplorable way, has deserted the house of a
    friend of mine.'

    'Papa sees so many and such odd people,' said Flora, rising, 'that I
    shouldn't venture to go down for any one but you Arthur but for you I
    would willingly go down in a diving-bell much more a dining-room and
    will come back directly if you'll mind and at the same time not mind Mr
    F.'s Aunt while I'm gone.'

    With those words and a parting glance, Flora bustled out, leaving
    Clennam under dreadful apprehension of this terrible charge.

    The first variation which manifested itself in Mr F.'s Aunt's demeanour
    when she had finished her piece of toast, was a loud and prolonged
    sniff. Finding it impossible to avoid construing this demonstration
    into a defiance of himself, its gloomy significance being unmistakable,
    Clennam looked plaintively at the excellent though prejudiced lady
    from whom it emanated, in the hope that she might be disarmed by a meek
    submission.

    'None of your eyes at me,' said Mr F.'s Aunt, shivering with hostility.
    'Take that.'

    'That' was the crust of the piece of toast. Clennam accepted the boon
    with a look of gratitude, and held it in his hand under the pressure
    of a little embarrassment, which was not relieved when Mr F.'s Aunt,
    elevating her voice into a cry of considerable power, exclaimed, 'He
    has a proud stomach, this chap! He's too proud a chap to eat it!' and,
    coming out of her chair, shook her venerable fist so very close to his
    nose as to tickle the surface. But for the timely return of Flora, to
    find him in this difficult situation, further consequences might
    have ensued. Flora, without the least discomposure or surprise, but
    congratulating the old lady in an approving manner on being 'very lively
    to-night', handed her back to her chair.

    'He has a proud stomach, this chap,' said Mr F.'s relation, on being
    reseated. 'Give him a meal of chaff!'

    'Oh! I don't think he would like that, aunt,' returned Flora.

    'Give him a meal of chaff, I tell you,' said Mr F.'s Aunt, glaring round
    Flora on her enemy. 'It's the only thing for a proud stomach. Let him
    eat up every morsel. Drat him, give him a meal of chaff!'

    Under a general pretence of helping him to this refreshment, Flora got
    him out on the staircase; Mr F.'s Aunt even then constantly reiterating,
    with inexpressible bitterness, that he was 'a chap,' and had a 'proud
    stomach,' and over and over again insisting on that equine provision
    being made for him which she had already so strongly prescribed.

    'Such an inconvenient staircase and so many corner-stairs Arthur,'
    whispered Flora, 'would you object to putting your arm round me under my
    pelerine?'

    With a sense of going down-stairs in a highly-ridiculous manner, Clennam
    descended in the required attitude, and only released his fair burden at
    the dining-room door; indeed, even there she was rather difficult to
    be got rid of, remaining in his embrace to murmur, 'Arthur, for mercy's
    sake, don't breathe it to papa!'

    She accompanied Arthur into the room, where the Patriarch sat alone,
    with his list shoes on the fender, twirling his thumbs as if he had
    never left off. The youthful Patriarch, aged ten, looked out of his
    picture-frame above him with no calmer air than he. Both smooth heads
    were alike beaming, blundering, and bumpy.

    'Mr Clennam, I am glad to see you. I hope you are well, sir, I hope you
    are well. Please to sit down, please to sit down.'

    'I had hoped, sir,' said Clennam, doing so, and looking round with a
    face of blank disappointment, 'not to find you alone.'

    'Ah, indeed?' said the Patriarch, sweetly. 'Ah, indeed?'

    'I told you so you know papa,' cried Flora.

    'Ah, to be sure!' returned the Patriarch. 'Yes, just so. Ah, to be
    sure!'

    'Pray, sir,'demanded Clennam, anxiously, 'is Miss Wade gone?'

    'Miss--? Oh, you call her Wade,' returned Mr Casby. 'Highly proper.'

    Arthur quickly returned, 'What do you call her?'

    'Wade,' said Mr Casby. 'Oh, always Wade.'

    After looking at the philanthropic visage and the long silky white hair
    for a few seconds, during which Mr Casby twirled his thumbs, and smiled
    at the fire as if he were benevolently wishing it to burn him that he
    might forgive it, Arthur began:

    'I beg your pardon, Mr Casby--'

    'Not so, not so,' said the Patriarch, 'not so.'

    '--But, Miss Wade had an attendant with her--a young woman brought up
    by friends of mine, over whom her influence is not considered very
    salutary, and to whom I should be glad to have the opportunity of giving
    the assurance that she has not yet forfeited the interest of those
    protectors.'

    'Really, really?' returned the Patriarch.

    'Will you therefore be so good as to give me the address of Miss Wade?'

    'Dear, dear, dear!' said the Patriarch, 'how very unfortunate! If you
    had only sent in to me when they were here! I observed the young woman,
    Mr Clennam. A fine full-coloured young woman, Mr Clennam, with very dark
    hair and very dark eyes. If I mistake not, if I mistake not?'

    Arthur assented, and said once more with new expression, 'If you would
    be so good as to give me the address.'

    'Dear, dear, dear!' exclaimed the Patriarch in sweet regret. 'Tut, tut,
    tut! what a pity, what a pity! I have no address, sir. Miss Wade mostly
    lives abroad, Mr Clennam. She has done so for some years, and she is (if
            I may say so of a fellow-creature and a lady) fitful and uncertain to a
    fault, Mr Clennam. I may not see her again for a long, long time. I may
    never see her again. What a pity, what a pity!'

    Clennam saw now, that he had as much hope of getting assistance out of
    the Portrait as out of the Patriarch; but he said nevertheless:

    'Mr Casby, could you, for the satisfaction of the friends I have
    mentioned, and under any obligation of secrecy that you may consider it
    your duty to impose, give me any information at all touching Miss Wade?
    I have seen her abroad, and I have seen her at home, but I know nothing
    of her. Could you give me any account of her whatever?'

    'None,' returned the Patriarch, shaking his big head with his utmost
    benevolence. 'None at all. Dear, dear, dear! What a real pity that
    she stayed so short a time, and you delayed! As confidential agency
    business, agency business, I have occasionally paid this lady money; but
    what satisfaction is it to you, sir, to know that?'

    'Truly, none at all,' said Clennam.

    'Truly,' assented the Patriarch, with a shining face as he
    philanthropically smiled at the fire, 'none at all, sir. You hit the
    wise answer, Mr Clennam. Truly, none at all, sir.'

    His turning of his smooth thumbs over one another as he sat there, was
    so typical to Clennam of the way in which he would make the subject
    revolve if it were pursued, never showing any new part of it nor
    allowing it to make the smallest advance, that it did much to help to
    convince him of his labour having been in vain. He might have taken any
    time to think about it, for Mr Casby, well accustomed to get on anywhere
    by leaving everything to his bumps and his white hair, knew his strength
    to lie in silence. So there Casby sat, twirling and twirling, and making
    his polished head and forehead look largely benevolent in every knob.

    With this spectacle before him, Arthur had risen to go, when from the
    inner Dock where the good ship Pancks was hove down when out in no
    cruising ground, the noise was heard of that steamer labouring towards
    him. It struck Arthur that the noise began demonstratively far off, as
    though Mr Pancks sought to impress on any one who might happen to think
    about it, that he was working on from out of hearing.

    Mr Pancks and he shook hands, and the former brought his employer a
    letter or two to sign. Mr Pancks in shaking hands merely scratched his
    eyebrow with his left forefinger and snorted once, but Clennam, who
    understood him better now than of old, comprehended that he had almost
    done for the evening and wished to say a word to him outside. Therefore,
    when he had taken his leave of Mr Casby, and (which was a more difficult
            process) of Flora, he sauntered in the neighbourhood on Mr Pancks's line
    of road.

    He had waited but a short time when Mr Pancks appeared. Mr Pancks
    shaking hands again with another expressive snort, and taking off his
    hat to put his hair up, Arthur thought he received his cue to speak to
    him as one who knew pretty well what had just now passed. Therefore he
    said, without any preface:

    'I suppose they were really gone, Pancks?'

    'Yes,' replied Pancks. 'They were really gone.'

    'Does he know where to find that lady?'

    'Can't say. I should think so.'

    Mr Pancks did not? No, Mr Pancks did not. Did Mr Pancks know anything
    about her?

    'I expect,' rejoined that worthy, 'I know as much about her as she knows
    about herself. She is somebody's child--anybody's, nobody's. Put her in
    a room in London here with any six people old enough to be her parents,
    and her parents may be there for anything she knows. They may be in any
    house she sees, they may be in any churchyard she passes, she may run
    against 'em in any street, she may make chance acquaintance of 'em at
    any time; and never know it. She knows nothing about 'em. She knows
    nothing about any relative whatever. Never did. Never will.'

    'Mr Casby could enlighten her, perhaps?'

    'May be,' said Pancks. 'I expect so, but don't know. He has long had
    money (not overmuch as I make out) in trust to dole out to her when
    she can't do without it. Sometimes she's proud and won't touch it for
    a length of time; sometimes she's so poor that she must have it. She
    writhes under her life. A woman more angry, passionate, reckless,
    and revengeful never lived. She came for money to-night. Said she had
    peculiar occasion for it.'

    'I think,' observed Clennam musing, 'I by chance know what occasion--I
    mean into whose pocket the money is to go.'

    'Indeed?' said Pancks. 'If it's a compact, I recommend that party to be
    exact in it. I wouldn't trust myself to that woman, young and handsome
    as she is, if I had wronged her; no, not for twice my proprietor's
    money! Unless,' Pancks added as a saving clause, 'I had a lingering
    illness on me, and wanted to get it over.'

    Arthur, hurriedly reviewing his own observation of her, found it to
    tally pretty nearly with Mr Pancks's view.

    'The wonder is to me,' pursued Pancks, 'that she has never done for my
    proprietor, as the only person connected with her story she can lay
    hold of. Mentioning that, I may tell you, between ourselves, that I am
    sometimes tempted to do for him myself.'

    Arthur started and said, 'Dear me, Pancks, don't say that!'

    'Understand me,' said Pancks, extending five cropped coaly finger-nails
    on Arthur's arm; 'I don't mean, cut his throat. But by all that's
    precious, if he goes too far, I'll cut his hair!'

    Having exhibited himself in the new light of enunciating this tremendous
    threat, Mr Pancks, with a countenance of grave import, snorted several
    times and steamed away.




The shady waiting-rooms of the Circumlocution Office, where he passed a
good deal of time in company with various troublesome Convicts who were
under sentence to be broken alive on that wheel, had afforded Arthur
Clennam ample leisure, in three or four successive days, to exhaust the
subject of his late glimpse of Miss Wade and Tattycoram. He had been
able to make no more of it and no less of it, and in this unsatisfactory
condition he was fain to leave it.

During this space he had not been to his mother's dismal old house.
One of his customary evenings for repairing thither now coming round,
    he left his dwelling and his partner at nearly nine o'clock, and slowly
    walked in the direction of that grim home of his youth.

    It always affected his imagination as wrathful, mysterious, and sad;
    and his imagination was sufficiently impressible to see the whole
    neighbourhood under some tinge of its dark shadow. As he went along,
    upon a dreary night, the dim streets by which he went, seemed all
    depositories of oppressive secrets. The deserted counting-houses, with
    their secrets of books and papers locked up in chests and safes; the
    banking-houses, with their secrets of strong rooms and wells, the
    keys of which were in a very few secret pockets and a very few secret
    breasts; the secrets of all the dispersed grinders in the vast mill,
    among whom there were doubtless plunderers, forgers, and trust-betrayers
    of many sorts, whom the light of any day that dawned might reveal; he
    could have fancied that these things, in hiding, imparted a heaviness
    to the air. The shadow thickening and thickening as he approached its
    source, he thought of the secrets of the lonely church-vaults, where the
    people who had hoarded and secreted in iron coffers were in their turn
    similarly hoarded, not yet at rest from doing harm; and then of the
    secrets of the river, as it rolled its turbid tide between two frowning
    wildernesses of secrets, extending, thick and dense, for many miles, and
    warding off the free air and the free country swept by winds and wings
    of birds.

    The shadow still darkening as he drew near the house, the melancholy
    room which his father had once occupied, haunted by the appealing face
    he had himself seen fade away with him when there was no other watcher
    by the bed, arose before his mind. Its close air was secret. The gloom,
    and must, and dust of the whole tenement, were secret. At the heart of
    it his mother presided, inflexible of face, indomitable of will, firmly
    holding all the secrets of her own and his father's life, and austerely
    opposing herself, front to front, to the great final secret of all life.

    He had turned into the narrow and steep street from which the court of
    enclosure wherein the house stood opened, when another footstep turned
    into it behind him, and so close upon his own that he was jostled to the
    wall. As his mind was teeming with these thoughts, the encounter took
    him altogether unprepared, so that the other passenger had had time to
    say, boisterously, 'Pardon! Not my fault!' and to pass on before the
    instant had elapsed which was requisite to his recovery of the realities
    about him.

    When that moment had flashed away, he saw that the man striding on
    before him was the man who had been so much in his mind during the last
    few days. It was no casual resemblance, helped out by the force of
    the impression the man made upon him. It was the man; the man he had
    followed in company with the girl, and whom he had overheard talking to
    Miss Wade.

    The street was a sharp descent and was crooked too, and the man (who
            although not drunk had the air of being flushed with some strong drink)
    went down it so fast that Clennam lost him as he looked at him. With
    no defined intention of following him, but with an impulse to keep the
    figure in view a little longer, Clennam quickened his pace to pass the
    twist in the street which hid him from his sight. On turning it, he saw
    the man no more.

    Standing now, close to the gateway of his mother's house, he looked
    down the street: but it was empty. There was no projecting shadow large
    enough to obscure the man; there was no turning near that he could have
    taken; nor had there been any audible sound of the opening and closing
    of a door. Nevertheless, he concluded that the man must have had a key
    in his hand, and must have opened one of the many house-doors and gone
    in.

    Ruminating on this strange chance and strange glimpse, he turned into
    the court-yard. As he looked, by mere habit, towards the feebly lighted
    windows of his mother's room, his eyes encountered the figure he had
    just lost, standing against the iron railings of the little waste
    enclosure looking up at those windows and laughing to himself. Some of
    the many vagrant cats who were always prowling about there by night,
    and who had taken fright at him, appeared to have stopped when he had
    stopped, and were looking at him with eyes by no means unlike his own
    from tops of walls and porches, and other safe points of pause. He had
    only halted for a moment to entertain himself thus; he immediately went
    forward, throwing the end of his cloak off his shoulder as he went,
    ascended the unevenly sunken steps, and knocked a sounding knock at the
    door.

    Clennam's surprise was not so absorbing but that he took his resolution
    without any incertitude. He went up to the door too, and ascended the
    steps too. His friend looked at him with a braggart air, and sang to
    himself.


    'Who passes by this road so late?
    Compagnon de la Majolaine;
    Who passes by this road so late?
    Always gay!'


    After which he knocked again.

    'You are impatient, sir,' said Arthur.

    'I am, sir. Death of my life, sir,' returned the stranger, 'it's my
    character to be impatient!'

    The sound of Mistress Affery cautiously chaining the door before she
    opened it, caused them both to look that way. Affery opened it a very
    little, with a flaring candle in her hands and asked who was that, at
    that time of night, with that knock! 'Why, Arthur!' she added with
    astonishment, seeing him first. 'Not you sure? Ah, Lord save us! No,'
    she cried out, seeing the other. 'Him again!'

    'It's true! Him again, dear Mrs Flintwinch,' cried the stranger. 'Open
    the door, and let me take my dear friend Jeremiah to my arms! Open the
    door, and let me hasten myself to embrace my Flintwinch!'

    'He's not at home,' cried Affery.

    'Fetch him!' cried the stranger. 'Fetch my Flintwinch! Tell him that it
    is his old Blandois, who comes from arriving in England; tell him that
    it is his little boy who is here, his cabbage, his well-beloved! Open
    the door, beautiful Mrs Flintwinch, and in the meantime let me to pass
    upstairs, to present my compliments--homage of Blandois--to my lady! My
    lady lives always? It is well. Open then!'

    To Arthur's increased surprise, Mistress Affery, stretching her eyes
    wide at himself, as if in warning that this was not a gentleman for
    him to interfere with, drew back the chain, and opened the door. The
    stranger, without ceremony, walked into the hall, leaving Arthur to
    follow him.

    'Despatch then! Achieve then! Bring my Flintwinch! Announce me to my
    lady!' cried the stranger, clanking about the stone floor.

    'Pray tell me, Affery,' said Arthur aloud and sternly, as he surveyed
    him from head to foot with indignation; 'who is this gentleman?'

    'Pray tell me, Affery,' the stranger repeated in his turn, 'who--ha, ha,
    ha!--who is this gentleman?'

    The voice of Mrs Clennam opportunely called from her chamber above,
    'Affery, let them both come up. Arthur, come straight to me!'

    'Arthur?' exclaimed Blandois, taking off his hat at arm's length,
    and bringing his heels together from a great stride in making him a
    flourishing bow. 'The son of my lady? I am the all-devoted of the son of
    my lady!'

    Arthur looked at him again in no more flattering manner than before,
    and, turning on his heel without acknowledgment, went up-stairs. The
    visitor followed him up-stairs. Mistress Affery took the key from behind
    the door, and deftly slipped out to fetch her lord.

    A bystander, informed of the previous appearance of Monsieur Blandois
    in that room, would have observed a difference in Mrs Clennam's present
    reception of him. Her face was not one to betray it; and her suppressed
    manner, and her set voice, were equally under her control. It wholly
    consisted in her never taking her eyes off his face from the moment of
    his entrance, and in her twice or thrice, when he was becoming noisy,
    swaying herself a very little forward in the chair in which she sat
    upright, with her hands immovable upon its elbows; as if she gave him
    the assurance that he should be presently heard at any length he would.
    Arthur did not fail to observe this; though the difference between the
    present occasion and the former was not within his power of observation.

    'Madame,' said Blandois, 'do me the honour to present me to Monsieur,
    your son. It appears to me, madame, that Monsieur, your son, is disposed
    to complain of me. He is not polite.'

    'Sir,' said Arthur, striking in expeditiously, 'whoever you are, and
    however you come to be here, if I were the master of this house I would
    lose no time in placing you on the outside of it.'

    'But you are not,' said his mother, without looking at him.
    'Unfortunately for the gratification of your unreasonable temper, you
    are not the master, Arthur.'

    'I make no claim to be, mother. If I object to this person's manner of
    conducting himself here, and object to it so much, that if I had any
    authority here I certainly would not suffer him to remain a minute, I
    object on your account.'

    'In the case of objection being necessary,' she returned, 'I could
    object for myself. And of course I should.'

    The subject of their dispute, who had seated himself, laughed aloud, and
    rapped his legs with his hand.

    'You have no right,' said Mrs Clennam, always intent on Blandois,
    however directly she addressed her son, 'to speak to the prejudice of
    any gentleman (least of all a gentleman from another country), because
    he does not conform to your standard, or square his behaviour by your
    rules. It is possible that the gentleman may, on similar grounds, object
    to you.'

    'I hope so,' returned Arthur.

    'The gentleman,' pursued Mrs Clennam, 'on a former occasion brought
    a letter of recommendation to us from highly esteemed and responsible
    correspondents. I am perfectly unacquainted with the gentleman's object
    in coming here at present. I am entirely ignorant of it, and cannot be
    supposed likely to be able to form the remotest guess at its nature;'
    her habitual frown became stronger, as she very slowly and weightily
    emphasised those words; 'but, when the gentleman proceeds to explain
    his object, as I shall beg him to have the goodness to do to myself and
    Flintwinch, when Flintwinch returns, it will prove, no doubt, to be one
    more or less in the usual way of our business, which it will be both our
    business and our pleasure to advance. It can be nothing else.'

    'We shall see, madame!' said the man of business.

    'We shall see,' she assented. 'The gentleman is acquainted with
    Flintwinch; and when the gentleman was in London last, I remember
    to have heard that he and Flintwinch had some entertainment or
    good-fellowship together. I am not in the way of knowing much that
    passes outside this room, and the jingle of little worldly things beyond
    it does not much interest me; but I remember to have heard that.'

    'Right, madame. It is true.' He laughed again, and whistled the burden
    of the tune he had sung at the door.

    'Therefore, Arthur,' said his mother, 'the gentleman comes here as an
    acquaintance, and no stranger; and it is much to be regretted that your
    unreasonable temper should have found offence in him. I regret it. I say
    so to the gentleman. You will not say so, I know; therefore I say it for
    myself and Flintwinch, since with us two the gentleman's business lies.'

    The key of the door below was now heard in the lock, and the door was
    heard to open and close. In due sequence Mr Flintwinch appeared; on
    whose entrance the visitor rose from his chair, laughing loud, and
    folded him in a close embrace.

    'How goes it, my cherished friend!' said he. 'How goes the world, my
    Flintwinch? Rose-coloured? So much the better, so much the better! Ah,
    but you look charming! Ah, but you look young and fresh as the flowers
    of Spring! Ah, good little boy! Brave child, brave child!'

    While heaping these compliments on Mr Flintwinch, he rolled him about
    with a hand on each of his shoulders, until the staggerings of that
    gentleman, who under the circumstances was dryer and more twisted than
    ever, were like those of a teetotum nearly spent.

    'I had a presentiment, last time, that we should be better and more
    intimately acquainted. Is it coming on you, Flintwinch? Is it yet coming
    on?'

    'Why, no, sir,' retorted Mr Flintwinch. 'Not unusually. Hadn't you
    better be seated? You have been calling for some more of that port, sir,
    I guess?'

    'Ah, Little joker! Little pig!' cried the visitor. 'Ha ha ha ha!' And
    throwing Mr Flintwinch away, as a closing piece of raillery, he sat down
    again.

    The amazement, suspicion, resentment, and shame, with which Arthur
    looked on at all this, struck him dumb. Mr Flintwinch, who had spun
    backward some two or three yards under the impetus last given to him,
    brought himself up with a face completely unchanged in its stolidity
    except as it was affected by shortness of breath, and looked hard at
    Arthur. Not a whit less reticent and wooden was Mr Flintwinch outwardly,
    than in the usual course of things: the only perceptible difference in
    him being that the knot of cravat which was generally under his ear,
    had worked round to the back of his head: where it formed an ornamental
    appendage not unlike a bagwig, and gave him something of a courtly
    appearance.

    As Mrs Clennam never removed her eyes from Blandois (on whom they had
            some effect, as a steady look has on a lower sort of dog), so Jeremiah
    never removed his from Arthur. It was as if they had tacitly agreed to
    take their different provinces. Thus, in the ensuing silence, Jeremiah
    stood scraping his chin and looking at Arthur as though he were trying
    to screw his thoughts out of him with an instrument.

    After a little, the visitor, as if he felt the silence irksome, rose,
    and impatiently put himself with his back to the sacred fire which had
    burned through so many years. Thereupon Mrs Clennam said, moving one of
    her hands for the first time, and moving it very slightly with an action
    of dismissal:

    'Please to leave us to our business, Arthur.'

    'Mother, I do so with reluctance.'

    'Never mind with what,' she returned, 'or with what not. Please to leave
    us. Come back at any other time when you may consider it a duty to bury
    half an hour wearily here. Good night.'

    She held up her muffled fingers that he might touch them with his,
    according to their usual custom, and he stood over her wheeled chair to
    touch her face with his lips. He thought, then, that her cheek was
    more strained than usual, and that it was colder. As he followed the
    direction of her eyes, in rising again, towards Mr Flintwinch's good
    friend, Mr Blandois, Mr Blandois snapped his finger and thumb with one
    loud contemptuous snap.

    'I leave your--your business acquaintance in my mother's room, Mr
    Flintwinch,' said Clennam, 'with a great deal of surprise and a great
    deal of unwillingness.'

    The person referred to snapped his finger and thumb again.

    'Good night, mother.'

    'Good night.'

    'I had a friend once, my good comrade Flintwinch,' said Blandois,
    standing astride before the fire, and so evidently saying it to arrest
    Clennam's retreating steps, that he lingered near the door; 'I had a
    friend once, who had heard so much of the dark side of this city and
    its ways, that he wouldn't have confided himself alone by night with two
    people who had an interest in getting him under the ground--my faith!
    not even in a respectable house like this--unless he was bodily too
    strong for them. Bah! What a poltroon, my Flintwinch! Eh?'

    'A cur, sir.'

    'Agreed! A cur. But he wouldn't have done it, my Flintwinch, unless he
    had known them to have the will to silence him, without the power. He
    wouldn't have drunk from a glass of water under such circumstances--not
    even in a respectable house like this, my Flintwinch--unless he had seen
    one of them drink first, and swallow too!'

    Disdaining to speak, and indeed not very well able, for he was
    half-choking, Clennam only glanced at the visitor as he passed out.
    The visitor saluted him with another parting snap, and his nose came
    down over his moustache and his moustache went up under his nose, in an
    ominous and ugly smile.

    'For Heaven's sake, Affery,' whispered Clennam, as she opened the door
    for him in the dark hall, and he groped his way to the sight of the
    night-sky, 'what is going on here?'

    Her own appearance was sufficiently ghastly, standing in the dark
    with her apron thrown over her head, and speaking behind it in a low,
    deadened voice.

    'Don't ask me anything, Arthur. I've been in a dream for ever so long.
    Go away!'

    He went out, and she shut the door upon him. He looked up at the windows
    of his mother's room, and the dim light, deadened by the yellow blinds,
    seemed to say a response after Affery, and to mutter, 'Don't ask me
    anything. Go away!'




Dear Mr Clennam,

     As I said in my last that it was best for nobody to write to me, and
     as my sending you another little letter can therefore give you no other
     trouble than the trouble of reading it (perhaps you may not find leisure
             for even that, though I hope you will some day), I am now going to
     devote an hour to writing to you again. This time, I write from Rome.

     We left Venice before Mr and Mrs Gowan did, but they were not so long
     upon the road as we were, and did not travel by the same way, and so
     when we arrived we found them in a lodging here, in a place called the
     Via Gregoriana. I dare say you know it.

     Now I am going to tell you all I can about them, because I know that is
     what you most want to hear. Theirs is not a very comfortable lodging,
     but perhaps I thought it less so when I first saw it than you would have
     done, because you have been in many different countries and have
     seen many different customs. Of course it is a far, far better
     place--millions of times--than any I have ever been used to until
     lately; and I fancy I don't look at it with my own eyes, but with hers.
     For it would be easy to see that she has always been brought up in a
     tender and happy home, even if she had not told me so with great love
     for it.

     Well, it is a rather bare lodging up a rather dark common staircase, and
     it is nearly all a large dull room, where Mr Gowan paints. The windows
     are blocked up where any one could look out, and the walls have been
     all drawn over with chalk and charcoal by others who have lived there
     before--oh,--I should think, for years! There is a curtain more
     dust-coloured than red, which divides it, and the part behind the
     curtain makes the private sitting-room. When I first saw her there she
     was alone, and her work had fallen out of her hand, and she was looking
     up at the sky shining through the tops of the windows. Pray do not be
     uneasy when I tell you, but it was not quite so airy, nor so bright, nor
     so cheerful, nor so happy and youthful altogether as I should have liked
     it to be.

     On account of Mr Gowan's painting Papa's picture (which I am not quite
             convinced I should have known from the likeness if I had not seen him
             doing it), I have had more opportunities of being with her since then
     than I might have had without this fortunate chance. She is very much
     alone. Very much alone indeed.

     Shall I tell you about the second time I saw her? I went one day, when
     it happened that I could run round by myself, at four or five o'clock
     in the afternoon. She was then dining alone, and her solitary dinner had
     been brought in from somewhere, over a kind of brazier with a fire in
     it, and she had no company or prospect of company, that I could see,
     but the old man who had brought it. He was telling her a long story (of
             robbers outside the walls being taken up by a stone statue of a Saint),
     to entertain her--as he said to me when I came out, 'because he had a
     daughter of his own, though she was not so pretty.'

     I ought now to mention Mr Gowan, before I say what little more I have to
     say about her. He must admire her beauty, and he must be proud of her,
     for everybody praises it, and he must be fond of her, and I do not
     doubt that he is--but in his way. You know his way, and if it appears
     as careless and discontented in your eyes as it does in mine, I am not
     wrong in thinking that it might be better suited to her. If it does not
     seem so to you, I am quite sure I am wholly mistaken; for your unchanged
     poor child confides in your knowledge and goodness more than she could
     ever tell you if she was to try. But don't be frightened, I am not going
     to try.

     Owing (as I think, if you think so too) to Mr Gowan's unsettled
     and dissatisfied way, he applies himself to his profession very little.
     He does nothing steadily or patiently; but equally takes things up and
     throws them down, and does them, or leaves them undone, without caring
     about them. When I have heard him talking to Papa during the sittings
     for the picture, I have sat wondering whether it could be that he has no
     belief in anybody else, because he has no belief in himself. Is it so?
     I wonder what you will say when you come to this! I know how you will
     look, and I can almost hear the voice in which you would tell me on the
     Iron Bridge.

     Mr Gowan goes out a good deal among what is considered the best company
     here--though he does not look as if he enjoyed it or liked it when he is
     with it--and she sometimes accompanies him, but lately she has gone out
     very little. I think I have noticed that they have an inconsistent way
     of speaking about her, as if she had made some great self-interested
     success in marrying Mr Gowan, though, at the same time, the very same
     people, would not have dreamed of taking him for themselves or their
     daughters. Then he goes into the country besides, to think about making
     sketches; and in all places where there are visitors, he has a large
     acquaintance and is very well known. Besides all this, he has a friend
     who is much in his society both at home and away from home, though he
     treats this friend very coolly and is very uncertain in his behaviour
     to him. I am quite sure (because she has told me so), that she does not
     like this friend. He is so revolting to me, too, that his being away
     from here, at present, is quite a relief to my mind. How much more to
     hers!

     But what I particularly want you to know, and why I have resolved
     to tell you so much while I am afraid it may make you a little
     uncomfortable without occasion, is this. She is so true and so devoted,
     and knows so completely that all her love and duty are his for ever,
     that you may be certain she will love him, admire him, praise him, and
     conceal all his faults, until she dies. I believe she conceals them, and
     always will conceal them, even from herself. She has given him a heart
     that can never be taken back; and however much he may try it, he will
     never wear out its affection. You know the truth of this, as you know
     everything, far far better than I; but I cannot help telling you what a
     nature she shows, and that you can never think too well of her.

     I have not yet called her by her name in this letter, but we are such
     friends now that I do so when we are quietly together, and she speaks to
     me by my name--I mean, not my Christian name, but the name you gave me.
     When she began to call me Amy, I told her my short story, and that you
     had always called me Little Dorrit. I told her that the name was much
     dearer to me than any other, and so she calls me Little Dorrit too.

     Perhaps you have not heard from her father or mother yet, and may not
     know that she has a baby son. He was born only two days ago, and just a
     week after they came. It has made them very happy. However, I must tell
     you, as I am to tell you all, that I fancy they are under a constraint
     with Mr Gowan, and that they feel as if his mocking way with them was
     sometimes a slight given to their love for her. It was but yesterday,
     when I was there, that I saw Mr Meagles change colour, and get up and
     go out, as if he was afraid that he might say so, unless he prevented
     himself by that means. Yet I am sure they are both so considerate,
     good-humoured, and reasonable, that he might spare them. It is hard in
     him not to think of them a little more.

     I stopped at the last full stop to read all this over. It looked at
     first as if I was taking on myself to understand and explain so much,
     that I was half inclined not to send it. But when I thought it over a
     little, I felt more hopeful for your knowing at once that I had only
     been watchful for you, and had only noticed what I think I have noticed,
     because I was quickened by your interest in it. Indeed, you may be sure
     that is the truth.

     And now I have done with the subject in the present letter, and have
     little left to say.

     We are all quite well, and Fanny improves every day. You can hardly
     think how kind she is to me, and what pains she takes with me. She has
     a lover, who has followed her, first all the way from Switzerland, and
     then all the way from Venice, and who has just confided to me that he
     means to follow her everywhere. I was much confused by his speaking to
     me about it, but he would. I did not know what to say, but at last I
     told him that I thought he had better not. For Fanny (but I did not tell
             him this) is much too spirited and clever to suit him. Still, he said he
     would, all the same. I have no lover, of course.

     If you should ever get so far as this in this long letter, you will
     perhaps say, Surely Little Dorrit will not leave off without telling me
     something about her travels, and surely it is time she did. I think it
     is indeed, but I don't know what to tell you. Since we left Venice we
     have been in a great many wonderful places, Genoa and Florence among
     them, and have seen so many wonderful sights, that I am almost giddy
     when I think what a crowd they make. But you can tell me so much more
     about them than I can tell you, that why should I tire you with my
     accounts and descriptions?

     Dear Mr Clennam, as I had the courage to tell you what the familiar
     difficulties in my travelling mind were before, I will not be a coward
     now. One of my frequent thoughts is this:--Old as these cities are,
     their age itself is hardly so curious, to my reflections, as that they
     should have been in their places all through those days when I did not
     even know of the existence of more than two or three of them, and when
     I scarcely knew of anything outside our old walls. There is something
     melancholy in it, and I don't know why. When we went to see the famous
     leaning tower at Pisa, it was a bright sunny day, and it and the
     buildings near it looked so old, and the earth and the sky looked so
     young, and its shadow on the ground was so soft and retired! I could not
     at first think how beautiful it was, or how curious, but I thought, 'O
     how many times when the shadow of the wall was falling on our room, and
     when that weary tread of feet was going up and down the yard--O how many
     times this place was just as quiet and lovely as it is to-day!' It quite
     overpowered me. My heart was so full that tears burst out of my eyes,
     though I did what I could to restrain them. And I have the same feeling
     often--often.

     Do you know that since the change in our fortunes, though I appear to
     myself to have dreamed more than before, I have always dreamed of myself
     as very young indeed! I am not very old, you may say. No, but that is
     not what I mean. I have always dreamed of myself as a child learning
     to do needlework. I have often dreamed of myself as back there, seeing
     faces in the yard little known, and which I should have thought I had
     quite forgotten; but, as often as not, I have been abroad here--in
     Switzerland, or France, or Italy--somewhere where we have been--yet
     always as that little child. I have dreamed of going down to Mrs
     General, with the patches on my clothes in which I can first remember
     myself. I have over and over again dreamed of taking my place at dinner
     at Venice when we have had a large company, in the mourning for my poor
     mother which I wore when I was eight years old, and wore long after it
     was threadbare and would mend no more. It has been a great distress to
     me to think how irreconcilable the company would consider it with my
     father's wealth, and how I should displease and disgrace him and Fanny
     and Edward by so plainly disclosing what they wished to keep secret. But
     I have not grown out of the little child in thinking of it; and at the
     self-same moment I have dreamed that I have sat with the heart-ache at
     table, calculating the expenses of the dinner, and quite distracting
     myself with thinking how they were ever to be made good. I have never
     dreamed of the change in our fortunes itself; I have never dreamed of
     your coming back with me that memorable morning to break it; I have
     never even dreamed of you.

     Dear Mr Clennam, it is possible that I have thought of you--and
     others--so much by day, that I have no thoughts left to wander round
     you by night. For I must now confess to you that I suffer from
     home-sickness--that I long so ardently and earnestly for home, as
     sometimes, when no one sees me, to pine for it. I cannot bear to turn my
     face further away from it. My heart is a little lightened when we turn
     towards it, even for a few miles, and with the knowledge that we are
     soon to turn away again. So dearly do I love the scene of my poverty and
     your kindness. O so dearly, O so dearly!

     Heaven knows when your poor child will see England again. We are all
     fond of the life here (except me), and there are no plans for our
     return. My dear father talks of a visit to London late in this next
     spring, on some affairs connected with the property, but I have no hope
     that he will bring me with him.

     I have tried to get on a little better under Mrs General's instruction,
     and I hope I am not quite so dull as I used to be. I have begun to speak
     and understand, almost easily, the hard languages I told you about. I
     did not remember, at the moment when I wrote last, that you knew them
     both; but I remembered it afterwards, and it helped me on. God bless
     you, dear Mr Clennam. Do not forget

     Your ever grateful and affectionate

     LITTLE DORRIT.

     P.S.--Particularly remember that Minnie Gowan deserves the best
     remembrance in which you can hold her. You cannot think too generously
     or too highly of her. I forgot Mr Pancks last time. Please, if you
     should see him, give him your Little Dorrit's kind regard. He was very
     good to Little D.




The famous name of Merdle became, every day, more famous in the land.
Nobody knew that the Merdle of such high renown had ever done any good
to any one, alive or dead, or to any earthly thing; nobody knew that he
had any capacity or utterance of any sort in him, which had ever thrown,
    for any creature, the feeblest farthing-candle ray of light on any path
    of duty or diversion, pain or pleasure, toil or rest, fact or fancy,
    among the multiplicity of paths in the labyrinth trodden by the sons
    of Adam; nobody had the smallest reason for supposing the clay of which
    this object of worship was made, to be other than the commonest clay,
    with as clogged a wick smouldering inside of it as ever kept an image of
humanity from tumbling to pieces. All people knew (or thought they knew)
    that he had made himself immensely rich; and, for that reason alone,
    prostrated themselves before him, more degradedly and less excusably
    than the darkest savage creeps out of his hole in the ground to
    propitiate, in some log or reptile, the Deity of his benighted soul.

    Nay, the high priests of this worship had the man before them as
    a protest against their meanness. The multitude worshipped on
    trust--though always distinctly knowing why--but the officiators at the
    altar had the man habitually in their view. They sat at his feasts, and
    he sat at theirs. There was a spectre always attendant on him, saying to
    these high priests, 'Are such the signs you trust, and love to honour;
    this head, these eyes, this mode of speech, the tone and manner of this
    man? You are the levers of the Circumlocution Office, and the rulers of
    men. When half-a-dozen of you fall out by the ears, it seems that mother
    earth can give birth to no other rulers. Does your qualification lie in
    the superior knowledge of men which accepts, courts, and puffs this man?
    Or, if you are competent to judge aright the signs I never fail to
    show you when he appears among you, is your superior honesty your
    qualification?' Two rather ugly questions these, always going about
    town with Mr Merdle; and there was a tacit agreement that they must be
    stifled.

    In Mrs Merdle's absence abroad, Mr Merdle still kept the great house
    open for the passage through it of a stream Of visitors. A few of these
    took affable possession of the establishment. Three or four ladies of
    distinction and liveliness used to say to one another, 'Let us dine at
    our dear Merdle's next Thursday. Whom shall we have?' Our dear Merdle
    would then receive his instructions; and would sit heavily among the
    company at table and wander lumpishly about his drawing-rooms
    afterwards, only remarkable for appearing to have nothing to do with the
    entertainment beyond being in its way.

    The Chief Butler, the Avenging Spirit of this great man's life, relaxed
    nothing of his severity. He looked on at these dinners when the bosom
    was not there, as he looked on at other dinners when the bosom was
    there; and his eye was a basilisk to Mr Merdle. He was a hard man, and
    would never bate an ounce of plate or a bottle of wine. He would not
    allow a dinner to be given, unless it was up to his mark. He set forth
    the table for his own dignity. If the guests chose to partake of what
    was served, he saw no objection; but it was served for the maintenance
    of his rank. As he stood by the sideboard he seemed to announce, 'I have
    accepted office to look at this which is now before me, and to look at
    nothing less than this.' If he missed the presiding bosom, it was as a
    part of his own state of which he was, from unavoidable circumstances,
    temporarily deprived, just as he might have missed a centre-piece, or a
    choice wine-cooler, which had been sent to the Banker's.

    Mr Merdle issued invitations for a Barnacle dinner. Lord Decimus was to
    be there, Mr Tite Barnacle was to be there, the pleasant young Barnacle
    was to be there; and the Chorus of Parliamentary Barnacles who went
    about the provinces when the House was up, warbling the praises of their
    Chief, were to be represented there. It was understood to be a great
    occasion. Mr Merdle was going to take up the Barnacles. Some delicate
    little negotiations had occurred between him and the noble Decimus--the
    young Barnacle of engaging manners acting as negotiator--and Mr Merdle
    had decided to cast the weight of his great probity and great riches
    into the Barnacle scale. Jobbery was suspected by the malicious; perhaps
    because it was indisputable that if the adherence of the immortal Enemy
    of Mankind could have been secured by a job, the Barnacles would have
    jobbed him--for the good of the country, for the good of the country.

    Mrs Merdle had written to this magnificent spouse of hers, whom it was
    heresy to regard as anything less than all the British Merchants since
    the days of Whittington rolled into one, and gilded three feet deep all
    over--had written to this spouse of hers, several letters from Rome, in
    quick succession, urging upon him with importunity that now or never was
    the time to provide for Edmund Sparkler. Mrs Merdle had shown him that
    the case of Edmund was urgent, and that infinite advantages might result
    from his having some good thing directly. In the grammar of Mrs
    Merdle's verbs on this momentous subject, there was only one mood, the
    Imperative; and that Mood had only one Tense, the Present. Mrs Merdle's
    verbs were so pressingly presented to Mr Merdle to conjugate, that his
    sluggish blood and his long coat-cuffs became quite agitated.

    In which state of agitation, Mr Merdle, evasively rolling his eyes
    round the Chief Butler's shoes without raising them to the index of that
    stupendous creature's thoughts, had signified to him his intention of
    giving a special dinner: not a very large dinner, but a very special
    dinner. The Chief Butler had signified, in return, that he had no
    objection to look on at the most expensive thing in that way that could
    be done; and the day of the dinner was now come.

    Mr Merdle stood in one of his drawing-rooms, with his back to the fire,
    waiting for the arrival of his important guests. He seldom or never took
    the liberty of standing with his back to the fire unless he was quite
    alone. In the presence of the Chief Butler, he could not have done such
    a deed. He would have clasped himself by the wrists in that constabulary
    manner of his, and have paced up and down the hearthrug, or gone
    creeping about among the rich objects of furniture, if his oppressive
    retainer had appeared in the room at that very moment. The sly shadows
    which seemed to dart out of hiding when the fire rose, and to dart back
    into it when the fire fell, were sufficient witnesses of his making
    himself so easy. They were even more than sufficient, if his
    uncomfortable glances at them might be taken to mean anything.

    Mr Merdle's right hand was filled with the evening paper, and the
    evening paper was full of Mr Merdle. His wonderful enterprise, his
    wonderful wealth, his wonderful Bank, were the fattening food of the
    evening paper that night. The wonderful Bank, of which he was the chief
    projector, establisher, and manager, was the latest of the many Merdle
    wonders. So modest was Mr Merdle withal, in the midst of these splendid
    achievements, that he looked far more like a man in possession of his
    house under a distraint, than a commercial Colossus bestriding his own
    hearthrug, while the little ships were sailing into dinner.

    Behold the vessels coming into port! The engaging young Barnacle was the
    first arrival; but Bar overtook him on the staircase. Bar, strengthened
    as usual with his double eye-glass and his little jury droop, was
    overjoyed to see the engaging young Barnacle; and opined that we were
    going to sit in Banco, as we lawyers called it, to take a special
    argument?

    'Indeed,' said the sprightly young Barnacle, whose name was Ferdinand;
    'how so?'

    'Nay,' smiled Bar. 'If you don't know, how can I know? You are in the
    innermost sanctuary of the temple; I am one of the admiring concourse on
    the plain without.'

    Bar could be light in hand, or heavy in hand, according to the customer
    he had to deal with. With Ferdinand Barnacle he was gossamer. Bar was
    likewise always modest and self-depreciatory--in his way. Bar was a man
    of great variety; but one leading thread ran through the woof of all his
    patterns. Every man with whom he had to do was in his eyes a jury-man;
    and he must get that jury-man over, if he could.

    'Our illustrious host and friend,' said Bar; 'our shining mercantile
    star;--going into politics?'

    'Going? He has been in Parliament some time, you know,' returned the
    engaging young Barnacle.

    'True,' said Bar, with his light-comedy laugh for special jury-men,
    which was a very different thing from his low-comedy laugh for comic
    tradesmen on common juries: 'he has been in Parliament for some time.
    Yet hitherto our star has been a vacillating and wavering star? Humph?'

    An average witness would have been seduced by the Humph? into an
    affirmative answer, But Ferdinand Barnacle looked knowingly at Bar as he
    strolled up-stairs, and gave him no answer at all.

    'Just so, just so,' said Bar, nodding his head, for he was not to be put
    off in that way, 'and therefore I spoke of our sitting _in Banco_ to take
    a special argument--meaning this to be a high and solemn occasion, when,
    as Captain Macheath says, "the judges are met: a terrible show!" We
    lawyers are sufficiently liberal, you see, to quote the Captain, though
    the Captain is severe upon us. Nevertheless, I think I could put in
    evidence an admission of the Captain's,' said Bar, with a little jocose
    roll of his head; for, in his legal current of speech, he always assumed
    the air of rallying himself with the best grace in the world; 'an
    admission of the Captain's that Law, in the gross, is at least
    intended to be impartial. For what says the Captain, if I quote
    him correctly--and if not,' with a light-comedy touch of his double
    eye-glass on his companion's shoulder, 'my learned friend will set me
    right:


    "Since laws were made for every degree,
    To curb vice in others as well as in me,
    I wonder we ha'n't better company
    Upon Tyburn Tree!"'


    These words brought them to the drawing-room, where Mr Merdle stood
    before the fire. So immensely astounded was Mr Merdle by the entrance
    of Bar with such a reference in his mouth, that Bar explained himself
    to have been quoting Gay. 'Assuredly not one of our Westminster Hall
    authorities,' said he, 'but still no despicable one to a man possessing
    the largely-practical Mr Merdle's knowledge of the world.'

    Mr Merdle looked as if he thought he would say something, but
    subsequently looked as if he thought he wouldn't. The interval afforded
    time for Bishop to be announced.

    Bishop came in with meekness, and yet with a strong and rapid step as if
    he wanted to get his seven-league dress-shoes on, and go round the world
    to see that everybody was in a satisfactory state. Bishop had no idea
    that there was anything significant in the occasion. That was the most
    remarkable trait in his demeanour. He was crisp, fresh, cheerful,
    affable, bland; but so surprisingly innocent.

    Bar sidled up to prefer his politest inquiries in reference to the
    health of Mrs Bishop. Mrs Bishop had been a little unfortunate in the
    article of taking cold at a Confirmation, but otherwise was well. Young
    Mr Bishop was also well. He was down, with his young wife and little
    family, at his Cure of Souls.

    The representatives of the Barnacle Chorus dropped in next, and Mr
    Merdle's physician dropped in next. Bar, who had a bit of one eye and a
    bit of his double eye-glass for every one who came in at the door, no
    matter with whom he was conversing or what he was talking about, got
    among them all by some skilful means, without being seen to get at them,
    and touched each individual gentleman of the jury on his own individual
    favourite spot. With some of the Chorus, he laughed about the sleepy
    member who had gone out into the lobby the other night, and voted the
    wrong way: with others, he deplored that innovating spirit in the time
    which could not even be prevented from taking an unnatural interest in
    the public service and the public money: with the physician he had a
    word to say about the general health; he had also a little information
    to ask him for, concerning a professional man of unquestioned erudition
    and polished manners--but those credentials in their highest development
    he believed were the possession of other professors of the healing art
    (jury droop)--whom he had happened to have in the witness-box the day
    before yesterday, and from whom he had elicited in cross-examination
    that he claimed to be one of the exponents of this new mode of treatment
    which appeared to Bar to--eh?--well, Bar thought so; Bar had thought,
    and hoped, Physician would tell him so. Without presuming to decide
    where doctors disagreed, it did appear to Bar, viewing it as a question
    of common sense and not of so-called legal penetration, that this new
    system was--might be, in the presence of so great an authority--say,
    Humbug? Ah! Fortified by such encouragement, he could venture to say
    Humbug; and now Bar's mind was relieved.

    Mr Tite Barnacle, who, like Dr Johnson's celebrated acquaintance, had
    only one idea in his head and that was a wrong one, had appeared by this
    time. This eminent gentleman and Mr Merdle, seated diverse ways and with
    ruminating aspects on a yellow ottoman in the light of the fire,
    holding no verbal communication with each other, bore a strong general
    resemblance to the two cows in the Cuyp picture over against them.

    But now, Lord Decimus arrived. The Chief Butler, who up to this time
    had limited himself to a branch of his usual function by looking at the
    company as they entered (and that, with more of defiance than favour),
    put himself so far out of his way as to come up-stairs with him and
    announce him. Lord Decimus being an overpowering peer, a bashful young
    member of the Lower House who was the last fish but one caught by the
    Barnacles, and who had been invited on this occasion to commemorate his
    capture, shut his eyes when his Lordship came in.

    Lord Decimus, nevertheless, was glad to see the Member. He was also
    glad to see Mr Merdle, glad to see Bishop, glad to see Bar, glad to see
    Physician, glad to see Tite Barnacle, glad to see Chorus, glad to
    see Ferdinand his private secretary. Lord Decimus, though one of the
    greatest of the earth, was not remarkable for ingratiatory manners, and
    Ferdinand had coached him up to the point of noticing all the fellows
    he might find there, and saying he was glad to see them. When he had
    achieved this rush of vivacity and condescension, his Lordship composed
    himself into the picture after Cuyp, and made a third cow in the group.

    Bar, who felt that he had got all the rest of the jury and must now lay
    hold of the Foreman, soon came sidling up, double eye-glass in hand. Bar
    tendered the weather, as a subject neatly aloof from official reserve,
    for the Foreman's consideration. Bar said that he was told (as everybody
            always is told, though who tells them, and why, will ever remain a
            mystery), that there was to be no wall-fruit this year. Lord Decimus
    had not heard anything amiss of his peaches, but rather believed, if his
    people were correct, he was to have no apples. No apples? Bar was lost
    in astonishment and concern. It would have been all one to him, in
    reality, if there had not been a pippin on the surface of the earth, but
    his show of interest in this apple question was positively painful.
    Now, to what, Lord Decimus--for we troublesome lawyers loved to gather
    information, and could never tell how useful it might prove to us--to
    what, Lord Decimus, was this to be attributed? Lord Decimus could not
    undertake to propound any theory about it. This might have stopped
    another man; but Bar, sticking to him fresh as ever, said, 'As to pears,
    now?'

    Long after Bar got made Attorney-General, this was told of him as
    a master-stroke. Lord Decimus had a reminiscence about a pear-tree
    formerly growing in a garden near the back of his dame's house at Eton,
    upon which pear-tree the only joke of his life perennially bloomed. It
    was a joke of a compact and portable nature, turning on the difference
    between Eton pears and Parliamentary pairs; but it was a joke, a refined
    relish of which would seem to have appeared to Lord Decimus impossible
    to be had without a thorough and intimate acquaintance with the tree.
    Therefore, the story at first had no idea of such a tree, sir, then
    gradually found it in winter, carried it through the changing season,
    saw it bud, saw it blossom, saw it bear fruit, saw the fruit ripen; in
    short, cultivated the tree in that diligent and minute manner before it
    got out of the bed-room window to steal the fruit, that many thanks had
    been offered up by belated listeners for the trees having been planted
    and grafted prior to Lord Decimus's time. Bar's interest in apples was
    so overtopped by the wrapt suspense in which he pursued the changes
    of these pears, from the moment when Lord Decimus solemnly opened with
    'Your mentioning pears recalls to my remembrance a pear-tree,' down to
    the rich conclusion, 'And so we pass, through the various changes
    of life, from Eton pears to Parliamentary pairs,' that he had to go
    down-stairs with Lord Decimus, and even then to be seated next to him
    at table in order that he might hear the anecdote out. By that time, Bar
    felt that he had secured the Foreman, and might go to dinner with a good
    appetite.

    It was a dinner to provoke an appetite, though he had not had one. The
    rarest dishes, sumptuously cooked and sumptuously served; the choicest
    fruits; the most exquisite wines; marvels of workmanship in gold and
    silver, china and glass; innumerable things delicious to the senses of
    taste, smell, and sight, were insinuated into its composition. O, what
    a wonderful man this Merdle, what a great man, what a master man, how
    blessedly and enviably endowed--in one word, what a rich man!

    He took his usual poor eighteenpennyworth of food in his usual
    indigestive way, and had as little to say for himself as ever a
    wonderful man had. Fortunately Lord Decimus was one of those sublimities
    who have no occasion to be talked to, for they can be at any time
    sufficiently occupied with the contemplation of their own greatness.
    This enabled the bashful young Member to keep his eyes open long enough
    at a time to see his dinner. But, whenever Lord Decimus spoke, he shut
    them again.

    The agreeable young Barnacle, and Bar, were the talkers of the party.
    Bishop would have been exceedingly agreeable also, but that his
    innocence stood in his way. He was so soon left behind. When there was
    any little hint of anything being in the wind, he got lost directly.
    Worldly affairs were too much for him; he couldn't make them out at all.

    This was observable when Bar said, incidentally, that he was happy to
    have heard that we were soon to have the advantage of enlisting on
    the good side, the sound and plain sagacity--not demonstrative or
    ostentatious, but thoroughly sound and practical--of our friend Mr
    Sparkler.

    Ferdinand Barnacle laughed, and said oh yes, he believed so. A vote was
    a vote, and always acceptable.

    Bar was sorry to miss our good friend Mr Sparkler to-day, Mr Merdle.

    'He is away with Mrs Merdle,' returned that gentleman, slowly coming
    out of a long abstraction, in the course of which he had been fitting a
    tablespoon up his sleeve. 'It is not indispensable for him to be on the
    spot.'

    'The magic name of Merdle,' said Bar, with the jury droop, 'no doubt
    will suffice for all.'

    'Why--yes--I believe so,' assented Mr Merdle, putting the spoon aside,
    and clumsily hiding each of his hands in the coat-cuff of the other
    hand. 'I believe the people in my interest down there will not make any
    difficulty.'

    'Model people!' said Bar.

    'I am glad you approve of them,' said Mr Merdle.

    'And the people of those other two places, now,' pursued Bar, with a
    bright twinkle in his keen eye, as it slightly turned in the direction
    of his magnificent neighbour; 'we lawyers are always curious, always
    inquisitive, always picking up odds and ends for our patchwork minds,
    since there is no knowing when and where they may fit into some
    corner;--the people of those other two places now? Do they yield so
    laudably to the vast and cumulative influence of such enterprise and
    such renown; do those little rills become absorbed so quietly
    and easily, and, as it were by the influence of natural laws, so
    beautifully, in the swoop of the majestic stream as it flows upon its
    wondrous way enriching the surrounding lands; that their course is
    perfectly to be calculated, and distinctly to be predicated?'

    Mr Merdle, a little troubled by Bar's eloquence, looked fitfully about
    the nearest salt-cellar for some moments, and then said hesitating:

    'They are perfectly aware, sir, of their duty to Society. They will
    return anybody I send to them for that purpose.'

    'Cheering to know,' said Bar. 'Cheering to know.'

    The three places in question were three little rotten holes in this
    Island, containing three little ignorant, drunken, guzzling, dirty,
    out-of-the-way constituencies, that had reeled into Mr Merdle's pocket.
    Ferdinand Barnacle laughed in his easy way, and airily said they were
    a nice set of fellows. Bishop, mentally perambulating among paths of
    peace, was altogether swallowed up in absence of mind.

    'Pray,' asked Lord Decimus, casting his eyes around the table, 'what
    is this story I have heard of a gentleman long confined in a debtors'
    prison proving to be of a wealthy family, and having come into the
    inheritance of a large sum of money? I have met with a variety of
    allusions to it. Do you know anything of it, Ferdinand?'

    'I only know this much,' said Ferdinand, 'that he has given the
    Department with which I have the honour to be associated;' this
    sparkling young Barnacle threw off the phrase sportively, as who should
    say, We know all about these forms of speech, but we must keep it up,
    we must keep the game alive; 'no end of trouble, and has put us into
    innumerable fixes.'

    'Fixes?' repeated Lord Decimus, with a majestic pausing and pondering
    on the word that made the bashful Member shut his eyes quite tight.
    'Fixes?'

    'A very perplexing business indeed,' observed Mr Tite Barnacle, with an
    air of grave resentment.

    'What,' said Lord Decimus, 'was the character of his business; what was
    the nature of these--a--Fixes, Ferdinand?'

    'Oh, it's a good story, as a story,' returned that gentleman; 'as good
    a thing of its kind as need be. This Mr Dorrit (his name is Dorrit) had
    incurred a responsibility to us, ages before the fairy came out of
    the Bank and gave him his fortune, under a bond he had signed for the
    performance of a contract which was not at all performed. He was a
    partner in a house in some large way--spirits, or buttons, or wine, or
    blacking, or oatmeal, or woollen, or pork, or hooks and eyes, or iron,
    or treacle, or shoes, or something or other that was wanted for troops,
    or seamen, or somebody--and the house burst, and we being among
    the creditors, detainees were lodged on the part of the Crown in a
    scientific manner, and all the rest of it. When the fairy had appeared
    and he wanted to pay us off, Egad we had got into such an exemplary
    state of checking and counter-checking, signing and counter-signing,
    that it was six months before we knew how to take the money, or how to
    give a receipt for it. It was a triumph of public business,' said this
    handsome young Barnacle, laughing heartily, 'You never saw such a lot of
    forms in your life. "Why," the attorney said to me one day, "if I wanted
    this office to give me two or three thousand pounds instead of take it,
    I couldn't have more trouble about it." "You are right, old fellow,"
    I told him, "and in future you'll know that we have something to do
    here."' The pleasant young Barnacle finished by once more laughing
    heartily. He was a very easy, pleasant fellow indeed, and his manners
    were exceedingly winning.

    Mr Tite Barnacle's view of the business was of a less airy character. He
    took it ill that Mr Dorrit had troubled the Department by wanting to
    pay the money, and considered it a grossly informal thing to do after so
    many years. But Mr Tite Barnacle was a buttoned-up man, and consequently
    a weighty one. All buttoned-up men are weighty. All buttoned-up men are
    believed in. Whether or no the reserved and never-exercised power of
    unbuttoning, fascinates mankind; whether or no wisdom is supposed to
    condense and augment when buttoned up, and to evaporate when unbuttoned;
    it is certain that the man to whom importance is accorded is the
    buttoned-up man. Mr Tite Barnacle never would have passed for half his
    current value, unless his coat had been always buttoned-up to his white
    cravat.

    'May I ask,' said Lord Decimus, 'if Mr Darrit--or Dorrit--has any
    family?'

    Nobody else replying, the host said, 'He has two daughters, my lord.'

    'Oh! you are acquainted with him?' asked Lord Decimus.

    'Mrs Merdle is. Mr Sparkler is, too. In fact,' said Mr Merdle, 'I rather
    believe that one of the young ladies has made an impression on Edmund
    Sparkler. He is susceptible, and--I--think--the conquest--' Here Mr
    Merdle stopped, and looked at the table-cloth, as he usually did when he
    found himself observed or listened to.

    Bar was uncommonly pleased to find that the Merdle family, and this
    family, had already been brought into contact. He submitted, in a low
    voice across the table to Bishop, that it was a kind of analogical
    illustration of those physical laws, in virtue of which Like flies to
    Like. He regarded this power of attraction in wealth to draw wealth
    to it, as something remarkably interesting and curious--something
    indefinably allied to the loadstone and gravitation. Bishop, who
    had ambled back to earth again when the present theme was broached,
    acquiesced. He said it was indeed highly important to Society that one
    in the trying situation of unexpectedly finding himself invested with a
    power for good or for evil in Society, should become, as it were, merged
    in the superior power of a more legitimate and more gigantic growth, the
influence of which (as in the case of our friend at whose board we sat)
    was habitually exercised in harmony with the best interests of Society.
    Thus, instead of two rival and contending flames, a larger and a lesser,
    each burning with a lurid and uncertain glare, we had a blended and a
    softened light whose genial ray diffused an equable warmth throughout
    the land. Bishop seemed to like his own way of putting the case very
    much, and rather dwelt upon it; Bar, meanwhile (not to throw away a
            jury-man), making a show of sitting at his feet and feeding on his
    precepts.

    The dinner and dessert being three hours long, the bashful Member cooled
    in the shadow of Lord Decimus faster than he warmed with food and drink,
    and had but a chilly time of it. Lord Decimus, like a tall tower in a
    flat country, seemed to project himself across the table-cloth, hide the
    light from the honourable Member, cool the honourable Member's marrow,
    and give him a woeful idea of distance. When he asked this unfortunate
    traveller to take wine, he encompassed his faltering steps with the
    gloomiest of shades; and when he said, 'Your health sir!' all around him
    was barrenness and desolation.

    At length Lord Decimus, with a coffee-cup in his hand, began to hover
    about among the pictures, and to cause an interesting speculation to
    arise in all minds as to the probabilities of his ceasing to hover, and
    enabling the smaller birds to flutter up-stairs; which could not be
    done until he had urged his noble pinions in that direction. After some
    delay, and several stretches of his wings which came to nothing, he
    soared to the drawing-rooms.

    And here a difficulty arose, which always does arise when two people
    are specially brought together at a dinner to confer with one another.
    Everybody (except Bishop, who had no suspicion of it) knew perfectly
    well that this dinner had been eaten and drunk, specifically to the end
    that Lord Decimus and Mr Merdle should have five minutes' conversation
    together. The opportunity so elaborately prepared was now arrived, and
    it seemed from that moment that no mere human ingenuity could so much as
    get the two chieftains into the same room. Mr Merdle and his noble guest
    persisted in prowling about at opposite ends of the perspective. It was
    in vain for the engaging Ferdinand to bring Lord Decimus to look at the
    bronze horses near Mr Merdle. Then Mr Merdle evaded, and wandered away.
    It was in vain for him to bring Mr Merdle to Lord Decimus to tell him
    the history of the unique Dresden vases. Then Lord Decimus evaded and
    wandered away, while he was getting his man up to the mark.

    'Did you ever see such a thing as this?' said Ferdinand to Bar when he
    had been baffled twenty times.

    'Often,' returned Bar.

    'Unless I butt one of them into an appointed corner, and you butt the
    other,' said Ferdinand,'it will not come off after all.'

    'Very good,' said Bar. 'I'll butt Merdle, if you like; but not my lord.'

    Ferdinand laughed, in the midst of his vexation. 'Confound them both!'
    said he, looking at his watch. 'I want to get away. Why the deuce can't
    they come together! They both know what they want and mean to do. Look
    at them!'

    They were still looming at opposite ends of the perspective, each with
    an absurd pretence of not having the other on his mind, which could not
    have been more transparently ridiculous though his real mind had been
    chalked on his back. Bishop, who had just now made a third with Bar and
    Ferdinand, but whose innocence had again cut him out of the subject and
    washed him in sweet oil, was seen to approach Lord Decimus and glide
    into conversation.

    'I must get Merdle's doctor to catch and secure him, I suppose,' said
    Ferdinand; 'and then I must lay hold of my illustrious kinsman, and
    decoy him if I can--drag him if I can't--to the conference.'

    'Since you do me the honour,' said Bar, with his slyest smile, to ask
    for my poor aid, it shall be yours with the greatest pleasure. I don't
    think this is to be done by one man. But if you will undertake to pen
    my lord into that furthest drawing-room where he is now so profoundly
    engaged, I will undertake to bring our dear Merdle into the presence,
    without the possibility of getting away.'

    'Done!' said Ferdinand. 'Done!' said Bar.

    Bar was a sight wondrous to behold, and full of matter, when, jauntily
    waving his double eye-glass by its ribbon, and jauntily drooping to an
    Universe of Jurymen, he, in the most accidental manner ever seen,
    found himself at Mr Merdle's shoulder, and embraced that opportunity of
    mentioning a little point to him, on which he particularly wished to
    be guided by the light of his practical knowledge. (Here he took Mr
            Merdle's arm and walked him gently away.) A banker, whom we would call
    A. B., advanced a considerable sum of money, which we would call fifteen
    thousand pounds, to a client or customer of his, whom he would call P.
    Q. (Here, as they were getting towards Lord Decimus, he held Mr Merdle
            tight.) As a security for the repayment of this advance to P. Q. whom
    we would call a widow lady, there were placed in A. B.'s hands the
    title-deeds of a freehold estate, which we would call Blinkiter Doddles.
    Now, the point was this. A limited right of felling and lopping in
    the woods of Blinkiter Doddles, lay in the son of P. Q. then past his
    majority, and whom we would call X. Y.--but really this was too bad! In
    the presence of Lord Decimus, to detain the host with chopping our dry
    chaff of law, was really too bad! Another time! Bar was truly repentant,
    and would not say another syllable. Would Bishop favour him with
    half-a-dozen words? (He had now set Mr Merdle down on a couch, side by
            side with Lord Decimus, and to it they must go, now or never.)

    And now the rest of the company, highly excited and interested, always
    excepting Bishop, who had not the slightest idea that anything was going
    on, formed in one group round the fire in the next drawing-room, and
    pretended to be chatting easily on the infinite variety of small topics,
    while everybody's thoughts and eyes were secretly straying towards the
    secluded pair. The Chorus were excessively nervous, perhaps as labouring
    under the dreadful apprehension that some good thing was going to
    be diverted from them! Bishop alone talked steadily and evenly. He
    conversed with the great Physician on that relaxation of the throat with
    which young curates were too frequently afflicted, and on the means
    of lessening the great prevalence of that disorder in the church.
    Physician, as a general rule, was of opinion that the best way to avoid
    it was to know how to read, before you made a profession of reading.
    Bishop said dubiously, did he really think so? And Physician said,
    decidedly, yes he did.

    Ferdinand, meanwhile, was the only one of the party who skirmished on
    the outside of the circle; he kept about mid-way between it and the
    two, as if some sort of surgical operation were being performed by Lord
    Decimus on Mr Merdle, or by Mr Merdle on Lord Decimus, and his services
    might at any moment be required as Dresser. In fact, within a quarter
    of an hour Lord Decimus called to him 'Ferdinand!' and he went, and
    took his place in the conference for some five minutes more. Then a
    half-suppressed gasp broke out among the Chorus; for Lord Decimus rose
    to take his leave. Again coached up by Ferdinand to the point of making
    himself popular, he shook hands in the most brilliant manner with the
    whole company, and even said to Bar, 'I hope you were not bored by my
    pears?' To which Bar retorted, 'Eton, my lord, or Parliamentary?' neatly
    showing that he had mastered the joke, and delicately insinuating that
    he could never forget it while his life remained.

    All the grave importance that was buttoned up in Mr Tite Barnacle, took
    itself away next; and Ferdinand took himself away next, to the opera.
    Some of the rest lingered a little, marrying golden liqueur glasses to
    Buhl tables with sticky rings; on the desperate chance of Mr Merdle's
    saying something. But Merdle, as usual, oozed sluggishly and muddily
    about his drawing-room, saying never a word.

    In a day or two it was announced to all the town, that Edmund Sparkler,
    Esquire, son-in-law of the eminent Mr Merdle of worldwide renown, was
    made one of the Lords of the Circumlocution Office; and proclamation was
    issued, to all true believers, that this admirable appointment was to
    be hailed as a graceful and gracious mark of homage, rendered by the
    graceful and gracious Decimus, to that commercial interest which must
    ever in a great commercial country--and all the rest of it, with
    blast of trumpet. So, bolstered by this mark of Government homage, the
    wonderful Bank and all the other wonderful undertakings went on and went
    up; and gapers came to Harley Street, Cavendish Square, only to look at
    the house where the golden wonder lived.

    And when they saw the Chief Butler looking out at the hall-door in
    his moments of condescension, the gapers said how rich he looked, and
    wondered how much money he had in the wonderful Bank. But, if they had
    known that respectable Nemesis better, they would not have wondered
    about it, and might have stated the amount with the utmost precision.




That it is at least as difficult to stay a moral infection as a physical
one; that such a disease will spread with the malignity and rapidity of
the Plague; that the contagion, when it has once made head, will spare
no pursuit or condition, but will lay hold on people in the soundest
health, and become developed in the most unlikely constitutions: is
a fact as firmly established by experience as that we human creatures
breathe an atmosphere. A blessing beyond appreciation would be conferred
upon mankind, if the tainted, in whose weakness or wickedness these
virulent disorders are bred, could be instantly seized and placed in
close confinement (not to say summarily smothered) before the poison is
communicable.

As a vast fire will fill the air to a great distance with its roar, so
the sacred flame which the mighty Barnacles had fanned caused the air to
resound more and more with the name of Merdle. It was deposited on every
lip, and carried into every ear. There never was, there never had
been, there never again should be, such a man as Mr Merdle. Nobody,
    as aforesaid, knew what he had done; but everybody knew him to be the
    greatest that had appeared.

    Down in Bleeding Heart Yard, where there was not one unappropriated
    halfpenny, as lively an interest was taken in this paragon of men as on
    the Stock Exchange. Mrs Plornish, now established in the small grocery
    and general trade in a snug little shop at the crack end of the Yard,
    at the top of the steps, with her little old father and Maggy acting
    as assistants, habitually held forth about him over the counter in
    conversation with her customers. Mr Plornish, who had a small share in a
    small builder's business in the neighbourhood, said, trowel in hand, on
    the tops of scaffolds and on the tiles of houses, that people did tell
    him as Mr Merdle was _the_ one, mind you, to put us all to rights in
    respects of that which all on us looked to, and to bring us all safe
    home as much as we needed, mind you, fur toe be brought. Mr Baptist,
    sole lodger of Mr and Mrs Plornish was reputed in whispers to lay by
    the savings which were the result of his simple and moderate life,
    for investment in one of Mr Merdle's certain enterprises. The female
    Bleeding Hearts, when they came for ounces of tea, and hundredweights of
    talk, gave Mrs Plornish to understand, That how, ma'am, they had heard
    from their cousin Mary Anne, which worked in the line, that his lady's
    dresses would fill three waggons. That how she was as handsome a lady,
    ma'am, as lived, no matter wheres, and a busk like marble itself. That
    how, according to what they was told, ma'am, it was her son by a former
    husband as was took into the Government; and a General he had been, and
    armies he had marched again and victory crowned, if all you heard was to
    be believed. That how it was reported that Mr Merdle's words had been,
    that if they could have made it worth his while to take the whole
    Government he would have took it without a profit, but that take it he
    could not and stand a loss. That how it was not to be expected, ma'am,
    that he should lose by it, his ways being, as you might say and utter
    no falsehood, paved with gold; but that how it was much to be regretted
    that something handsome hadn't been got up to make it worth his while;
    for it was such and only such that knowed the heighth to which the bread
    and butchers' meat had rose, and it was such and only such that both
    could and would bring that heighth down.

    So rife and potent was the fever in Bleeding Heart Yard, that Mr
    Pancks's rent-days caused no interval in the patients. The disease took
    the singular form, on those occasions, of causing the infected to find
    an unfathomable excuse and consolation in allusions to the magic name.

    'Now, then!' Mr Pancks would say, to a defaulting lodger. 'Pay up!
    Come on!'

    'I haven't got it, Mr Pancks,' Defaulter would reply. 'I tell you the
    truth, sir, when I say I haven't got so much as a single sixpence of it
    to bless myself with.'

    'This won't do, you know,' Mr Pancks would retort. 'You don't expect it
    _will_ do; do you?'

    Defaulter would admit, with a low-spirited 'No, sir,' having no such
    expectation.

    'My proprietor isn't going to stand this, you know,' Mr Pancks would
    proceed. 'He don't send me here for this. Pay up! Come!'

    The Defaulter would make answer, 'Ah, Mr Pancks. If I was the rich
    gentleman whose name is in everybody's mouth--if my name was Merdle,
    sir--I'd soon pay up, and be glad to do it.'

    Dialogues on the rent-question usually took place at the house-doors
    or in the entries, and in the presence of several deeply interested
    Bleeding Hearts. They always received a reference of this kind with a
    low murmur of response, as if it were convincing; and the Defaulter,
    however black and discomfited before, always cheered up a little in
    making it.

    'If I was Mr Merdle, sir, you wouldn't have cause to complain of me
    then. No, believe me!' the Defaulter would proceed with a shake of the
    head. 'I'd pay up so quick then, Mr Pancks, that you shouldn't have to
    ask me.'

    The response would be heard again here, implying that it was impossible
    to say anything fairer, and that this was the next thing to paying the
    money down.

    Mr Pancks would be now reduced to saying as he booked the case, 'Well!
    You'll have the broker in, and be turned out; that's what'll happen to
    you. It's no use talking to me about Mr Merdle. You are not Mr Merdle,
    any more than I am.'

    'No, sir,' the Defaulter would reply. 'I only wish you _were_ him, sir.'

    The response would take this up quickly; replying with great feeling,
    'Only wish you _were_ him, sir.'

    'You'd be easier with us if you were Mr Merdle, sir,' the Defaulter
    would go on with rising spirits, 'and it would be better for all
    parties. Better for our sakes, and better for yours, too. You wouldn't
    have to worry no one, then, sir. You wouldn't have to worry us, and you
    wouldn't have to worry yourself. You'd be easier in your own mind, sir,
    and you'd leave others easier, too, you would, if you were Mr Merdle.'

    Mr Pancks, in whom these impersonal compliments produced an irresistible
    sheepishness, never rallied after such a charge. He could only bite
    his nails and puff away to the next Defaulter. The responsive Bleeding
    Hearts would then gather round the Defaulter whom he had just abandoned,
    and the most extravagant rumours would circulate among them, to their
    great comfort, touching the amount of Mr Merdle's ready money.

    From one of the many such defeats of one of many rent-days, Mr Pancks,
    having finished his day's collection, repaired with his note-book
    under his arm to Mrs Plornish's corner. Mr Pancks's object was not
    professional, but social. He had had a trying day, and wanted a little
    brightening. By this time he was on friendly terms with the Plornish
    family, having often looked in upon them at similar seasons, and borne
    his part in recollections of Miss Dorrit.

    Mrs Plornish's shop-parlour had been decorated under her own eye, and
    presented, on the side towards the shop, a little fiction in which Mrs
    Plornish unspeakably rejoiced. This poetical heightening of the parlour
    consisted in the wall being painted to represent the exterior of a
    thatched cottage; the artist having introduced (in as effective a manner
            as he found compatible with their highly disproportionate dimensions)
    the real door and window. The modest sunflower and hollyhock were
    depicted as flourishing with great luxuriance on this rustic dwelling,
    while a quantity of dense smoke issuing from the chimney indicated good
    cheer within, and also, perhaps, that it had not been lately swept.
    A faithful dog was represented as flying at the legs of the friendly
    visitor, from the threshold; and a circular pigeon-house, enveloped in a
    cloud of pigeons, arose from behind the garden-paling. On the door (when
            it was shut), appeared the semblance of a brass-plate, presenting
    the inscription, Happy Cottage, T. and M. Plornish; the partnership
    expressing man and wife. No Poetry and no Art ever charmed the
    imagination more than the union of the two in this counterfeit cottage
    charmed Mrs Plornish. It was nothing to her that Plornish had a habit
    of leaning against it as he smoked his pipe after work, when his
    hat blotted out the pigeon-house and all the pigeons, when his back
    swallowed up the dwelling, when his hands in his pockets uprooted the
    blooming garden and laid waste the adjacent country. To Mrs Plornish, it
    was still a most beautiful cottage, a most wonderful deception; and
    it made no difference that Mr Plornish's eye was some inches above the
    level of the gable bed-room in the thatch. To come out into the shop
    after it was shut, and hear her father sing a song inside this cottage,
    was a perfect Pastoral to Mrs Plornish, the Golden Age revived. And
    truly if that famous period had been revived, or had ever been at all,
    it may be doubted whether it would have produced many more heartily
    admiring daughters than the poor woman.

    Warned of a visitor by the tinkling bell at the shop-door, Mrs Plornish
    came out of Happy Cottage to see who it might be. 'I guessed it was
    you, Mr Pancks,' said she, 'for it's quite your regular night; ain't it?
    Here's father, you see, come out to serve at the sound of the bell, like
    a brisk young shopman. Ain't he looking well? Father's more pleased to
    see you than if you was a customer, for he dearly loves a gossip; and
    when it turns upon Miss Dorrit, he loves it all the more. You never
    heard father in such voice as he is at present,' said Mrs Plornish, her
    own voice quavering, she was so proud and pleased. 'He gave us Strephon
    last night to that degree that Plornish gets up and makes him this
    speech across the table. "John Edward Nandy," says Plornish to father,
    "I never heard you come the warbles as I have heard you come the warbles
    this night." An't it gratifying, Mr Pancks, though; really?'

    Mr Pancks, who had snorted at the old man in his friendliest manner,
    replied in the affirmative, and casually asked whether that lively Altro
    chap had come in yet? Mrs Plornish answered no, not yet, though he had
    gone to the West-End with some work, and had said he should be back
    by tea-time. Mr Pancks was then hospitably pressed into Happy Cottage,
    where he encountered the elder Master Plornish just come home from
    school. Examining that young student, lightly, on the educational
    proceedings of the day, he found that the more advanced pupils who
    were in the large text and the letter M, had been set the copy 'Merdle,
    Millions.'

    'And how are _you_ getting on, Mrs Plornish,' said Pancks, 'since we're
    mentioning millions?'

    'Very steady, indeed, sir,' returned Mrs Plornish. 'Father, dear, would
    you go into the shop and tidy the window a little bit before tea, your
    taste being so beautiful?'

    John Edward Nandy trotted away, much gratified, to comply with his
    daughter's request. Mrs Plornish, who was always in mortal terror
    of mentioning pecuniary affairs before the old gentleman, lest any
    disclosure she made might rouse his spirit and induce him to run away to
    the workhouse, was thus left free to be confidential with Mr Pancks.

    'It's quite true that the business is very steady indeed,' said Mrs
    Plornish, lowering her voice; 'and has a excellent connection. The only
    thing that stands in its way, sir, is the Credit.'

    This drawback, rather severely felt by most people who engaged in
    commercial transactions with the inhabitants of Bleeding Heart Yard,
    was a large stumbling-block in Mrs Plornish's trade. When Mr Dorrit had
    established her in the business, the Bleeding Hearts had shown an amount
    of emotion and a determination to support her in it, that did honour to
    human nature. Recognising her claim upon their generous feelings as one
    who had long been a member of their community, they pledged themselves,
    with great feeling, to deal with Mrs Plornish, come what would and
    bestow their patronage on no other establishment. Influenced by these
    noble sentiments, they had even gone out of their way to purchase little
    luxuries in the grocery and butter line to which they were unaccustomed;
    saying to one another, that if they did stretch a point, was it not for
    a neighbour and a friend, and for whom ought a point to be stretched if
    not for such? So stimulated, the business was extremely brisk, and the
    articles in stock went off with the greatest celerity. In short, if the

    Bleeding Hearts had but paid, the undertaking would have been a complete
    success; whereas, by reason of their exclusively confining themselves to
    owing, the profits actually realised had not yet begun to appear in the
    books.

    Mr Pancks was making a very porcupine of himself by sticking his hair
    up in the contemplation of this state of accounts, when old Mr Nandy,
    re-entering the cottage with an air of mystery, entreated them to come
    and look at the strange behaviour of Mr Baptist, who seemed to have met
    with something that had scared him. All three going into the shop, and
    watching through the window, then saw Mr Baptist, pale and agitated, go
    through the following extraordinary performances. First, he was observed
    hiding at the top of the steps leading down into the Yard, and peeping
    up and down the street with his head cautiously thrust out close to the
    side of the shop-door. After very anxious scrutiny, he came out of
    his retreat, and went briskly down the street as if he were going away
    altogether; then, suddenly turned about, and went, at the same pace, and
    with the same feint, up the street. He had gone no further up the street
    than he had gone down, when he crossed the road and disappeared. The
    object of this last manoeuvre was only apparent, when his entering the
    shop with a sudden twist, from the steps again, explained that he
    had made a wide and obscure circuit round to the other, or Doyce and
    Clennam, end of the Yard, and had come through the Yard and bolted in.
    He was out of breath by that time, as he might well be, and his heart
    seemed to jerk faster than the little shop-bell, as it quivered and
    jingled behind him with his hasty shutting of the door.

    'Hallo, old chap!' said Mr Pancks. 'Altro, old boy! What's the matter?'

    Mr Baptist, or Signor Cavalletto, understood English now almost as well
    as Mr Pancks himself, and could speak it very well too. Nevertheless,
    Mrs Plornish, with a pardonable vanity in that accomplishment of hers
    which made her all but Italian, stepped in as interpreter.

    'E ask know,' said Mrs Plornish, 'what go wrong?'

    'Come into the happy little cottage, Padrona,' returned Mr Baptist,
    imparting great stealthiness to his flurried back-handed shake of his
    right forefinger. 'Come there!'

    Mrs Plornish was proud of the title Padrona, which she regarded as
    signifying: not so much Mistress of the house, as Mistress of the
    Italian tongue. She immediately complied with Mr Baptist's request, and
    they all went into the cottage.

    'E ope you no fright,' said Mrs Plornish then, interpreting Mr Pancks
    in a new way with her usual fertility of resource. 'What appen? Peaka
    Padrona!'

    'I have seen some one,' returned Baptist. 'I have rincontrato him.'

    'Im? Oo him?' asked Mrs Plornish.

    'A bad man. A baddest man. I have hoped that I should never see him
    again.'

    'Ow you know him bad?' asked Mrs Plornish.

    'It does not matter, Padrona. I know it too well.'

    'E see you?' asked Mrs Plornish.

    'No. I hope not. I believe not.'

    'He says,' Mrs Plornish then interpreted, addressing her father and
    Pancks with mild condescension, 'that he has met a bad man, but he hopes
    the bad man didn't see him--Why,' inquired Mrs Plornish, reverting to
    the Italian language, 'why ope bad man no see?'

    'Padrona, dearest,' returned the little foreigner whom she so
    considerately protected, 'do not ask, I pray. Once again I say it
    matters not. I have fear of this man. I do not wish to see him, I do not
    wish to be known of him--never again! Enough, most beautiful. Leave it.'

    The topic was so disagreeable to him, and so put his usual liveliness to
    the rout, that Mrs Plornish forbore to press him further: the rather as
    the tea had been drawing for some time on the hob. But she was not the
    less surprised and curious for asking no more questions; neither was
    Mr Pancks, whose expressive breathing had been labouring hard since the
    entrance of the little man, like a locomotive engine with a great load
    getting up a steep incline. Maggy, now better dressed than of yore,
    though still faithful to the monstrous character of her cap, had been
    in the background from the first with open mouth and eyes, which staring
    and gaping features were not diminished in breadth by the untimely
    suppression of the subject. However, no more was said about it, though
    much appeared to be thought on all sides: by no means excepting the two
    young Plornishes, who partook of the evening meal as if their eating
    the bread and butter were rendered almost superfluous by the painful
    probability of the worst of men shortly presenting himself for the
    purpose of eating them. Mr Baptist, by degrees began to chirp a little;
    but never stirred from the seat he had taken behind the door and close
    to the window, though it was not his usual place. As often as the little
    bell rang, he started and peeped out secretly, with the end of the
    little curtain in his hand and the rest before his face; evidently not
    at all satisfied but that the man he dreaded had tracked him through all
    his doublings and turnings, with the certainty of a terrible bloodhound.

    The entrance, at various times, of two or three customers and of Mr
    Plornish, gave Mr Baptist just enough of this employment to keep the
    attention of the company fixed upon him. Tea was over, and the children
    were abed, and Mrs Plornish was feeling her way to the dutiful proposal
    that her father should favour them with Chloe, when the bell rang again,
    and Mr Clennam came in.

    Clennam had been poring late over his books and letters; for the
    waiting-rooms of the Circumlocution Office ravaged his time sorely.
    Over and above that, he was depressed and made uneasy by the late
    occurrence at his mother's. He looked worn and solitary. He felt so,
    too; but, nevertheless, was returning home from his counting-house by
    that end of the Yard to give them the intelligence that he had received
    another letter from Miss Dorrit.

    The news made a sensation in the cottage which drew off the general
    attention from Mr Baptist. Maggy, who pushed her way into the foreground
    immediately, would have seemed to draw in the tidings of her Little
    Mother equally at her ears, nose, mouth, and eyes, but that the last
    were obstructed by tears. She was particularly delighted when Clennam
    assured her that there were hospitals, and very kindly conducted
    hospitals, in Rome. Mr Pancks rose into new distinction in virtue of
    being specially remembered in the letter. Everybody was pleased and
    interested, and Clennam was well repaid for his trouble.

    'But you are tired, sir. Let me make you a cup of tea,' said Mrs
    Plornish, 'if you'd condescend to take such a thing in the cottage; and
    many thanks to you, too, I am sure, for bearing us in mind so kindly.'

    Mr Plornish deeming it incumbent on him, as host, to add his personal
    acknowledgments, tendered them in the form which always expressed his
    highest ideal of a combination of ceremony with sincerity.

    'John Edward Nandy,' said Mr Plornish, addressing the old gentleman.
    'Sir. It's not too often that you see unpretending actions without a
    spark of pride, and therefore when you see them give grateful honour
    unto the same, being that if you don't, and live to want 'em, it follows
    serve you right.'

    To which Mr Nandy replied:

    'I am heartily of your opinion, Thomas, and which your opinion is the
    same as mine, and therefore no more words and not being backwards
    with that opinion, which opinion giving it as yes, Thomas, yes, is the
    opinion in which yourself and me must ever be unanimously jined by all,
    and where there is not difference of opinion there can be none but one
    opinion, which fully no, Thomas, Thomas, no!'

    Arthur, with less formality, expressed himself gratified by their high
    appreciation of so very slight an attention on his part; and explained
    as to the tea that he had not yet dined, and was going straight home to
    refresh after a long day's labour, or he would have readily accepted the
    hospitable offer. As Mr Pancks was somewhat noisily getting his steam
    up for departure, he concluded by asking that gentleman if he would walk
    with him? Mr Pancks said he desired no better engagement, and the two
    took leave of Happy Cottage.

    'If you will come home with me, Pancks,' said Arthur, when they got into
    the street, 'and will share what dinner or supper there is, it will
    be next door to an act of charity; for I am weary and out of sorts
    to-night.'

    'Ask me to do a greater thing than that,' said Pancks, 'when you want it
    done, and I'll do it.'

    Between this eccentric personage and Clennam, a tacit understanding and
    accord had been always improving since Mr Pancks flew over Mr Rugg's
    back in the Marshalsea Yard. When the carriage drove away on the
    memorable day of the family's departure, these two had looked after it
    together, and had walked slowly away together. When the first letter
    came from little Dorrit, nobody was more interested in hearing of
    her than Mr Pancks. The second letter, at that moment in Clennam's
    breast-pocket, particularly remembered him by name. Though he had never
    before made any profession or protestation to Clennam, and though what
    he had just said was little enough as to the words in which it was
    expressed, Clennam had long had a growing belief that Mr Pancks, in
    his own odd way, was becoming attached to him. All these strings
    intertwining made Pancks a very cable of anchorage that night.

    'I am quite alone,' Arthur explained as they walked on. 'My partner is
    away, busily engaged at a distance on his branch of our business, and
    you shall do just as you like.'

    'Thank you. You didn't take particular notice of little Altro just now;
    did you?' said Pancks.

    'No. Why?'

    'He's a bright fellow, and I like him,' said Pancks. 'Something has
    gone amiss with him to-day. Have you any idea of any cause that can have
    overset him?'

    'You surprise me! None whatever.'

    Mr Pancks gave his reasons for the inquiry. Arthur was quite unprepared
    for them, and quite unable to suggest an explanation of them.

    'Perhaps you'll ask him,' said Pancks, 'as he's a stranger?'

    'Ask him what?' returned Clennam.

    'What he has on his mind.'

    'I ought first to see for myself that he has something on his mind, I
    think,' said Clennam. 'I have found him in every way so diligent, so
    grateful (for little enough), and so trustworthy, that it might look
    like suspecting him. And that would be very unjust.'

    'True,' said Pancks. 'But, I say! You oughtn't to be anybody's
    proprietor, Mr Clennam. You're much too delicate.'

    'For the matter of that,' returned Clennam laughing, 'I have not a large
    proprietary share in Cavalletto. His carving is his livelihood. He keeps
    the keys of the Factory, watches it every alternate night, and acts as a
    sort of housekeeper to it generally; but we have little work in the way
    of his ingenuity, though we give him what we have. No! I am rather his
    adviser than his proprietor. To call me his standing counsel and his
    banker would be nearer the fact. Speaking of being his banker, is it not
    curious, Pancks, that the ventures which run just now in so many
    people's heads, should run even in little Cavalletto's?'

    'Ventures?' retorted Pancks, with a snort. 'What ventures?'

    'These Merdle enterprises.'

    'Oh! Investments,' said Pancks. 'Ay, ay! I didn't know you were speaking
    of investments.'

    His quick way of replying caused Clennam to look at him, with a doubt
    whether he meant more than he said. As it was accompanied, however, with
    a quickening of his pace and a corresponding increase in the labouring
    of his machinery, Arthur did not pursue the matter, and they soon
    arrived at his house.

    A dinner of soup and a pigeon-pie, served on a little round table before
    the fire, and flavoured with a bottle of good wine, oiled Mr Pancks's
    works in a highly effective manner; so that when Clennam produced his
    Eastern pipe, and handed Mr Pancks another Eastern pipe, the latter
    gentleman was perfectly comfortable.

    They puffed for a while in silence, Mr Pancks like a steam-vessel
    with wind, tide, calm water, and all other sea-going conditions in her
    favour. He was the first to speak, and he spoke thus:

    'Yes. Investments is the word.'

    Clennam, with his former look, said 'Ah!'

    'I am going back to it, you see,' said Pancks.

    'Yes. I see you are going back to it,' returned Clennam, wondering why.

    'Wasn't it a curious thing that they should run in little Altro's head?
    Eh?' said Pancks as he smoked. 'Wasn't that how you put it?'

    'That was what I said.'

    'Ay! But think of the whole Yard having got it. Think of their
    all meeting me with it, on my collecting days, here and there and
    everywhere. Whether they pay, or whether they don't pay. Merdle, Merdle,
    Merdle. Always Merdle.'

    'Very strange how these runs on an infatuation prevail,' said Arthur.

    'An't it?' returned Pancks. After smoking for a minute or so, more drily
    than comported with his recent oiling, he added: 'Because you see these
    people don't understand the subject.'

    'Not a bit,' assented Clennam.

    'Not a bit,' cried Pancks. 'Know nothing of figures. Know nothing of
    money questions. Never made a calculation. Never worked it, sir!'

    'If they had--' Clennam was going on to say; when Mr Pancks, without
    change of countenance, produced a sound so far surpassing all his usual
    efforts, nasal or bronchial, that he stopped.

    'If they had?' repeated Pancks in an inquiring tone.

    'I thought you--spoke,' said Arthur, hesitating what name to give the
    interruption.

    'Not at all,' said Pancks. 'Not yet. I may in a minute. If they had?'

    'If they had,' observed Clennam, who was a little at a loss how to take
    his friend, 'why, I suppose they would have known better.'

    'How so, Mr Clennam?' Pancks asked quickly, and with an odd effect of
    having been from the commencement of the conversation loaded with the
    heavy charge he now fired off. 'They're right, you know. They don't mean
    to be, but they're right.'

    'Right in sharing Cavalletto's inclination to speculate with Mr Merdle?'

    'Per-fectly, sir,' said Pancks. 'I've gone into it. I've made the
    calculations. I've worked it. They're safe and genuine.' Relieved by
    having got to this, Mr Pancks took as long a pull as his lungs would
    permit at his Eastern pipe, and looked sagaciously and steadily at
    Clennam while inhaling and exhaling too.

    In those moments, Mr Pancks began to give out the dangerous infection
    with which he was laden. It is the manner of communicating these
    diseases; it is the subtle way in which they go about.

    'Do you mean, my good Pancks,' asked Clennam emphatically, 'that you
    would put that thousand pounds of yours, let us say, for instance, out
    at this kind of interest?'

    'Certainly,' said Pancks. 'Already done it, sir.'

    Mr Pancks took another long inhalation, another long exhalation, another
    long sagacious look at Clennam.

    'I tell you, Mr Clennam, I've gone into it,' said Pancks. 'He's a man of
    immense resources--enormous capital--government influence. They're the
    best schemes afloat. They're safe. They're certain.'

    'Well!' returned Clennam, looking first at him gravely and then at the
    fire gravely. 'You surprise me!'

    'Bah!' Pancks retorted. 'Don't say that, sir. It's what you ought to do
    yourself! Why don't you do as I do?'

    Of whom Mr Pancks had taken the prevalent disease, he could no more have
    told than if he had unconsciously taken a fever. Bred at first, as many
    physical diseases are, in the wickedness of men, and then disseminated
    in their ignorance, these epidemics, after a period, get communicated to
    many sufferers who are neither ignorant nor wicked. Mr Pancks might, or
    might not, have caught the illness himself from a subject of this class;
    but in this category he appeared before Clennam, and the infection he
    threw off was all the more virulent.

    'And you have really invested,' Clennam had already passed to that word,
    'your thousand pounds, Pancks?'

    'To be sure, sir!' replied Pancks boldly, with a puff of smoke. 'And
    only wish it ten!'

    Now, Clennam had two subjects lying heavy on his lonely mind that night;
    the one, his partner's long-deferred hope; the other, what he had seen
    and heard at his mother's. In the relief of having this companion,
    and of feeling that he could trust him, he passed on to both, and both
    brought him round again, with an increase and acceleration of force, to
    his point of departure.

    It came about in the simplest manner. Quitting the investment subject,
    after an interval of silent looking at the fire through the smoke of his
    pipe, he told Pancks how and why he was occupied with the great National
    Department. 'A hard case it has been, and a hard case it is on Doyce,'
    he finished by saying, with all the honest feeling the topic roused in
    him.

    'Hard indeed,' Pancks acquiesced. 'But you manage for him, Mr Clennam?'

    'How do you mean?'

    'Manage the money part of the business?'

    'Yes. As well as I can.'

    'Manage it better, sir,' said Pancks. 'Recompense him for his toils and
    disappointments. Give him the chances of the time. He'll never benefit
    himself in that way, patient and preoccupied workman. He looks to you,
    sir.'

    'I do my best, Pancks,' returned Clennam, uneasily. 'As to duly weighing
    and considering these new enterprises of which I have had no experience,
    I doubt if I am fit for it, I am growing old.'

    'Growing old?' cried Pancks. 'Ha, ha!'

    There was something so indubitably genuine in the wonderful laugh, and
    series of snorts and puffs, engendered in Mr Pancks's astonishment at,
    and utter rejection of, the idea, that his being quite in earnest could
    not be questioned.

    'Growing old?' cried Pancks. 'Hear, hear, hear! Old? Hear him, hear
    him!'

    The positive refusal expressed in Mr Pancks's continued snorts, no less
    than in these exclamations, to entertain the sentiment for a single
    instant, drove Arthur away from it. Indeed, he was fearful of something
    happening to Mr Pancks in the violent conflict that took place between
    the breath he jerked out of himself and the smoke he jerked into
    himself. This abandonment of the second topic threw him on the third.

    'Young, old, or middle-aged, Pancks,' he said, when there was a
    favourable pause, 'I am in a very anxious and uncertain state; a state
    that even leads me to doubt whether anything now seeming to belong to
    me, may be really mine. Shall I tell you how this is? Shall I put a
    great trust in you?'

    'You shall, sir,' said Pancks, 'if you believe me worthy of it.'

    'I do.'

    'You may!' Mr Pancks's short and sharp rejoinder, confirmed by the
    sudden outstretching of his coaly hand, was most expressive and
    convincing. Arthur shook the hand warmly.

    He then, softening the nature of his old apprehensions as much as was
    possible consistently with their being made intelligible and never
    alluding to his mother by name, but speaking vaguely of a relation
    of his, confided to Mr Pancks a broad outline of the misgivings he
    entertained, and of the interview he had witnessed. Mr Pancks listened
    with such interest that, regardless of the charms of the Eastern pipe,
    he put it in the grate among the fire-irons, and occupied his hands
    during the whole recital in so erecting the loops and hooks of hair
    all over his head, that he looked, when it came to a conclusion, like a
    journeyman Hamlet in conversation with his father's spirit.

    'Brings me back, sir,' was his exclamation then, with a startling touch
    on Clennam's knee, 'brings me back, sir, to the Investments! I don't
    say anything of your making yourself poor to repair a wrong you never
    committed. That's you. A man must be himself. But I say this,
    fearing you may want money to save your own blood from exposure and
    disgrace--make as much as you can!'

    Arthur shook his head, but looked at him thoughtfully too.

    'Be as rich as you can, sir,' Pancks adjured him with a powerful
    concentration of all his energies on the advice. 'Be as rich as you
    honestly can. It's your duty. Not for your sake, but for the sake of
    others. Take time by the forelock. Poor Mr Doyce (who really _is_ growing
            old) depends upon you. Your relative depends upon you. You don't know
    what depends upon you.'

    'Well, well, well!' returned Arthur. 'Enough for to-night.'

    'One word more, Mr Clennam,' retorted Pancks, 'and then enough for
    to-night. Why should you leave all the gains to the gluttons, knaves,
    and impostors? Why should you leave all the gains that are to be got to
    my proprietor and the like of him? Yet you're always doing it. When I
    say you, I mean such men as you. You know you are. Why, I see it
    every day of my life. I see nothing else. It's my business to see it.
    Therefore I say,' urged Pancks, 'Go in and win!'

    'But what of Go in and lose?' said Arthur.

    'Can't be done, sir,' returned Pancks. 'I have looked into it. Name up
    everywhere--immense resources--enormous capital--great position--high
    connection--government influence. Can't be done!'

    Gradually, after this closing exposition, Mr Pancks subsided; allowed
    his hair to droop as much as it ever would droop on the utmost
    persuasion; reclaimed the pipe from the fire-irons, filled it anew, and
    smoked it out. They said little more; but were company to one another in
    silently pursuing the same subjects, and did not part until midnight.
    On taking his leave, Mr Pancks, when he had shaken hands with Clennam,
    worked completely round him before he steamed out at the door. This,
    Arthur received as an assurance that he might implicitly rely on Pancks,
    if he ever should come to need assistance; either in any of the matters
    of which they had spoken that night, or any other subject that could in
    any way affect himself.

    At intervals all next day, and even while his attention was fixed on
    other things, he thought of Mr Pancks's investment of his thousand
    pounds, and of his having 'looked into it.' He thought of Mr Pancks's
    being so sanguine in this matter, and of his not being usually of a
    sanguine character. He thought of the great National Department, and of
    the delight it would be to him to see Doyce better off. He thought
    of the darkly threatening place that went by the name of Home in his
    remembrance, and of the gathering shadows which made it yet more darkly
    threatening than of old. He observed anew that wherever he went, he
    saw, or heard, or touched, the celebrated name of Merdle; he found it
    difficult even to remain at his desk a couple of hours, without having
    it presented to one of his bodily senses through some agency or other.
    He began to think it was curious too that it should be everywhere, and
    that nobody but he should seem to have any mistrust of it. Though indeed
    he began to remember, when he got to this, even _he_ did not mistrust it;
    he had only happened to keep aloof from it.

    Such symptoms, when a disease of the kind is rife, are usually the signs
    of sickening.




When it became known to the Britons on the shore of the yellow Tiber
that their intelligent compatriot, Mr Sparkler, was made one of the
Lords of their Circumlocution Office, they took it as a piece of news
with which they had no nearer concern than with any other piece of
news--any other Accident or Offence--in the English papers. Some
laughed; some said, by way of complete excuse, that the post was
virtually a sinecure, and any fool who could spell his name was good
enough for it; some, and these the more solemn political oracles,
       said that Decimus did wisely to strengthen himself, and that the sole
       constitutional purpose of all places within the gift of Decimus, was,
       that Decimus _should_ strengthen himself. A few bilious Britons there were
       who would not subscribe to this article of faith; but their objection
       was purely theoretical. In a practical point of view, they listlessly
       abandoned the matter, as being the business of some other Britons
       unknown, somewhere, or nowhere. In like manner, at home, great numbers
       of Britons maintained, for as long as four-and-twenty consecutive hours,
       that those invisible and anonymous Britons 'ought to take it up;' and
       that if they quietly acquiesced in it, they deserved it. But of what
       class the remiss Britons were composed, and where the unlucky creatures
       hid themselves, and why they hid themselves, and how it constantly
       happened that they neglected their interests, when so many other Britons
       were quite at a loss to account for their not looking after those
       interests, was not, either upon the shore of the yellow Tiber or the
       shore of the black Thames, made apparent to men.

       Mrs Merdle circulated the news, as she received congratulations on it,
       with a careless grace that displayed it to advantage, as the setting
       displays the jewel. Yes, she said, Edmund had taken the place. Mr Merdle
       wished him to take it, and he had taken it. She hoped Edmund might like
       it, but really she didn't know. It would keep him in town a good
       deal, and he preferred the country. Still, it was not a disagreeable
       position--and it was a position. There was no denying that the thing
       was a compliment to Mr Merdle, and was not a bad thing for Edmund if he
       liked it. It was just as well that he should have something to do, and
       it was just as well that he should have something for doing it. Whether
       it would be more agreeable to Edmund than the army, remained to be seen.

       Thus the Bosom; accomplished in the art of seeming to make things of
       small account, and really enhancing them in the process. While Henry
       Gowan, whom Decimus had thrown away, went through the whole round of
       his acquaintance between the Gate of the People and the town of Albano,
       vowing, almost (but not quite) with tears in his eyes, that Sparkler was
       the sweetest-tempered, simplest-hearted, altogether most lovable jackass
       that ever grazed on the public common; and that only one circumstance
       could have delighted him (Gowan) more, than his (the beloved jackass's)
       getting this post, and that would have been his (Gowan's) getting it
       himself. He said it was the very thing for Sparkler. There was nothing
       to do, and he would do it charmingly; there was a handsome salary to
       draw, and he would draw it charmingly; it was a delightful, appropriate,
       capital appointment; and he almost forgave the donor his slight of
       himself, in his joy that the dear donkey for whom he had so great an
       affection was so admirably stabled. Nor did his benevolence stop here.
       He took pains, on all social occasions, to draw Mr Sparkler out, and
       make him conspicuous before the company; and, although the considerate
       action always resulted in that young gentleman's making a dreary and
       forlorn mental spectacle of himself, the friendly intention was not to
       be doubted.

       Unless, indeed, it chanced to be doubted by the object of Mr Sparkler's
       affections. Miss Fanny was now in the difficult situation of being
       universally known in that light, and of not having dismissed Mr
       Sparkler, however capriciously she used him. Hence, she was sufficiently
       identified with the gentleman to feel compromised by his being more than
       usually ridiculous; and hence, being by no means deficient in quickness,
       she sometimes came to his rescue against Gowan, and did him very good
       service. But, while doing this, she was ashamed of him, undetermined
       whether to get rid of him or more decidedly encourage him, distracted
       with apprehensions that she was every day becoming more and more
       immeshed in her uncertainties, and tortured by misgivings that Mrs
       Merdle triumphed in her distress. With this tumult in her mind, it is no
       subject for surprise that Miss Fanny came home one night in a state
       of agitation from a concert and ball at Mrs Merdle's house, and on her
       sister affectionately trying to soothe her, pushed that sister away from
       the toilette-table at which she sat angrily trying to cry, and declared
       with a heaving bosom that she detested everybody, and she wished she was
       dead.

       'Dear Fanny, what is the matter? Tell me.'

       'Matter, you little Mole,' said Fanny. 'If you were not the blindest of
       the blind, you would have no occasion to ask me. The idea of daring to
       pretend to assert that you have eyes in your head, and yet ask me what's
       the matter!'

       'Is it Mr Sparkler, dear?'

       'Mis-ter Spark-ler!' repeated Fanny, with unbounded scorn, as if he were
       the last subject in the Solar system that could possibly be near her
       mind. 'No, Miss Bat, it is not.'

       Immediately afterwards, she became remorseful for having called her
       sister names; declaring with sobs that she knew she made herself
       hateful, but that everybody drove her to it.

       'I don't think you are well to-night, dear Fanny.'

       'Stuff and nonsense!' replied the young lady, turning angry again; 'I am
       as well as you are. Perhaps I might say better, and yet make no boast of
       it.'

       Poor Little Dorrit, not seeing her way to the offering of any soothing
       words that would escape repudiation, deemed it best to remain quiet. At
       first, Fanny took this ill, too; protesting to her looking-glass, that
       of all the trying sisters a girl could have, she did think the most
       trying sister was a flat sister. That she knew she was at times a
       wretched temper; that she knew she made herself hateful; that when she
       made herself hateful, nothing would do her half the good as being told
       so; but that, being afflicted with a flat sister, she never _was_ told so,
       and the consequence resulted that she was absolutely tempted and
       goaded into making herself disagreeable. Besides (she angrily told
               her looking-glass), she didn't want to be forgiven. It was not a right
       example, that she should be constantly stooping to be forgiven by a
       younger sister. And this was the Art of it--that she was always being
       placed in the position of being forgiven, whether she liked it or not.
       Finally she burst into violent weeping, and, when her sister came and
       sat close at her side to comfort her, said, 'Amy, you're an Angel!'

       'But, I tell you what, my Pet,' said Fanny, when her sister's gentleness
       had calmed her, 'it now comes to this; that things cannot and shall not
       go on as they are at present going on, and that there must be an end of
       this, one way or another.'

       As the announcement was vague, though very peremptory, Little Dorrit
       returned, 'Let us talk about it.'

       'Quite so, my dear,' assented Fanny, as she dried her eyes. 'Let us talk
       about it. I am rational again now, and you shall advise me. _Will_ you
       advise me, my sweet child?'

       Even Amy smiled at this notion, but she said, 'I will, Fanny, as well as
       I can.'

       'Thank you, dearest Amy,' returned Fanny, kissing her. 'You are my
       anchor.'

       Having embraced her Anchor with great affection, Fanny took a bottle of
       sweet toilette water from the table, and called to her maid for a fine
       handkerchief. She then dismissed that attendant for the night, and went
       on to be advised; dabbing her eyes and forehead from time to time to
       cool them.

       'My love,' Fanny began, 'our characters and points of view are
       sufficiently different (kiss me again, my darling), to make it very
       probable that I shall surprise you by what I am going to say. What I am
       going to say, my dear, is, that notwithstanding our property, we labour,
       socially speaking, under disadvantages. You don't quite understand what
       I mean, Amy?'

       'I have no doubt I shall,' said Amy, mildly, 'after a few words more.'

       'Well, my dear, what I mean is, that we are, after all, newcomers into
       fashionable life.'

       'I am sure, Fanny,' Little Dorrit interposed in her zealous admiration,
       'no one need find that out in you.'

       'Well, my dear child, perhaps not,' said Fanny, 'though it's most kind
       and most affectionate in you, you precious girl, to say so.' Here she
       dabbed her sister's forehead, and blew upon it a little. 'But you are,'
       resumed Fanny, 'as is well known, the dearest little thing that ever
       was! To resume, my child. Pa is extremely gentlemanly and extremely well
       informed, but he is, in some trifling respects, a little different from
       other gentlemen of his fortune: partly on account of what he has gone
       through, poor dear: partly, I fancy, on account of its often running in
       his mind that other people are thinking about that, while he is talking
       to them. Uncle, my love, is altogether unpresentable. Though a dear
       creature to whom I am tenderly attached, he is, socially speaking,
       shocking. Edward is frightfully expensive and dissipated. I don't mean
       that there is anything ungenteel in that itself--far from it--but I
       do mean that he doesn't do it well, and that he doesn't, if I may
       so express myself, get the money's-worth in the sort of dissipated
       reputation that attaches to him.'

       'Poor Edward!' sighed Little Dorrit, with the whole family history in
       the sigh.

       'Yes. And poor you and me, too,' returned Fanny, rather sharply.
       'Very true! Then, my dear, we have no mother, and we have a Mrs General.
       And I tell you again, darling, that Mrs General, if I may reverse a
       common proverb and adapt it to her, is a cat in gloves who _will_
       catch mice. That woman, I am quite sure and confident, will be our
       mother-in-law.'

       'I can hardly think, Fanny--' Fanny stopped her.

       'Now, don't argue with me about it, Amy,' said she, 'because I know
       better.' Feeling that she had been sharp again, she dabbed her sister's
       forehead again, and blew upon it again. 'To resume once more, my dear.
       It then becomes a question with me (I am proud and spirited, Amy, as you
               very well know: too much so, I dare say) whether I shall make up my mind
       to take it upon myself to carry the family through.'

       'How?' asked her sister, anxiously.

       'I will not,' said Fanny, without answering the question, 'submit to
       be mother-in-lawed by Mrs General; and I will not submit to be, in any
       respect whatever, either patronised or tormented by Mrs Merdle.'

       Little Dorrit laid her hand upon the hand that held the bottle of sweet
       water, with a still more anxious look. Fanny, quite punishing her own
       forehead with the vehement dabs she now began to give it, fitfully went
       on.

       'That he has somehow or other, and how is of no consequence, attained a
       very good position, no one can deny. That it is a very good connection,
       no one can deny. And as to the question of clever or not clever, I doubt
       very much whether a clever husband would be suitable to me. I cannot
       submit. I should not be able to defer to him enough.'

       'O, my dear Fanny!' expostulated Little Dorrit, upon whom a kind of
       terror had been stealing as she perceived what her sister meant. 'If you
       loved any one, all this feeling would change. If you loved any one, you
       would no more be yourself, but you would quite lose and forget yourself
       in your devotion to him. If you loved him, Fanny--' Fanny had stopped
       the dabbing hand, and was looking at her fixedly.

       'O, indeed!' cried Fanny. 'Really? Bless me, how much some people know
       of some subjects! They say every one has a subject, and I certainly
       seem to have hit upon yours, Amy. There, you little thing, I was only in
       fun,' dabbing her sister's forehead; 'but don't you be a silly puss,
       and don't you think flightily and eloquently about degenerate
       impossibilities. There! Now, I'll go back to myself.'

       'Dear Fanny, let me say first, that I would far rather we worked for
       a scanty living again than I would see you rich and married to Mr
       Sparkler.'

       '_Let_ you say, my dear?' retorted Fanny. 'Why, of course, I will _let_
       you say anything. There is no constraint upon you, I hope. We are
       together to talk it over. And as to marrying Mr Sparkler, I have not the
       slightest intention of doing so to-night, my dear, or to-morrow morning
       either.'

       'But at some time?'

       'At no time, for anything I know at present,' answered Fanny, with
       indifference. Then, suddenly changing her indifference into a burning
       restlessness, she added, 'You talk about the clever men, you little
       thing! It's all very fine and easy to talk about the clever men; but
       where are they? _I_ don't see them anywhere near _me_!'

       'My dear Fanny, so short a time--'

       'Short time or long time,' interrupted Fanny. 'I am impatient of our
       situation. I don't like our situation, and very little would induce
       me to change it. Other girls, differently reared and differently
       circumstanced altogether, might wonder at what I say or may do. Let
       them. They are driven by their lives and characters; I am driven by
       mine.'

       'Fanny, my dear Fanny, you know that you have qualities to make you the
       wife of one very superior to Mr Sparkler.'

       'Amy, my dear Amy,' retorted Fanny, parodying her words, 'I know that I
       wish to have a more defined and distinct position, in which I can assert
       myself with greater effect against that insolent woman.'

       'Would you therefore--forgive my asking, Fanny--therefore marry her
       son?'

       'Why, perhaps,' said Fanny, with a triumphant smile. 'There may be many
       less promising ways of arriving at an end than that, my dear. That piece
       of insolence may think, now, that it would be a great success to get her
       son off upon me, and shelve me. But, perhaps, she little thinks how I
       would retort upon her if I married her son. I would oppose her in
       everything, and compete with her. I would make it the business of my
       life.'

       Fanny set down the bottle when she came to this, and walked about the
       room; always stopping and standing still while she spoke.

       'One thing I could certainly do, my child: I could make her older. And I
       would!'

       This was followed by another walk.

       'I would talk of her as an old woman. I would pretend to know--if I
       didn't, but I should from her son--all about her age. And she should
       hear me say, Amy: affectionately, quite dutifully and affectionately:
       how well she looked, considering her time of life. I could make her seem
       older at once, by being myself so much younger. I may not be as handsome
       as she is; I am not a fair judge of that question, I suppose; but I know
       I am handsome enough to be a thorn in her side. And I would be!'

       'My dear sister, would you condemn yourself to an unhappy life for
       this?'

       'It wouldn't be an unhappy life, Amy. It would be the life I am fitted
       for. Whether by disposition, or whether by circumstances, is no matter;
       I am better fitted for such a life than for almost any other.'

       There was something of a desolate tone in those words; but, with a
       short proud laugh she took another walk, and after passing a great
       looking-glass came to another stop.

       'Figure! Figure, Amy! Well. The woman has a good figure. I will give her
       her due, and not deny it. But is it so far beyond all others that it is
       altogether unapproachable? Upon my word, I am not so sure of it. Give
       some much younger woman the latitude as to dress that she has, being
       married; and we would see about that, my dear!'

       Something in the thought that was agreeable and flattering, brought her
       back to her seat in a gayer temper. She took her sister's hands in hers,
       and clapped all four hands above her head as she looked in her sister's
       face laughing:

       'And the dancer, Amy, that she has quite forgotten--the dancer who bore
       no sort of resemblance to me, and of whom I never remind her, oh dear
       no!--should dance through her life, and dance in her way, to such a tune
       as would disturb her insolent placidity a little. Just a little, my dear
       Amy, just a little!'

       Meeting an earnest and imploring look in Amy's face, she brought the
       four hands down, and laid only one on Amy's lips.

       'Now, don't argue with me, child,' she said in a sterner way, 'because
       it is of no use. I understand these subjects much better than you do. I
       have not nearly made up my mind, but it may be. Now we have talked this
       over comfortably, and may go to bed. You best and dearest little mouse,
       Good night!' With those words Fanny weighed her Anchor, and--having
       taken so much advice--left off being advised for that occasion.

       Thenceforward, Amy observed Mr Sparkler's treatment by his enslaver,
       with new reasons for attaching importance to all that passed between
       them. There were times when Fanny appeared quite unable to endure his
       mental feebleness, and when she became so sharply impatient of it that
       she would all but dismiss him for good. There were other times when she
       got on much better with him; when he amused her, and when her sense of
       superiority seemed to counterbalance that opposite side of the scale. If
       Mr Sparkler had been other than the faithfullest and most submissive of
       swains, he was sufficiently hard pressed to have fled from the scene of
       his trials, and have set at least the whole distance from Rome to London
       between himself and his enchantress. But he had no greater will of his
       own than a boat has when it is towed by a steam-ship; and he followed
       his cruel mistress through rough and smooth, on equally strong
       compulsion.

       Mrs Merdle, during these passages, said little to Fanny, but said
       more about her. She was, as it were, forced to look at her through her
       eye-glass, and in general conversation to allow commendations of her
       beauty to be wrung from her by its irresistible demands. The defiant
       character it assumed when Fanny heard these extollings (as it generally
               happened that she did), was not expressive of concessions to the
       impartial bosom; but the utmost revenge the bosom took was, to say
       audibly, 'A spoilt beauty--but with that face and shape, who could
       wonder?'

       It might have been about a month or six weeks after the night of the
       new advice, when Little Dorrit began to think she detected some new
       understanding between Mr Sparkler and Fanny. Mr Sparkler, as if in
       attendance to some compact, scarcely ever spoke without first looking
       towards Fanny for leave. That young lady was too discreet ever to look
       back again; but, if Mr Sparkler had permission to speak, she remained
       silent; if he had not, she herself spoke. Moreover, it became plain
       whenever Henry Gowan attempted to perform the friendly office of drawing
       him out, that he was not to be drawn. And not only that, but Fanny would
       presently, without any pointed application in the world, chance to say
       something with such a sting in it that Gowan would draw back as if he
       had put his hand into a bee-hive.

       There was yet another circumstance which went a long way to confirm
       Little Dorrit in her fears, though it was not a great circumstance
       in itself. Mr Sparkler's demeanour towards herself changed. It became
       fraternal. Sometimes, when she was in the outer circle of assemblies--at
       their own residence, at Mrs Merdle's, or elsewhere--she would find
       herself stealthily supported round the waist by Mr Sparkler's arm. Mr
       Sparkler never offered the slightest explanation of this attention;
       but merely smiled with an air of blundering, contented, good-natured
       proprietorship, which, in so heavy a gentleman, was ominously
       expressive.

       Little Dorrit was at home one day, thinking about Fanny with a heavy
       heart. They had a room at one end of their drawing-room suite, nearly
       all irregular bay-window, projecting over the street, and commanding
       all the picturesque life and variety of the Corso, both up and down. At
       three or four o'clock in the afternoon, English time, the view from this
       window was very bright and peculiar; and Little Dorrit used to sit
       and muse here, much as she had been used to while away the time in her
       balcony at Venice. Seated thus one day, she was softly touched on the
       shoulder, and Fanny said, 'Well, Amy dear,' and took her seat at her
       side. Their seat was a part of the window; when there was anything in
       the way of a procession going on, they used to have bright draperies
       hung out of the window, and used to kneel or sit on this seat, and look
       out at it, leaning on the brilliant colour. But there was no procession
       that day, and Little Dorrit was rather surprised by Fanny's being at
       home at that hour, as she was generally out on horseback then.

       'Well, Amy,' said Fanny, 'what are you thinking of, little one?'

       'I was thinking of you, Fanny.'

       'No? What a coincidence! I declare here's some one else. You were not
       thinking of this some one else too; were you, Amy?'

       Amy _had_ been thinking of this some one else too; for it was Mr Sparkler.
       She did not say so, however, as she gave him her hand. Mr Sparkler
       came and sat down on the other side of her, and she felt the fraternal
       railing come behind her, and apparently stretch on to include Fanny.

       'Well, my little sister,' said Fanny with a sigh, 'I suppose you know
       what this means?'

       'She's as beautiful as she's doated on,' stammered Mr Sparkler--'and
       there's no nonsense about her--it's arranged--'

       'You needn't explain, Edmund,' said Fanny.

       'No, my love,' said Mr Sparkler.

       'In short, pet,' proceeded Fanny, 'on the whole, we are engaged. We
       must tell papa about it either to-night or to-morrow, according to the
       opportunities. Then it's done, and very little more need be said.'

       'My dear Fanny,' said Mr Sparkler, with deference, 'I should like to say
       a word to Amy.'

       'Well, well! Say it for goodness' sake,' returned the young lady.

       'I am convinced, my dear Amy,' said Mr Sparkler, 'that if ever there
       was a girl, next to your highly endowed and beautiful sister, who had no
       nonsense about her--'

       'We know all about that, Edmund,' interposed Miss Fanny. 'Never mind
       that. Pray go on to something else besides our having no nonsense about
       us.'

       'Yes, my love,' said Mr Sparkler. 'And I assure you, Amy, that nothing
       can be a greater happiness to myself, myself--next to the happiness of
       being so highly honoured with the choice of a glorious girl who hasn't
       an atom of--'

       'Pray, Edmund, pray!' interrupted Fanny, with a slight pat of her pretty
       foot upon the floor.

       'My love, you're quite right,' said Mr Sparkler, 'and I know I have a
       habit of it. What I wished to declare was, that nothing can be a greater
       happiness to myself, myself-next to the happiness of being united to
       pre-eminently the most glorious of girls--than to have the happiness
       of cultivating the affectionate acquaintance of Amy. I may not myself,'
       said Mr Sparkler manfully, 'be up to the mark on some other subjects
       at a short notice, and I am aware that if you were to poll Society the
       general opinion would be that I am not; but on the subject of Amy I AM
       up to the mark!'

       Mr Sparkler kissed her, in witness thereof.

       'A knife and fork and an apartment,' proceeded Mr Sparkler, growing, in
       comparison with his oratorical antecedents, quite diffuse, 'will ever
       be at Amy's disposal. My Governor, I am sure, will always be proud to
       entertain one whom I so much esteem. And regarding my mother,' said Mr
       Sparkler, 'who is a remarkably fine woman, with--'

       'Edmund, Edmund!' cried Miss Fanny, as before.

       'With submission, my soul,' pleaded Mr Sparkler. 'I know I have a habit
       of it, and I thank you very much, my adorable girl, for taking the
       trouble to correct it; but my mother is admitted on all sides to be a
       remarkably fine woman, and she really hasn't any.'

       'That may be, or may not be,' returned Fanny, 'but pray don't mention it
       any more.'

       'I will not, my love,' said Mr Sparkler.

       'Then, in fact, you have nothing more to say, Edmund; have you?'
       inquired Fanny.

       'So far from it, my adorable girl,' answered Mr Sparkler, 'I apologise
       for having said so much.'

       Mr Sparkler perceived, by a kind of inspiration, that the question
       implied had he not better go? He therefore withdrew the fraternal
       railing, and neatly said that he thought he would, with submission, take
       his leave. He did not go without being congratulated by Amy, as well
       as she could discharge that office in the flutter and distress of her
       spirits.

       When he was gone, she said, 'O Fanny, Fanny!' and turned to her sister
       in the bright window, and fell upon her bosom and cried there. Fanny
       laughed at first; but soon laid her face against her sister's and cried
       too--a little. It was the last time Fanny ever showed that there was any
       hidden, suppressed, or conquered feeling in her on the matter. From that
       hour the way she had chosen lay before her, and she trod it with her own
       imperious self-willed step.




