Arthur Clennam rose hastily, and saw her standing at the door. This
history must sometimes see with Little Dorrit's eyes, and shall begin
that course by seeing him.

Little Dorrit looked into a dim room, which seemed a spacious one to
her, and grandly furnished. Courtly ideas of Covent Garden, as a place
with famous coffee-houses, where gentlemen wearing gold-laced coats and
swords had quarrelled and fought duels; costly ideas of Covent Garden,
       as a place where there were flowers in winter at guineas a-piece,
       pine-apples at guineas a pound, and peas at guineas a pint; picturesque
       ideas of Covent Garden, as a place where there was a mighty theatre,
       showing wonderful and beautiful sights to richly-dressed ladies and
       gentlemen, and which was for ever far beyond the reach of poor Fanny or
       poor uncle; desolate ideas of Covent Garden, as having all those arches
       in it, where the miserable children in rags among whom she had just now
       passed, like young rats, slunk and hid, fed on offal, huddled together
       for warmth, and were hunted about (look to the rats young and old, all
               ye Barnacles, for before God they are eating away our foundations, and
               will bring the roofs on our heads!); teeming ideas of Covent Garden, as
       a place of past and present mystery, romance, abundance, want, beauty,
       ugliness, fair country gardens, and foul street gutters; all confused
       together,--made the room dimmer than it was in Little Dorrit's eyes, as
       they timidly saw it from the door.

       At first in the chair before the gone-out fire, and then turned round
       wondering to see her, was the gentleman whom she sought. The brown,
       grave gentleman, who smiled so pleasantly, who was so frank and
       considerate in his manner, and yet in whose earnestness there was
       something that reminded her of his mother, with the great difference
       that she was earnest in asperity and he in gentleness. Now he regarded
       her with that attentive and inquiring look before which Little Dorrit's
       eyes had always fallen, and before which they fell still.

       'My poor child! Here at midnight?'

       'I said Little Dorrit, sir, on purpose to prepare you. I knew you must
       be very much surprised.'

       'Are you alone?'

       'No sir, I have got Maggy with me.'

       Considering her entrance sufficiently prepared for by this mention of
       her name, Maggy appeared from the landing outside, on the broad grin.
       She instantly suppressed that manifestation, however, and became fixedly
       solemn.

       'And I have no fire,' said Clennam. 'And you are--' He was going to say
       so lightly clad, but stopped himself in what would have been a reference
       to her poverty, saying instead, 'And it is so cold.'

       Putting the chair from which he had risen nearer to the grate, he made
       her sit down in it; and hurriedly bringing wood and coal, heaped them
       together and got a blaze.

       'Your foot is like marble, my child;' he had happened to touch it, while
       stooping on one knee at his work of kindling the fire; 'put it nearer
       the warmth.' Little Dorrit thanked him hastily. It was quite warm, it
       was very warm! It smote upon his heart to feel that she hid her thin,
       worn shoe.

       Little Dorrit was not ashamed of her poor shoes. He knew her story, and
       it was not that. Little Dorrit had a misgiving that he might blame her
       father, if he saw them; that he might think, 'why did he dine to-day,
       and leave this little creature to the mercy of the cold stones!' She had
       no belief that it would have been a just reflection; she simply knew,
       by experience, that such delusions did sometimes present themselves to
       people. It was a part of her father's misfortunes that they did.

       'Before I say anything else,' Little Dorrit began, sitting before
       the pale fire, and raising her eyes again to the face which in its
       harmonious look of interest, and pity, and protection, she felt to be a
       mystery far above her in degree, and almost removed beyond her guessing
       at; 'may I tell you something, sir?'

       'Yes, my child.'

       A slight shade of distress fell upon her, at his so often calling her a
       child. She was surprised that he should see it, or think of such a
       slight thing; but he said directly:

       'I wanted a tender word, and could think of no other. As you just now
       gave yourself the name they give you at my mother's, and as that is the
       name by which I always think of you, let me call you Little Dorrit.'

       'Thank you, sir, I should like it better than any name.'

       'Little Dorrit.'

       'Little mother,' Maggy (who had been falling asleep) put in, as a
       correction.

       'It's all the same, Maggy,' returned Little Dorrit, 'all the same.'

       'Is it all the same, mother?'

       'Just the same.'

       Maggy laughed, and immediately snored. In Little Dorrit's eyes and ears,
       the uncouth figure and the uncouth sound were as pleasant as could be.
       There was a glow of pride in her big child, overspreading her face, when
       it again met the eyes of the grave brown gentleman. She wondered what he
       was thinking of, as he looked at Maggy and her. She thought what a
       good father he would be. How, with some such look, he would counsel and
       cherish his daughter.

       'What I was going to tell you, sir,' said Little Dorrit, 'is, that my
       brother is at large.'

       Arthur was rejoiced to hear it, and hoped he would do well.

       'And what I was going to tell you, sir,' said Little Dorrit, trembling
       in all her little figure and in her voice, 'is, that I am not to know
       whose generosity released him--am never to ask, and am never to be told,
       and am never to thank that gentleman with all my grateful heart!'

       He would probably need no thanks, Clennam said. Very likely he would be
       thankful himself (and with reason), that he had had the means and chance
       of doing a little service to her, who well deserved a great one.

       'And what I was going to say, sir, is,' said Little Dorrit, trembling
       more and more, 'that if I knew him, and I might, I would tell him that
       he can never, never know how I feel his goodness, and how my good father
       would feel it. And what I was going to say, sir, is, that if I knew him,
       and I might--but I don't know him and I must not--I know that!--I would
       tell him that I shall never any more lie down to sleep without having
       prayed to Heaven to bless him and reward him. And if I knew him, and I
       might, I would go down on my knees to him, and take his hand and kiss
       it and ask him not to draw it away, but to leave it--O to leave it for a
       moment--and let my thankful tears fall on it; for I have no other thanks
       to give him!'

       Little Dorrit had put his hand to her lips, and would have kneeled to
       him, but he gently prevented her, and replaced her in her chair. Her
       eyes, and the tones of her voice, had thanked him far better than she
       thought. He was not able to say, quite as composedly as usual, 'There,
       Little Dorrit, there, there, there! We will suppose that you did know
       this person, and that you might do all this, and that it was all done.
       And now tell me, Who am quite another person--who am nothing more than
       the friend who begged you to trust him--why you are out at midnight, and
       what it is that brings you so far through the streets at this late hour,
       my slight, delicate,' child was on his lips again, 'Little Dorrit!'

       'Maggy and I have been to-night,' she answered, subduing herself with
       the quiet effort that had long been natural to her, 'to the theatre
       where my sister is engaged.'

       'And oh ain't it a Ev'nly place,' suddenly interrupted Maggy, who seemed
       to have the power of going to sleep and waking up whenever she chose.
       'Almost as good as a hospital. Only there ain't no Chicking in it.'

       Here she shook herself, and fell asleep again.

       'We went there,' said Little Dorrit, glancing at her charge, 'because
       I like sometimes to know, of my own knowledge, that my sister is doing
       well; and like to see her there, with my own eyes, when neither she nor
       Uncle is aware. It is very seldom indeed that I can do that, because
       when I am not out at work, I am with my father, and even when I am out
       at work, I hurry home to him. But I pretend to-night that I am at a
       party.'

       As she made the confession, timidly hesitating, she raised her eyes to
       the face, and read its expression so plainly that she answered it.

       'Oh no, certainly! I never was at a party in my life.'

       She paused a little under his attentive look, and then said, 'I hope
       there is no harm in it. I could never have been of any use, if I had
       not pretended a little.'

       She feared that he was blaming her in his mind for so devising to
       contrive for them, think for them, and watch over them, without their
       knowledge or gratitude; perhaps even with their reproaches for supposed
       neglect. But what was really in his mind, was the weak figure with its
       strong purpose, the thin worn shoes, the insufficient dress, and the
       pretence of recreation and enjoyment. He asked where the suppositious
       party was? At a place where she worked, answered Little Dorrit,
       blushing. She had said very little about it; only a few words to
       make her father easy. Her father did not believe it to be a grand
       party--indeed he might suppose that. And she glanced for an instant at
       the shawl she wore.

       'It is the first night,' said Little Dorrit, 'that I have ever been away
       from home. And London looks so large, so barren, and so wild.' In Little
       Dorrit's eyes, its vastness under the black sky was awful; a tremor
       passed over her as she said the words.

       'But this is not,' she added, with the quiet effort again, 'what I have
       come to trouble you with, sir. My sister's having found a friend, a lady
    she has told me of and made me rather anxious about, was the first cause
of my coming away from home. And being away, and coming (on purpose)
    round by where you lived and seeing a light in the window--'

    Not for the first time. No, not for the first time. In Little Dorrit's
    eyes, the outside of that window had been a distant star on other nights
    than this. She had toiled out of her way, tired and troubled, to look up
    at it, and wonder about the grave, brown gentleman from so far off, who
    had spoken to her as a friend and protector.

    'There were three things,' said Little Dorrit, 'that I thought I would
    like to say, if you were alone and I might come up-stairs. First, what I
    have tried to say, but never can--never shall--'

    'Hush, hush! That is done with, and disposed of. Let us pass to the
    second,' said Clennam, smiling her agitation away, making the blaze
    shine upon her, and putting wine and cake and fruit towards her on the
    table.

    'I think,' said Little Dorrit--'this is the second thing, sir--I think
    Mrs Clennam must have found out my secret, and must know where I come
    from and where I go to. Where I live, I mean.'

    'Indeed!' returned Clennam quickly. He asked her, after short
    consideration, why she supposed so.

    'I think,' replied Little Dorrit, 'that Mr Flintwinch must have watched
    me.'

    And why, Clennam asked, as he turned his eyes upon the fire, bent his
    brows, and considered again; why did she suppose that?

    'I have met him twice. Both times near home. Both times at night, when
    I was going back. Both times I thought (though that may easily be my
            mistake), that he hardly looked as if he had met me by accident.'

    'Did he say anything?'

    'No; he only nodded and put his head on one side.'

    'The devil take his head!' mused Clennam, still looking at the fire;
    'it's always on one side.'

    He roused himself to persuade her to put some wine to her lips, and to
    touch something to eat--it was very difficult, she was so timid and
    shy--and then said, musing again:

    'Is my mother at all changed to you?'

    'Oh, not at all. She is just the same. I wondered whether I had better
    tell her my history. I wondered whether I might--I mean, whether you
    would like me to tell her. I wondered,' said Little Dorrit, looking at
    him in a suppliant way, and gradually withdrawing her eyes as he looked
    at her, 'whether you would advise me what I ought to do.'

    'Little Dorrit,' said Clennam; and the phrase had already begun, between
    these two, to stand for a hundred gentle phrases, according to the
    varying tone and connection in which it was used; 'do nothing. I will
    have some talk with my old friend, Mrs Affery. Do nothing, Little
    Dorrit--except refresh yourself with such means as there are here. I
    entreat you to do that.'

    'Thank you, I am not hungry. Nor,' said Little Dorrit, as he softly
    put her glass towards her, 'nor thirsty.--I think Maggy might like
    something, perhaps.'

    'We will make her find pockets presently for all there is here,' said
    Clennam: 'but before we awake her, there was a third thing to say.'

    'Yes. You will not be offended, sir?'

    'I promise that, unreservedly.'

    'It will sound strange. I hardly know how to say it. Don't think it
    unreasonable or ungrateful in me,' said Little Dorrit, with returning
    and increasing agitation.

    'No, no, no. I am sure it will be natural and right. I am not afraid
    that I shall put a wrong construction on it, whatever it is.'

    'Thank you. You are coming back to see my father again?'

    'Yes.'

    'You have been so good and thoughtful as to write him a note, saying
    that you are coming to-morrow?'

    'Oh, that was nothing! Yes.'

    'Can you guess,' said Little Dorrit, folding her small hands tight in
    one another, and looking at him with all the earnestness of her soul
    looking steadily out of her eyes, 'what I am going to ask you not to
    do?'

    'I think I can. But I may be wrong.'

    'No, you are not wrong,' said Little Dorrit, shaking her head. 'If we
    should want it so very, very badly that we cannot do without it, let me
    ask you for it.'

    'I Will,--I Will.'

    'Don't encourage him to ask. Don't understand him if he does ask. Don't
    give it to him. Save him and spare him that, and you will be able to
    think better of him!'

    Clennam said--not very plainly, seeing those tears glistening in her
    anxious eyes--that her wish should be sacred with him.

    'You don't know what he is,' she said; 'you don't know what he really
    is. How can you, seeing him there all at once, dear love, and not
    gradually, as I have done! You have been so good to us, so delicately
    and truly good, that I want him to be better in your eyes than in
    anybody's. And I cannot bear to think,' cried Little Dorrit, covering
    her tears with her hands, 'I cannot bear to think that you of all the
    world should see him in his only moments of degradation.'

    'Pray,' said Clennam, 'do not be so distressed. Pray, pray, Little
    Dorrit! This is quite understood now.'

    'Thank you, sir. Thank you! I have tried very much to keep myself from
    saying this; I have thought about it, days and nights; but when I knew
    for certain you were coming again, I made up my mind to speak to you.
    Not because I am ashamed of him,' she dried her tears quickly, 'but
    because I know him better than any one does, and love him, and am proud
    of him.'

    Relieved of this weight, Little Dorrit was nervously anxious to be gone.
    Maggy being broad awake, and in the act of distantly gloating over the
    fruit and cakes with chuckles of anticipation, Clennam made the best
    diversion in his power by pouring her out a glass of wine, which she
    drank in a series of loud smacks; putting her hand upon her windpipe
    after every one, and saying, breathless, with her eyes in a prominent
    state, 'Oh, ain't it d'licious! Ain't it hospitally!' When she had
    finished the wine and these encomiums, he charged her to load her basket
    (she was never without her basket) with every eatable thing upon the
    table, and to take especial care to leave no scrap behind. Maggy's
    pleasure in doing this and her little mother's pleasure in seeing Maggy
    pleased, was as good a turn as circumstances could have given to the
    late conversation.

    'But the gates will have been locked long ago,' said Clennam, suddenly
    remembering it. 'Where are you going?'

    'I am going to Maggy's lodging,' answered Little Dorrit. 'I shall be
    quite safe, quite well taken care of.'

    'I must accompany you there,' said Clennam, 'I cannot let you go alone.'

    'Yes, pray leave us to go there by ourselves. Pray do!' begged Little
    Dorrit.

    She was so earnest in the petition, that Clennam felt a delicacy in
    obtruding himself upon her: the rather, because he could well understand
    that Maggy's lodging was of the obscurest sort. 'Come, Maggy,' said
    Little Dorrit cheerily, 'we shall do very well; we know the way by this
    time, Maggy?'

    'Yes, yes, little mother; we know the way,' chuckled Maggy. And away
    they went. Little Dorrit turned at the door to say, 'God bless you!' She
    said it very softly, but perhaps she may have been as audible above--who
    knows!--as a whole cathedral choir.

    Arthur Clennam suffered them to pass the corner of the street before he
    followed at a distance; not with any idea of encroaching a second time
    on Little Dorrit's privacy, but to satisfy his mind by seeing her secure
    in the neighbourhood to which she was accustomed. So diminutive she
    looked, so fragile and defenceless against the bleak damp weather,
    flitting along in the shuffling shadow of her charge, that he felt, in
    his compassion, and in his habit of considering her a child apart from
    the rest of the rough world, as if he would have been glad to take her
    up in his arms and carry her to her journey's end.

    In course of time she came into the leading thoroughfare where the
    Marshalsea was, and then he saw them slacken their pace, and soon turn
    down a by-street. He stopped, felt that he had no right to go further,
    and slowly left them. He had no suspicion that they ran any risk of
    being houseless until morning; had no idea of the truth until long, long
    afterwards.

    But, said Little Dorrit, when they stopped at a poor dwelling all in
    darkness, and heard no sound on listening at the door, 'Now, this is a
    good lodging for you, Maggy, and we must not give offence. Consequently,
    we will only knock twice, and not very loud; and if we cannot wake them
    so, we must walk about till day.'

    Once, Little Dorrit knocked with a careful hand, and listened. Twice,
    Little Dorrit knocked with a careful hand, and listened. All was close
    and still. 'Maggy, we must do the best we can, my dear. We must be
    patient, and wait for day.'

    It was a chill dark night, with a damp wind blowing, when they came out
    into the leading street again, and heard the clocks strike half-past
    one. 'In only five hours and a half,' said Little Dorrit, 'we shall be
    able to go home.' To speak of home, and to go and look at it, it being
    so near, was a natural sequence. They went to the closed gate, and
    peeped through into the court-yard. 'I hope he is sound asleep,' said
    Little Dorrit, kissing one of the bars, 'and does not miss me.'

    The gate was so familiar, and so like a companion, that they put down
    Maggy's basket in a corner to serve for a seat, and keeping close
    together, rested there for some time. While the street was empty and
    silent, Little Dorrit was not afraid; but when she heard a footstep at
    a distance, or saw a moving shadow among the street lamps, she was
    startled, and whispered, 'Maggy, I see some one. Come away!' Maggy
    would then wake up more or less fretfully, and they would wander about a
    little, and come back again.

    As long as eating was a novelty and an amusement, Maggy kept up pretty
    well. But that period going by, she became querulous about the cold, and
    shivered and whimpered. 'It will soon be over, dear,' said Little Dorrit
    patiently. 'Oh it's all very fine for you, little mother,' returned
    Maggy, 'but I'm a poor thing, only ten years old.' At last, in the dead
    of the night, when the street was very still indeed, Little Dorrit laid
    the heavy head upon her bosom, and soothed her to sleep. And thus she
    sat at the gate, as it were alone; looking up at the stars, and seeing
    the clouds pass over them in their wild flight--which was the dance at
    Little Dorrit's party.

    'If it really was a party!' she thought once, as she sat there. 'If it
    was light and warm and beautiful, and it was our house, and my poor dear
    was its master, and had never been inside these walls. And if Mr
    Clennam was one of our visitors, and we were dancing to delightful
    music, and were all as gay and light-hearted as ever we could be! I
    wonder--' Such a vista of wonder opened out before her, that she sat
    looking up at the stars, quite lost, until Maggy was querulous again,
    and wanted to get up and walk.

    Three o'clock, and half-past three, and they had passed over London
    Bridge. They had heard the rush of the tide against obstacles; and
    looked down, awed, through the dark vapour on the river; had seen little
    spots of lighted water where the bridge lamps were reflected, shining
    like demon eyes, with a terrible fascination in them for guilt and
    misery. They had shrunk past homeless people, lying coiled up in
    nooks. They had run from drunkards. They had started from slinking men,
    whistling and signing to one another at bye corners, or running away at
    full speed. Though everywhere the leader and the guide, Little Dorrit,
    happy for once in her youthful appearance, feigned to cling to and rely
    upon Maggy. And more than once some voice, from among a knot of brawling
    or prowling figures in their path, had called out to the rest to 'let
    the woman and the child go by!'

    So, the woman and the child had gone by, and gone on, and five had
    sounded from the steeples. They were walking slowly towards the east,
    already looking for the first pale streak of day, when a woman came
    after them.

    'What are you doing with the child?' she said to Maggy.

    She was young--far too young to be there, Heaven knows!--and neither
    ugly nor wicked-looking. She spoke coarsely, but with no naturally
    coarse voice; there was even something musical in its sound.

    'What are you doing with yourself?' retorted Maggy, for want of a better
    answer.

    'Can't you see, without my telling you?'

    'I don't know as I can,' said Maggy.

    'Killing myself! Now I have answered you, answer me. What are you doing
    with the child?'

    The supposed child kept her head drooped down, and kept her form close
    at Maggy's side.

    'Poor thing!' said the woman. 'Have you no feeling, that you keep her
    out in the cruel streets at such a time as this? Have you no eyes, that
    you don't see how delicate and slender she is? Have you no sense (you
            don't look as if you had much) that you don't take more pity on this
    cold and trembling little hand?'

    She had stepped across to that side, and held the hand between her own
    two, chafing it. 'Kiss a poor lost creature, dear,' she said, bending
    her face, 'and tell me where's she taking you.'

    Little Dorrit turned towards her.

    'Why, my God!' she said, recoiling, 'you're a woman!'

    'Don't mind that!' said Little Dorrit, clasping one of her hands that
    had suddenly released hers. 'I am not afraid of you.'

    'Then you had better be,' she answered. 'Have you no mother?'

    'No.'

    'No father?'

    'Yes, a very dear one.'

    'Go home to him, and be afraid of me. Let me go. Good night!'

    'I must thank you first; let me speak to you as if I really were a
    child.'

    'You can't do it,' said the woman. 'You are kind and innocent; but you
    can't look at me out of a child's eyes. I never should have touched you,
    but I thought that you were a child.' And with a strange, wild cry, she
    went away.

    No day yet in the sky, but there was day in the resounding stones of
    the streets; in the waggons, carts, and coaches; in the workers going
    to various occupations; in the opening of early shops; in the traffic
    at markets; in the stir of the riverside. There was coming day in the
    flaring lights, with a feebler colour in them than they would have had
    at another time; coming day in the increased sharpness of the air, and
    the ghastly dying of the night.

    They went back again to the gate, intending to wait there now until it
    should be opened; but the air was so raw and cold that Little Dorrit,
    leading Maggy about in her sleep, kept in motion. Going round by the
    Church, she saw lights there, and the door open; and went up the steps
    and looked in.

    'Who's that?' cried a stout old man, who was putting on a nightcap as if
    he were going to bed in a vault.

    'It's no one particular, sir,' said Little Dorrit.

    'Stop!' cried the man. 'Let's have a look at you!'

    This caused her to turn back again in the act of going out, and to
    present herself and her charge before him.

    'I thought so!' said he. 'I know _you_.'

    'We have often seen each other,' said Little Dorrit, recognising the
    sexton, or the beadle, or the verger, or whatever he was, 'when I have
    been at church here.'

    'More than that, we've got your birth in our Register, you know; you're
    one of our curiosities.'

    'Indeed!' said Little Dorrit.

    'To be sure. As the child of the--by-the-bye, how did you get out so
    early?'

    'We were shut out last night, and are waiting to get in.'

    'You don't mean it? And there's another hour good yet! Come into the
    vestry. You'll find a fire in the vestry, on account of the painters.
    I'm waiting for the painters, or I shouldn't be here, you may depend
    upon it. One of our curiosities mustn't be cold when we have it in our
    power to warm her up comfortable. Come along.'

    He was a very good old fellow, in his familiar way; and having stirred
    the vestry fire, he looked round the shelves of registers for a
    particular volume. 'Here you are, you see,' he said, taking it down and
    turning the leaves. 'Here you'll find yourself, as large as life. Amy,
    daughter of William and Fanny Dorrit. Born, Marshalsea Prison, Parish of
    St George. And we tell people that you have lived there, without so much
    as a day's or a night's absence, ever since. Is it true?'

    'Quite true, till last night.'

    'Lord!' But his surveying her with an admiring gaze suggested Something
    else to him, to wit: 'I am sorry to see, though, that you are faint and
    tired. Stay a bit. I'll get some cushions out of the church, and you and
    your friend shall lie down before the fire. Don't be afraid of not
    going in to join your father when the gate opens. _I'll_ call you.'

    He soon brought in the cushions, and strewed them on the ground.

    'There you are, you see. Again as large as life. Oh, never mind
    thanking. I've daughters of my own. And though they weren't born in the
    Marshalsea Prison, they might have been, if I had been, in my ways of
    carrying on, of your father's breed. Stop a bit. I must put something
    under the cushion for your head. Here's a burial volume, just the
    thing! We have got Mrs Bangham in this book. But what makes these books
    interesting to most people is--not who's in 'em, but who isn't--who's
    coming, you know, and when. That's the interesting question.'

    Commendingly looking back at the pillow he had improvised, he left them
    to their hour's repose. Maggy was snoring already, and Little Dorrit
    was soon fast asleep with her head resting on that sealed book of Fate,
    untroubled by its mysterious blank leaves.

    This was Little Dorrit's party. The shame, desertion, wretchedness, and
    exposure of the great capital; the wet, the cold, the slow hours, and
    the swift clouds of the dismal night. This was the party from which
    Little Dorrit went home, jaded, in the first grey mist of a rainy
    morning.




The debilitated old house in the city, wrapped in its mantle of soot,
    and leaning heavily on the crutches that had partaken of its decay and
    worn out with it, never knew a healthy or a cheerful interval, let what
    would betide. If the sun ever touched it, it was but with a ray, and
    that was gone in half an hour; if the moonlight ever fell upon it, it
    was only to put a few patches on its doleful cloak, and make it look
    more wretched. The stars, to be sure, coldly watched it when the nights
    and the smoke were clear enough; and all bad weather stood by it with
    a rare fidelity. You should alike find rain, hail, frost, and thaw
    lingering in that dismal enclosure when they had vanished from other
    places; and as to snow, you should see it there for weeks, long after
    it had changed from yellow to black, slowly weeping away its grimy life.
    The place had no other adherents. As to street noises, the rumbling of
    wheels in the lane merely rushed in at the gateway in going past, and
    rushed out again: making the listening Mistress Affery feel as if she
    were deaf, and recovered the sense of hearing by instantaneous flashes.
    So with whistling, singing, talking, laughing, and all pleasant human
    sounds. They leaped the gap in a moment, and went upon their way.

    The varying light of fire and candle in Mrs Clennam's room made the
    greatest change that ever broke the dead monotony of the spot. In her
    two long narrow windows, the fire shone sullenly all day, and sullenly
    all night. On rare occasions it flashed up passionately, as she did;
    but for the most part it was suppressed, like her, and preyed upon
    itself evenly and slowly. During many hours of the short winter days,
    however, when it was dusk there early in the afternoon, changing
    distortions of herself in her wheeled chair, of Mr Flintwinch with his
    wry neck, of Mistress Affery coming and going, would be thrown upon the
    house wall that was over the gateway, and would hover there like shadows
    from a great magic lantern. As the room-ridden invalid settled for the
    night, these would gradually disappear: Mistress Affery's magnified
    shadow always flitting about, last, until it finally glided away into
    the air, as though she were off upon a witch excursion. Then the
    solitary light would burn unchangingly, until it burned pale before the
    dawn, and at last died under the breath of Mrs Affery, as her shadow
    descended on it from the witch-region of sleep.

    Strange, if the little sick-room fire were in effect a beacon fire,
    summoning some one, and that the most unlikely some one in the world,
    to the spot that _must_ be come to. Strange, if the little sick-room light
    were in effect a watch-light, burning in that place every night until
    an appointed event should be watched out! Which of the vast multitude
    of travellers, under the sun and the stars, climbing the dusty hills
    and toiling along the weary plains, journeying by land and journeying by
    sea, coming and going so strangely, to meet and to act and react on one
    another; which of the host may, with no suspicion of the journey's end,
    be travelling surely hither?

    Time shall show us. The post of honour and the post of shame, the
    general's station and the drummer's, a peer's statue in Westminster
    Abbey and a seaman's hammock in the bosom of the deep, the mitre and
    the workhouse, the woolsack and the gallows, the throne and the
    guillotine--the travellers to all are on the great high road, but it
    has wonderful divergencies, and only Time shall show us whither each
    traveller is bound.

    On a wintry afternoon at twilight, Mrs Flintwinch, having been heavy all
    day, dreamed this dream:

    She thought she was in the kitchen getting the kettle ready for tea, and
    was warming herself with her feet upon the fender and the skirt of her
    gown tucked up, before the collapsed fire in the middle of the grate,
    bordered on either hand by a deep cold black ravine. She thought that
    as she sat thus, musing upon the question whether life was not for some
    people a rather dull invention, she was frightened by a sudden noise
    behind her. She thought that she had been similarly frightened once last
    week, and that the noise was of a mysterious kind--a sound of rustling
    and of three or four quick beats like a rapid step; while a shock or
    tremble was communicated to her heart, as if the step had shaken the
    floor, or even as if she had been touched by some awful hand. She
    thought that this revived within her certain old fears of hers that
    the house was haunted; and that she flew up the kitchen stairs without
    knowing how she got up, to be nearer company.

    Mistress Affery thought that on reaching the hall, she saw the door of
    her liege lord's office standing open, and the room empty. That she went
    to the ripped-up window in the little room by the street door to connect
    her palpitating heart, through the glass, with living things beyond
    and outside the haunted house. That she then saw, on the wall over the
    gateway, the shadows of the two clever ones in conversation above. That
    she then went upstairs with her shoes in her hand, partly to be near
    the clever ones as a match for most ghosts, and partly to hear what they
    were talking about.

    'None of your nonsense with me,' said Mr Flintwinch. 'I won't take it
    from you.'

    Mrs Flintwinch dreamed that she stood behind the door, which was just
    ajar, and most distinctly heard her husband say these bold words.

    'Flintwinch,' returned Mrs Clennam, in her usual strong low voice,
    'there is a demon of anger in you. Guard against it.'

    'I don't care whether there's one or a dozen,' said Mr Flintwinch,
    forcibly suggesting in his tone that the higher number was nearer the
    mark. 'If there was fifty, they should all say, None of your nonsense
    with me, I won't take it from you--I'd make 'em say it, whether they
    liked it or not.'

    'What have I done, you wrathful man?' her strong voice asked.

    'Done?' said Mr Flintwinch. 'Dropped down upon me.'

    'If you mean, remonstrated with you--'

    'Don't put words into my mouth that I don't mean,' said Jeremiah,
    sticking to his figurative expression with tenacious and impenetrable
    obstinacy: 'I mean dropped down upon me.'

    'I remonstrated with you,' she began again, 'because--'

    'I won't have it!' cried Jeremiah. 'You dropped down upon me.'

    'I dropped down upon you, then, you ill-conditioned man,' (Jeremiah
            chuckled at having forced her to adopt his phrase,) 'for having been
    needlessly significant to Arthur that morning. I have a right to
    complain of it as almost a breach of confidence. You did not mean it--'

    'I won't have it!' interposed the contradictory Jeremiah, flinging back
    the concession. 'I did mean it.'

    'I suppose I must leave you to speak in soliloquy if you choose,' she
    replied, after a pause that seemed an angry one. 'It is useless my
    addressing myself to a rash and headstrong old man who has a set purpose
    not to hear me.'

    'Now, I won't take that from you either,' said Jeremiah. 'I have no such
    purpose. I have told you I did mean it. Do you wish to know why I meant
    it, you rash and headstrong old woman?'

    'After all, you only restore me my own words,' she said, struggling with
    her indignation. 'Yes.'

    'This is why, then. Because you hadn't cleared his father to him, and
    you ought to have done it. Because, before you went into any tantrum
    about yourself, who are--'

    'Hold there, Flintwinch!' she cried out in a changed voice: 'you may go
    a word too far.'

    The old man seemed to think so. There was another pause, and he had
    altered his position in the room, when he spoke again more mildly:

    'I was going to tell you why it was. Because, before you took your own
    part, I thought you ought to have taken the part of Arthur's father.
    Arthur's father! I had no particular love for Arthur's father. I served
    Arthur's father's uncle, in this house, when Arthur's father was not
    much above me--was poorer as far as his pocket went--and when his uncle
    might as soon have left me his heir as have left him. He starved in the
    parlour, and I starved in the kitchen; that was the principal difference
    in our positions; there was not much more than a flight of breakneck
    stairs between us. I never took to him in those times; I don't know that
    I ever took to him greatly at any time. He was an undecided, irresolute
    chap, who had everything but his orphan life scared out of him when he
    was young. And when he brought you home here, the wife his uncle
    had named for him, I didn't need to look at you twice (you were a
            good-looking woman at that time) to know who'd be master. You have stood
    of your own strength ever since. Stand of your own strength now. Don't
    lean against the dead.'

    'I do _not_--as you call it--lean against the dead.'

    'But you had a mind to do it, if I had submitted,' growled Jeremiah,
    'and that's why you drop down upon me. You can't forget that I didn't
    submit. I suppose you are astonished that I should consider it worth my
    while to have justice done to Arthur's father? Hey? It doesn't matter
    whether you answer or not, because I know you are, and you know you are.
    Come, then, I'll tell you how it is. I may be a bit of an oddity in
    point of temper, but this is my temper--I can't let anybody have
    entirely their own way. You are a determined woman, and a clever woman;
    and when you see your purpose before you, nothing will turn you from it.
    Who knows that better than I do?'

    'Nothing will turn me from it, Flintwinch, when I have justified it to
    myself. Add that.'

    'Justified it to yourself? I said you were the most determined woman on
    the face of the earth (or I meant to say so), and if you are determined
    to justify any object you entertain, of course you'll do it.'

    'Man! I justify myself by the authority of these Books,' she cried, with
    stern emphasis, and appearing from the sound that followed to strike the
    dead-weight of her arm upon the table.

    'Never mind that,' returned Jeremiah calmly, 'we won't enter into that
    question at present. However that may be, you carry out your purposes,
    and you make everything go down before them. Now, I won't go down before
    them. I have been faithful to you, and useful to you, and I am attached
    to you. But I can't consent, and I won't consent, and I never did
    consent, and I never will consent to be lost in you. Swallow up
    everybody else, and welcome. The peculiarity of my temper is, ma'am,
    that I won't be swallowed up alive.'

    Perhaps this had originally been the mainspring of the understanding
    between them. Descrying thus much of force of character in Mr
    Flintwinch, perhaps Mrs Clennam had deemed alliance with him worth her
    while.

    'Enough and more than enough of the subject,' said she gloomily.

    'Unless you drop down upon me again,' returned the persistent
    Flintwinch, 'and then you must expect to hear of it again.'

    Mistress Affery dreamed that the figure of her lord here began walking
    up and down the room, as if to cool his spleen, and that she ran away;
    but that, as he did not issue forth when she had stood listening and
    trembling in the shadowy hall a little time, she crept up-stairs again,
    impelled as before by ghosts and curiosity, and once more cowered
    outside the door.

    'Please to light the candle, Flintwinch,' Mrs Clennam was saying,
    apparently wishing to draw him back into their usual tone. 'It is nearly
    time for tea. Little Dorrit is coming, and will find me in the dark.'

    Mr Flintwinch lighted the candle briskly, and said as he put it down
    upon the table:

    'What are you going to do with Little Dorrit? Is she to come to work
    here for ever? To come to tea here for ever? To come backwards and
    forwards here, in the same way, for ever?'

    'How can you talk about "for ever" to a maimed creature like me? Are we
    not all cut down like the grass of the field, and was not I shorn by the
    scythe many years ago: since when I have been lying here, waiting to be
    gathered into the barn?'

    'Ay, ay! But since you have been lying here--not near dead--nothing like
    it--numbers of children and young people, blooming women, strong men,
    and what not, have been cut down and carried; and still here are you,
    you see, not much changed after all. Your time and mine may be a long
    one yet. When I say for ever, I mean (though I am not poetical) through
    all our time.' Mr Flintwinch gave this explanation with great calmness,
    and calmly waited for an answer.

    'So long as Little Dorrit is quiet and industrious, and stands in need
    of the slight help I can give her, and deserves it; so long, I suppose,
    unless she withdraws of her own act, she will continue to come here, I
    being spared.'

    'Nothing more than that?' said Flintwinch, stroking his mouth and chin.

    'What should there be more than that! What could there be more than
    that!' she ejaculated in her sternly wondering way.

    Mrs Flintwinch dreamed, that, for the space of a minute or two, they
    remained looking at each other with the candle between them, and
    that she somehow derived an impression that they looked at each other
    fixedly.

    'Do you happen to know, Mrs Clennam,' Affery's liege lord then demanded
    in a much lower voice, and with an amount of expression that seemed
    quite out of proportion to the simple purpose of his words, 'where she
    lives?'

    'No.'

    'Would you--now, would you like to know?' said Jeremiah with a pounce as
    if he had sprung upon her.

    'If I cared to know, I should know already. Could I not have asked her
    any day?'

    'Then you don't care to know?'

    'I do not.'

    Mr Flintwinch, having expelled a long significant breath said, with his
    former emphasis, 'For I have accidentally--mind!--found out.'

    'Wherever she lives,' said Mrs Clennam, speaking in one unmodulated hard
    voice, and separating her words as distinctly as if she were reading
    them off from separate bits of metal that she took up one by one, 'she
    has made a secret of it, and she shall always keep her secret from me.'

    'After all, perhaps you would rather not have known the fact, any how?'
    said Jeremiah; and he said it with a twist, as if his words had come out
    of him in his own wry shape.

    'Flintwinch,' said his mistress and partner, flashing into a sudden
    energy that made Affery start, 'why do you goad me? Look round this
    room. If it is any compensation for my long confinement within these
    narrow limits--not that I complain of being afflicted; you know I never
    complain of that--if it is any compensation to me for long confinement
    to this room, that while I am shut up from all pleasant change I am also
    shut up from the knowledge of some things that I may prefer to avoid
    knowing, why should you, of all men, grudge me that belief?'

    'I don't grudge it to you,' returned Jeremiah.

    'Then say no more. Say no more. Let Little Dorrit keep her secret from
    me, and do you keep it from me also. Let her come and go, unobserved and
    unquestioned. Let me suffer, and let me have what alleviation belongs to
    my condition. Is it so much, that you torment me like an evil spirit?'

    'I asked you a question. That's all.'

    'I have answered it. So, say no more. Say no more.' Here the sound of
    the wheeled chair was heard upon the floor, and Affery's bell rang with
    a hasty jerk.

    More afraid of her husband at the moment than of the mysterious sound in
    the kitchen, Affery crept away as lightly and as quickly as she could,
    descended the kitchen stairs almost as rapidly as she had ascended them,
    resumed her seat before the fire, tucked up her skirt again, and finally
    threw her apron over her head. Then the bell rang once more, and then
    once more, and then kept on ringing; in despite of which importunate
    summons, Affery still sat behind her apron, recovering her breath.

    At last Mr Flintwinch came shuffling down the staircase into the
    hall, muttering and calling 'Affery woman!' all the way. Affery still
    remaining behind her apron, he came stumbling down the kitchen stairs,
    candle in hand, sidled up to her, twitched her apron off, and roused
    her.

    'Oh Jeremiah!' cried Affery, waking. 'What a start you gave me!'

    'What have you been doing, woman?' inquired Jeremiah. 'You've been rung
    for fifty times.'

    'Oh Jeremiah,' said Mistress Affery, 'I have been a-dreaming!'

    Reminded of her former achievement in that way, Mr Flintwinch held the
    candle to her head, as if he had some idea of lighting her up for the
    illumination of the kitchen.

    'Don't you know it's her tea-time?' he demanded with a vicious grin, and
    giving one of the legs of Mistress Affery's chair a kick.

    'Jeremiah? Tea-time? I don't know what's come to me. But I got such a
    dreadful turn, Jeremiah, before I went--off a-dreaming, that I think it
    must be that.'

    'Yoogh! Sleepy-Head!' said Mr Flintwinch, 'what are you talking about?'

    'Such a strange noise, Jeremiah, and such a curious movement. In the
    kitchen here--just here.'

    Jeremiah held up his light and looked at the blackened ceiling, held
    down his light and looked at the damp stone floor, turned round with his
    light and looked about at the spotted and blotched walls.

    'Rats, cats, water, drains,' said Jeremiah.

    Mistress Affery negatived each with a shake of her head. 'No, Jeremiah;
    I have felt it before. I have felt it up-stairs, and once on the
    staircase as I was going from her room to ours in the night--a rustle
    and a sort of trembling touch behind me.'

    'Affery, my woman,' said Mr Flintwinch grimly, after advancing his nose
    to that lady's lips as a test for the detection of spirituous liquors,
    'if you don't get tea pretty quick, old woman, you'll become sensible
    of a rustle and a touch that'll send you flying to the other end of the
    kitchen.'

    This prediction stimulated Mrs Flintwinch to bestir herself, and to
    hasten up-stairs to Mrs Clennam's chamber. But, for all that, she now
    began to entertain a settled conviction that there was something wrong
    in the gloomy house. Henceforth, she was never at peace in it after
    daylight departed; and never went up or down stairs in the dark without
    having her apron over her head, lest she should see something.

    What with these ghostly apprehensions and her singular dreams, Mrs
    Flintwinch fell that evening into a haunted state of mind, from which
    it may be long before this present narrative descries any trace of her
    recovery. In the vagueness and indistinctness of all her new experiences
    and perceptions, as everything about her was mysterious to herself she
    began to be mysterious to others: and became as difficult to be made out
    to anybody's satisfaction as she found the house and everything in it
    difficult to make out to her own.

    She had not yet finished preparing Mrs Clennam's tea, when the soft
    knock came to the door which always announced Little Dorrit. Mistress
    Affery looked on at Little Dorrit taking off her homely bonnet in the
    hall, and at Mr Flintwinch scraping his jaws and contemplating her in
    silence, as expecting some wonderful consequence to ensue which would
    frighten her out of her five wits or blow them all three to pieces.

    After tea there came another knock at the door, announcing Arthur.
    Mistress Affery went down to let him in, and he said on entering,
    'Affery, I am glad it's you. I want to ask you a question.' Affery
    immediately replied, 'For goodness sake don't ask me nothing, Arthur! I
    am frightened out of one half of my life, and dreamed out of the
    other. Don't ask me nothing! I don't know which is which, or what is
    what!'--and immediately started away from him, and came near him no
    more.

    Mistress Affery having no taste for reading, and no sufficient light for
    needlework in the subdued room, supposing her to have the inclination,
    now sat every night in the dimness from which she had momentarily
    emerged on the evening of Arthur Clennam's return, occupied with crowds
    of wild speculations and suspicions respecting her mistress and her
    husband and the noises in the house. When the ferocious devotional
    exercises were engaged in, these speculations would distract Mistress
    Affery's eyes towards the door, as if she expected some dark form to
    appear at those propitious moments, and make the party one too many.

    Otherwise, Affery never said or did anything to attract the attention of
    the two clever ones towards her in any marked degree, except on certain
    occasions, generally at about the quiet hour towards bed-time, when she
    would suddenly dart out of her dim corner, and whisper with a face of
    terror to Mr Flintwinch, reading the paper near Mrs Clennam's little
    table:

    'There, Jeremiah! Now! What's that noise?'

    Then the noise, if there were any, would have ceased, and Mr Flintwinch
    would snarl, turning upon her as if she had cut him down that moment
    against his will, 'Affery, old woman, you shall have a dose, old woman,
    such a dose! You have been dreaming again!'




The time being come for the renewal of his acquaintance with the Meagles
family, Clennam, pursuant to contract made between himself and Mr
Meagles within the precincts of Bleeding Heart Yard, turned his face
on a certain Saturday towards Twickenham, where Mr Meagles had a
cottage-residence of his own. The weather being fine and dry, and any
English road abounding in interest for him who had been so long away,
        he sent his valise on by the coach, and set out to walk. A walk was in
        itself a new enjoyment to him, and one that had rarely diversified his
        life afar off.

        He went by Fulham and Putney, for the pleasure of strolling over the
        heath. It was bright and shining there; and when he found himself so far
        on his road to Twickenham, he found himself a long way on his road to
        a number of airier and less substantial destinations. They had risen
        before him fast, in the healthful exercise and the pleasant road. It is
        not easy to walk alone in the country without musing upon something. And
        he had plenty of unsettled subjects to meditate upon, though he had been
        walking to the Land's End.

        First, there was the subject seldom absent from his mind, the question,
        what he was to do henceforth in life; to what occupation he should
        devote himself, and in what direction he had best seek it. He was far
        from rich, and every day of indecision and inaction made his inheritance
        a source of greater anxiety to him. As often as he began to consider how
        to increase this inheritance, or to lay it by, so often his misgiving
        that there was some one with an unsatisfied claim upon his justice,
        returned; and that alone was a subject to outlast the longest walk.
        Again, there was the subject of his relations with his mother, which
        were now upon an equable and peaceful but never confidential footing,
        and whom he saw several times a week. Little Dorrit was a leading and a
        constant subject: for the circumstances of his life, united to those of
        her own story, presented the little creature to him as the only person
        between whom and himself there were ties of innocent reliance on one
        hand, and affectionate protection on the other; ties of compassion,
        respect, unselfish interest, gratitude, and pity. Thinking of her, and
        of the possibility of her father's release from prison by the unbarring
        hand of death--the only change of circumstance he could foresee that
        might enable him to be such a friend to her as he wished to be, by
        altering her whole manner of life, smoothing her rough road, and
        giving her a home--he regarded her, in that perspective, as his adopted
        daughter, his poor child of the Marshalsea hushed to rest. If there were
        a last subject in his thoughts, and it lay towards Twickenham, its form
        was so indefinite that it was little more than the pervading atmosphere
        in which these other subjects floated before him.

        He had crossed the heath and was leaving it behind when he gained upon a
        figure which had been in advance of him for some time, and which, as
        he gained upon it, he thought he knew. He derived this impression
        from something in the turn of the head, and in the figure's action of
        consideration, as it went on at a sufficiently sturdy walk. But when
        the man--for it was a man's figure--pushed his hat up at the back of his
        head, and stopped to consider some object before him, he knew it to be
        Daniel Doyce.

        'How do you do, Mr Doyce?' said Clennam, overtaking him. 'I am glad to
        see you again, and in a healthier place than the Circumlocution Office.'

        'Ha! Mr Meagles's friend!' exclaimed that public criminal, coming out of
        some mental combinations he had been making, and offering his hand. 'I
        am glad to see you, sir. Will you excuse me if I forget your name?'

        'Readily. It's not a celebrated name. It's not Barnacle.'

        'No, no,' said Daniel, laughing. 'And now I know what it is. It's
        Clennam. How do you do, Mr Clennam?'

        'I have some hope,' said Arthur, as they walked on together, 'that we
        may be going to the same place, Mr Doyce.'

        'Meaning Twickenham?' returned Daniel. 'I am glad to hear it.'

        They were soon quite intimate, and lightened the way with a variety of
        conversation. The ingenious culprit was a man of great modesty and good
        sense; and, though a plain man, had been too much accustomed to combine
        what was original and daring in conception with what was patient and
        minute in execution, to be by any means an ordinary man. It was at first
        difficult to lead him to speak about himself, and he put off Arthur's
        advances in that direction by admitting slightly, oh yes, he had done
        this, and he had done that, and such a thing was of his making, and
        such another thing was his discovery, but it was his trade, you see, his
        trade; until, as he gradually became assured that his companion had a
        real interest in his account of himself, he frankly yielded to it. Then
        it appeared that he was the son of a north-country blacksmith, and had
        originally been apprenticed by his widowed mother to a lock-maker; that
        he had 'struck out a few little things' at the lock-maker's, which had
        led to his being released from his indentures with a present, which
        present had enabled him to gratify his ardent wish to bind himself to
        a working engineer, under whom he had laboured hard, learned hard, and
        lived hard, seven years. His time being out, he had 'worked in the shop'
        at weekly wages seven or eight years more; and had then betaken
        himself to the banks of the Clyde, where he had studied, and filed, and
        hammered, and improved his knowledge, theoretical and practical, for six
        or seven years more. There he had had an offer to go to Lyons, which he
        had accepted; and from Lyons had been engaged to go to Germany, and in
        Germany had had an offer to go to St Petersburg, and there had done very
        well indeed--never better. However, he had naturally felt a preference
        for his own country, and a wish to gain distinction there, and to do
        whatever service he could do, there rather than elsewhere. And so he had
        come home. And so at home he had established himself in business, and
        had invented and executed, and worked his way on, until, after a dozen
        years of constant suit and service, he had been enrolled in the
        Great British Legion of Honour, the Legion of the Rebuffed of the
        Circumlocution Office, and had been decorated with the Great British
        Order of Merit, the Order of the Disorder of the Barnacles and
        Stiltstalkings.

        'It is much to be regretted,' said Clennam, 'that you ever turned your
        thoughts that way, Mr Doyce.'

        'True, sir, true to a certain extent. But what is a man to do? if he
        has the misfortune to strike out something serviceable to the nation,
        he must follow where it leads him.'

        'Hadn't he better let it go?' said Clennam.

        'He can't do it,' said Doyce, shaking his head with a thoughtful smile.
        'It's not put into his head to be buried. It's put into his head to be
        made useful. You hold your life on the condition that to the last you
        shall struggle hard for it. Every man holds a discovery on the same
        terms.'

        'That is to say,' said Arthur, with a growing admiration of his quiet
        companion, 'you are not finally discouraged even now?'

        'I have no right to be, if I am,' returned the other. 'The thing is as
        true as it ever was.'

        When they had walked a little way in silence, Clennam, at once to
        change the direct point of their conversation and not to change it
        too abruptly, asked Mr Doyce if he had any partner in his business to
        relieve him of a portion of its anxieties?

        'No,' he returned, 'not at present. I had when I first entered on it,
        and a good man he was. But he has been dead some years; and as I could
        not easily take to the notion of another when I lost him, I bought
        his share for myself and have gone on by myself ever since. And here's
        another thing,' he said, stopping for a moment with a good-humoured
        laugh in his eyes, and laying his closed right hand, with its peculiar
        suppleness of thumb, on Clennam's arm, 'no inventor can be a man of
        business, you know.'

        'No?' said Clennam.

        'Why, so the men of business say,' he answered, resuming the walk and
        laughing outright. 'I don't know why we unfortunate creatures should
        be supposed to want common sense, but it is generally taken for granted
        that we do. Even the best friend I have in the world, our excellent
        friend over yonder,' said Doyce, nodding towards Twickenham, 'extends
        a sort of protection to me, don't you know, as a man not quite able to
        take care of himself?'

        Arthur Clennam could not help joining in the good-humoured laugh, for he
        recognised the truth of the description.

        'So I find that I must have a partner who is a man of business and not
        guilty of any inventions,' said Daniel Doyce, taking off his hat to pass
        his hand over his forehead, 'if it's only in deference to the current
        opinion, and to uphold the credit of the Works. I don't think he'll find
        that I have been very remiss or confused in my way of conducting them;
        but that's for him to say--whoever he is--not for me.'

        'You have not chosen him yet, then?'

        'No, sir, no. I have only just come to a decision to take one. The fact
        is, there's more to do than there used to be, and the Works are enough
        for me as I grow older. What with the books and correspondence, and
        foreign journeys for which a Principal is necessary, I can't do all. I
        am going to talk over the best way of negotiating the matter, if I find
        a spare half-hour between this and Monday morning, with my--my Nurse and
        protector,' said Doyce, with laughing eyes again. 'He is a sagacious man
        in business, and has had a good apprenticeship to it.'

        After this, they conversed on different subjects until they arrived at
        their journey's end. A composed and unobtrusive self-sustainment was
        noticeable in Daniel Doyce--a calm knowledge that what was true must
        remain true, in spite of all the Barnacles in the family ocean, and
        would be just the truth, and neither more nor less when even that sea
        had run dry--which had a kind of greatness in it, though not of the
        official quality.

        As he knew the house well, he conducted Arthur to it by the way that
        showed it to the best advantage. It was a charming place (none the worse
                for being a little eccentric), on the road by the river, and just what
        the residence of the Meagles family ought to be. It stood in a garden,
        no doubt as fresh and beautiful in the May of the Year as Pet now was
        in the May of her life; and it was defended by a goodly show of handsome
        trees and spreading evergreens, as Pet was by Mr and Mrs Meagles. It
        was made out of an old brick house, of which a part had been altogether
        pulled down, and another part had been changed into the present cottage;
        so there was a hale elderly portion, to represent Mr and Mrs Meagles,
        and a young picturesque, very pretty portion to represent Pet. There was
        even the later addition of a conservatory sheltering itself against it,
        uncertain of hue in its deep-stained glass, and in its more transparent
        portions flashing to the sun's rays, now like fire and now like harmless
        water drops; which might have stood for Tattycoram. Within view was
        the peaceful river and the ferry-boat, to moralise to all the inmates
        saying: Young or old, passionate or tranquil, chafing or content, you,
        thus runs the current always. Let the heart swell into what discord it
        will, thus plays the rippling water on the prow of the ferry-boat ever
        the same tune. Year after year, so much allowance for the drifting of
        the boat, so many miles an hour the flowing of the stream, here the
        rushes, there the lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet, upon this road
        that steadily runs away; while you, upon your flowing road of time, are
        so capricious and distracted.

        The bell at the gate had scarcely sounded when Mr Meagles came out to
        receive them. Mr Meagles had scarcely come out, when Mrs Meagles came
        out. Mrs Meagles had scarcely come out, when Pet came out. Pet scarcely
        had come out, when Tattycoram came out. Never had visitors a more
        hospitable reception.

        'Here we are, you see,' said Mr Meagles, 'boxed up, Mr Clennam, within
        our own home-limits, as if we were never going to expand--that is,
        travel--again. Not like Marseilles, eh? No allonging and marshonging
        here!'

        'A different kind of beauty, indeed!' said Clennam, looking about him.

        'But, Lord bless me!' cried Mr Meagles, rubbing his hands with a relish,
        'it was an uncommonly pleasant thing being in quarantine, wasn't it?
        Do you know, I have often wished myself back again? We were a capital
        party.'

        This was Mr Meagles's invariable habit. Always to object to everything
        while he was travelling, and always to want to get back to it when he
        was not travelling.

        'If it was summer-time,' said Mr Meagles, 'which I wish it was on your
        account, and in order that you might see the place at its best, you
        would hardly be able to hear yourself speak for birds. Being practical
        people, we never allow anybody to scare the birds; and the birds, being
        practical people too, come about us in myriads. We are delighted to see
        you, Clennam (if you'll allow me, I shall drop the Mister); I heartily
        assure you, we are delighted.'

        'I have not had so pleasant a greeting,' said Clennam--then he recalled
        what Little Dorrit had said to him in his own room, and faithfully
        added 'except once--since we last walked to and fro, looking down at the
        Mediterranean.'

        'Ah!' returned Mr Meagles. 'Something like a look out, _that_ was, wasn't
        it? I don't want a military government, but I shouldn't mind a little
        allonging and marshonging--just a dash of it--in this neighbourhood
        sometimes. It's Devilish still.'

        Bestowing this eulogium on the retired character of his retreat with a
        dubious shake of the head, Mr Meagles led the way into the house. It was
        just large enough, and no more; was as pretty within as it was without,
        and was perfectly well-arranged and comfortable. Some traces of the
        migratory habits of the family were to be observed in the covered frames
        and furniture, and wrapped-up hangings; but it was easy to see that it
        was one of Mr Meagles's whims to have the cottage always kept, in their
        absence, as if they were always coming back the day after to-morrow. Of
        articles collected on his various expeditions, there was such a vast
        miscellany that it was like the dwelling of an amiable Corsair. There
        were antiquities from Central Italy, made by the best modern houses in
        that department of industry; bits of mummy from Egypt (and perhaps
                Birmingham); model gondolas from Venice; model villages from
        Switzerland; morsels of tesselated pavement from Herculaneum and
        Pompeii, like petrified minced veal; ashes out of tombs, and lava out of
        Vesuvius; Spanish fans, Spezzian straw hats, Moorish slippers, Tuscan
        hairpins, Carrara sculpture, Trastaverini scarves, Genoese velvets and
        filigree, Neapolitan coral, Roman cameos, Geneva jewellery, Arab
        lanterns, rosaries blest all round by the Pope himself, and an infinite
        variety of lumber. There were views, like and unlike, of a multitude of
        places; and there was one little picture-room devoted to a few of the
        regular sticky old Saints, with sinews like whipcord, hair like
        Neptune's, wrinkles like tattooing, and such coats of varnish that every
        holy personage served for a fly-trap, and became what is now called in
        the vulgar tongue a Catch-em-alive O. Of these pictorial acquisitions Mr
        Meagles spoke in the usual manner. He was no judge, he said, except of
        what pleased himself; he had picked them up, dirt-cheap, and people
        _had_ considered them rather fine. One man, who at any rate ought to
        know something of the subject, had declared that 'Sage, Reading' (a
                specially oily old gentleman in a blanket, with a swan's-down tippet for
                a beard, and a web of cracks all over him like rich pie-crust), to be a
        fine Guercino. As for Sebastian del Piombo there, you would judge for
        yourself; if it were not his later manner, the question was, Who was it?
        Titian, that might or might not be--perhaps he had only touched it.
        Daniel Doyce said perhaps he hadn't touched it, but Mr Meagles rather
        declined to overhear the remark.

        When he had shown all his spoils, Mr Meagles took them into his own
        snug room overlooking the lawn, which was fitted up in part like a
        dressing-room and in part like an office, and in which, upon a kind of
        counter-desk, were a pair of brass scales for weighing gold, and a scoop
        for shovelling out money.

        'Here they are, you see,' said Mr Meagles. 'I stood behind these two
        articles five-and-thirty years running, when I no more thought of
        gadding about than I now think of--staying at home. When I left the Bank
        for good, I asked for them, and brought them away with me. I mention it
        at once, or you might suppose that I sit in my counting-house (as Pet
                says I do), like the king in the poem of the four-and-twenty blackbirds,
        counting out my money.'

        Clennam's eyes had strayed to a natural picture on the wall, of two
        pretty little girls with their arms entwined. 'Yes, Clennam,' said
        Mr Meagles, in a lower voice. 'There they both are. It was taken some
        seventeen years ago. As I often say to Mother, they were babies then.'

        'Their names?' said Arthur.

        'Ah, to be sure! You have never heard any name but Pet. Pet's name is
        Minnie; her sister's Lillie.'

        'Should you have known, Mr Clennam, that one of them was meant for me?'
        asked Pet herself, now standing in the doorway.

        'I might have thought that both of them were meant for you, both
        are still so like you. Indeed,' said Clennam, glancing from the fair
        original to the picture and back, 'I cannot even now say which is not
        your portrait.'

        'D'ye hear that, Mother?' cried Mr Meagles to his wife, who had followed
        her daughter. 'It's always the same, Clennam; nobody can decide. The
        child to your left is Pet.'

        The picture happened to be near a looking-glass. As Arthur looked at
        it again, he saw, by the reflection of the mirror, Tattycoram stop in
        passing outside the door, listen to what was going on, and pass away
        with an angry and contemptuous frown upon her face, that changed its
        beauty into ugliness.

        'But come!' said Mr Meagles. 'You have had a long walk, and will be glad
        to get your boots off. As to Daniel here, I suppose he'd never think of
        taking _his_ boots off, unless we showed him a boot-jack.'

        'Why not?' asked Daniel, with a significant smile at Clennam.

        'Oh! You have so many things to think about,' returned Mr Meagles,
        clapping him on the shoulder, as if his weakness must not be left to
        itself on any account. 'Figures, and wheels, and cogs, and levers, and
        screws, and cylinders, and a thousand things.'

        'In my calling,' said Daniel, amused, 'the greater usually includes the
        less. But never mind, never mind! Whatever pleases you, pleases me.'

        Clennam could not help speculating, as he seated himself in his room
        by the fire, whether there might be in the breast of this honest,
        affectionate, and cordial Mr Meagles, any microscopic portion of
        the mustard-seed that had sprung up into the great tree of the
        Circumlocution Office. His curious sense of a general superiority to
        Daniel Doyce, which seemed to be founded, not so much on anything
        in Doyce's personal character as on the mere fact of his being an
        originator and a man out of the beaten track of other men, suggested the
        idea. It might have occupied him until he went down to dinner an hour
        afterwards, if he had not had another question to consider, which
        had been in his mind so long ago as before he was in quarantine at
        Marseilles, and which had now returned to it, and was very urgent with
        it. No less a question than this: Whether he should allow himself to
        fall in love with Pet?

        He was twice her age. (He changed the leg he had crossed over the other,
                and tried the calculation again, but could not bring out the total at
                less.) He was twice her age. Well! He was young in appearance, young
        in health and strength, young in heart. A man was certainly not old
        at forty; and many men were not in circumstances to marry, or did not
        marry, until they had attained that time of life. On the other hand, the
        question was, not what he thought of the point, but what she thought of
        it.

        He believed that Mr Meagles was disposed to entertain a ripe regard for
        him, and he knew that he had a sincere regard for Mr Meagles and his
        good wife. He could foresee that to relinquish this beautiful only
        child, of whom they were so fond, to any husband, would be a trial
        of their love which perhaps they never yet had had the fortitude to
        contemplate. But the more beautiful and winning and charming she, the
        nearer they must always be to the necessity of approaching it. And why
        not in his favour, as well as in another's?

        When he had got so far, it came again into his head that the question
        was, not what they thought of it, but what she thought of it.

        Arthur Clennam was a retiring man, with a sense of many deficiencies;
        and he so exalted the merits of the beautiful Minnie in his mind, and
        depressed his own, that when he pinned himself to this point, his hopes
        began to fail him. He came to the final resolution, as he made himself
        ready for dinner, that he would not allow himself to fall in love with
        Pet.

        There were only five, at a round table, and it was very pleasant indeed.
        They had so many places and people to recall, and they were all so easy
        and cheerful together (Daniel Doyce either sitting out like an amused
                spectator at cards, or coming in with some shrewd little experiences of
                his own, when it happened to be to the purpose), that they might have
        been together twenty times, and not have known so much of one another.

        'And Miss Wade,' said Mr Meagles, after they had recalled a number of
        fellow-travellers. 'Has anybody seen Miss Wade?'

        'I have,' said Tattycoram.

        She had brought a little mantle which her young mistress had sent for,
        and was bending over her, putting it on, when she lifted up her dark
        eyes and made this unexpected answer.

        'Tatty!' her young mistress exclaimed. 'You seen Miss Wade?--where?'

        'Here, miss,' said Tattycoram.

        'How?'

        An impatient glance from Tattycoram seemed, as Clennam saw it, to answer
        'With my eyes!' But her only answer in words was: 'I met her near the
        church.'

        'What was she doing there I wonder!' said Mr Meagles. 'Not going to it,
        I should think.'

        'She had written to me first,' said Tattycoram.

        'Oh, Tatty!' murmured her mistress, 'take your hands away. I feel as if
        some one else was touching me!'

        She said it in a quick involuntary way, but half playfully, and not more
        petulantly or disagreeably than a favourite child might have done, who
        laughed next moment. Tattycoram set her full red lips together, and
        crossed her arms upon her bosom.

        'Did you wish to know, sir,' she said, looking at Mr Meagles, 'what Miss
        Wade wrote to me about?'

        'Well, Tattycoram,' returned Mr Meagles, 'since you ask the question,
        and we are all friends here, perhaps you may as well mention it, if you
        are so inclined.'

        'She knew, when we were travelling, where you lived,' said Tattycoram,
        'and she had seen me not quite--not quite--'

        'Not quite in a good temper, Tattycoram?' suggested Mr Meagles,
        shaking his head at the dark eyes with a quiet caution. 'Take a little
        time--count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

        She pressed her lips together again, and took a long deep breath.

        'So she wrote to me to say that if I ever felt myself hurt,' she looked
        down at her young mistress, 'or found myself worried,' she looked down
        at her again, 'I might go to her, and be considerately treated. I was
        to think of it, and could speak to her by the church. So I went there to
        thank her.'

        'Tatty,' said her young mistress, putting her hand up over her shoulder
        that the other might take it, 'Miss Wade almost frightened me when we
        parted, and I scarcely like to think of her just now as having been so
        near me without my knowing it. Tatty dear!'

        Tatty stood for a moment, immovable.

        'Hey?' cried Mr Meagles. 'Count another five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

        She might have counted a dozen, when she bent and put her lips to the
        caressing hand. It patted her cheek, as it touched the owner's beautiful
        curls, and Tattycoram went away.

        'Now there,' said Mr Meagles softly, as he gave a turn to the
        dumb-waiter on his right hand to twirl the sugar towards himself.
        'There's a girl who might be lost and ruined, if she wasn't among
        practical people. Mother and I know, solely from being practical, that
        there are times when that girl's whole nature seems to roughen itself
        against seeing us so bound up in Pet. No father and mother were bound
        up in her, poor soul. I don't like to think of the way in which that
        unfortunate child, with all that passion and protest in her, feels when
        she hears the Fifth Commandment on a Sunday. I am always inclined to
        call out, Church, Count five-and-twenty, Tattycoram.'

        Besides his dumb-waiter, Mr Meagles had two other not dumb waiters in
        the persons of two parlour-maids with rosy faces and bright eyes, who
        were a highly ornamental part of the table decoration. 'And why not, you
        see?' said Mr Meagles on this head. 'As I always say to Mother, why
        not have something pretty to look at, if you have anything at all?'

        A certain Mrs Tickit, who was Cook and Housekeeper when the family were
        at home, and Housekeeper only when the family were away, completed the
        establishment. Mr Meagles regretted that the nature of the duties in
        which she was engaged, rendered Mrs Tickit unpresentable at present,
        but hoped to introduce her to the new visitor to-morrow. She was an
        important part of the Cottage, he said, and all his friends knew her.
        That was her picture up in the corner. When they went away, she always
        put on the silk-gown and the jet-black row of curls represented in that
        portrait (her hair was reddish-grey in the kitchen), established herself
        in the breakfast-room, put her spectacles between two particular leaves
        of Doctor Buchan's Domestic Medicine, and sat looking over the blind all
        day until they came back again. It was supposed that no persuasion could
        be invented which would induce Mrs Tickit to abandon her post at the
        blind, however long their absence, or to dispense with the attendance
        of Dr Buchan; the lucubrations of which learned practitioner, Mr Meagles
        implicitly believed she had never yet consulted to the extent of one
        word in her life.

        In the evening they played an old-fashioned rubber; and Pet sat looking
        over her father's hand, or singing to herself by fits and starts at the
        piano. She was a spoilt child; but how could she be otherwise? Who could
        be much with so pliable and beautiful a creature, and not yield to her
        endearing influence? Who could pass an evening in the house, and not
        love her for the grace and charm of her very presence in the room? This
        was Clennam's reflection, notwithstanding the final conclusion at which
        he had arrived up-stairs.

        In making it, he revoked. 'Why, what are you thinking of, my good sir?'
        asked the astonished Mr Meagles, who was his partner. 'I beg your
        pardon. Nothing,' returned Clennam. 'Think of something, next time;
        that's a dear fellow,' said Mr Meagles. Pet laughingly believed he had
        been thinking of Miss Wade. 'Why of Miss Wade, Pet?' asked her father.
        'Why, indeed!' said Arthur Clennam. Pet coloured a little, and went to
        the piano again.

        As they broke up for the night, Arthur overheard Doyce ask his host if
        he could give him half an hour's conversation before breakfast in the
        morning? The host replying willingly, Arthur lingered behind a moment,
        having his own word to add to that topic.

        'Mr Meagles,' he said, on their being left alone, 'do you remember when
        you advised me to go straight to London?'

        'Perfectly well.'

        'And when you gave me some other good advice which I needed at that time?'

        'I won't say what it was worth,' answered Mr Meagles: 'but of course I
        remember our being very pleasant and confidential together.'

        'I have acted on your advice; and having disembarrassed myself of an
        occupation that was painful to me for many reasons, wish to devote
        myself and what means I have, to another pursuit.'

        'Right! You can't do it too soon,' said Mr Meagles.

        'Now, as I came down to-day, I found that your friend, Mr Doyce, is
        looking for a partner in his business--not a partner in his mechanical
        knowledge, but in the ways and means of turning the business arising
        from it to the best account.'

        'Just so,' said Mr Meagles, with his hands in his pockets, and with
        the old business expression of face that had belonged to the scales and
        scoop.

        'Mr Doyce mentioned incidentally, in the course of our conversation,
        that he was going to take your valuable advice on the subject of finding
        such a partner. If you should think our views and opportunities at all
        likely to coincide, perhaps you will let him know my available position.
        I speak, of course, in ignorance of the details, and they may be
        unsuitable on both sides.'

        'No doubt, no doubt,' said Mr Meagles, with the caution belonging to the
        scales and scoop.

        'But they will be a question of figures and accounts--'

        'Just so, just so,' said Mr Meagles, with arithmetical solidity
        belonging to the scales and scoop.

        '--And I shall be glad to enter into the subject, provided Mr Doyce
        responds, and you think well of it. If you will at present, therefore,
        allow me to place it in your hands, you will much oblige me.'

        'Clennam, I accept the trust with readiness,' said Mr Meagles. 'And
        without anticipating any of the points which you, as a man of business,
        have of course reserved, I am free to say to you that I think something
        may come of this. Of one thing you may be perfectly certain. Daniel is
        an honest man.'

        'I am so sure of it that I have promptly made up my mind to speak to
        you.'

        'You must guide him, you know; you must steer him; you must direct him;
        he is one of a crotchety sort,' said Mr Meagles, evidently meaning
        nothing more than that he did new things and went new ways; 'but he is
        as honest as the sun, and so good night!'

        Clennam went back to his room, sat down again before his fire, and made
        up his mind that he was glad he had resolved not to fall in love with
        Pet. She was so beautiful, so amiable, so apt to receive any true
        impression given to her gentle nature and her innocent heart, and make
        the man who should be so happy as to communicate it, the most fortunate
        and enviable of all men, that he was very glad indeed he had come to
        that conclusion.

        But, as this might have been a reason for coming to the opposite
        conclusion, he followed out the theme again a little way in his mind; to
        justify himself, perhaps.

        'Suppose that a man,' so his thoughts ran, 'who had been of age some
        twenty years or so; who was a diffident man, from the circumstances of
        his youth; who was rather a grave man, from the tenor of his life; who
        knew himself to be deficient in many little engaging qualities which
        he admired in others, from having been long in a distant region, with
        nothing softening near him; who had no kind sisters to present to her;
        who had no congenial home to make her known in; who was a stranger in
        the land; who had not a fortune to compensate, in any measure, for
        these defects; who had nothing in his favour but his honest love and his
        general wish to do right--suppose such a man were to come to this house,
        and were to yield to the captivation of this charming girl, and were to
        persuade himself that he could hope to win her; what a weakness it would
        be!'

        He softly opened his window, and looked out upon the serene river. Year
        after year so much allowance for the drifting of the ferry-boat, so
        many miles an hour the flowing of the stream, here the rushes, there the
        lilies, nothing uncertain or unquiet.

        Why should he be vexed or sore at heart? It was not his weakness that he
        had imagined. It was nobody's, nobody's within his knowledge; why should
        it trouble him? And yet it did trouble him. And he thought--who has not
        thought for a moment, sometimes?--that it might be better to flow away
        monotonously, like the river, and to compound for its insensibility to
        happiness with its insensibility to pain.




Before breakfast in the morning, Arthur walked out to look about him.
As the morning was fine and he had an hour on his hands, he crossed the
river by the ferry, and strolled along a footpath through some meadows.
When he came back to the towing-path, he found the ferry-boat on the
opposite side, and a gentleman hailing it and waiting to be taken over.

This gentleman looked barely thirty. He was well dressed, of a sprightly
and gay appearance, a well-knit figure, and a rich dark complexion. As
Arthur came over the stile and down to the water's edge, the lounger
glanced at him for a moment, and then resumed his occupation of idly
tossing stones into the water with his foot. There was something in his
way of spurning them out of their places with his heel, and getting them
into the required position, that Clennam thought had an air of cruelty
in it. Most of us have more or less frequently derived a similar
impression from a man's manner of doing some very little thing: plucking
a flower, clearing away an obstacle, or even destroying an insentient
object.

The gentleman's thoughts were preoccupied, as his face showed, and he
took no notice of a fine Newfoundland dog, who watched him attentively,
     and watched every stone too, in its turn, eager to spring into the
     river on receiving his master's sign. The ferry-boat came over, however,
     without his receiving any sign, and when it grounded his master took him
     by the collar and walked him into it.

     'Not this morning,' he said to the dog. 'You won't do for ladies'
     company, dripping wet. Lie down.'

     Clennam followed the man and the dog into the boat, and took his seat.
     The dog did as he was ordered. The man remained standing, with his hands
     in his pockets, and towered between Clennam and the prospect. Man and
     dog both jumped lightly out as soon as they touched the other side, and
     went away. Clennam was glad to be rid of them.

     The church clock struck the breakfast hour as he walked up the little
     lane by which the garden-gate was approached. The moment he pulled the
     bell a deep loud barking assailed him from within the wall.

     'I heard no dog last night,' thought Clennam. The gate was opened by
     one of the rosy maids, and on the lawn were the Newfoundland dog and the
     man.

     'Miss Minnie is not down yet, gentlemen,' said the blushing portress, as
     they all came together in the garden. Then she said to the master of the
     dog, 'Mr Clennam, sir,' and tripped away.

     'Odd enough, Mr Clennam, that we should have met just now,' said
     the man. Upon which the dog became mute. 'Allow me to introduce
     myself--Henry Gowan. A pretty place this, and looks wonderfully well
     this morning!'

     The manner was easy, and the voice agreeable; but still Clennam thought,
     that if he had not made that decided resolution to avoid falling in love
     with Pet, he would have taken a dislike to this Henry Gowan.

     'It's new to you, I believe?' said this Gowan, when Arthur had extolled
     the place.

     'Quite new. I made acquaintance with it only yesterday afternoon.'

     'Ah! Of course this is not its best aspect. It used to look charming in
     the spring, before they went away last time. I should like you to have
     seen it then.'

     But for that resolution so often recalled, Clennam might have wished him
     in the crater of Mount Etna, in return for this civility.

     'I have had the pleasure of seeing it under many circumstances during
     the last three years, and it's--a Paradise.'

     It was (at least it might have been, always excepting for that wise
             resolution) like his dexterous impudence to call it a Paradise. He only
     called it a Paradise because he first saw her coming, and so made her
     out within her hearing to be an angel, Confusion to him!

     And ah! how beaming she looked, and how glad! How she caressed the dog,
     and how the dog knew her! How expressive that heightened colour in her
     face, that fluttered manner, her downcast eyes, her irresolute
     happiness! When had Clennam seen her look like this? Not that there was
     any reason why he might, could, would, or should have ever seen her look
     like this, or that he had ever hoped for himself to see her look like
     this; but still--when had he ever known her do it!

     He stood at a little distance from them. This Gowan when he had talked
     about a Paradise, had gone up to her and taken her hand. The dog had put
     his great paws on her arm and laid his head against her dear bosom. She
     had laughed and welcomed them, and made far too much of the dog, far,
     far, too much--that is to say, supposing there had been any third person
     looking on who loved her.

     She disengaged herself now, and came to Clennam, and put her hand in his
     and wished him good morning, and gracefully made as if she would take
     his arm and be escorted into the house. To this Gowan had no objection.
     No, he knew he was too safe.

     There was a passing cloud on Mr Meagles's good-humoured face when they
     all three (four, counting the dog, and he was the most objectionable
             but one of the party) came in to breakfast. Neither it, nor the touch
     of uneasiness on Mrs Meagles as she directed her eyes towards it, was
     unobserved by Clennam.

     'Well, Gowan,' said Mr Meagles, even suppressing a sigh; 'how goes the
     world with you this morning?'

     'Much as usual, sir. Lion and I being determined not to waste anything
     of our weekly visit, turned out early, and came over from Kingston, my
     present headquarters, where I am making a sketch or two.' Then he told
     how he had met Mr Clennam at the ferry, and they had come over together.

     'Mrs Gowan is well, Henry?' said Mrs Meagles. (Clennam became
             attentive.)

     'My mother is quite well, thank you.' (Clennam became inattentive.) 'I
     have taken the liberty of making an addition to your family dinner-party
     to-day, which I hope will not be inconvenient to you or to Mr Meagles. I
     couldn't very well get out of it,' he explained, turning to the latter.
     'The young fellow wrote to propose himself to me; and as he is well
     connected, I thought you would not object to my transferring him here.'

     'Who _is_ the young fellow?' asked Mr Meagles with peculiar complacency.

     'He is one of the Barnacles. Tite Barnacle's son, Clarence Barnacle, who
     is in his father's Department. I can at least guarantee that the river
     shall not suffer from his visit. He won't set it on fire.'

     'Aye, aye?' said Meagles. 'A Barnacle is he? _We_ know something of that
     family, eh, Dan? By George, they are at the top of the tree, though! Let
     me see. What relation will this young fellow be to Lord Decimus now? His
     Lordship married, in seventeen ninety-seven, Lady Jemima Bilberry, who
     was the second daughter by the third marriage--no! There I am wrong!
     That was Lady Seraphina--Lady Jemima was the first daughter by the
     second marriage of the fifteenth Earl of Stiltstalking with the
     Honourable Clementina Toozellem. Very well. Now this young fellow's
     father married a Stiltstalking and _his_ father married his cousin who
     was a Barnacle. The father of that father who married a Barnacle,
     married a Joddleby.--I am getting a little too far back, Gowan; I want
     to make out what relation this young fellow is to Lord Decimus.'

     'That's easily stated. His father is nephew to Lord Decimus.'

     'Nephew--to--Lord--Decimus,' Mr Meagles luxuriously repeated with his
     eyes shut, that he might have nothing to distract him from the full
     flavour of the genealogical tree. 'By George, you are right, Gowan. So
     he is.'

     'Consequently, Lord Decimus is his great uncle.'

     'But stop a bit!' said Mr Meagles, opening his eyes with a fresh
     discovery. 'Then on the mother's side, Lady Stiltstalking is his great
     aunt.'

     'Of course she is.'

     'Aye, aye, aye?' said Mr Meagles with much interest. 'Indeed, indeed? We
     shall be glad to see him. We'll entertain him as well as we can, in our
     humble way; and we shall not starve him, I hope, at all events.'

     In the beginning of this dialogue, Clennam had expected some great
     harmless outburst from Mr Meagles, like that which had made him burst
     out of the Circumlocution Office, holding Doyce by the collar. But his
     good friend had a weakness which none of us need go into the next street
     to find, and which no amount of Circumlocution experience could long
     subdue in him. Clennam looked at Doyce; but Doyce knew all about it
     beforehand, and looked at his plate, and made no sign, and said no word.

     'I am much obliged to you,' said Gowan, to conclude the subject.
     'Clarence is a great ass, but he is one of the dearest and best fellows
     that ever lived!'

     It appeared, before the breakfast was over, that everybody whom this
     Gowan knew was either more or less of an ass, or more or less of a
     knave; but was, notwithstanding, the most lovable, the most engaging,
     the simplest, truest, kindest, dearest, best fellow that ever lived.
     The process by which this unvarying result was attained, whatever the
     premises, might have been stated by Mr Henry Gowan thus: 'I claim to be
     always book-keeping, with a peculiar nicety, in every man's case, and
     posting up a careful little account of Good and Evil with him. I do
     this so conscientiously, that I am happy to tell you I find the most
     worthless of men to be the dearest old fellow too: and am in a condition
     to make the gratifying report, that there is much less difference than
     you are inclined to suppose between an honest man and a scoundrel.' The
     effect of this cheering discovery happened to be, that while he seemed
     to be scrupulously finding good in most men, he did in reality lower
     it where it was, and set it up where it was not; but that was its only
     disagreeable or dangerous feature.

     It scarcely seemed, however, to afford Mr Meagles as much satisfaction
     as the Barnacle genealogy had done. The cloud that Clennam had never
     seen upon his face before that morning, frequently overcast it again;
     and there was the same shadow of uneasy observation of him on the comely
     face of his wife. More than once or twice when Pet caressed the dog,
     it appeared to Clennam that her father was unhappy in seeing her do it;
and, in one particular instance when Gowan stood on the other side of
the dog, and bent his head at the same time, Arthur fancied that he saw
tears rise to Mr Meagles's eyes as he hurried out of the room. It was
either the fact too, or he fancied further, that Pet herself was not
insensible to these little incidents; that she tried, with a more
delicate affection than usual, to express to her good father how much
she loved him; that it was on this account that she fell behind the
rest, both as they went to church and as they returned from it, and
took his arm. He could not have sworn but that as he walked alone in
the garden afterwards, he had an instantaneous glimpse of her in
her father's room, clinging to both her parents with the greatest
tenderness, and weeping on her father's shoulder.

The latter part of the day turning out wet, they were fain to keep the
house, look over Mr Meagles's collection, and beguile the time with
conversation. This Gowan had plenty to say for himself, and said it
in an off-hand and amusing manner. He appeared to be an artist by
profession, and to have been at Rome some time; yet he had a slight,
    careless, amateur way with him--a perceptible limp, both in his devotion
    to art and his attainments--which Clennam could scarcely understand.

    He applied to Daniel Doyce for help, as they stood together, looking out
    of window.

    'You know Mr Gowan?' he said in a low voice.

    'I have seen him here. Comes here every Sunday when they are at home.'

    'An artist, I infer from what he says?'

    'A sort of a one,' said Daniel Doyce, in a surly tone.

    'What sort of a one?' asked Clennam, with a smile.

    'Why, he has sauntered into the Arts at a leisurely Pall-Mall pace,'
    said Doyce, 'and I doubt if they care to be taken quite so coolly.'

    Pursuing his inquiries, Clennam found that the Gowan family were a very
    distant ramification of the Barnacles; and that the paternal Gowan,
    originally attached to a legation abroad, had been pensioned off as a
    Commissioner of nothing particular somewhere or other, and had died at
    his post with his drawn salary in his hand, nobly defending it to the
    last extremity. In consideration of this eminent public service, the
    Barnacle then in power had recommended the Crown to bestow a pension of
    two or three hundred a-year on his widow; to which the next Barnacle in
    power had added certain shady and sedate apartments in the Palaces at
    Hampton Court, where the old lady still lived, deploring the degeneracy
    of the times in company with several other old ladies of both sexes. Her
    son, Mr Henry Gowan, inheriting from his father, the Commissioner, that
    very questionable help in life, a very small independence, had been
    difficult to settle; the rather, as public appointments chanced to
    be scarce, and his genius, during his earlier manhood, was of that
    exclusively agricultural character which applies itself to the
    cultivation of wild oats. At last he had declared that he would become
    a Painter; partly because he had always had an idle knack that way,
    and partly to grieve the souls of the Barnacles-in-chief who had not
    provided for him. So it had come to pass successively, first, that
    several distinguished ladies had been frightfully shocked; then, that
    portfolios of his performances had been handed about o' nights, and
    declared with ecstasy to be perfect Claudes, perfect Cuyps, perfect
    phaenomena; then, that Lord Decimus had bought his picture, and had
    asked the President and Council to dinner at a blow, and had said, with
    his own magnificent gravity, 'Do you know, there appears to me to
    be really immense merit in that work?' and, in short, that people of
    condition had absolutely taken pains to bring him into fashion. But,
    somehow, it had all failed. The prejudiced public had stood out against
    it obstinately. They had determined not to admire Lord Decimus's
    picture. They had determined to believe that in every service, except
    their own, a man must qualify himself, by striving early and late, and
    by working heart and soul, might and main. So now Mr Gowan, like that
    worn-out old coffin which never was Mahomet's nor anybody else's, hung
    midway between two points: jaundiced and jealous as to the one he had
    left: jaundiced and jealous as to the other that he couldn't reach.

    Such was the substance of Clennam's discoveries concerning him, made
    that rainy Sunday afternoon and afterwards.

    About an hour or so after dinner time, Young Barnacle appeared, attended
    by his eye-glass; in honour of whose family connections, Mr Meagles had
    cashiered the pretty parlour-maids for the day, and had placed on duty
    in their stead two dingy men. Young Barnacle was in the last
    degree amazed and disconcerted at sight of Arthur, and had murmured
    involuntarily, 'Look here! upon my soul, you know!' before his presence
    of mind returned.

    Even then, he was obliged to embrace the earliest opportunity of taking
    his friend into a window, and saying, in a nasal way that was a part of
    his general debility:

    'I want to speak to you, Gowan. I say. Look here. Who is that fellow?'

    'A friend of our host's. None of mine.'

    'He's a most ferocious Radical, you know,' said Young Barnacle.

    'Is he? How do you know?'

    'Ecod, sir, he was Pitching into our people the other day in the most
    tremendous manner. Went up to our place and Pitched into my father to
    that extent that it was necessary to order him out. Came back to
    our Department, and Pitched into me. Look here. You never saw such a
    fellow.'

    'What did he want?'

    'Ecod, sir,' returned Young Barnacle, 'he said he wanted to know, you
    know! Pervaded our Department--without an appointment--and said he
    wanted to know!'

    The stare of indignant wonder with which Young Barnacle accompanied
    this disclosure, would have strained his eyes injuriously but for
    the opportune relief of dinner. Mr Meagles (who had been extremely
            solicitous to know how his uncle and aunt were) begged him to conduct
    Mrs Meagles to the dining-room. And when he sat on Mrs Meagles's right
    hand, Mr Meagles looked as gratified as if his whole family were there.

    All the natural charm of the previous day was gone. The eaters of the
    dinner, like the dinner itself, were lukewarm, insipid, overdone--and
    all owing to this poor little dull Young Barnacle. Conversationless at
    any time, he was now the victim of a weakness special to the occasion,
    and solely referable to Clennam. He was under a pressing and continual
    necessity of looking at that gentleman, which occasioned his eye-glass
    to get into his soup, into his wine-glass, into Mrs Meagles's plate, to
    hang down his back like a bell-rope, and be several times disgracefully
    restored to his bosom by one of the dingy men. Weakened in mind by his
    frequent losses of this instrument, and its determination not to stick
    in his eye, and more and more enfeebled in intellect every time he
    looked at the mysterious Clennam, he applied spoons to his eyes,
    forks, and other foreign matters connected with the furniture of the
    dinner-table. His discovery of these mistakes greatly increased his
    difficulties, but never released him from the necessity of looking at
    Clennam. And whenever Clennam spoke, this ill-starred young man was
    clearly seized with a dread that he was coming, by some artful device,
    round to that point of wanting to know, you know.

    It may be questioned, therefore, whether any one but Mr Meagles had much
    enjoyment of the time. Mr Meagles, however, thoroughly enjoyed Young
    Barnacle. As a mere flask of the golden water in the tale became a full
    fountain when it was poured out, so Mr Meagles seemed to feel that this
    small spice of Barnacle imparted to his table the flavour of the whole
    family-tree. In its presence, his frank, fine, genuine qualities
    paled; he was not so easy, he was not so natural, he was striving after
    something that did not belong to him, he was not himself. What a strange
    peculiarity on the part of Mr Meagles, and where should we find another
    such case!

    At last the wet Sunday wore itself out in a wet night; and Young
    Barnacle went home in a cab, feebly smoking; and the objectionable Gowan
    went away on foot, accompanied by the objectionable dog. Pet had taken
    the most amiable pains all day to be friendly with Clennam, but Clennam
    had been a little reserved since breakfast--that is to say, would have
    been, if he had loved her.

    When he had gone to his own room, and had again thrown himself into the
    chair by the fire, Mr Doyce knocked at the door, candle in hand, to
    ask him how and at what hour he proposed returning on the morrow? After
    settling this question, he said a word to Mr Doyce about this Gowan--who
    would have run in his head a good deal, if he had been his rival.

    'Those are not good prospects for a painter,' said Clennam.

    'No,' returned Doyce.

    Mr Doyce stood, chamber-candlestick in hand, the other hand in his
    pocket, looking hard at the flame of his candle, with a certain quiet
    perception in his face that they were going to say something more.

    'I thought our good friend a little changed, and out of spirits, after
    he came this morning?' said Clennam.

    'Yes,' returned Doyce.

    'But not his daughter?' said Clennam.

    'No,' said Doyce.

    There was a pause on both sides. Mr Doyce, still looking at the flame of
    his candle, slowly resumed:

    'The truth is, he has twice taken his daughter abroad in the hope of
    separating her from Mr Gowan. He rather thinks she is disposed to like
    him, and he has painful doubts (I quite agree with him, as I dare say
            you do) of the hopefulness of such a marriage.'

    'There--' Clennam choked, and coughed, and stopped.

    'Yes, you have taken cold,' said Daniel Doyce. But without looking at
    him.

    '--There is an engagement between them, of course?' said Clennam airily.

    'No. As I am told, certainly not. It has been solicited on the
    gentleman's part, but none has been made. Since their recent return,
    our friend has yielded to a weekly visit, but that is the utmost. Minnie
    would not deceive her father and mother. You have travelled with them,
    and I believe you know what a bond there is among them, extending even
    beyond this present life. All that there is between Miss Minnie and Mr
    Gowan, I have no doubt we see.'

    'Ah! We see enough!' cried Arthur.

    Mr Doyce wished him Good Night in the tone of a man who had heard a
    mournful, not to say despairing, exclamation, and who sought to infuse
    some encouragement and hope into the mind of the person by whom it had
    been uttered. Such tone was probably a part of his oddity, as one of
    a crotchety band; for how could he have heard anything of that kind,
    without Clennam's hearing it too?

    The rain fell heavily on the roof, and pattered on the ground, and
    dripped among the evergreens and the leafless branches of the trees. The
    rain fell heavily, drearily. It was a night of tears.

    If Clennam had not decided against falling in love with Pet; if he
    had had the weakness to do it; if he had, little by little, persuaded
    himself to set all the earnestness of his nature, all the might of his
    hope, and all the wealth of his matured character, on that cast; if
    he had done this and found that all was lost; he would have been,
    that night, unutterably miserable. As it was--

    As it was, the rain fell heavily, drearily.




Little Dorrit had not attained her twenty-second birthday without
finding a lover. Even in the shallow Marshalsea, the ever young Archer
shot off a few featherless arrows now and then from a mouldy bow, and
winged a Collegian or two.

Little Dorrit's lover, however, was not a Collegian. He was the
sentimental son of a turnkey. His father hoped, in the fulness of time,
            to leave him the inheritance of an unstained key; and had from his
            early youth familiarised him with the duties of his office, and with an
            ambition to retain the prison-lock in the family. While the succession
            was yet in abeyance, he assisted his mother in the conduct of a snug
            tobacco business round the corner of Horsemonger Lane (his father being
                    a non-resident turnkey), which could usually command a neat connection
            within the College walls.

            Years agone, when the object of his affections was wont to sit in her
            little arm-chair by the high Lodge-fender, Young John (family name,
                    Chivery), a year older than herself, had eyed her with admiring wonder.
            When he had played with her in the yard, his favourite game had been to
            counterfeit locking her up in corners, and to counterfeit letting
            her out for real kisses. When he grew tall enough to peep through the
            keyhole of the great lock of the main door, he had divers times set down
            his father's dinner, or supper, to get on as it might on the outer side
            thereof, while he stood taking cold in one eye by dint of peeping at her
            through that airy perspective.

            If Young John had ever slackened in his truth in the less penetrable
            days of his boyhood, when youth is prone to wear its boots unlaced and
            is happily unconscious of digestive organs, he had soon strung it up
            again and screwed it tight. At nineteen, his hand had inscribed in chalk
            on that part of the wall which fronted her lodgings, on the occasion of
            her birthday, 'Welcome sweet nursling of the Fairies!' At twenty-three,
            the same hand falteringly presented cigars on Sundays to the Father of
            the Marshalsea, and Father of the queen of his soul.

            Young John was small of stature, with rather weak legs and very weak
            light hair. One of his eyes (perhaps the eye that used to peep through
                    the keyhole) was also weak, and looked larger than the other, as if
            it couldn't collect itself. Young John was gentle likewise. But he was
            great of soul. Poetical, expansive, faithful.

            Though too humble before the ruler of his heart to be sanguine, Young
            John had considered the object of his attachment in all its lights and
            shades. Following it out to blissful results, he had descried, without
            self-commendation, a fitness in it. Say things prospered, and they were
            united. She, the child of the Marshalsea; he, the lock-keeper. There
            was a fitness in that. Say he became a resident turnkey. She would
            officially succeed to the chamber she had rented so long. There was a
            beautiful propriety in that. It looked over the wall, if you stood on
            tip-toe; and, with a trellis-work of scarlet beans and a canary or so,
            would become a very Arbour. There was a charming idea in that. Then,
            being all in all to one another, there was even an appropriate grace in
            the lock. With the world shut out (except that part of it which would
                    be shut in); with its troubles and disturbances only known to them by
            hearsay, as they would be described by the pilgrims tarrying with them
            on their way to the Insolvent Shrine; with the Arbour above, and the
            Lodge below; they would glide down the stream of time, in pastoral
            domestic happiness. Young John drew tears from his eyes by finishing the
            picture with a tombstone in the adjoining churchyard, close against the
            prison wall, bearing the following touching inscription: 'Sacred to
            the Memory Of JOHN CHIVERY, Sixty years Turnkey, and fifty years
            Head Turnkey, Of the neighbouring Marshalsea, Who departed this life,
            universally respected, on the thirty-first of December, One thousand
            eight hundred and eighty-six, Aged eighty-three years. Also of his truly
            beloved and truly loving wife, AMY, whose maiden name was DORRIT, Who
            survived his loss not quite forty-eight hours, And who breathed her last
            in the Marshalsea aforesaid. There she was born, There she lived, There
            she died.'

            The Chivery parents were not ignorant of their son's attachment--indeed
            it had, on some exceptional occasions, thrown him into a state of mind
            that had impelled him to conduct himself with irascibility towards the
            customers, and damage the business--but they, in their turns, had worked
            it out to desirable conclusions. Mrs Chivery, a prudent woman, had
            desired her husband to take notice that their John's prospects of the
            Lock would certainly be strengthened by an alliance with Miss Dorrit,
            who had herself a kind of claim upon the College and was much respected
            there. Mrs Chivery had desired her husband to take notice that if, on
            the one hand, their John had means and a post of trust, on the other
            hand, Miss Dorrit had family; and that her (Mrs Chivery's) sentiment
            was, that two halves made a whole. Mrs Chivery, speaking as a mother and
            not as a diplomatist, had then, from a different point of view, desired
            her husband to recollect that their John had never been strong, and
            that his love had fretted and worrited him enough as it was, without
            his being driven to do himself a mischief, as nobody couldn't say
            he wouldn't be if he was crossed. These arguments had so powerfully
            influenced the mind of Mr Chivery, who was a man of few words, that he
            had on sundry Sunday mornings, given his boy what he termed 'a lucky
            touch,' signifying that he considered such commendation of him to Good
            Fortune, preparatory to his that day declaring his passion and
            becoming triumphant. But Young John had never taken courage to make
            the declaration; and it was principally on these occasions that he had
            returned excited to the tobacco shop, and flown at the customers.

            In this affair, as in every other, Little Dorrit herself was the last
            person considered. Her brother and sister were aware of it, and attained
            a sort of station by making a peg of it on which to air the miserably
            ragged old fiction of the family gentility. Her sister asserted the
            family gentility by flouting the poor swain as he loitered about the
            prison for glimpses of his dear. Tip asserted the family gentility, and
            his own, by coming out in the character of the aristocratic brother, and
            loftily swaggering in the little skittle ground respecting seizures by
            the scruff of the neck, which there were looming probabilities of some
            gentleman unknown executing on some little puppy not mentioned. These
            were not the only members of the Dorrit family who turned it to account.
            No, no. The Father of the Marshalsea was supposed to know nothing about
            the matter, of course: his poor dignity could not see so low. But he
            took the cigars, on Sundays, and was glad to get them; and sometimes
            even condescended to walk up and down the yard with the donor (who was
                    proud and hopeful then), and benignantly to smoke one in his society.
            With no less readiness and condescension did he receive attentions from
            Chivery Senior, who always relinquished his arm-chair and newspaper to
            him, when he came into the Lodge during one of his spells of duty; and
            who had even mentioned to him, that, if he would like at any time after
            dusk quietly to step out into the fore-court and take a look at the
            street, there was not much to prevent him. If he did not avail himself
            of this latter civility, it was only because he had lost the relish for
            it; inasmuch as he took everything else he could get, and would say at
            times, 'Extremely civil person, Chivery; very attentive man and very
            respectful. Young Chivery, too; really almost with a delicate perception
            of one's position here. A very well conducted family indeed, the
            Chiveries. Their behaviour gratifies me.'

            The devoted Young John all this time regarded the family with reverence.
            He never dreamed of disputing their pretensions, but did homage to the
            miserable Mumbo jumbo they paraded. As to resenting any affront from _her_
            brother, he would have felt, even if he had not naturally been of a most
            pacific disposition, that to wag his tongue or lift his hand against
            that sacred gentleman would be an unhallowed act. He was sorry that
            his noble mind should take offence; still, he felt the fact to be not
            incompatible with its nobility, and sought to propitiate and conciliate
            that gallant soul. Her father, a gentleman in misfortune--a gentleman of
            a fine spirit and courtly manners, who always bore with him--he deeply
            honoured. Her sister he considered somewhat vain and proud, but a young
            lady of infinite accomplishments, who could not forget the past. It was
            an instinctive testimony to Little Dorrit's worth and difference from
            all the rest, that the poor young fellow honoured and loved her for
            being simply what she was.

            The tobacco business round the corner of Horsemonger Lane was carried
            out in a rural establishment one story high, which had the benefit of
            the air from the yards of Horsemonger Lane jail, and the advantage of a
            retired walk under the wall of that pleasant establishment. The business
            was of too modest a character to support a life-size Highlander, but it
            maintained a little one on a bracket on the door-post, who looked like
            a fallen Cherub that had found it necessary to take to a kilt.

            From the portal thus decorated, one Sunday after an early dinner of
            baked viands, Young John issued forth on his usual Sunday errand; not
            empty-handed, but with his offering of cigars. He was neatly attired in
            a plum-coloured coat, with as large a collar of black velvet as his
            figure could carry; a silken waistcoat, bedecked with golden sprigs; a
            chaste neckerchief much in vogue at that day, representing a preserve of
            lilac pheasants on a buff ground; pantaloons so highly decorated with
            side-stripes that each leg was a three-stringed lute; and a hat of
            state very high and hard. When the prudent Mrs Chivery perceived that
            in addition to these adornments her John carried a pair of white kid
            gloves, and a cane like a little finger-post, surmounted by an ivory
            hand marshalling him the way that he should go; and when she saw him, in
            this heavy marching order, turn the corner to the right; she remarked to
            Mr Chivery, who was at home at the time, that she thought she knew which
            way the wind blew.

            The Collegians were entertaining a considerable number of visitors that
            Sunday afternoon, and their Father kept his room for the purpose of
            receiving presentations. After making the tour of the yard, Little
            Dorrit's lover with a hurried heart went up-stairs, and knocked with his
            knuckles at the Father's door.

            'Come in, come in!' said a gracious voice. The Father's voice, her
            father's, the Marshalsea's father's. He was seated in his black velvet
            cap, with his newspaper, three-and-sixpence accidentally left on the
            table, and two chairs arranged. Everything prepared for holding his
            Court.

            'Ah, Young John! How do you do, how do you do!'

            'Pretty well, I thank you, sir. I hope you are the same.'

            'Yes, John Chivery; yes. Nothing to complain of.'

            'I have taken the liberty, sir, of--'

            'Eh?' The Father of the Marshalsea always lifted up his eyebrows at this
            point, and became amiably distraught and smilingly absent in mind.

            '--A few cigars, sir.'

            'Oh!' (For the moment, excessively surprised.) 'Thank you, Young John,
            thank you. But really, I am afraid I am too--No? Well then, I will say
            no more about it. Put them on the mantelshelf, if you please, Young
            John. And sit down, sit down. You are not a stranger, John.'

            'Thank you, sir, I am sure--Miss;' here Young John turned the great hat
            round and round upon his left-hand, like a slowly twirling mouse-cage;
            'Miss Amy quite well, sir?'

            'Yes, John, yes; very well. She is out.'

            'Indeed, sir?'

            'Yes, John. Miss Amy is gone for an airing. My young people all go out a
            good deal. But at their time of life, it's natural, John.'

            'Very much so, I am sure, sir.'

            'An airing. An airing. Yes.' He was blandly tapping his fingers on
            the table, and casting his eyes up at the window. 'Amy has gone for
            an airing on the Iron Bridge. She has become quite partial to the Iron
            Bridge of late, and seems to like to walk there better than anywhere.'
            He returned to conversation. 'Your father is not on duty at present, I
            think, John?'

            'No, sir, he comes on later in the afternoon.' Another twirl of the
            great hat, and then Young John said, rising, 'I am afraid I must wish
            you good day, sir.'

            'So soon? Good day, Young John. Nay, nay,' with the utmost
            condescension, 'never mind your glove, John. Shake hands with it on. You
            are no stranger here, you know.'

            Highly gratified by the kindness of his reception, Young John descended
            the staircase. On his way down he met some Collegians bringing up
            visitors to be presented, and at that moment Mr Dorrit happened to call
            over the banisters with particular distinctness, 'Much obliged to you
            for your little testimonial, John!'

            Little Dorrit's lover very soon laid down his penny on the tollplate of
            the Iron Bridge, and came upon it looking about him for the well-known
            and well-beloved figure. At first he feared she was not there; but as he
            walked on towards the Middlesex side, he saw her standing still, looking
            at the water. She was absorbed in thought, and he wondered what
            she might be thinking about. There were the piles of city roofs and
            chimneys, more free from smoke than on week-days; and there were the
            distant masts and steeples. Perhaps she was thinking about them.

            Little Dorrit mused so long, and was so entirely preoccupied, that
            although her lover stood quiet for what he thought was a long time, and
            twice or thrice retired and came back again to the former spot, still
            she did not move. So, in the end, he made up his mind to go on, and seem
            to come upon her casually in passing, and speak to her. The place was
            quiet, and now or never was the time to speak to her.

            He walked on, and she did not appear to hear his steps until he was
            close upon her. When he said 'Miss Dorrit!' she started and fell back
            from him, with an expression in her face of fright and something like
            dislike that caused him unutterable dismay. She had often avoided him
            before--always, indeed, for a long, long while. She had turned away and
            glided off so often when she had seen him coming toward her, that the
            unfortunate Young John could not think it accidental. But he had hoped
            that it might be shyness, her retiring character, her foreknowledge of
            the state of his heart, anything short of aversion. Now, that momentary
            look had said, 'You, of all people! I would rather have seen any one on
            earth than you!'

            It was but a momentary look, inasmuch as she checked it, and said in her
            soft little voice, 'Oh, Mr John! Is it you?' But she felt what it had
            been, as he felt what it had been; and they stood looking at one another
            equally confused.

            'Miss Amy, I am afraid I disturbed you by speaking to you.'

            'Yes, rather. I--I came here to be alone, and I thought I was.'

            'Miss Amy, I took the liberty of walking this way, because Mr Dorrit
            chanced to mention, when I called upon him just now, that you--'

            She caused him more dismay than before by suddenly murmuring, 'O father,
            father!' in a heartrending tone, and turning her face away.

            'Miss Amy, I hope I don't give you any uneasiness by naming Mr Dorrit.
            I assure you I found him very well and in the best of Spirits, and he
            showed me even more than his usual kindness; being so very kind as to
            say that I was not a stranger there, and in all ways gratifying me very
            much.'

            To the inexpressible consternation of her lover, Little Dorrit, with her
            hands to her averted face, and rocking herself where she stood as if she
            were in pain, murmured, 'O father, how can you! O dear, dear father, how
            can you, can you, do it!'

            The poor fellow stood gazing at her, overflowing with sympathy, but not
            knowing what to make of this, until, having taken out her handkerchief
            and put it to her still averted face, she hurried away. At first he
            remained stock still; then hurried after her.

            'Miss Amy, pray! Will you have the goodness to stop a moment? Miss Amy,
            if it comes to that, let _me_ go. I shall go out of my senses, if I have
            to think that I have driven you away like this.'

            His trembling voice and unfeigned earnestness brought Little Dorrit to
            a stop. 'Oh, I don't know what to do,' she cried, 'I don't know what to
            do!'

            To Young John, who had never seen her bereft of her quiet self-command,
            who had seen her from her infancy ever so reliable and self-suppressed,
            there was a shock in her distress, and in having to associate himself
            with it as its cause, that shook him from his great hat to the
            pavement. He felt it necessary to explain himself. He might be
            misunderstood--supposed to mean something, or to have done something,
            that had never entered into his imagination. He begged her to hear him
            explain himself, as the greatest favour she could show him.

            'Miss Amy, I know very well that your family is far above mine. It were
            vain to conceal it. There never was a Chivery a gentleman that ever
            I heard of, and I will not commit the meanness of making a false
            representation on a subject so momentous. Miss Amy, I know very well
            that your high-souled brother, and likewise your spirited sister, spurn
            me from a height. What I have to do is to respect them, to wish to be
            admitted to their friendship, to look up at the eminence on which they
            are placed from my lowlier station--for, whether viewed as tobacco or
            viewed as the lock, I well know it is lowly--and ever wish them well and
            happy.'

            There really was a genuineness in the poor fellow, and a contrast
            between the hardness of his hat and the softness of his heart (albeit,
                    perhaps, of his head, too), that was moving. Little Dorrit entreated him
            to disparage neither himself nor his station, and, above all things, to
            divest himself of any idea that she supposed hers to be superior. This
            gave him a little comfort.

            'Miss Amy,' he then stammered, 'I have had for a long time--ages they
            seem to me--Revolving ages--a heart-cherished wish to say something to
            you. May I say it?'

            Little Dorrit involuntarily started from his side again, with the
            faintest shadow of her former look; conquering that, she went on at
            great speed half across the Bridge without replying!

            'May I--Miss Amy, I but ask the question humbly--may I say it? I have
            been so unlucky already in giving you pain without having any such
            intentions, before the holy Heavens! that there is no fear of my saying
            it unless I have your leave. I can be miserable alone, I can be cut up
            by myself, why should I also make miserable and cut up one that I would
            fling myself off that parapet to give half a moment's joy to! Not that
            that's much to do, for I'd do it for twopence.'

            The mournfulness of his spirits, and the gorgeousness of his appearance,
            might have made him ridiculous, but that his delicacy made him
            respectable. Little Dorrit learnt from it what to do.

            'If you please, John Chivery,' she returned, trembling, but in a quiet
            way, 'since you are so considerate as to ask me whether you shall say
            any more--if you please, no.'

            'Never, Miss Amy?'

            'No, if you please. Never.'

            'O Lord!' gasped Young John.

            'But perhaps you will let me, instead, say something to you. I want
            to say it earnestly, and with as plain a meaning as it is possible to
            express. When you think of us, John--I mean my brother, and sister,
            and me--don't think of us as being any different from the rest; for,
            whatever we once were (which I hardly know) we ceased to be long ago,
            and never can be any more. It will be much better for you, and much
            better for others, if you will do that instead of what you are doing
            now.'

            Young John dolefully protested that he would try to bear it in mind, and
            would be heartily glad to do anything she wished.

            'As to me,' said Little Dorrit, 'think as little of me as you can; the
            less, the better. When you think of me at all, John, let it only be as
            the child you have seen grow up in the prison with one set of duties
            always occupying her; as a weak, retired, contented, unprotected girl. I
            particularly want you to remember, that when I come outside the gate, I
            am unprotected and solitary.'

            He would try to do anything she wished. But why did Miss Amy so much
            want him to remember that?

            'Because,' returned Little Dorrit, 'I know I can then quite trust you
            not to forget to-day, and not to say any more to me. You are so generous
            that I know I can trust to you for that; and I do and I always will. I
            am going to show you, at once, that I fully trust you. I like this place
            where we are speaking better than any place I know;' her slight colour
            had faded, but her lover thought he saw it coming back just then; 'and I
            may be often here. I know it is only necessary for me to tell you so, to
            be quite sure that you will never come here again in search of me. And I
            am--quite sure!'

            She might rely upon it, said Young John. He was a miserable wretch, but
            her word was more than a law for him.

            'And good-bye, John,' said Little Dorrit. 'And I hope you will have a
            good wife one day, and be a happy man. I am sure you will deserve to be
            happy, and you will be, John.'

            As she held out her hand to him with these words, the heart that was
            under the waistcoat of sprigs--mere slop-work, if the truth must be
            known--swelled to the size of the heart of a gentleman; and the poor
            common little fellow, having no room to hold it, burst into tears.

            'Oh, don't cry,' said Little Dorrit piteously. 'Don't, don't! Good-bye,
            John. God bless you!'

            'Good-bye, Miss Amy. Good-bye!'

            And so he left her: first observing that she sat down on the corner of a
            seat, and not only rested her little hand upon the rough wall, but laid
            her face against it too, as if her head were heavy, and her mind were
            sad.

            It was an affecting illustration of the fallacy of human projects,
            to behold her lover, with the great hat pulled over his eyes, the velvet
            collar turned up as if it rained, the plum-coloured coat buttoned
            to conceal the silken waistcoat of golden sprigs, and the little
            direction-post pointing inexorably home, creeping along by the worst
            back-streets, and composing, as he went, the following new inscription
            for a tombstone in St George's Churchyard:

            'Here lie the mortal remains Of JOHN CHIVERY, Never anything worth
            mentioning, Who died about the end of the year one thousand eight
            hundred and twenty-six, Of a broken heart, Requesting with his last
            breath that the word AMY might be inscribed over his ashes, which was
            accordingly directed to be done, By his afflicted Parents.'




The brothers William and Frederick Dorrit, walking up and down the
College-yard--of course on the aristocratic or Pump side, for the Father
made it a point of his state to be chary of going among his children
on the Poor side, except on Sunday mornings, Christmas Days, and other
occasions of ceremony, in the observance whereof he was very punctual,
          and at which times he laid his hand upon the heads of their infants,
          and blessed those young insolvents with a benignity that was highly
          edifying--the brothers, walking up and down the College-yard together,
          were a memorable sight. Frederick the free, was so humbled, bowed,
          withered, and faded; William the bond, was so courtly, condescending,
          and benevolently conscious of a position; that in this regard only, if
          in no other, the brothers were a spectacle to wonder at.

          They walked up and down the yard on the evening of Little Dorrit's
          Sunday interview with her lover on the Iron Bridge. The cares of state
          were over for that day, the Drawing Room had been well attended, several
          new presentations had taken place, the three-and-sixpence accidentally
          left on the table had accidentally increased to twelve shillings, and
          the Father of the Marshalsea refreshed himself with a whiff of cigar. As
          he walked up and down, affably accommodating his step to the shuffle of
          his brother, not proud in his superiority, but considerate of that poor
          creature, bearing with him, and breathing toleration of his infirmities
          in every little puff of smoke that issued from his lips and aspired to
          get over the spiked wall, he was a sight to wonder at.

          His brother Frederick of the dim eye, palsied hand, bent form, and
          groping mind, submissively shuffled at his side, accepting his patronage
          as he accepted every incident of the labyrinthian world in which he had
          got lost. He held the usual screwed bit of whitey-brown paper in his
          hand, from which he ever and again unscrewed a spare pinch of snuff.
          That falteringly taken, he would glance at his brother not unadmiringly,
          put his hands behind him, and shuffle on so at his side until he took
          another pinch, or stood still to look about him--perchance suddenly
          missing his clarionet.

          The College visitors were melting away as the shades of night drew on,
          but the yard was still pretty full, the Collegians being mostly out,
          seeing their friends to the Lodge. As the brothers paced the yard,
          William the bond looked about him to receive salutes, returned them by
          graciously lifting off his hat, and, with an engaging air, prevented
          Frederick the free from running against the company, or being jostled
          against the wall. The Collegians as a body were not easily impressible,
          but even they, according to their various ways of wondering, appeared to
          find in the two brothers a sight to wonder at.

          'You are a little low this evening, Frederick,' said the Father of the
          Marshalsea. 'Anything the matter?'

          'The matter?' He stared for a moment, and then dropped his head and eyes
          again. 'No, William, no. Nothing is the matter.'

          'If you could be persuaded to smarten yourself up a little, Frederick--'

          'Aye, aye!' said the old man hurriedly. 'But I can't be. I can't be.
          Don't talk so. That's all over.'

          The Father of the Marshalsea glanced at a passing Collegian with whom he
          was on friendly terms, as who should say, 'An enfeebled old man, this;
          but he is my brother, sir, my brother, and the voice of Nature is
          potent!' and steered his brother clear of the handle of the pump by the
          threadbare sleeve. Nothing would have been wanting to the perfection of
          his character as a fraternal guide, philosopher and friend, if he had
          only steered his brother clear of ruin, instead of bringing it upon him.

          'I think, William,' said the object of his affectionate consideration,
          'that I am tired, and will go home to bed.'

          'My dear Frederick,' returned the other, 'don't let me detain you; don't
          sacrifice your inclination to me.'

          'Late hours, and a heated atmosphere, and years, I suppose,' said
          Frederick, 'weaken me.'

          'My dear Frederick,' returned the Father of the Marshalsea, 'do you
          think you are sufficiently careful of yourself? Do you think your habits
          are as precise and methodical as--shall I say as mine are? Not to revert
          again to that little eccentricity which I mentioned just now, I doubt if
          you take air and exercise enough, Frederick. Here is the parade, always
          at your service. Why not use it more regularly than you do?'

          'Hah!' sighed the other. 'Yes, yes, yes, yes.'

          'But it is of no use saying yes, yes, my dear Frederick,' the Father
          of the Marshalsea in his mild wisdom persisted, 'unless you act on that
          assent. Consider my case, Frederick. I am a kind of example. Necessity
          and time have taught me what to do. At certain stated hours of the day,
          you will find me on the parade, in my room, in the Lodge, reading the
          paper, receiving company, eating and drinking. I have impressed upon Amy
          during many years, that I must have my meals (for instance) punctually.
          Amy has grown up in a sense of the importance of these arrangements, and
          you know what a good girl she is.'

          The brother only sighed again, as he plodded dreamily along, 'Hah! Yes,
          yes, yes, yes.'

          'My dear fellow,' said the Father of the Marshalsea, laying his hand
          upon his shoulder, and mildly rallying him--mildly, because of his
          weakness, poor dear soul; 'you said that before, and it does not express
          much, Frederick, even if it means much. I wish I could rouse you, my
          good Frederick; you want to be roused.'

          'Yes, William, yes. No doubt,' returned the other, lifting his dim eyes
          to his face. 'But I am not like you.'

          The Father of the Marshalsea said, with a shrug of modest
          self-depreciation, 'Oh! You might be like me, my dear Frederick;
          you might be, if you chose!' and forbore, in the magnanimity of his
          strength, to press his fallen brother further.

          There was a great deal of leave-taking going on in corners, as was usual
          on Sunday nights; and here and there in the dark, some poor woman, wife
          or mother, was weeping with a new Collegian. The time had been when the
          Father himself had wept, in the shades of that yard, as his own
          poor wife had wept. But it was many years ago; and now he was like
          a passenger aboard ship in a long voyage, who has recovered from
          sea-sickness, and is impatient of that weakness in the fresher
          passengers taken aboard at the last port. He was inclined to
          remonstrate, and to express his opinion that people who couldn't get on
          without crying, had no business there. In manner, if not in words, he
          always testified his displeasure at these interruptions of the general
          harmony; and it was so well understood, that delinquents usually
          withdrew if they were aware of him.

          On this Sunday evening, he accompanied his brother to the gate with an
          air of endurance and clemency; being in a bland temper and graciously
          disposed to overlook the tears. In the flaring gaslight of the Lodge,
          several Collegians were basking; some taking leave of visitors, and
          some who had no visitors, watching the frequent turning of the key, and
          conversing with one another and with Mr Chivery. The paternal entrance
          made a sensation of course; and Mr Chivery, touching his hat (in a short
                  manner though) with his key, hoped he found himself tolerable.

          'Thank you, Chivery, quite well. And you?'

          Mr Chivery said in a low growl, 'Oh! _he_ was all right.' Which was his
          general way of acknowledging inquiries after his health when a little
          sullen.

          'I had a visit from Young John to-day, Chivery. And very smart he
          looked, I assure you.'

          So Mr Chivery had heard. Mr Chivery must confess, however, that his wish
          was that the boy didn't lay out so much money upon it. For what did it
          bring him in? It only brought him in wexation. And he could get that
          anywhere for nothing.

          'How vexation, Chivery?' asked the benignant father.

          'No odds,' returned Mr Chivery. 'Never mind. Mr Frederick going out?'

          'Yes, Chivery, my brother is going home to bed. He is tired, and
          not quite well. Take care, Frederick, take care. Good night, my dear
          Frederick!'

          Shaking hands with his brother, and touching his greasy hat to the
          company in the Lodge, Frederick slowly shuffled out of the door which
          Mr Chivery unlocked for him. The Father of the Marshalsea showed the
          amiable solicitude of a superior being that he should come to no harm.

          'Be so kind as to keep the door open a moment, Chivery, that I may see
          him go along the passage and down the steps. Take care, Frederick! (He
                  is very infirm.) Mind the steps! (He is so very absent.) Be careful
          how you cross, Frederick. (I really don't like the notion of his going
                  wandering at large, he is so extremely liable to be run over.)'

          With these words, and with a face expressive of many uneasy doubts and
          much anxious guardianship, he turned his regards upon the assembled
          company in the Lodge: so plainly indicating that his brother was to be
          pitied for not being under lock and key, that an opinion to that effect
          went round among the Collegians assembled.

          But he did not receive it with unqualified assent; on the contrary, he
          said, No, gentlemen, no; let them not misunderstand him. His brother
          Frederick was much broken, no doubt, and it might be more comfortable to
          himself (the Father of the Marshalsea) to know that he was safe within
          the walls. Still, it must be remembered that to support an existence
          there during many years, required a certain combination of qualities--he
          did not say high qualities, but qualities--moral qualities. Now, had his
          brother Frederick that peculiar union of qualities? Gentlemen, he was a
          most excellent man, a most gentle, tender, and estimable man, with the
          simplicity of a child; but would he, though unsuited for most other
          places, do for that place? No; he said confidently, no! And, he said,
          Heaven forbid that Frederick should be there in any other character
          than in his present voluntary character! Gentlemen, whoever came to
          that College, to remain there a length of time, must have strength of
          character to go through a good deal and to come out of a good deal. Was
          his beloved brother Frederick that man? No. They saw him, even as it
          was, crushed. Misfortune crushed him. He had not power of recoil enough,
          not elasticity enough, to be a long time in such a place, and yet
          preserve his self-respect and feel conscious that he was a gentleman.
          Frederick had not (if he might use the expression) Power enough to see
          in any delicate little attentions and--and--Testimonials that he might
          under such circumstances receive, the goodness of human nature, the fine
          spirit animating the Collegians as a community, and at the same time
          no degradation to himself, and no depreciation of his claims as a
          gentleman. Gentlemen, God bless you!

          Such was the homily with which he improved and pointed the occasion to
          the company in the Lodge before turning into the sallow yard again,
          and going with his own poor shabby dignity past the Collegian in the
          dressing-gown who had no coat, and past the Collegian in the sea-side
          slippers who had no shoes, and past the stout greengrocer Collegian in
          the corduroy knee-breeches who had no cares, and past the lean clerk
          Collegian in buttonless black who had no hopes, up his own poor shabby
          staircase to his own poor shabby room.

          There, the table was laid for his supper, and his old grey gown was
          ready for him on his chair-back at the fire. His daughter put her
          little prayer-book in her pocket--had she been praying for pity on all
          prisoners and captives!--and rose to welcome him.

          Uncle had gone home, then? she asked him, as she changed his coat and
          gave him his black velvet cap. Yes, uncle had gone home. Had her father
          enjoyed his walk? Why, not much, Amy; not much. No! Did he not feel
          quite well?

          As she stood behind him, leaning over his chair so lovingly, he looked
          with downcast eyes at the fire. An uneasiness stole over him that was
          like a touch of shame; and when he spoke, as he presently did, it was in
          an unconnected and embarrassed manner.

          'Something, I--hem!--I don't know what, has gone wrong with Chivery.
          He is not--ha!--not nearly so obliging and attentive as usual to-night.
          It--hem!--it's a little thing, but it puts me out, my love. It's
          impossible to forget,' turning his hands over and over and looking
          closely at them, 'that--hem!--that in such a life as mine, I am
          unfortunately dependent on these men for something every hour in the
          day.'

          Her arm was on his shoulder, but she did not look in his face while he
          spoke. Bending her head she looked another way.

          'I--hem!--I can't think, Amy, what has given Chivery offence. He is
          generally so--so very attentive and respectful. And to-night he was
          quite--quite short with me. Other people there too! Why, good Heaven!
          if I was to lose the support and recognition of Chivery and his brother
          officers, I might starve to death here.' While he spoke, he was opening
          and shutting his hands like valves; so conscious all the time of that
          touch of shame, that he shrunk before his own knowledge of his meaning.

          'I--ha!--I can't think what it's owing to. I am sure I cannot imagine
          what the cause of it is. There was a certain Jackson here once, a
          turnkey of the name of Jackson (I don't think you can remember him,
                  my dear, you were very young), and--hem!--and he had a--brother, and
          this--young brother paid his addresses to--at least, did not go so far
          as to pay his addresses to--but admired--respectfully admired--the--not
          daughter, the sister--of one of us; a rather distinguished Collegian; I
          may say, very much so. His name was Captain Martin; and he
          consulted me on the question whether it was necessary that his
          daughter--sister--should hazard offending the turnkey brother by
          being too--ha!--too plain with the other brother. Captain Martin was
          a gentleman and a man of honour, and I put it to him first to give me
          his--his own opinion. Captain Martin (highly respected in the army) then
          unhesitatingly said that it appeared to him that his--hem!--sister was
          not called upon to understand the young man too distinctly, and that
          she might lead him on--I am doubtful whether "lead him on" was Captain
          Martin's exact expression: indeed I think he said tolerate him--on her
          father's--I should say, brother's--account. I hardly know how I have
          strayed into this story. I suppose it has been through being unable to
          account for Chivery; but as to the connection between the two, I don't
          see--'

          His voice died away, as if she could not bear the pain of hearing him,
          and her hand had gradually crept to his lips. For a little while there
          was a dead silence and stillness; and he remained shrunk in his chair,
          and she remained with her arm round his neck and her head bowed down
          upon his shoulder.

          His supper was cooking in a saucepan on the fire, and, when she moved,
          it was to make it ready for him on the table. He took his usual seat,
          she took hers, and he began his meal. They did not, as yet, look at one
          another. By little and little he began; laying down his knife and fork
          with a noise, taking things up sharply, biting at his bread as if he
          were offended with it, and in other similar ways showing that he was out
          of sorts. At length he pushed his plate from him, and spoke aloud; with
          the strangest inconsistency.

          'What does it matter whether I eat or starve? What does it matter
          whether such a blighted life as mine comes to an end, now, next week, or
          next year? What am I worth to anyone? A poor prisoner, fed on alms and
          broken victuals; a squalid, disgraced wretch!'

          'Father, father!' As he rose she went on her knees to him, and held up
          her hands to him.

          'Amy,' he went on in a suppressed voice, trembling violently, and
          looking at her as wildly as if he had gone mad. 'I tell you, if you
          could see me as your mother saw me, you wouldn't believe it to be the
          creature you have only looked at through the bars of this cage. I was
          young, I was accomplished, I was good-looking, I was independent--by God
          I was, child!--and people sought me out, and envied me. Envied me!'

          'Dear father!' She tried to take down the shaking arm that he flourished
          in the air, but he resisted, and put her hand away.

          'If I had but a picture of myself in those days, though it was ever so
          ill done, you would be proud of it, you would be proud of it. But I have
          no such thing. Now, let me be a warning! Let no man,' he cried, looking
          haggardly about, 'fail to preserve at least that little of the times of
          his prosperity and respect. Let his children have that clue to what he
          was. Unless my face, when I am dead, subsides into the long departed
          look--they say such things happen, I don't know--my children will have
          never seen me.'

          'Father, father!'

          'O despise me, despise me! Look away from me, don't listen to me, stop
          me, blush for me, cry for me--even you, Amy! Do it, do it! I do it to
          myself! I am hardened now, I have sunk too low to care long even for
          that.'

          'Dear father, loved father, darling of my heart!' She was clinging to
          him with her arms, and she got him to drop into his chair again, and
          caught at the raised arm, and tried to put it round her neck.

          'Let it lie there, father. Look at me, father, kiss me, father! Only
          think of me, father, for one little moment!'

          Still he went on in the same wild way, though it was gradually breaking
          down into a miserable whining.

          'And yet I have some respect here. I have made some stand against it. I
          am not quite trodden down. Go out and ask who is the chief person in the
          place. They'll tell you it's your father. Go out and ask who is never
          trifled with, and who is always treated with some delicacy. They'll say,
          your father. Go out and ask what funeral here (it must be here, I know
                  it can be nowhere else) will make more talk, and perhaps more grief,
          than any that has ever gone out at the gate. They'll say your father's.
          Well then. Amy! Amy! Is your father so universally despised? Is there
          nothing to redeem him? Will you have nothing to remember him by but his
          ruin and decay? Will you be able to have no affection for him when he is
          gone, poor castaway, gone?'

          He burst into tears of maudlin pity for himself, and at length suffering
          her to embrace him and take charge of him, let his grey head rest
          against her cheek, and bewailed his wretchedness. Presently he changed
          the subject of his lamentations, and clasping his hands about her as she
          embraced him, cried, O Amy, his motherless, forlorn child! O the days
          that he had seen her careful and laborious for him! Then he reverted to
          himself, and weakly told her how much better she would have loved him
          if she had known him in his vanished character, and how he would have
          married her to a gentleman who should have been proud of her as his
          daughter, and how (at which he cried again) she should first have ridden
          at his fatherly side on her own horse, and how the crowd (by which he
                  meant in effect the people who had given him the twelve shillings
                  he then had in his pocket) should have trudged the dusty roads
          respectfully.

          Thus, now boasting, now despairing, in either fit a captive with the
          jail-rot upon him, and the impurity of his prison worn into the grain of
          his soul, he revealed his degenerate state to his affectionate child.
          No one else ever beheld him in the details of his humiliation. Little
          recked the Collegians who were laughing in their rooms over his late
          address in the Lodge, what a serious picture they had in their obscure
          gallery of the Marshalsea that Sunday night.

          There was a classical daughter once--perhaps--who ministered to her
          father in his prison as her mother had ministered to her. Little Dorrit,
          though of the unheroic modern stock and mere English, did much more,
          in comforting her father's wasted heart upon her innocent breast, and
          turning to it a fountain of love and fidelity that never ran dry or
          waned through all his years of famine.

          She soothed him; asked him for his forgiveness if she had been, or
          seemed to have been, undutiful; told him, Heaven knows truly, that she
          could not honour him more if he were the favourite of Fortune and the
          whole world acknowledged him. When his tears were dried, and he sobbed
          in his weakness no longer, and was free from that touch of shame, and
          had recovered his usual bearing, she prepared the remains of his supper
          afresh, and, sitting by his side, rejoiced to see him eat and drink. For
          now he sat in his black velvet cap and old grey gown, magnanimous again;
          and would have comported himself towards any Collegian who might have
          looked in to ask his advice, like a great moral Lord Chesterfield, or
          Master of the ethical ceremonies of the Marshalsea.

          To keep his attention engaged, she talked with him about his wardrobe;
          when he was pleased to say, that Yes, indeed, those shirts she proposed
          would be exceedingly acceptable, for those he had were worn out, and,
          being ready-made, had never fitted him. Being conversational, and in a
          reasonable flow of spirits, he then invited her attention to his coat
          as it hung behind the door: remarking that the Father of the place
          would set an indifferent example to his children, already disposed to be
          slovenly, if he went among them out at elbows. He was jocular, too,
          as to the heeling of his shoes; but became grave on the subject of his
          cravat, and promised her that, when she could afford it, she should buy
          him a new one.

          While he smoked out his cigar in peace, she made his bed, and put the
          small room in order for his repose. Being weary then, owing to the
          advanced hour and his emotions, he came out of his chair to bless her
          and wish her Good night. All this time he had never once thought of _her_
          dress, her shoes, her need of anything. No other person upon earth, save
          herself, could have been so unmindful of her wants.

          He kissed her many times with 'Bless you, my love. Good night, my dear!'

          But her gentle breast had been so deeply wounded by what she had seen of
          him that she was unwilling to leave him alone, lest he should lament
          and despair again. 'Father, dear, I am not tired; let me come back
          presently, when you are in bed, and sit by you.'

          He asked her, with an air of protection, if she felt solitary?

          'Yes, father.'

          'Then come back by all means, my love.'

          'I shall be very quiet, father.'

          'Don't think of me, my dear,' he said, giving her his kind permission
          fully. 'Come back by all means.'

          He seemed to be dozing when she returned, and she put the low fire
          together very softly lest she should awake him. But he overheard her,
          and called out who was that?

          'Only Amy, father.'

          'Amy, my child, come here. I want to say a word to you.'

          He raised himself a little in his low bed, as she kneeled beside it to
          bring her face near him; and put his hand between hers. O! Both the
          private father and the Father of the Marshalsea were strong within him
          then.

          'My love, you have had a life of hardship here. No companions, no
          recreations, many cares I am afraid?'

          'Don't think of that, dear. I never do.'

          'You know my position, Amy. I have not been able to do much for you; but
          all I have been able to do, I have done.'

          'Yes, my dear father,' she rejoined, kissing him. 'I know, I know.'

          'I am in the twenty-third year of my life here,' he said, with a catch
          in his breath that was not so much a sob as an irrepressible sound of
          self-approval, the momentary outburst of a noble consciousness. 'It is
          all I could do for my children--I have done it. Amy, my love, you are
          by far the best loved of the three; I have had you principally in my
          mind--whatever I have done for your sake, my dear child, I have done
          freely and without murmuring.'

          Only the wisdom that holds the clue to all hearts and all mysteries, can
          surely know to what extent a man, especially a man brought down as this
          man had been, can impose upon himself. Enough, for the present place,
          that he lay down with wet eyelashes, serene, in a manner majestic, after
          bestowing his life of degradation as a sort of portion on the devoted
          child upon whom its miseries had fallen so heavily, and whose love alone
          had saved him to be even what he was.

          That child had no doubts, asked herself no question, for she was but too
          content to see him with a lustre round his head. Poor dear, good dear,
          truest, kindest, dearest, were the only words she had for him, as she
          hushed him to rest.

          She never left him all that night. As if she had done him a wrong which
          her tenderness could hardly repair, she sat by him in his sleep, at
          times softly kissing him with suspended breath, and calling him in a
          whisper by some endearing name. At times she stood aside so as not to
          intercept the low fire-light, and, watching him when it fell upon his
          sleeping face, wondered did he look now at all as he had looked when he
          was prosperous and happy; as he had so touched her by imagining that he
          might look once more in that awful time. At the thought of that time,
          she kneeled beside his bed again, and prayed, 'O spare his life! O
          save him to me! O look down upon my dear, long-suffering, unfortunate,
          much-changed, dear dear father!'

          Not until the morning came to protect him and encourage him, did she
          give him a last kiss and leave the small room. When she had stolen
          down-stairs, and along the empty yard, and had crept up to her own
          high garret, the smokeless housetops and the distant country hills were
          discernible over the wall in the clear morning. As she gently opened the
          window, and looked eastward down the prison yard, the spikes upon the
          wall were tipped with red, then made a sullen purple pattern on the sun
          as it came flaming up into the heavens. The spikes had never looked so
          sharp and cruel, nor the bars so heavy, nor the prison space so gloomy
          and contracted. She thought of the sunrise on rolling rivers, of the
          sunrise on wide seas, of the sunrise on rich landscapes, of the
          sunrise on great forests where the birds were waking and the trees were
          rustling; and she looked down into the living grave on which the sun
          had risen, with her father in it three-and-twenty years, and said, in
          a burst of sorrow and compassion, 'No, no, I have never seen him in my
          life!'




