Mr Dorrit, on being informed by his elder daughter that she had accepted
matrimonial overtures from Mr Sparkler, to whom she had plighted her
troth, received the communication at once with great dignity and with a
large display of parental pride; his dignity dilating with the widened
prospect of advantageous ground from which to make acquaintances, and
his parental pride being developed by Miss Fanny's ready sympathy with
that great object of his existence. He gave her to understand that her
noble ambition found harmonious echoes in his heart; and bestowed
his blessing on her, as a child brimful of duty and good principle,
    self-devoted to the aggrandisement of the family name.

    To Mr Sparkler, when Miss Fanny permitted him to appear, Mr Dorrit said,
    he would not disguise that the alliance Mr Sparkler did him the honour
    to propose was highly congenial to his feelings; both as being in unison
    with the spontaneous affections of his daughter Fanny, and as opening
    a family connection of a gratifying nature with Mr Merdle, the
    master spirit of the age. Mrs Merdle also, as a leading lady rich in
    distinction, elegance, grace, and beauty, he mentioned in very laudatory
    terms. He felt it his duty to remark (he was sure a gentleman of Mr
            Sparkler's fine sense would interpret him with all delicacy), that he
    could not consider this proposal definitely determined on, until he
    should have had the privilege of holding some correspondence with Mr
    Merdle; and of ascertaining it to be so far accordant with the views
    of that eminent gentleman as that his (Mr Dorrit's) daughter would be
    received on that footing which her station in life and her dowry and
    expectations warranted him in requiring that she should maintain in
    what he trusted he might be allowed, without the appearance of being
    mercenary, to call the Eye of the Great World. While saying this, which
    his character as a gentleman of some little station, and his character
    as a father, equally demanded of him, he would not be so diplomatic
    as to conceal that the proposal remained in hopeful abeyance and
    under conditional acceptance, and that he thanked Mr Sparkler for the
    compliment rendered to himself and to his family. He concluded with
    some further and more general observations on the--ha--character of an
    independent gentleman, and the--hum--character of a possibly too
    partial and admiring parent. To sum the whole up shortly, he received
    Mr Sparkler's offer very much as he would have received three or four
    half-crowns from him in the days that were gone.

    Mr Sparkler, finding himself stunned by the words thus heaped upon his
    inoffensive head, made a brief though pertinent rejoinder; the same
    being neither more nor less than that he had long perceived Miss Fanny
    to have no nonsense about her, and that he had no doubt of its being all
    right with his Governor. At that point the object of his affections shut
    him up like a box with a spring lid, and sent him away.

    Proceeding shortly afterwards to pay his respects to the Bosom, Mr
    Dorrit was received by it with great consideration. Mrs Merdle had heard
    of this affair from Edmund. She had been surprised at first, because she
    had not thought Edmund a marrying man. Society had not thought Edmund
    a marrying man. Still, of course she had seen, as a woman (we women
            did instinctively see these things, Mr Dorrit!), that Edmund had been
    immensely captivated by Miss Dorrit, and she had openly said that Mr
    Dorrit had much to answer for in bringing so charming a girl abroad to
    turn the heads of his countrymen.

    'Have I the honour to conclude, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'that the
    direction which Mr Sparkler's affections have taken, is--ha-approved of
    by you?'

    'I assure you, Mr Dorrit,' returned the lady, 'that, personally, I am
    charmed.'

    That was very gratifying to Mr Dorrit.

    'Personally,' repeated Mrs Merdle, 'charmed.'

    This casual repetition of the word 'personally,' moved Mr Dorrit to
    express his hope that Mr Merdle's approval, too, would not be wanting?

    'I cannot,' said Mrs Merdle, 'take upon myself to answer positively for
    Mr Merdle; gentlemen, especially gentlemen who are what Society calls
    capitalists, having their own ideas of these matters. But I should
    think--merely giving an opinion, Mr Dorrit--I should think Mr Merdle
    would be upon the whole,' here she held a review of herself before
    adding at her leisure, 'quite charmed.'

    At the mention of gentlemen whom Society called capitalists, Mr Dorrit
    had coughed, as if some internal demur were breaking out of him. Mrs
    Merdle had observed it, and went on to take up the cue.

    'Though, indeed, Mr Dorrit, it is scarcely necessary for me to make that
    remark, except in the mere openness of saying what is uppermost to one
    whom I so highly regard, and with whom I hope I may have the pleasure
    of being brought into still more agreeable relations. For one cannot
    but see the great probability of your considering such things from Mr
    Merdle's own point of view, except indeed that circumstances have made
    it Mr Merdle's accidental fortune, or misfortune, to be engaged in
    business transactions, and that they, however vast, may a little cramp
    his horizons. I am a very child as to having any notion of business,'
    said Mrs Merdle; 'but I am afraid, Mr Dorrit, it may have that
    tendency.'

    This skilful see-saw of Mr Dorrit and Mrs Merdle, so that each of them
    sent the other up, and each of them sent the other down, and neither
    had the advantage, acted as a sedative on Mr Dorrit's cough. He remarked
    with his utmost politeness, that he must beg to protest against its
    being supposed, even by Mrs Merdle, the accomplished and graceful
    (to which compliment she bent herself), that such enterprises as Mr
    Merdle's, apart as they were from the puny undertakings of the rest of
    men, had any lower tendency than to enlarge and expand the genius in
    which they were conceived. 'You are generosity itself,' said Mrs Merdle
    in return, smiling her best smile; 'let us hope so. But I confess I am
    almost superstitious in my ideas about business.'

    Mr Dorrit threw in another compliment here, to the effect that business,
    like the time which was precious in it, was made for slaves; and that it
    was not for Mrs Merdle, who ruled all hearts at her supreme pleasure,
    to have anything to do with it. Mrs Merdle laughed, and conveyed to
    Mr Dorrit an idea that the Bosom flushed--which was one of her best
    effects.

    'I say so much,' she then explained, 'merely because Mr Merdle has
    always taken the greatest interest in Edmund, and has always expressed
    the strongest desire to advance his prospects. Edmund's public position,
    I think you know. His private position rests solely with Mr Merdle. In
    my foolish incapacity for business, I assure you I know no more.'

    Mr Dorrit again expressed, in his own way, the sentiment that business
    was below the ken of enslavers and enchantresses. He then mentioned his
    intention, as a gentleman and a parent, of writing to Mr Merdle. Mrs
    Merdle concurred with all her heart--or with all her art, which was
    exactly the same thing--and herself despatched a preparatory letter by
    the next post to the eighth wonder of the world.

    In his epistolary communication, as in his dialogues and discourses on
    the great question to which it related, Mr Dorrit surrounded the
    subject with flourishes, as writing-masters embellish copy-books and
    ciphering-books: where the titles of the elementary rules of
    arithmetic diverge into swans, eagles, griffins, and other calligraphic
    recreations, and where the capital letters go out of their minds and
    bodies into ecstasies of pen and ink. Nevertheless, he did render the
    purport of his letter sufficiently clear, to enable Mr Merdle to make a
    decent pretence of having learnt it from that source. Mr Merdle replied
    to it accordingly. Mr Dorrit replied to Mr Merdle; Mr Merdle replied to
    Mr Dorrit; and it was soon announced that the corresponding powers had
    come to a satisfactory understanding.

    Now, and not before, Miss Fanny burst upon the scene, completely arrayed
    for her new part. Now and not before, she wholly absorbed Mr Sparkler in
    her light, and shone for both, and twenty more. No longer feeling that
    want of a defined place and character which had caused her so much
    trouble, this fair ship began to steer steadily on a shaped course, and
    to swim with a weight and balance that developed her sailing qualities.

    'The preliminaries being so satisfactorily arranged, I think I will now,
    my dear,' said Mr Dorrit, 'announce--ha--formally, to Mrs General--'

    'Papa,' returned Fanny, taking him up short upon that name, 'I don't see
    what Mrs General has got to do with it.'

    'My dear,' said Mr Dorrit, 'it will be an act of courtesy to--hum--a
    lady, well bred and refined--'

    'Oh! I am sick of Mrs General's good breeding and refinement, papa,'
    said Fanny. 'I am tired of Mrs General.'

    'Tired,' repeated Mr Dorrit in reproachful astonishment, 'of--ha--Mrs
    General.'

    'Quite disgusted with her, papa,' said Fanny. 'I really don't see what
    she has to do with my marriage. Let her keep to her own matrimonial
    projects--if she has any.'

    'Fanny,' returned Mr Dorrit, with a grave and weighty slowness upon him,
    contrasting strongly with his daughter's levity: 'I beg the favour of
    your explaining--ha--what it is you mean.'

    'I mean, papa,' said Fanny, 'that if Mrs General should happen to have
    any matrimonial projects of her own, I dare say they are quite enough to
    occupy her spare time. And that if she has not, so much the better; but
    still I don't wish to have the honour of making announcements to her.'

    'Permit me to ask you, Fanny,' said Mr Dorrit, 'why not?'

    'Because she can find my engagement out for herself, papa,' retorted
    Fanny. 'She is watchful enough, I dare say. I think I have seen her
    so. Let her find it out for herself. If she should not find it out for
    herself, she will know it when I am married. And I hope you will not
    consider me wanting in affection for you, papa, if I say it strikes me
    that will be quite enough for Mrs General.'

    'Fanny,' returned Mr Dorrit, 'I am amazed, I am displeased by
    this--hum--this capricious and unintelligible display of animosity
    towards--ha--Mrs General.'

    'Do not, if you please, papa,' urged Fanny, 'call it animosity, because
    I assure you I do not consider Mrs General worth my animosity.'

    At this, Mr Dorrit rose from his chair with a fixed look of severe
    reproof, and remained standing in his dignity before his daughter. His
    daughter, turning the bracelet on her arm, and now looking at him, and
    now looking from him, said, 'Very well, papa. I am truly sorry if you
    don't like it; but I can't help it. I am not a child, and I am not Amy,
    and I must speak.'

    'Fanny,' gasped Mr Dorrit, after a majestic silence, 'if I request
    you to remain here, while I formally announce to Mrs General, as
    an exemplary lady, who is--hum--a trusted member of this family,
    the--ha--the change that is contemplated among us; if I--ha--not only
    request it, but--hum--insist upon it--'

    'Oh, papa,' Fanny broke in with pointed significance, 'if you make so
    much of it as that, I have in duty nothing to do but comply. I hope I
    may have my thoughts upon the subject, however, for I really cannot help
    it under the circumstances.' So, Fanny sat down with a meekness which,
    in the junction of extremes, became defiance; and her father, either not
    deigning to answer, or not knowing what to answer, summoned Mr Tinkler
    into his presence.

    'Mrs General.'

    Mr Tinkler, unused to receive such short orders in connection with the
    fair varnisher, paused. Mr Dorrit, seeing the whole Marshalsea and all
    its testimonials in the pause, instantly flew at him with, 'How dare
    you, sir? What do you mean?'

    'I beg your pardon, sir,' pleaded Mr Tinkler, 'I was wishful to know--'

    'You wished to know nothing, sir,' cried Mr Dorrit, highly flushed.
    'Don't tell me you did. Ha. You didn't. You are guilty of mockery, sir.'

    'I assure you, sir--' Mr Tinkler began.

    'Don't assure me!' said Mr Dorrit. 'I will not be assured by a
    domestic. You are guilty of mockery. You shall leave me--hum--the whole
    establishment shall leave me. What are you waiting for?'

    'Only for my orders, sir.'

    'It's false,' said Mr Dorrit, 'you have your orders. Ha--hum. My
    compliments to Mrs General, and I beg the favour of her coming to me, if
    quite convenient, for a few minutes. Those are your orders.'

    In his execution of this mission, Mr Tinkler perhaps expressed that Mr
    Dorrit was in a raging fume. However that was, Mrs General's skirts were
    very speedily heard outside, coming along--one might almost have said
    bouncing along--with unusual expedition. Albeit, they settled down at
    the door and swept into the room with their customary coolness.

    'Mrs General,' said Mr Dorrit, 'take a chair.'

    Mrs General, with a graceful curve of acknowledgment, descended into the
    chair which Mr Dorrit offered.

    'Madam,' pursued that gentleman, 'as you have had the kindness to
    undertake the--hum--formation of my daughters, and as I am persuaded
    that nothing nearly affecting them can--ha--be indifferent to you--'

    'Wholly impossible,' said Mrs General in the calmest of ways.

    '--I therefore wish to announce to you, madam, that my daughter now
    present--'

    Mrs General made a slight inclination of her head to Fanny, who made
    a very low inclination of her head to Mrs General, and came loftily
    upright again.

    '--That my daughter Fanny is--ha--contracted to be married to Mr
    Sparkler, with whom you are acquainted. Hence, madam, you will be
    relieved of half your difficult charge--ha--difficult charge.' Mr
    Dorrit repeated it with his angry eye on Fanny. 'But not, I hope, to
    the--hum--diminution of any other portion, direct or indirect, of the
    footing you have at present the kindness to occupy in my family.'

    'Mr Dorrit,' returned Mrs General, with her gloved hands resting on
    one another in exemplary repose, 'is ever considerate, and ever but too
    appreciative of my friendly services.'

    (Miss Fanny coughed, as much as to say, 'You are right.')

    'Miss Dorrit has no doubt exercised the soundest discretion of which
    the circumstances admitted, and I trust will allow me to offer her my
    sincere congratulations. When free from the trammels of passion,' Mrs
    General closed her eyes at the word, as if she could not utter it, and
    see anybody; 'when occurring with the approbation of near relatives;
    and when cementing the proud structure of a family edifice; these are
    usually auspicious events. I trust Miss Dorrit will allow me to offer
    her my best congratulations.'

    Here Mrs General stopped, and added internally, for the setting of her
    face, 'Papa, potatoes, poultry, Prunes, and prism.'

    'Mr Dorrit,' she superadded aloud, 'is ever most obliging; and for
    the attention, and I will add distinction, of having this confidence
    imparted to me by himself and Miss Dorrit at this early time, I beg to
    offer the tribute of my thanks. My thanks, and my congratulations, are
    equally the meed of Mr Dorrit and of Miss Dorrit.'

    'To me,' observed Miss Fanny, 'they are excessively
    gratifying--inexpressibly so. The relief of finding that you have no
    objection to make, Mrs General, quite takes a load off my mind, I am
    sure. I hardly know what I should have done,' said Fanny, 'if you had
    interposed any objection, Mrs General.'

    Mrs General changed her gloves, as to the right glove being uppermost
    and the left undermost, with a Prunes and Prism smile.

    'To preserve your approbation, Mrs General,' said Fanny, returning the
    smile with one in which there was no trace of those ingredients, 'will
    of course be the highest object of my married life; to lose it, would of
    course be perfect wretchedness. I am sure your great kindness will
    not object, and I hope papa will not object, to my correcting a
    small mistake you have made, however. The best of us are so liable to
    mistakes, that even you, Mrs General, have fallen into a little error.
    The attention and distinction you have so impressively mentioned, Mrs
    General, as attaching to this confidence, are, I have no doubt, of the
    most complimentary and gratifying description; but they don't at all
    proceed from me. The merit of having consulted you on the subject would
    have been so great in me, that I feel I must not lay claim to it when it
    really is not mine. It is wholly papa's. I am deeply obliged to you for
    your encouragement and patronage, but it was papa who asked for it.
    I have to thank you, Mrs General, for relieving my breast of a great
    weight by so handsomely giving your consent to my engagement, but you
    have really nothing to thank me for. I hope you will always approve of
    my proceedings after I have left home and that my sister also may long
    remain the favoured object of your condescension, Mrs General.'

    With this address, which was delivered in her politest manner, Fanny
    left the room with an elegant and cheerful air--to tear up-stairs with
    a flushed face as soon as she was out of hearing, pounce in upon her
    sister, call her a little Dormouse, shake her for the better opening of
    her eyes, tell her what had passed below, and ask her what she thought
    of Pa now?

    Towards Mrs Merdle, the young lady comported herself with great
    independence and self-possession; but not as yet with any more decided
    opening of hostilities. Occasionally they had a slight skirmish, as when
    Fanny considered herself patted on the back by that lady, or as when Mrs
    Merdle looked particularly young and well; but Mrs Merdle always soon
    terminated those passages of arms by sinking among her cushions with the
    gracefullest indifference, and finding her attention otherwise engaged.
Society (for that mysterious creature sat upon the Seven Hills too)
    found Miss Fanny vastly improved by her engagement. She was much more
    accessible, much more free and engaging, much less exacting; insomuch
    that she now entertained a host of followers and admirers, to the bitter
    indignation of ladies with daughters to marry, who were to be regarded
    as Having revolted from Society on the Miss Dorrit grievance, and
    erected a rebellious standard. Enjoying the flutter she caused. Miss
    Dorrit not only haughtily moved through it in her own proper person, but
    haughtily, even Ostentatiously, led Mr Sparkler through it too: seeming
    to say to them all, 'If I think proper to march among you in triumphal
    procession attended by this weak captive in bonds, rather than a
    stronger one, that is my business. Enough that I choose to do it!' Mr
    Sparkler for his part, questioned nothing; but went wherever he was
    taken, did whatever he was told, felt that for his bride-elect to be
    distinguished was for him to be distinguished on the easiest terms, and
    was truly grateful for being so openly acknowledged.

    The winter passing on towards the spring while this condition of affairs
    prevailed, it became necessary for Mr Sparkler to repair to England, and
    take his appointed part in the expression and direction of its genius,
    learning, commerce, spirit, and sense. The land of Shakespeare, Milton,
    Bacon, Newton, Watt, the land of a host of past and present abstract
    philosophers, natural philosophers, and subduers of Nature and Art in
    their myriad forms, called to Mr Sparkler to come and take care of it,
    lest it should perish. Mr Sparkler, unable to resist the agonised cry
    from the depths of his country's soul, declared that he must go.

    It followed that the question was rendered pressing when, where, and
    how Mr Sparkler should be married to the foremost girl in all this world
    with no nonsense about her. Its solution, after some little mystery and
    secrecy, Miss Fanny herself announced to her sister.

    'Now, my child,' said she, seeking her out one day, 'I am going to tell
    you something. It is only this moment broached; and naturally I hurry to
    you the moment it _is_ broached.'

    'Your marriage, Fanny?'

    'My precious child,' said Fanny, 'don't anticipate me. Let me impart my
    confidence to you, you flurried little thing, in my own way. As to your
    guess, if I answered it literally, I should answer no. For really it is
    not my marriage that is in question, half as much as it is Edmund's.'

    Little Dorrit looked, and perhaps not altogether without cause, somewhat
    at a loss to understand this fine distinction.

    'I am in no difficulty,' exclaimed Fanny, 'and in no hurry. I am not
    wanted at any public office, or to give any vote anywhere else.
    But Edmund is. And Edmund is deeply dejected at the idea of going away
    by himself, and, indeed, I don't like that he should be trusted by
    himself. For, if it's possible--and it generally is--to do a foolish
    thing, he is sure to do it.'

    As she concluded this impartial summary of the reliance that might be
    safely placed upon her future husband, she took off, with an air of
    business, the bonnet she wore, and dangled it by its strings upon the
    ground.

    'It is far more Edmund's question, therefore, than mine. However, we
    need say no more about that. That is self-evident on the face of it.
    Well, my dearest Amy! The point arising, is he to go by himself, or is
    he not to go by himself, this other point arises, are we to be married
    here and shortly, or are we to be married at home months hence?'

    'I see I am going to lose you, Fanny.'

    'What a little thing you are,' cried Fanny, half tolerant and half
    impatient, 'for anticipating one! Pray, my darling, hear me out. That
    woman,' she spoke of Mrs Merdle, of course, 'remains here until after
    Easter; so, in the case of my being married here and going to London
    with Edmund, I should have the start of her. That is something. Further,
    Amy. That woman being out of the way, I don't know that I greatly object
    to Mr Merdle's proposal to Pa that Edmund and I should take up our abode
    in that house--_you_ know--where you once went with a dancer, my dear,
    until our own house can be chosen and fitted up. Further still, Amy.
    Papa having always intended to go to town himself, in the spring,--you
    see, if Edmund and I were married here, we might go off to Florence,
    where papa might join us, and we might all three travel home together.
    Mr Merdle has entreated Pa to stay with him in that same mansion I have
    mentioned, and I suppose he will. But he is master of his own actions;
    and upon that point (which is not at all material) I can't speak
    positively.'

    The difference between papa's being master of his own actions and Mr
    Sparkler's being nothing of the sort, was forcibly expressed by Fanny in
    her manner of stating the case. Not that her sister noticed it; for she
    was divided between regret at the coming separation, and a lingering
    wish that she had been included in the plans for visiting England.

    'And these are the arrangements, Fanny dear?'

    'Arrangements!' repeated Fanny. 'Now, really, child, you are a little
    trying. You know I particularly guarded myself against laying my words
    open to any such construction. What I said was, that certain questions
    present themselves; and these are the questions.'

    Little Dorrit's thoughtful eyes met hers, tenderly and quietly.

    'Now, my own sweet girl,' said Fanny, weighing her bonnet by the strings
    with considerable impatience, 'it's no use staring. A little owl could
    stare. I look to you for advice, Amy. What do you advise me to do?'

    'Do you think,' asked Little Dorrit, persuasively, after a short
    hesitation, 'do you think, Fanny, that if you were to put it off for a
    few months, it might be, considering all things, best?'

    'No, little Tortoise,' retorted Fanny, with exceeding sharpness. 'I
    don't think anything of the kind.'

    Here, she threw her bonnet from her altogether, and flounced into a
    chair. But, becoming affectionate almost immediately, she flounced out
    of it again, and kneeled down on the floor to take her sister, chair and
    all, in her arms.

    'Don't suppose I am hasty or unkind, darling, because I really am not.
    But you are such a little oddity! You make one bite your head off,
    when one wants to be soothing beyond everything. Didn't I tell you, you
    dearest baby, that Edmund can't be trusted by himself? And don't you
    know that he can't?'

    'Yes, yes, Fanny. You said so, I know.'

    'And you know it, I know,' retorted Fanny. 'Well, my precious child! If
    he is not to be trusted by himself, it follows, I suppose, that I should
    go with him?'

    'It--seems so, love,' said Little Dorrit.

    'Therefore, having heard the arrangements that are feasible to carry
    out that object, am I to understand, dearest Amy, that on the whole you
    advise me to make them?'

    'It--seems so, love,' said Little Dorrit again.

    'Very well,' cried Fanny with an air of resignation, 'then I suppose it
    must be done! I came to you, my sweet, the moment I saw the doubt, and
    the necessity of deciding. I have now decided. So let it be.'

    After yielding herself up, in this pattern manner, to sisterly advice
    and the force of circumstances, Fanny became quite benignant: as one
    who had laid her own inclinations at the feet of her dearest friend, and
    felt a glow of conscience in having made the sacrifice. 'After all, my
    Amy,' she said to her sister, 'you are the best of small creatures, and
    full of good sense; and I don't know what I shall ever do without you!'

    With which words she folded her in a closer embrace, and a really fond
    one.

    'Not that I contemplate doing without You, Amy, by any means, for I hope
    we shall ever be next to inseparable. And now, my pet, I am going
    to give you a word of advice. When you are left alone here with Mrs
    General--'

    'I am to be left alone here with Mrs General?' said Little Dorrit,
    quietly.

    'Why, of course, my precious, till papa comes back! Unless you call
    Edward company, which he certainly is not, even when he is here, and
    still more certainly is not when he is away at Naples or in Sicily. I
    was going to say--but you are such a beloved little Marplot for putting
    one out--when you are left alone here with Mrs General, Amy, don't you
    let her slide into any sort of artful understanding with you that she is
    looking after Pa, or that Pa is looking after her. She will if she can.
    I know her sly manner of feeling her way with those gloves of hers. But
    don't you comprehend her on any account. And if Pa should tell you when
    he comes back, that he has it in contemplation to make Mrs General your
    mama (which is not the less likely because I am going away), my advice
    to you is, that you say at once, "Papa, I beg to object most strongly.
    Fanny cautioned me about this, and she objected, and I object." I don't
    mean to say that any objection from you, Amy, is likely to be of the
    smallest effect, or that I think you likely to make it with any degree
    of firmness. But there is a principle involved--a filial principle--and
    I implore you not to submit to be mother-in-lawed by Mrs General,
    without asserting it in making every one about you as uncomfortable as
    possible. I don't expect you to stand by it--indeed, I know you won't,
    Pa being concerned--but I wish to rouse you to a sense of duty. As to
    any help from me, or as to any opposition that I can offer to such a
    match, you shall not be left in the lurch, my love. Whatever weight
    I may derive from my position as a married girl not wholly devoid of
    attractions--used, as that position always shall be, to oppose that
    woman--I will bring to bear, you May depend upon it, on the head and
    false hair (for I am confident it's not all real, ugly as it is and
            unlikely as it appears that any One in their Senses would go to the
            expense of buying it) of Mrs General!'

    Little Dorrit received this counsel without venturing to oppose it but
    without giving Fanny any reason to believe that she intended to act upon
    it. Having now, as it were, formally wound up her single life and
    arranged her worldly affairs, Fanny proceeded with characteristic ardour
    to prepare for the serious change in her condition.

    The preparation consisted in the despatch of her maid to Paris under the
    protection of the Courier, for the purchase of that outfit for a bride
    on which it would be extremely low, in the present narrative, to bestow
    an English name, but to which (on a vulgar principle it observes
            of adhering to the language in which it professes to be written) it
    declines to give a French one. The rich and beautiful wardrobe purchased
    by these agents, in the course of a few weeks made its way through the
    intervening country, bristling with custom-houses, garrisoned by an
    immense army of shabby mendicants in uniform who incessantly repeated
    the Beggar's Petition over it, as if every individual warrior among them
    were the ancient Belisarius: and of whom there were so many Legions,
    that unless the Courier had expended just one bushel and a half of
    silver money relieving their distresses, they would have worn the
    wardrobe out before it got to Rome, by turning it over and over. Through
    all such dangers, however, it was triumphantly brought, inch by inch,
    and arrived at its journey's end in fine condition.

    There it was exhibited to select companies of female viewers, in whose
    gentle bosoms it awakened implacable feelings. Concurrently, active
    preparations were made for the day on which some of its treasures were
    to be publicly displayed. Cards of breakfast-invitation were sent out
    to half the English in the city of Romulus; the other half made
    arrangements to be under arms, as criticising volunteers, at various
    outer points of the solemnity. The most high and illustrious English
    Signor Edgardo Dorrit, came post through the deep mud and ruts (from
            forming a surface under the improving Neapolitan nobility), to grace
    the occasion. The best hotel and all its culinary myrmidons, were set to
    work to prepare the feast. The drafts of Mr Dorrit almost constituted a
    run on the Torlonia Bank. The British Consul hadn't had such a marriage
    in the whole of his Consularity.

    The day came, and the She-Wolf in the Capitol might have snarled with
    envy to see how the Island Savages contrived these things now-a-days.
    The murderous-headed statues of the wicked Emperors of the Soldiery,
    whom sculptors had not been able to flatter out of their villainous
    hideousness, might have come off their pedestals to run away with the
    Bride. The choked old fountain, where erst the gladiators washed, might
    have leaped into life again to honour the ceremony. The Temple of
    Vesta might have sprung up anew from its ruins, expressly to lend its
    countenance to the occasion. Might have done; but did not. Like sentient
    things--even like the lords and ladies of creation sometimes--might
    have done much, but did nothing. The celebration went off with admirable
    pomp; monks in black robes, white robes, and russet robes stopped to
    look after the carriages; wandering peasants in fleeces of sheep, begged
    and piped under the house-windows; the English volunteers defiled; the
    day wore on to the hour of vespers; the festival wore away; the thousand
    churches rang their bells without any reference to it; and St Peter
    denied that he had anything to do with it.

    But by that time the Bride was near the end of the first day's journey
    towards Florence. It was the peculiarity of the nuptials that they
    were all Bride. Nobody noticed the Bridegroom. Nobody noticed the first
    Bridesmaid. Few could have seen Little Dorrit (who held that post) for
    the glare, even supposing many to have sought her. So, the Bride had
    mounted into her handsome chariot, incidentally accompanied by the
    Bridegroom; and after rolling for a few minutes smoothly over a fair
    pavement, had begun to jolt through a Slough of Despond, and through a
    long, long avenue of wrack and ruin. Other nuptial carriages are said to
    have gone the same road, before and since.

    If Little Dorrit found herself left a little lonely and a little low
    that night, nothing would have done so much against her feeling of
    depression as the being able to sit at work by her father, as in the old
    time, and help him to his supper and his rest. But that was not to be
    thought of now, when they sat in the state-equipage with Mrs General on
    the coach-box. And as to supper! If Mr Dorrit had wanted supper, there
    was an Italian cook and there was a Swiss confectioner, who must
    have put on caps as high as the Pope's Mitre, and have performed the
    mysteries of Alchemists in a copper-saucepaned laboratory below, before
    he could have got it.

    He was sententious and didactic that night. If he had been simply
    loving, he would have done Little Dorrit more good; but she accepted him
    as he was--when had she not accepted him as he was!--and made the most
    and best of him. Mrs General at length retired. Her retirement for the
    night was always her frostiest ceremony, as if she felt it necessary
    that the human imagination should be chilled into stone to prevent
    its following her. When she had gone through her rigid preliminaries,
    amounting to a sort of genteel platoon-exercise, she withdrew. Little
    Dorrit then put her arm round her father's neck, to bid him good night.

    'Amy, my dear,' said Mr Dorrit, taking her by the hand, 'this is the
    close of a day, that has--ha--greatly impressed and gratified me.'

    'A little tired you, dear, too?'

    'No,' said Mr Dorrit, 'no: I am not sensible of fatigue when it arises
    from an occasion so--hum--replete with gratification of the purest
    kind.'

    Little Dorrit was glad to find him in such heart, and smiled from her
    own heart.

    'My dear,' he continued, 'this is an occasion--ha--teeming with a good
    example. With a good example, my favourite and attached child--hum--to
    you.'

    Little Dorrit, fluttered by his words, did not know what to say, though
    he stopped as if he expected her to say something.

    'Amy,' he resumed; 'your dear sister, our Fanny, has contracted
    ha hum--a marriage, eminently calculated to extend the basis of
    our--ha--connection, and to--hum--consolidate our social relations. My
    love, I trust that the time is not far distant when some--ha--eligible
    partner may be found for you.'

    'Oh no! Let me stay with you. I beg and pray that I may stay with you! I
    want nothing but to stay and take care of you!'

    She said it like one in sudden alarm.

    'Nay, Amy, Amy,' said Mr Dorrit. 'This is weak and foolish, weak
    and foolish. You have a--ha--responsibility imposed upon you by your
    position. It is to develop that position, and be--hum--worthy of that
    position. As to taking care of me; I can--ha--take care of myself.
    Or,' he added after a moment, 'if I should need to be taken care of,
    I--hum--can, with the--ha--blessing of Providence, be taken care of,
    I--ha hum--I cannot, my dear child, think of engrossing, and--ha--as it
    were, sacrificing you.'

    O what a time of day at which to begin that profession of self-denial;
    at which to make it, with an air of taking credit for it; at which to
    believe it, if such a thing could be!

    'Don't speak, Amy. I positively say I cannot do it. I--ha--must not do
    it. My--hum--conscience would not allow it. I therefore, my love, take
    the opportunity afforded by this gratifying and impressive occasion
    of--ha--solemnly remarking, that it is now a cherished wish and purpose
    of mine to see you--ha--eligibly (I repeat eligibly) married.'

    'Oh no, dear! Pray!'

    'Amy,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I am well persuaded that if the topic were
    referred to any person of superior social knowledge, of superior
    delicacy and sense--let us say, for instance, to--ha--Mrs General--that
    there would not be two opinions as to the--hum--affectionate character
    and propriety of my sentiments. But, as I know your loving and dutiful
    nature from--hum--from experience, I am quite satisfied that it is
    necessary to say no more. I have--hum--no husband to propose at
    present, my dear: I have not even one in view. I merely wish that we
    should--ha--understand each other. Hum. Good night, my dear and sole
    remaining daughter. Good night. God bless you!'

    If the thought ever entered Little Dorrit's head that night, that he
    could give her up lightly now in his prosperity, and when he had it in
    his mind to replace her with a second wife, she drove it away. Faithful
    to him still, as in the worst times through which she had borne him
    single-handed, she drove the thought away; and entertained no harder
    reflection, in her tearful unrest, than that he now saw everything
    through their wealth, and through the care he always had upon him that
    they should continue rich, and grow richer.

    They sat in their equipage of state, with Mrs General on the box, for
    three weeks longer, and then he started for Florence to join Fanny.
    Little Dorrit would have been glad to bear him company so far, only for
    the sake of her own love, and then to have turned back alone, thinking
    of dear England. But, though the Courier had gone on with the Bride, the
    Valet was next in the line; and the succession would not have come to
    her, as long as any one could be got for money.

    Mrs General took life easily--as easily, that is, as she could
    take anything--when the Roman establishment remained in their sole
    occupation; and Little Dorrit would often ride out in a hired carriage
    that was left them, and alight alone and wander among the ruins of old
    Rome. The ruins of the vast old Amphitheatre, of the old Temples, of the
    old commemorative Arches, of the old trodden highways, of the old
    tombs, besides being what they were, to her were ruins of the old
    Marshalsea--ruins of her own old life--ruins of the faces and forms
    that of old peopled it--ruins of its loves, hopes, cares, and joys. Two
    ruined spheres of action and suffering were before the solitary girl
    often sitting on some broken fragment; and in the lonely places, under
    the blue sky, she saw them both together.

    Up, then, would come Mrs General; taking all the colour out of
    everything, as Nature and Art had taken it out of herself; writing
    Prunes and Prism, in Mr Eustace's text, wherever she could lay a hand;
    looking everywhere for Mr Eustace and company, and seeing nothing else;
    scratching up the driest little bones of antiquity, and bolting them
    whole without any human visitings--like a Ghoule in gloves.




The newly married pair, on their arrival in Harley Street, Cavendish
Square, London, were received by the Chief Butler. That great man was
not interested in them, but on the whole endured them. People must
continue to be married and given in marriage, or Chief Butlers would not
be wanted. As nations are made to be taxed, so families are made to
be butlered. The Chief Butler, no doubt, reflected that the course of
nature required the wealthy population to be kept up, on his account.

He therefore condescended to look at the carriage from the Hall-door
without frowning at it, and said, in a very handsome way, to one of
his men, 'Thomas, help with the luggage.' He even escorted the Bride
up-stairs into Mr Merdle's presence; but this must be considered as an
act of homage to the sex (of which he was an admirer, being notoriously
        captivated by the charms of a certain Duchess), and not as a committal
of himself with the family.

Mr Merdle was slinking about the hearthrug, waiting to welcome Mrs
Sparkler. His hand seemed to retreat up his sleeve as he advanced to
do so, and he gave her such a superfluity of coat-cuff that it was like
being received by the popular conception of Guy Fawkes. When he put his
lips to hers, besides, he took himself into custody by the wrists, and
backed himself among the ottomans and chairs and tables as if he were
his own Police officer, saying to himself, 'Now, none of that! Come!
I've got you, you know, and you go quietly along with me!'

Mrs Sparkler, installed in the rooms of state--the innermost sanctuary
of down, silk, chintz, and fine linen--felt that so far her triumph was
good, and her way made, step by step. On the day before her marriage,
    she had bestowed on Mrs Merdle's maid with an air of gracious
    indifference, in Mrs Merdle's presence, a trifling little keepsake
    (bracelet, bonnet, and two dresses, all new) about four times as
    valuable as the present formerly made by Mrs Merdle to her. She was now
    established in Mrs Merdle's own rooms, to which some extra touches had
    been given to render them more worthy of her occupation. In her mind's
    eye, as she lounged there, surrounded by every luxurious accessory that
    wealth could obtain or invention devise, she saw the fair bosom that
    beat in unison with the exultation of her thoughts, competing with the
    bosom that had been famous so long, outshining it, and deposing it.
    Happy? Fanny must have been happy. No more wishing one's self dead now.

    The Courier had not approved of Mr Dorrit's staying in the house of
    a friend, and had preferred to take him to an hotel in Brook Street,
    Grosvenor Square. Mr Merdle ordered his carriage to be ready early
    in the morning that he might wait upon Mr Dorrit immediately after
    breakfast.

    Bright the carriage looked, sleek the horses looked, gleaming the
    harness looked, luscious and lasting the liveries looked. A rich,
    responsible turn-out. An equipage for a Merdle. Early people looked
    after it as it rattled along the streets, and said, with awe in their
    breath, 'There he goes!'

    There he went, until Brook Street stopped him. Then, forth from its
    magnificent case came the jewel; not lustrous in itself, but quite the
    contrary.

    Commotion in the office of the hotel. Merdle! The landlord, though
    a gentleman of a haughty spirit who had just driven a pair of
    thorough-bred horses into town, turned out to show him up-stairs.
    The clerks and servants cut him off by back-passages, and were found
    accidentally hovering in doorways and angles, that they might look upon
    him. Merdle! O ye sun, moon, and stars, the great man! The rich man, who
    had in a manner revised the New Testament, and already entered into the
    kingdom of Heaven. The man who could have any one he chose to dine with
    him, and who had made the money! As he went up the stairs, people were
    already posted on the lower stairs, that his shadow might fall upon them
    when he came down. So were the sick brought out and laid in the track of
    the Apostle--who had _not_ got into the good society, and had _not_ made
    the money.

    Mr Dorrit, dressing-gowned and newspapered, was at his breakfast. The
    Courier, with agitation in his voice, announced 'Miss Mairdale!' Mr
    Dorrit's overwrought heart bounded as he leaped up.

    'Mr Merdle, this is--ha--indeed an honour. Permit me to express
    the--hum--sense, the high sense, I entertain of this--ha hum--highly
    gratifying act of attention. I am well aware, sir, of the many demands
    upon your time, and its--ha--enormous value,' Mr Dorrit could not
    say enormous roundly enough for his own satisfaction. 'That you
    should--ha--at this early hour, bestow any of your priceless time upon
    me, is--ha--a compliment that I acknowledge with the greatest esteem.'
    Mr Dorrit positively trembled in addressing the great man.

    Mr Merdle uttered, in his subdued, inward, hesitating voice, a few
    sounds that were to no purpose whatever; and finally said, 'I am glad to
    see you, sir.'

    'You are very kind,' said Mr Dorrit. 'Truly kind.' By this time the
    visitor was seated, and was passing his great hand over his exhausted
    forehead. 'You are well, I hope, Mr Merdle?'

    'I am as well as I--yes, I am as well as I usually am,' said Mr Merdle.

    'Your occupations must be immense.'

    'Tolerably so. But--Oh dear no, there's not much the matter with _me_,'
    said Mr Merdle, looking round the room.

    'A little dyspeptic?' Mr Dorrit hinted.

    'Very likely. But I--Oh, I am well enough,' said Mr Merdle.

    There were black traces on his lips where they met, as if a little train
    of gunpowder had been fired there; and he looked like a man who, if his
    natural temperament had been quicker, would have been very feverish that
    morning. This, and his heavy way of passing his hand over his forehead,
    had prompted Mr Dorrit's solicitous inquiries.

    'Mrs Merdle,' Mr Dorrit insinuatingly pursued, 'I left, as you will be
    prepared to hear, the--ha--observed of all observers, the--hum--admired
    of all admirers, the leading fascination and charm of Society in Rome.
    She was looking wonderfully well when I quitted it.'

    'Mrs Merdle,' said Mr Merdle, 'is generally considered a very attractive
    woman. And she is, no doubt. I am sensible of her being so.'

    'Who can be otherwise?' responded Mr Dorrit.

    Mr Merdle turned his tongue in his closed mouth--it seemed rather a
    stiff and unmanageable tongue--moistened his lips, passed his hand over
    his forehead again, and looked all round the room again, principally
    under the chairs.

    'But,' he said, looking Mr Dorrit in the face for the first time, and
    immediately afterwards dropping his eyes to the buttons of Mr Dorrit's
    waistcoat; 'if we speak of attractions, your daughter ought to be the
    subject of our conversation. She is extremely beautiful. Both in face
    and figure, she is quite uncommon. When the young people arrived last
    night, I was really surprised to see such charms.'

    Mr Dorrit's gratification was such that he said--ha--he could not
    refrain from telling Mr Merdle verbally, as he had already done by
    letter, what honour and happiness he felt in this union of their
    families. And he offered his hand. Mr Merdle looked at the hand for a
    little while, took it on his for a moment as if his were a yellow salver
    or fish-slice, and then returned it to Mr Dorrit.

    'I thought I would drive round the first thing,' said Mr Merdle, 'to
    offer my services, in case I can do anything for you; and to say that
    I hope you will at least do me the honour of dining with me to-day, and
    every day when you are not better engaged during your stay in town.'

    Mr Dorrit was enraptured by these attentions.

    'Do you stay long, sir?'

    'I have not at present the intention,' said Mr Dorrit,
    'of--ha--exceeding a fortnight.'

    'That's a very short stay, after so long a journey,' returned Mr Merdle.

    'Hum. Yes,' said Mr Dorrit. 'But the truth is--ha--my dear Mr Merdle,
    that I find a foreign life so well suited to my health and taste, that
    I--hum--have but two objects in my present visit to London. First,
    the--ha--the distinguished happiness and--ha--privilege which I now
    enjoy and appreciate; secondly, the arrangement--hum--the laying out,
    that is to say, in the best way, of--ha, hum--my money.'

    'Well, sir,' said Mr Merdle, after turning his tongue again, 'if I can
    be of any use to you in that respect, you may command me.'

    Mr Dorrit's speech had had more hesitation in it than usual, as he
    approached the ticklish topic, for he was not perfectly clear how so
    exalted a potentate might take it. He had doubts whether reference to
    any individual capital, or fortune, might not seem a wretchedly retail
    affair to so wholesale a dealer. Greatly relieved by Mr Merdle's
    affable offer of assistance, he caught at it directly, and heaped
    acknowledgments upon him.

    'I scarcely--ha--dared,' said Mr Dorrit, 'I assure you, to hope for
    so--hum--vast an advantage as your direct advice and assistance. Though
    of course I should, under any circumstances, like the--ha, hum--rest of
    the civilised world, have followed in Mr Merdle's train.'

    'You know we may almost say we are related, sir,' said Mr Merdle,
    curiously interested in the pattern of the carpet, 'and, therefore, you
    may consider me at your service.'

    'Ha. Very handsome, indeed!' cried Mr Dorrit. 'Ha. Most handsome!'

    'It would not,' said Mr Merdle, 'be at the present moment easy for
    what I may call a mere outsider to come into any of the good things--of
    course I speak of my own good things--'

    'Of course, of course!' cried Mr Dorrit, in a tone implying that there
    were no other good things.

    '--Unless at a high price. At what we are accustomed to term a very long
    figure.'

    Mr Dorrit laughed in the buoyancy of his spirit. Ha, ha, ha! Long
    figure. Good. Ha. Very expressive to be sure!

    'However,' said Mr Merdle, 'I do generally retain in my own hands the
    power of exercising some preference--people in general would be pleased
    to call it favour--as a sort of compliment for my care and trouble.'

    'And public spirit and genius,' Mr Dorrit suggested.

    Mr Merdle, with a dry, swallowing action, seemed to dispose of those
    qualities like a bolus; then added, 'As a sort of return for it. I will
    see, if you please, how I can exert this limited power (for people are
            jealous, and it is limited), to your advantage.'

    'You are very good,' replied Mr Dorrit. 'You are _very_ good.'

    'Of course,' said Mr Merdle, 'there must be the strictest integrity
    and uprightness in these transactions; there must be the purest faith
    between man and man; there must be unimpeached and unimpeachable
    confidence; or business could not be carried on.'

    Mr Dorrit hailed these generous sentiments with fervour.

    'Therefore,' said Mr Merdle, 'I can only give you a preference to a
    certain extent.'

    'I perceive. To a defined extent,' observed Mr Dorrit.

    'Defined extent. And perfectly above-board. As to my advice, however,'
    said Mr Merdle, 'that is another matter. That, such as it is--'

    Oh! Such as it was! (Mr Dorrit could not bear the faintest appearance of
            its being depreciated, even by Mr Merdle himself.)

    '--That, there is nothing in the bonds of spotless honour between myself
    and my fellow-man to prevent my parting with, if I choose. And that,'
    said Mr Merdle, now deeply intent upon a dust-cart that was passing the
    windows, 'shall be at your command whenever you think proper.'

    New acknowledgments from Mr Dorrit. New passages of Mr Merdle's hand
    over his forehead. Calm and silence. Contemplation of Mr Dorrit's
    waistcoat buttons by Mr Merdle.

    'My time being rather precious,' said Mr Merdle, suddenly getting up,
    as if he had been waiting in the interval for his legs and they had just
    come, 'I must be moving towards the City. Can I take you anywhere, sir?
    I shall be happy to set you down, or send you on. My carriage is at your
    disposal.'

    Mr Dorrit bethought himself that he had business at his banker's. His
    banker's was in the City. That was fortunate; Mr Merdle would take
    him into the City. But, surely, he might not detain Mr Merdle while he
    assumed his coat? Yes, he might and must; Mr Merdle insisted on it. So
    Mr Dorrit, retiring into the next room, put himself under the hands of
    his valet, and in five minutes came back glorious.

    Then said Mr Merdle, 'Allow me, sir. Take my arm!' Then leaning on
    Mr Merdle's arm, did Mr Dorrit descend the staircase, seeing the
    worshippers on the steps, and feeling that the light of Mr Merdle shone
    by reflection in himself. Then the carriage, and the ride into the
    City; and the people who looked at them; and the hats that flew off grey
    heads; and the general bowing and crouching before this wonderful mortal
    the like of which prostration of spirit was not to be seen--no, by
    high Heaven, no! It may be worth thinking of by Fawners of all
    denominations--in Westminster Abbey and Saint Paul's Cathedral put
    together, on any Sunday in the year. It was a rapturous dream to Mr
    Dorrit to find himself set aloft in this public car of triumph, making a
    magnificent progress to that befitting destination, the golden Street of
    the Lombards.

    There Mr Merdle insisted on alighting and going his way a-foot, and
    leaving his poor equipage at Mr Dorrit's disposition. So the dream
    increased in rapture when Mr Dorrit came out of the bank alone, and
    people looked at _him_ in default of Mr Merdle, and when, with the ears of
    his mind, he heard the frequent exclamation as he rolled glibly along,
    'A wonderful man to be Mr Merdle's friend!'

    At dinner that day, although the occasion was not foreseen and provided
    for, a brilliant company of such as are not made of the dust of the
    earth, but of some superior article for the present unknown, shed
    their lustrous benediction upon Mr Dorrit's daughter's marriage. And Mr
    Dorrit's daughter that day began, in earnest, her competition with that
    woman not present; and began it so well that Mr Dorrit could all but
    have taken his affidavit, if required, that Mrs Sparkler had all her
    life been lying at full length in the lap of luxury, and had never heard
    of such a rough word in the English tongue as Marshalsea.

    Next day, and the day after, and every day, all graced by more dinner
    company, cards descended on Mr Dorrit like theatrical snow. As the
    friend and relative by marriage of the illustrious Merdle, Bar, Bishop,
    Treasury, Chorus, Everybody, wanted to make or improve Mr Dorrit's
    acquaintance. In Mr Merdle's heap of offices in the City, when Mr Dorrit
    appeared at any of them on his business taking him Eastward (which it
            frequently did, for it throve amazingly), the name of Dorrit was always
    a passport to the great presence of Merdle. So the dream increased in
    rapture every hour, as Mr Dorrit felt increasingly sensible that this
    connection had brought him forward indeed.

    Only one thing sat otherwise than auriferously, and at the same time
    lightly, on Mr Dorrit's mind. It was the Chief Butler. That stupendous
    character looked at him, in the course of his official looking at the
    dinners, in a manner that Mr Dorrit considered questionable. He looked
    at him, as he passed through the hall and up the staircase, going to
    dinner, with a glazed fixedness that Mr Dorrit did not like. Seated
    at table in the act of drinking, Mr Dorrit still saw him through his
    wine-glass, regarding him with a cold and ghostly eye. It misgave him
    that the Chief Butler must have known a Collegian, and must have seen
    him in the College--perhaps had been presented to him. He looked as
    closely at the Chief Butler as such a man could be looked at, and yet
    he did not recall that he had ever seen him elsewhere. Ultimately he was
    inclined to think that there was no reverence in the man, no sentiment
    in the great creature. But he was not relieved by that; for, let him
    think what he would, the Chief Butler had him in his supercilious eye,
    even when that eye was on the plate and other table-garniture; and he
    never let him out of it. To hint to him that this confinement in his eye
    was disagreeable, or to ask him what he meant, was an act too daring to
    venture upon; his severity with his employers and their visitors being
    terrific, and he never permitting himself to be approached with the
    slightest liberty.




The term of Mr Dorrit's visit was within two days of being out, and he
was about to dress for another inspection by the Chief Butler (whose
        victims were always dressed expressly for him), when one of the servants
of the hotel presented himself bearing a card. Mr Dorrit, taking it,
   read:

   'Mrs Finching.'

   The servant waited in speechless deference.

   'Man, man,' said Mr Dorrit, turning upon him with grievous indignation,
   'explain your motive in bringing me this ridiculous name. I am wholly
   unacquainted with it. Finching, sir?' said Mr Dorrit, perhaps avenging
   himself on the Chief Butler by Substitute. 'Ha! What do you mean by
   Finching?'

   The man, man, seemed to mean Flinching as much as anything else, for
   he backed away from Mr Dorrit's severe regard, as he replied, 'A lady,
   sir.'

   'I know no such lady, sir,' said Mr Dorrit. 'Take this card away. I know
   no Finching of either sex.'

   'Ask your pardon, sir. The lady said she was aware she might be unknown
   by name. But she begged me to say, sir, that she had formerly the honour
   of being acquainted with Miss Dorrit. The lady said, sir, the youngest
   Miss Dorrit.'

   Mr Dorrit knitted his brows and rejoined, after a moment or two, 'Inform
   Mrs Finching, sir,' emphasising the name as if the innocent man were
   solely responsible for it, 'that she can come up.'

   He had reflected, in his momentary pause, that unless she were admitted
   she might leave some message, or might say something below, having
   a disgraceful reference to that former state of existence. Hence the
   concession, and hence the appearance of Flora, piloted in by the man,
   man.

   'I have not the pleasure,' said Mr Dorrit, standing with the card in his
   hand, and with an air which imported that it would scarcely have been a
   first-class pleasure if he had had it, 'of knowing either this name, or
   yourself, madam. Place a chair, sir.'

   The responsible man, with a start, obeyed, and went out on tiptoe.
   Flora, putting aside her veil with a bashful tremor upon her, proceeded
   to introduce herself. At the same time a singular combination of
   perfumes was diffused through the room, as if some brandy had been put
   by mistake in a lavender-water bottle, or as if some lavender-water had
   been put by mistake in a brandy-bottle.

   'I beg Mr Dorrit to offer a thousand apologies and indeed they would
   be far too few for such an intrusion which I know must appear extremely
   bold in a lady and alone too, but I thought it best upon the whole
   however difficult and even apparently improper though Mr F.'s Aunt would
   have willingly accompanied me and as a character of great force and
   spirit would probably have struck one possessed of such a knowledge of
   life as no doubt with so many changes must have been acquired, for Mr F.
   himself said frequently that although well educated in the neighbourhood
   of Blackheath at as high as eighty guineas which is a good deal for
   parents and the plate kept back too on going away but that is more a
   meanness than its value that he had learnt more in his first years as a
   commercial traveller with a large commission on the sale of an article
   that nobody would hear of much less buy which preceded the wine trade
   a long time than in the whole six years in that academy conducted by a
   college Bachelor, though why a Bachelor more clever than a married man I
   do not see and never did but pray excuse me that is not the point.'

   Mr Dorrit stood rooted to the carpet, a statue of mystification.

   'I must openly admit that I have no pretensions,' said Flora, 'but
   having known the dear little thing which under altered circumstances
   appears a liberty but is not so intended and Goodness knows there was no
   favour in half-a-crown a-day to such a needle as herself but quite the
   other way and as to anything lowering in it far from it the labourer is
   worthy of his hire and I am sure I only wish he got it oftener and more
   animal food and less rheumatism in the back and legs poor soul.'

   'Madam,' said Mr Dorrit, recovering his breath by a great effort, as the
   relict of the late Mr Finching stopped to take hers; 'madam,' said Mr
   Dorrit, very red in the face, 'if I understand you to refer to--ha--to
   anything in the antecedents of--hum--a daughter of mine, involving--ha
   hum--daily compensation, madam, I beg to observe that the--ha--fact,
   assuming it--ha--to be fact, never was within my knowledge. Hum. I
   should not have permitted it. Ha. Never! Never!'

   'Unnecessary to pursue the subject,' returned Flora, 'and would not have
   mentioned it on any account except as supposing it a favourable and only
   letter of introduction but as to being fact no doubt whatever and you
   may set your mind at rest for the very dress I have on now can prove it
   and sweetly made though there is no denying that it would tell better on
   a better figure for my own is much too fat though how to bring it down I
   know not, pray excuse me I am roving off again.'

   Mr Dorrit backed to his chair in a stony way, and seated himself, as
   Flora gave him a softening look and played with her parasol.

   'The dear little thing,' said Flora, 'having gone off perfectly limp
   and white and cold in my own house or at least papa's for though not
   a freehold still a long lease at a peppercorn on the morning when
   Arthur--foolish habit of our youthful days and Mr Clennam far more
   adapted to existing circumstances particularly addressing a stranger and
   that stranger a gentleman in an elevated station--communicated the glad
   tidings imparted by a person of name of Pancks emboldens me.'

   At the mention of these two names, Mr Dorrit frowned, stared, frowned
   again, hesitated with his fingers at his lips, as he had hesitated long
   ago, and said, 'Do me the favour to--ha--state your pleasure, madam.'

   'Mr Dorrit,' said Flora, 'you are very kind in giving me permission and
   highly natural it seems to me that you should be kind for though more
   stately I perceive a likeness filled out of course but a likeness still,
   the object of my intruding is my own without the slightest consultation
   with any human being and most decidedly not with Arthur--pray excuse me
   Doyce and Clennam I don't know what I am saying Mr Clennam solus--for to
   put that individual linked by a golden chain to a purple time when all
   was ethereal out of any anxiety would be worth to me the ransom of a
   monarch not that I have the least idea how much that would come to but
   using it as the total of all I have in the world and more.'

   Mr Dorrit, without greatly regarding the earnestness of these latter
   words, repeated, 'State your pleasure, madam.'

   'It's not likely I well know,' said Flora, 'but it's possible and being
   possible when I had the gratification of reading in the papers that you
   had arrived from Italy and were going back I made up my mind to try it
   for you might come across him or hear something of him and if so what a
   blessing and relief to all!'

   'Allow me to ask, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, with his ideas in wild
   confusion, 'to whom--ha--TO WHOM,' he repeated it with a raised voice in
   mere desperation, 'you at present allude?'

   'To the foreigner from Italy who disappeared in the City as no doubt you
   have read in the papers equally with myself,' said Flora, 'not referring
   to private sources by the name of Pancks from which one gathers what
   dreadfully ill-natured things some people are wicked enough to whisper
   most likely judging others by themselves and what the uneasiness
   and indignation of Arthur--quite unable to overcome it Doyce and
   Clennam--cannot fail to be.'

   It happened, fortunately for the elucidation of any intelligible result,
   that Mr Dorrit had heard or read nothing about the matter. This
   caused Mrs Finching, with many apologies for being in great practical
   difficulties as to finding the way to her pocket among the stripes of
   her dress at length to produce a police handbill, setting forth that
   a foreign gentleman of the name of Blandois, last from Venice, had
   unaccountably disappeared on such a night in such a part of the city of
   London; that he was known to have entered such a house, at such an hour;
   that he was stated by the inmates of that house to have left it, about
   so many minutes before midnight; and that he had never been beheld
   since. This, with exact particulars of time and locality, and with
   a good detailed description of the foreign gentleman who had so
   mysteriously vanished, Mr Dorrit read at large.

   'Blandois!' said Mr Dorrit. 'Venice! And this description! I know this
   gentleman. He has been in my house. He is intimately acquainted with a
   gentleman of good family (but in indifferent circumstances), of whom I
   am a--hum--patron.'

   'Then my humble and pressing entreaty is the more,' said Flora, 'that
   in travelling back you will have the kindness to look for this foreign
   gentleman along all the roads and up and down all the turnings and to
   make inquiries for him at all the hotels and orange-trees and vineyards
   and volcanoes and places for he must be somewhere and why doesn't he
   come forward and say he's there and clear all parties up?'

   'Pray, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, referring to the handbill again, 'who is
   Clennam and Co.? Ha. I see the name mentioned here, in connection with
   the occupation of the house which Monsieur Blandois was seen to
   enter: who is Clennam and Co.? Is it the individual of whom I had
   formerly--hum--some--ha--slight transitory knowledge, and to whom I
   believe you have referred? Is it--ha--that person?'

   'It's a very different person indeed,' replied Flora, 'with no limbs and
   wheels instead and the grimmest of women though his mother.'

   'Clennam and Co. a--hum--a mother!' exclaimed Mr Dorrit.

   'And an old man besides,' said Flora.

   Mr Dorrit looked as if he must immediately be driven out of his mind
   by this account. Neither was it rendered more favourable to sanity by
   Flora's dashing into a rapid analysis of Mr Flintwinch's cravat, and
   describing him, without the lightest boundary line of separation between
   his identity and Mrs Clennam's, as a rusty screw in gaiters. Which
   compound of man and woman, no limbs, wheels, rusty screw, grimness, and
   gaiters, so completely stupefied Mr Dorrit, that he was a spectacle to
   be pitied.

   'But I would not detain you one moment longer,' said Flora, upon whom
   his condition wrought its effect, though she was quite unconscious of
   having produced it, 'if you would have the goodness to give your promise
   as a gentleman that both in going back to Italy and in Italy too you
   would look for this Mr Blandois high and low and if you found or heard
   of him make him come forward for the clearing of all parties.'

   By that time Mr Dorrit had so far recovered from his bewilderment, as to
   be able to say, in a tolerably connected manner, that he should consider
   that his duty. Flora was delighted with her success, and rose to take
   her leave.

   'With a million thanks,' said she, 'and my address upon my card in case
   of anything to be communicated personally, I will not send my love to
   the dear little thing for it might not be acceptable, and indeed there
   is no dear little thing left in the transformation so why do it but
   both myself and Mr F.'s Aunt ever wish her well and lay no claim to any
   favour on our side you may be sure of that but quite the other way for
   what she undertook to do she did and that is more than a great many of
   us do, not to say anything of her doing it as well as it could be
   done and I myself am one of them for I have said ever since I began to
   recover the blow of Mr F's death that I would learn the Organ of which
   I am extremely fond but of which I am ashamed to say I do not yet know a
   note, good evening!'

   When Mr Dorrit, who attended her to the room-door, had had a little time
   to collect his senses, he found that the interview had summoned back
   discarded reminiscences which jarred with the Merdle dinner-table.
   He wrote and sent off a brief note excusing himself for that day, and
   ordered dinner presently in his own rooms at the hotel. He had another
   reason for this. His time in London was very nearly out, and was
   anticipated by engagements; his plans were made for returning; and he
   thought it behoved his importance to pursue some direct inquiry into the
   Blandois disappearance, and be in a condition to carry back to Mr
   Henry Gowan the result of his own personal investigation. He therefore
   resolved that he would take advantage of that evening's freedom to go
   down to Clennam and Co.'s, easily to be found by the direction set forth
   in the handbill; and see the place, and ask a question or two there
   himself.

   Having dined as plainly as the establishment and the Courier would let
   him, and having taken a short sleep by the fire for his better recovery
   from Mrs Finching, he set out in a hackney-cabriolet alone. The deep
   bell of St Paul's was striking nine as he passed under the shadow of
   Temple Bar, headless and forlorn in these degenerate days.

   As he approached his destination through the by-streets and water-side
   ways, that part of London seemed to him an uglier spot at such an hour
   than he had ever supposed it to be. Many long years had passed since he
   had seen it; he had never known much of it; and it wore a mysterious and
   dismal aspect in his eyes. So powerfully was his imagination impressed
   by it, that when his driver stopped, after having asked the way more
   than once, and said to the best of his belief this was the gateway they
   wanted, Mr Dorrit stood hesitating, with the coach-door in his hand,
   half afraid of the dark look of the place.

   Truly, it looked as gloomy that night as even it had ever looked. Two of
   the handbills were posted on the entrance wall, one on either side, and
   as the lamp flickered in the night air, shadows passed over them, not
   unlike the shadows of fingers following the lines. A watch was evidently
   kept upon the place. As Mr Dorrit paused, a man passed in from over the
   way, and another man passed out from some dark corner within; and both
   looked at him in passing, and both remained standing about.

   As there was only one house in the enclosure, there was no room for
   uncertainty, so he went up the steps of that house and knocked. There
   was a dim light in two windows on the first-floor. The door gave back
   a dreary, vacant sound, as though the house were empty; but it was not,
   for a light was visible, and a step was audible, almost directly. They
   both came to the door, and a chain grated, and a woman with her apron
   thrown over her face and head stood in the aperture.

   'Who is it?' said the woman.

   Mr Dorrit, much amazed by this appearance, replied that he was from
   Italy, and that he wished to ask a question relative to the missing
   person, whom he knew.

   'Hi!' cried the woman, raising a cracked voice. 'Jeremiah!'

   Upon this, a dry old man appeared, whom Mr Dorrit thought he identified
   by his gaiters, as the rusty screw. The woman was under apprehensions
   of the dry old man, for she whisked her apron away as he approached, and
   disclosed a pale affrighted face. 'Open the door, you fool,' said the
   old man; 'and let the gentleman in.'

   Mr Dorrit, not without a glance over his shoulder towards his driver and
   the cabriolet, walked into the dim hall. 'Now, sir,' said Mr Flintwinch,
   'you can ask anything here you think proper; there are no secrets here,
   sir.'

   Before a reply could be made, a strong stern voice, though a woman's,
   called from above, 'Who is it?'

   'Who is it?' returned Jeremiah. 'More inquiries. A gentleman from
   Italy.'

   'Bring him up here!'

   Mr Flintwinch muttered, as if he deemed that unnecessary; but, turning
   to Mr Dorrit, said, 'Mrs Clennam. She _will_ do as she likes. I'll show
   you the way.' He then preceded Mr Dorrit up the blackened staircase;
   that gentleman, not unnaturally looking behind him on the road, saw the
   woman following, with her apron thrown over her head again in her former
   ghastly manner.

   Mrs Clennam had her books open on her little table. 'Oh!' said she
   abruptly, as she eyed her visitor with a steady look. 'You are from
   Italy, sir, are you. Well?'

   Mr Dorrit was at a loss for any more distinct rejoinder at the moment
   than 'Ha--well?'

   'Where is this missing man? Have you come to give us information where
   he is? I hope you have?'

   'So far from it, I--hum--have come to seek information.'

   'Unfortunately for us, there is none to be got here. Flintwinch, show
   the gentleman the handbill. Give him several to take away. Hold the
   light for him to read it.'

   Mr Flintwinch did as he was directed, and Mr Dorrit read it through,
   as if he had not previously seen it; glad enough of the opportunity of
   collecting his presence of mind, which the air of the house and of the
   people in it had a little disturbed. While his eyes were on the paper,
   he felt that the eyes of Mr Flintwinch and of Mrs Clennam were on him.
   He found, when he looked up, that this sensation was not a fanciful one.

   'Now you know as much,' said Mrs Clennam, 'as we know, sir. Is Mr
   Blandois a friend of yours?'

   'No--a--hum--an acquaintance,' answered Mr Dorrit.

   'You have no commission from him, perhaps?'

   'I? Ha. Certainly not.'

   The searching look turned gradually to the floor, after taking Mr
   Flintwinch's face in its way. Mr Dorrit, discomfited by finding that
   he was the questioned instead of the questioner, applied himself to the
   reversal of that unexpected order of things.

   'I am--ha--a gentleman of property, at present residing in Italy with my
   family, my servants, and--hum--my rather large establishment. Being in
   London for a short time on affairs connected with--ha--my estate,
   and hearing of this strange disappearance, I wished to make myself
   acquainted with the circumstances at first-hand, because there is--ha
   hum--an English gentleman in Italy whom I shall no doubt see on my
   return, who has been in habits of close and daily intimacy with Monsieur
   Blandois. Mr Henry Gowan. You may know the name.'

   'Never heard of it.'

   Mrs Clennam said it, and Mr Flintwinch echoed it.

   'Wishing to--ha--make the narrative coherent and consecutive to him,'
   said Mr Dorrit, 'may I ask--say, three questions?'

   'Thirty, if you choose.'

   'Have you known Monsieur Blandois long?'

   'Not a twelvemonth. Mr Flintwinch here, will refer to the books and tell
   you when, and by whom at Paris he was introduced to us. If that,'
   Mrs Clennam added, 'should be any satisfaction to you. It is poor
   satisfaction to us.'

   'Have you seen him often?'

   'No. Twice. Once before, and--'

   'That once,' suggested Mr Flintwinch.

   'And that once.'

   'Pray, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, with a growing fancy upon him as he
   recovered his importance, that he was in some superior way in the
   Commission of the Peace; 'pray, madam, may I inquire, for the greater
   satisfaction of the gentleman whom I have the honour to--ha--retain, or
   protect or let me say to--hum--know--to know--Was Monsieur Blandois here
   on business on the night indicated in this present sheet?'

   'On what he called business,' returned Mrs Clennam.

   'Is--ha--excuse me--is its nature to be communicated?'

   'No.'

   It was evidently impracticable to pass the barrier of that reply.

   'The question has been asked before,' said Mrs Clennam, 'and the answer
   has been, No. We don't choose to publish our transactions, however
   unimportant, to all the town. We say, No.'

   'I mean, he took away no money with him, for example,' said Mr Dorrit.

   'He took away none of ours, sir, and got none here.'

   'I suppose,' observed Mr Dorrit, glancing from Mrs Clennam to Mr
   Flintwinch, and from Mr Flintwinch to Mrs Clennam, 'you have no way of
   accounting to yourself for this mystery?'

   'Why do you suppose so?' rejoined Mrs Clennam.

   Disconcerted by the cold and hard inquiry, Mr Dorrit was unable to
   assign any reason for his supposing so.

   'I account for it, sir,' she pursued after an awkward silence on Mr
   Dorrit's part, 'by having no doubt that he is travelling somewhere, or
   hiding somewhere.'

   'Do you know--ha--why he should hide anywhere?'

   'No.'

   It was exactly the same No as before, and put another barrier up.

   'You asked me if I accounted for the disappearance to myself,' Mrs
   Clennam sternly reminded him, 'not if I accounted for it to you. I do
   not pretend to account for it to you, sir. I understand it to be no more
   my business to do that, than it is yours to require that.'

   Mr Dorrit answered with an apologetic bend of his head. As he stepped
   back, preparatory to saying he had no more to ask, he could not but
   observe how gloomily and fixedly she sat with her eyes fastened on
   the ground, and a certain air upon her of resolute waiting; also,
   how exactly the self-same expression was reflected in Mr Flintwinch,
   standing at a little distance from her chair, with his eyes also on the
   ground, and his right hand softly rubbing his chin.

At that moment, Mistress Affery (of course, the woman with the apron)
    dropped the candlestick she held, and cried out, 'There! O good Lord!
    there it is again. Hark, Jeremiah! Now!'

    If there were any sound at all, it was so slight that she must have
    fallen into a confirmed habit of listening for sounds; but Mr Dorrit
    believed he did hear a something, like the falling of dry leaves. The
    woman's terror, for a very short space, seemed to touch the three; and
    they all listened.

    Mr Flintwinch was the first to stir. 'Affery, my woman,' said he,
    sidling at her with his fists clenched, and his elbows quivering with
    impatience to shake her, 'you are at your old tricks. You'll be walking
    in your sleep next, my woman, and playing the whole round of your
    distempered antics. You must have some physic. When I have shown this
    gentleman out, I'll make you up such a comfortable dose, my woman; such
    a comfortable dose!'

    It did not appear altogether comfortable in expectation to Mistress
    Affery; but Jeremiah, without further reference to his healing medicine,
    took another candle from Mrs Clennam's table, and said, 'Now, sir; shall
    I light you down?'

    Mr Dorrit professed himself obliged, and went down. Mr Flintwinch shut
    him out, and chained him out, without a moment's loss of time.
    He was again passed by the two men, one going out and the other coming
    in; got into the vehicle he had left waiting, and was driven away.

    Before he had gone far, the driver stopped to let him know that he
    had given his name, number, and address to the two men, on their joint
    requisition; and also the address at which he had taken Mr Dorrit up,
    the hour at which he had been called from his stand and the way by which
    he had come. This did not make the night's adventure run any less hotly
    in Mr Dorrit's mind, either when he sat down by his fire again, or
    when he went to bed. All night he haunted the dismal house, saw the two
    people resolutely waiting, heard the woman with her apron over her face
    cry out about the noise, and found the body of the missing Blandois, now
    buried in the cellar, and now bricked up in a wall.




Manifold are the cares of wealth and state. Mr Dorrit's satisfaction in
remembering that it had not been necessary for him to announce himself
to Clennam and Co., or to make an allusion to his having had any
knowledge of the intrusive person of that name, had been damped
over-night, while it was still fresh, by a debate that arose within him
whether or no he should take the Marshalsea in his way back, and look
at the old gate. He had decided not to do so; and had astonished the
coachman by being very fierce with him for proposing to go over London
Bridge and recross the river by Waterloo Bridge--a course which would
have taken him almost within sight of his old quarters. Still, for all
that, the question had raised a conflict in his breast; and, for some
odd reason or no reason, he was vaguely dissatisfied. Even at the Merdle
dinner-table next day, he was so out of sorts about it that he
continued at intervals to turn it over and over, in a manner frightfully
inconsistent with the good society surrounding him. It made him hot to
think what the Chief Butler's opinion of him would have been, if that
illustrious personage could have plumbed with that heavy eye of his the
stream of his meditations.

The farewell banquet was of a gorgeous nature, and wound up his visit
in a most brilliant manner. Fanny combined with the attractions of her
youth and beauty, a certain weight of self-sustainment as if she had
been married twenty years. He felt that he could leave her with a
quiet mind to tread the paths of distinction, and wished--but without
abatement of patronage, and without prejudice to the retiring virtues of
his favourite child--that he had such another daughter.

'My dear,' he told her at parting, 'our family looks to you
to--ha--assert its dignity and--hum--maintain its importance. I know you
will never disappoint it.'

'No, papa,' said Fanny, 'you may rely upon that, I think. My best love
to dearest Amy, and I will write to her very soon.'

'Shall I convey any message to--ha--anybody else?' asked Mr Dorrit, in
an insinuating manner.

'Papa,' said Fanny, before whom Mrs General instantly loomed, 'no, I
thank you. You are very kind, Pa, but I must beg to be excused. There
is no other message to send, I thank you, dear papa, that it would be at
all agreeable to you to take.'

They parted in an outer drawing-room, where only Mr Sparkler waited
on his lady, and dutifully bided his time for shaking hands. When Mr
Sparkler was admitted to this closing audience, Mr Merdle came creeping
in with not much more appearance of arms in his sleeves than if he
had been the twin brother of Miss Biffin, and insisted on escorting
Mr Dorrit down-stairs. All Mr Dorrit's protestations being in vain,
   he enjoyed the honour of being accompanied to the hall-door by this
   distinguished man, who (as Mr Dorrit told him in shaking hands on the
           step) had really overwhelmed him with attentions and services during
   this memorable visit. Thus they parted; Mr Dorrit entering his carriage
   with a swelling breast, not at all sorry that his Courier, who had
   come to take leave in the lower regions, should have an opportunity of
   beholding the grandeur of his departure.

   The aforesaid grandeur was yet full upon Mr Dorrit when he alighted at
   his hotel. Helped out by the Courier and some half-dozen of the hotel
   servants, he was passing through the hall with a serene magnificence,
   when lo! a sight presented itself that struck him dumb and motionless.
   John Chivery, in his best clothes, with his tall hat under his arm, his
   ivory-handled cane genteelly embarrassing his deportment, and a bundle
   of cigars in his hand!

   'Now, young man,' said the porter. 'This is the gentleman. This young
   man has persisted in waiting, sir, saying you would be glad to see him.'

   Mr Dorrit glared on the young man, choked, and said, in the mildest of
   tones, 'Ah! Young John! It is Young John, I think; is it not?'

   'Yes, sir,' returned Young John.

   'I--ha--thought it was Young John!' said Mr Dorrit. 'The young man may
   come up,' turning to the attendants, as he passed on: 'oh yes, he may
   come up. Let Young John follow. I will speak to him above.'

   Young John followed, smiling and much gratified. Mr Dorrit's rooms were
   reached. Candles were lighted. The attendants withdrew.

   'Now, sir,' said Mr Dorrit, turning round upon him and seizing him by
   the collar when they were safely alone. 'What do you mean by this?'

   The amazement and horror depicted in the unfortunate John's face--for
   he had rather expected to be embraced next--were of that powerfully
   expressive nature that Mr Dorrit withdrew his hand and merely glared at
   him.

   'How dare you do this?' said Mr Dorrit. 'How do you presume to come
   here? How dare you insult me?'

   'I insult you, sir?' cried Young John. 'Oh!'

   'Yes, sir,' returned Mr Dorrit. 'Insult me. Your coming here is an
   affront, an impertinence, an audacity. You are not wanted here.
   Who sent you here? What--ha--the Devil do you do here?'

   'I thought, sir,' said Young John, with as pale and shocked a face as
   ever had been turned to Mr Dorrit's in his life--even in his College
   life: 'I thought, sir, you mightn't object to have the goodness to
   accept a bundle--'

   'Damn your bundle, sir!' cried Mr Dorrit, in irrepressible rage.
   'I--hum--don't smoke.'

   'I humbly beg your pardon, sir. You used to.'

   'Tell me that again,' cried Mr Dorrit, quite beside himself, 'and I'll
   take the poker to you!'

   John Chivery backed to the door.

   'Stop, sir!' cried Mr Dorrit. 'Stop! Sit down. Confound you sit down!'

   John Chivery dropped into the chair nearest the door, and Mr Dorrit
   walked up and down the room; rapidly at first; then, more slowly. Once,
   he went to the window, and stood there with his forehead against the
   glass. All of a sudden, he turned and said:

   'What else did you come for, Sir?'

   'Nothing else in the world, sir. Oh dear me! Only to say, Sir, that I
   hoped you was well, and only to ask if Miss Amy was Well?'

   'What's that to you, sir?' retorted Mr Dorrit.

   'It's nothing to me, sir, by rights. I never thought of lessening the
   distance betwixt us, I am sure. I know it's a liberty, sir, but I never
   thought you'd have taken it ill. Upon my word and honour, sir,' said
   Young John, with emotion, 'in my poor way, I am too proud to have come,
   I assure you, if I had thought so.'

   Mr Dorrit was ashamed. He went back to the window, and leaned his
   forehead against the glass for some time. When he turned, he had his
   handkerchief in his hand, and he had been wiping his eyes with it, and
   he looked tired and ill.

   'Young John, I am very sorry to have been hasty with you, but--ha--some
   remembrances are not happy remembrances, and--hum--you shouldn't have
   come.'

   'I feel that now, sir,' returned John Chivery; 'but I didn't before, and
   Heaven knows I meant no harm, sir.'

   'No. No,' said Mr Dorrit. 'I am--hum--sure of that. Ha. Give me your
   hand, Young John, give me your hand.'

   Young John gave it; but Mr Dorrit had driven his heart out of it, and
   nothing could change his face now, from its white, shocked look.

   'There!' said Mr Dorrit, slowly shaking hands with him. 'Sit down again,
   Young John.'

   'Thank you, sir--but I'd rather stand.'

   Mr Dorrit sat down instead. After painfully holding his head a little
   while, he turned it to his visitor, and said, with an effort to be easy:

   'And how is your father, Young John? How--ha--how are they all, Young
   John?'

   'Thank you, sir, They're all pretty well, sir. They're not any ways
   complaining.'

   'Hum. You are in your--ha--old business I see, John?' said Mr Dorrit,
   with a glance at the offending bundle he had anathematised.

   'Partly, sir. I am in my'--John hesitated a little--'father's business
   likewise.'

   'Oh indeed!' said Mr Dorrit. 'Do you--ha hum--go upon the ha--'

   'Lock, sir? Yes, sir.'

   'Much to do, John?'

   'Yes, sir; we're pretty heavy at present. I don't know how it is, but we
   generally _are_ pretty heavy.'

   'At this time of the year, Young John?'

   'Mostly at all times of the year, sir. I don't know the time that makes
   much difference to us. I wish you good night, sir.'

   'Stay a moment, John--ha--stay a moment. Hum. Leave me the cigars, John,
   I--ha--beg.'

   'Certainly, sir.' John put them, with a trembling hand, on the table.

   'Stay a moment, Young John; stay another moment. It would be a--ha--a
   gratification to me to send a little--hum--Testimonial, by such a trusty
   messenger, to be divided among--ha hum--them--_them_--according to their
   wants. Would you object to take it, John?'

   'Not in any ways, sir. There's many of them, I'm sure, that would be the
   better for it.'

   'Thank you, John. I--ha--I'll write it, John.'

   His hand shook so that he was a long time writing it, and wrote it in
   a tremulous scrawl at last. It was a cheque for one hundred pounds. He
   folded it up, put it in Young John's hand, and pressed the hand in his.

   'I hope you'll--ha--overlook--hum--what has passed, John.'

   'Don't speak of it, sir, on any accounts. I don't in any ways bear
   malice, I'm sure.'

   But nothing while John was there could change John's face to its natural
   colour and expression, or restore John's natural manner.

   'And, John,' said Mr Dorrit, giving his hand a final pressure, and
   releasing it, 'I hope we--ha--agree that we have spoken together
   in confidence; and that you will abstain, in going out, from saying
   anything to any one that might--hum--suggest that--ha--once I--'

   'Oh! I assure you, sir,' returned John Chivery, 'in my poor humble way,
   sir, I'm too proud and honourable to do it, sir.'

   Mr Dorrit was not too proud and honourable to listen at the door that
   he might ascertain for himself whether John really went straight out, or
   lingered to have any talk with any one. There was no doubt that he went
   direct out at the door, and away down the street with a quick step.
   After remaining alone for an hour, Mr Dorrit rang for the Courier,
   who found him with his chair on the hearth-rug, sitting with his back
   towards him and his face to the fire. 'You can take that bundle of
   cigars to smoke on the journey, if you like,' said Mr Dorrit, with
   a careless wave of his hand. 'Ha--brought by--hum--little offering
   from--ha--son of old tenant of mine.'

   Next morning's sun saw Mr Dorrit's equipage upon the Dover road, where
   every red-jacketed postilion was the sign of a cruel house, established
   for the unmerciful plundering of travellers. The whole business of the
   human race, between London and Dover, being spoliation, Mr Dorrit was
   waylaid at Dartford, pillaged at Gravesend, rifled at Rochester, fleeced
   at Sittingbourne, and sacked at Canterbury. However, it being the
   Courier's business to get him out of the hands of the banditti, the
   Courier brought him off at every stage; and so the red-jackets went
   gleaming merrily along the spring landscape, rising and falling to
   a regular measure, between Mr Dorrit in his snug corner and the next
   chalky rise in the dusty highway.

   Another day's sun saw him at Calais. And having now got the Channel
   between himself and John Chivery, he began to feel safe, and to find
   that the foreign air was lighter to breathe than the air of England.

   On again by the heavy French roads for Paris. Having now quite recovered
   his equanimity, Mr Dorrit, in his snug corner, fell to castle-building
   as he rode along. It was evident that he had a very large castle in
   hand. All day long he was running towers up, taking towers down, adding
   a wing here, putting on a battlement there, looking to the walls,
   strengthening the defences, giving ornamental touches to the interior,
   making in all respects a superb castle of it. His preoccupied face so
   clearly denoted the pursuit in which he was engaged, that every cripple
   at the post-houses, not blind, who shoved his little battered tin-box in
   at the carriage window for Charity in the name of Heaven, Charity in the
   name of our Lady, Charity in the name of all the Saints, knew as well
   what work he was at, as their countryman Le Brun could have known it
   himself, though he had made that English traveller the subject of a
   special physiognomical treatise.

   Arrived at Paris, and resting there three days, Mr Dorrit strolled
   much about the streets alone, looking in at the shop-windows, and
   particularly the jewellers' windows. Ultimately, he went into the most
   famous jeweller's, and said he wanted to buy a little gift for a lady.

   It was a charming little woman to whom he said it--a sprightly little
   woman, dressed in perfect taste, who came out of a green velvet bower
   to attend upon him, from posting up some dainty little books of account
   which one could hardly suppose to be ruled for the entry of any articles
   more commercial than kisses, at a dainty little shining desk which
   looked in itself like a sweetmeat.

   For example, then, said the little woman, what species of gift did
   Monsieur desire? A love-gift?

   Mr Dorrit smiled, and said, Eh, well! Perhaps. What did he know? It was
   always possible; the sex being so charming. Would she show him some?

   Most willingly, said the little woman. Flattered and enchanted to show
   him many. But pardon! To begin with, he would have the great goodness
   to observe that there were love-gifts, and there were nuptial gifts.
   For example, these ravishing ear-rings and this necklace so superb to
   correspond, were what one called a love-gift. These brooches and these
   rings, of a beauty so gracious and celestial, were what one called, with
   the permission of Monsieur, nuptial gifts.

   Perhaps it would be a good arrangement, Mr Dorrit hinted, smiling, to
   purchase both, and to present the love-gift first, and to finish with
   the nuptial offering?

   Ah Heaven! said the little woman, laying the tips of the fingers of her
   two little hands against each other, that would be generous indeed, that
   would be a special gallantry! And without doubt the lady so crushed with
   gifts would find them irresistible.

   Mr Dorrit was not sure of that. But, for example, the sprightly little
   woman was very sure of it, she said. So Mr Dorrit bought a gift of
   each sort, and paid handsomely for it. As he strolled back to his hotel
   afterwards, he carried his head high: having plainly got up his castle
   now to a much loftier altitude than the two square towers of Notre Dame.

   Building away with all his might, but reserving the plans of his castle
   exclusively for his own eye, Mr Dorrit posted away for Marseilles.
   Building on, building on, busily, busily, from morning to night. Falling
   asleep, and leaving great blocks of building materials dangling in the
   air; waking again, to resume work and get them into their places. What
   time the Courier in the rumble, smoking Young John's best cigars, left
   a little thread of thin light smoke behind--perhaps as _he_ built a
   castle or two with stray pieces of Mr Dorrit's money.

   Not a fortified town that they passed in all their journey was as
   strong, not a Cathedral summit was as high, as Mr Dorrit's castle.
   Neither the Saone nor the Rhone sped with the swiftness of that peerless
   building; nor was the Mediterranean deeper than its foundations; nor
   were the distant landscapes on the Cornice road, nor the hills and bay
   of Genoa the Superb, more beautiful. Mr Dorrit and his matchless castle
   were disembarked among the dirty white houses and dirtier felons of
   Civita Vecchia, and thence scrambled on to Rome as they could, through
   the filth that festered on the way.




The sun had gone down full four hours, and it was later than most
travellers would like it to be for finding themselves outside the walls
of Rome, when Mr Dorrit's carriage, still on its last wearisome
stage, rattled over the solitary Campagna. The savage herdsmen and
the fierce-looking peasants who had chequered the way while the light
lasted, had all gone down with the sun, and left the wilderness
blank. At some turns of the road, a pale flare on the horizon, like an
exhalation from the ruin-sown land, showed that the city was yet far
off; but this poor relief was rare and short-lived. The carriage dipped
down again into a hollow of the black dry sea, and for a long time there
was nothing visible save its petrified swell and the gloomy sky.

Mr Dorrit, though he had his castle-building to engage his mind, could
not be quite easy in that desolate place. He was far more curious, in
every swerve of the carriage, and every cry of the postilions, than he
had been since he quitted London. The valet on the box evidently quaked.
The Courier in the rumble was not altogether comfortable in his mind. As
often as Mr Dorrit let down the glass and looked back at him (which was
        very often), he saw him smoking John Chivery out, it is true, but still
generally standing up the while and looking about him, like a man who
had his suspicions, and kept upon his guard. Then would Mr Dorrit,
    pulling up the glass again, reflect that those postilions were
    cut-throat looking fellows, and that he would have done better to have
    slept at Civita Vecchia, and have started betimes in the morning. But,
    for all this, he worked at his castle in the intervals.

    And now, fragments of ruinous enclosure, yawning window-gap and crazy
    wall, deserted houses, leaking wells, broken water-tanks, spectral
    cypress-trees, patches of tangled vine, and the changing of the track to
    a long, irregular, disordered lane where everything was crumbling away,
    from the unsightly buildings to the jolting road--now, these objects
    showed that they were nearing Rome. And now, a sudden twist and stoppage
    of the carriage inspired Mr Dorrit with the mistrust that the brigand
    moment was come for twisting him into a ditch and robbing him; until,
    letting down the glass again and looking out, he perceived himself
    assailed by nothing worse than a funeral procession, which came
    mechanically chaunting by, with an indistinct show of dirty vestments,
    lurid torches, swinging censers, and a great cross borne before a
    priest. He was an ugly priest by torchlight; of a lowering aspect, with
    an overhanging brow; and as his eyes met those of Mr Dorrit, looking
    bareheaded out of the carriage, his lips, moving as they chaunted,
    seemed to threaten that important traveller; likewise the action of
    his hand, which was in fact his manner of returning the traveller's
    salutation, seemed to come in aid of that menace. So thought Mr Dorrit,
    made fanciful by the weariness of building and travelling, as the priest
    drifted past him, and the procession straggled away, taking its dead
    along with it. Upon their so-different way went Mr Dorrit's company too;
    and soon, with their coach load of luxuries from the two great capitals
    of Europe, they were (like the Goths reversed) beating at the gates of
    Rome.

    Mr Dorrit was not expected by his own people that night. He had been;
    but they had given him up until to-morrow, not doubting that it was
    later than he would care, in those parts, to be out. Thus, when his
    equipage stopped at his own gate, no one but the porter appeared to
    receive him. Was Miss Dorrit from home? he asked. No. She was within.
    Good, said Mr Dorrit to the assembling servants; let them keep where
    they were; let them help to unload the carriage; he would find Miss
    Dorrit for himself.

    So he went up his grand staircase, slowly, and tired, and looked into
    various chambers which were empty, until he saw a light in a small
    ante-room. It was a curtained nook, like a tent, within two other rooms;
    and it looked warm and bright in colour, as he approached it through the
    dark avenue they made.

    There was a draped doorway, but no door; and as he stopped here, looking
    in unseen, he felt a pang. Surely not like jealousy? For why like
    jealousy? There was only his daughter and his brother there: he, with
    his chair drawn to the hearth, enjoying the warmth of the evening wood
    fire; she seated at a little table, busied with some embroidery work.
    Allowing for the great difference in the still-life of the picture, the
    figures were much the same as of old; his brother being sufficiently
    like himself to represent himself, for a moment, in the composition.
    So had he sat many a night, over a coal fire far away; so had she sat,
    devoted to him. Yet surely there was nothing to be jealous of in the old
    miserable poverty. Whence, then, the pang in his heart?

    'Do you know, uncle, I think you are growing young again?'

    Her uncle shook his head and said, 'Since when, my dear; since when?'

    'I think,' returned Little Dorrit, plying her needle, 'that you have
    been growing younger for weeks past. So cheerful, uncle, and so ready,
    and so interested.'

    'My dear child--all you.'

    'All me, uncle!'

    'Yes, yes. You have done me a world of good. You have been so
    considerate of me, and so tender with me, and so delicate in trying to
    hide your attentions from me, that I--well, well, well! It's treasured
    up, my darling, treasured up.'

    'There is nothing in it but your own fresh fancy, uncle,' said Little
    Dorrit, cheerfully.

    'Well, well, well!' murmured the old man. 'Thank God!'

    She paused for an instant in her work to look at him, and her look
    revived that former pain in her father's breast; in his poor weak
    breast, so full of contradictions, vacillations, inconsistencies, the
    little peevish perplexities of this ignorant life, mists which the
    morning without a night only can clear away.

    'I have been freer with you, you see, my dove,' said the old man, 'since
    we have been alone. I say, alone, for I don't count Mrs General; I
    don't care for her; she has nothing to do with me. But I know Fanny was
    impatient of me. And I don't wonder at it, or complain of it, for I am
    sensible that I must be in the way, though I try to keep out of it as
    well as I can. I know I am not fit company for our company. My brother
    William,' said the old man admiringly, 'is fit company for monarchs;
    but not so your uncle, my dear. Frederick Dorrit is no credit to William
    Dorrit, and he knows it quite well. Ah! Why, here's your father, Amy!
    My dear William, welcome back! My beloved brother, I am rejoiced to see
    you!'

    (Turning his head in speaking, he had caught sight of him as he stood in
     the doorway.)

    Little Dorrit with a cry of pleasure put her arms about her father's
    neck, and kissed him again and again. Her father was a little impatient,
    and a little querulous. 'I am glad to find you at last, Amy,' he said.
    'Ha. Really I am glad to find--hum--any one to receive me at last.
    I appear to have been--ha--so little expected, that upon my word
    I began--ha hum--to think it might be right to offer an apology
    for--ha--taking the liberty of coming back at all.'

    'It was so late, my dear William,' said his brother, 'that we had given
    you up for to-night.'

    'I am stronger than you, dear Frederick,' returned his brother with an
    elaboration of fraternity in which there was severity; 'and I hope I can
    travel without detriment at--ha--any hour I choose.'

    'Surely, surely,' returned the other, with a misgiving that he had given
    offence. 'Surely, William.'

    'Thank you, Amy,' pursued Mr Dorrit, as she helped him to put off his
    wrappers. 'I can do it without assistance. I--ha--need not trouble you,
    Amy. Could I have a morsel of bread and a glass of wine, or--hum--would
    it cause too much inconvenience?'

    'Dear father, you shall have supper in a very few minutes.'

    'Thank you, my love,' said Mr Dorrit, with a reproachful frost upon him;
    'I--ha--am afraid I am causing inconvenience. Hum. Mrs General pretty
    well?'

    'Mrs General complained of a headache, and of being fatigued; and so,
    when we gave you up, she went to bed, dear.'

    Perhaps Mr Dorrit thought that Mrs General had done well in being
    overcome by the disappointment of his not arriving. At any rate, his
    face relaxed, and he said with obvious satisfaction, 'Extremely sorry to
    hear that Mrs General is not well.'

    During this short dialogue, his daughter had been observant of him, with
    something more than her usual interest. It would seem as though he had
    a changed or worn appearance in her eyes, and he perceived and resented
    it; for he said with renewed peevishness, when he had divested himself
    of his travelling-cloak, and had come to the fire:

    'Amy, what are you looking at? What do you see in me that causes you
    to--ha--concentrate your solicitude on me in that--hum--very particular
    manner?'

    'I did not know it, father; I beg your pardon. It gladdens my eyes to
    see you again; that's all.'

    'Don't say that's all, because--ha--that's not all. You--hum--you
    think,' said Mr Dorrit, with an accusatory emphasis, 'that I am not
    looking well.'

    'I thought you looked a little tired, love.'

    'Then you are mistaken,' said Mr Dorrit. 'Ha, I am _not_ tired. Ha, hum. I
    am very much fresher than I was when I went away.'

    He was so inclined to be angry that she said nothing more in her
    justification, but remained quietly beside him embracing his arm. As
    he stood thus, with his brother on the other side, he fell into a heavy
    doze, of not a minute's duration, and awoke with a start.

    'Frederick,' he said, turning to his brother: 'I recommend you to go to
    bed immediately.'

    'No, William. I'll wait and see you sup.'

    'Frederick,' he retorted, 'I beg you to go to bed. I--ha--make it a
    personal request that you go to bed. You ought to have been in bed long
    ago. You are very feeble.'

    'Hah!' said the old man, who had no wish but to please him. 'Well, well,
    well! I dare say I am.'

    'My dear Frederick,' returned Mr Dorrit, with an astonishing superiority
    to his brother's failing powers, 'there can be no doubt of it. It is
    painful to me to see you so weak. Ha. It distresses me. Hum. I don't
    find you looking at all well. You are not fit for this sort of thing.
    You should be more careful, you should be very careful.'

    'Shall I go to bed?' asked Frederick.

    'Dear Frederick,' said Mr Dorrit, 'do, I adjure you! Good night,
    brother. I hope you will be stronger to-morrow. I am not at all pleased
    with your looks. Good night, dear fellow.' After dismissing his brother
    in this gracious way, he fell into a doze again before the old man was
    well out of the room: and he would have stumbled forward upon the logs,
    but for his daughter's restraining hold.

    'Your uncle wanders very much, Amy,' he said, when he was thus roused.
    'He is less--ha--coherent, and his conversation is more--hum--broken,
    than I have--ha, hum--ever known. Has he had any illness since I have
    been gone?'

    'No, father.'

    'You--ha--see a great change in him, Amy?'

    'I have not observed it, dear.'

    'Greatly broken,' said Mr Dorrit. 'Greatly broken. My poor,
    affectionate, failing Frederick! Ha. Even taking into account what he
    was before, he is--hum--sadly broken!'

    His supper, which was brought to him there, and spread upon the little
    table where he had seen her working, diverted his attention. She sat at
    his side as in the days that were gone, for the first time since those
    days ended. They were alone, and she helped him to his meat and poured
    out his drink for him, as she had been used to do in the prison. All
    this happened now, for the first time since their accession to wealth.
    She was afraid to look at him much, after the offence he had taken; but
    she noticed two occasions in the course of his meal, when he all of a
    sudden looked at her, and looked about him, as if the association were
    so strong that he needed assurance from his sense of sight that they
    were not in the old prison-room. Both times, he put his hand to his head
    as if he missed his old black cap--though it had been ignominiously
    given away in the Marshalsea, and had never got free to that hour, but
    still hovered about the yards on the head of his successor.

    He took very little supper, but was a long time over it, and often
    reverted to his brother's declining state. Though he expressed the
    greatest pity for him, he was almost bitter upon him. He said that poor
    Frederick--ha hum--drivelled. There was no other word to express it;
    drivelled. Poor fellow! It was melancholy to reflect what Amy must have
    undergone from the excessive tediousness of his Society--wandering and
    babbling on, poor dear estimable creature, wandering and babbling on--if
    it had not been for the relief she had had in Mrs General.
    Extremely sorry, he then repeated with his former satisfaction, that
    that--ha--superior woman was poorly.

    Little Dorrit, in her watchful love, would have remembered the lightest
    thing he said or did that night, though she had had no subsequent reason
    to recall that night. She always remembered that, when he looked about
    him under the strong influence of the old association, he tried to
    keep it out of her mind, and perhaps out of his own too, by immediately
    expatiating on the great riches and great company that had encompassed
    him in his absence, and on the lofty position he and his family had to
    sustain. Nor did she fail to recall that there were two under-currents,
    side by side, pervading all his discourse and all his manner; one
    showing her how well he had got on without her, and how independent
    he was of her; the other, in a fitful and unintelligible way almost
    complaining of her, as if it had been possible that she had neglected
    him while he was away.

    His telling her of the glorious state that Mr Merdle kept, and of the
    court that bowed before him, naturally brought him to Mrs Merdle. So
    naturally indeed, that although there was an unusual want of sequence in
    the greater part of his remarks, he passed to her at once, and asked how
    she was.

    'She is very well. She is going away next week.'

    'Home?' asked Mr Dorrit.

    'After a few weeks' stay upon the road.'

    'She will be a vast loss here,' said Mr Dorrit. 'A vast--ha--acquisition
    at home. To Fanny, and to--hum--the rest of the--ha--great world.'

    Little Dorrit thought of the competition that was to be entered upon,
    and assented very softly.

    'Mrs Merdle is going to have a great farewell Assembly, dear, and a
    dinner before it. She has been expressing her anxiety that you should
    return in time. She has invited both you and me to her dinner.'

    'She is--ha--very kind. When is the day?'

    'The day after to-morrow.'

    'Write round in the morning, and say that I have returned, and
    shall--hum--be delighted.'

    'May I walk with you up the stairs to your room, dear?'

    'No!' he answered, looking angrily round; for he was moving away, as if
    forgetful of leave-taking. 'You may not, Amy. I want no help. I am your
    father, not your infirm uncle!' He checked himself, as abruptly as he
    had broken into this reply, and said, 'You have not kissed me, Amy. Good
    night, my dear! We must marry--ha--we must marry _you_, now.' With that
    he went, more slowly and more tired, up the staircase to his rooms, and,
    almost as soon as he got there, dismissed his valet. His next care was
    to look about him for his Paris purchases, and, after opening their
    cases and carefully surveying them, to put them away under lock and
    key. After that, what with dozing and what with castle-building, he lost
    himself for a long time, so that there was a touch of morning on the
    eastward rim of the desolate Campagna when he crept to bed.

    Mrs General sent up her compliments in good time next day, and hoped
    he had rested well after this fatiguing journey. He sent down his
    compliments, and begged to inform Mrs General that he had rested very
    well indeed, and was in high condition. Nevertheless, he did not come
    forth from his own rooms until late in the afternoon; and, although he
    then caused himself to be magnificently arrayed for a drive with
    Mrs General and his daughter, his appearance was scarcely up to his
    description of himself.

    As the family had no visitors that day, its four members dined alone
    together. He conducted Mrs General to the seat at his right hand with
    immense ceremony; and Little Dorrit could not but notice as she followed
    with her uncle, both that he was again elaborately dressed, and that his
    manner towards Mrs General was very particular. The perfect formation of
    that accomplished lady's surface rendered it difficult to displace an
    atom of its genteel glaze, but Little Dorrit thought she descried a
    slight thaw of triumph in a corner of her frosty eye.

    Notwithstanding what may be called in these pages the Pruney and
    Prismatic nature of the family banquet, Mr Dorrit several times fell
    asleep while it was in progress. His fits of dozing were as sudden as
    they had been overnight, and were as short and profound. When the first
    of these slumberings seized him, Mrs General looked almost amazed: but,
    on each recurrence of the symptoms, she told her polite beads, Papa,
    Potatoes, Poultry, Prunes, and Prism; and, by dint of going through that
    infallible performance very slowly, appeared to finish her rosary at
    about the same time as Mr Dorrit started from his sleep.

    He was again painfully aware of a somnolent tendency in Frederick (which
            had no existence out of his own imagination), and after dinner, when
    Frederick had withdrawn, privately apologised to Mrs General for the
    poor man. 'The most estimable and affectionate of brothers,' he said,
    'but--ha, hum--broken up altogether. Unhappily, declining fast.'

    'Mr Frederick, sir,' quoth Mrs General, 'is habitually absent and
    drooping, but let us hope it is not so bad as that.'

    Mr Dorrit, however, was determined not to let him off. 'Fast declining,
    madam. A wreck. A ruin. Mouldering away before our eyes. Hum. Good
    Frederick!'

    'You left Mrs Sparkler quite well and happy, I trust?' said Mrs General,
    after heaving a cool sigh for Frederick.

    'Surrounded,' replied Mr Dorrit, 'by--ha--all that can charm the taste,
    and--hum--elevate the mind. Happy, my dear madam, in a--hum--husband.'

    Mrs General was a little fluttered; seeming delicately to put the word
    away with her gloves, as if there were no knowing what it might lead to.

    'Fanny,' Mr Dorrit continued. 'Fanny, Mrs General, has high
    qualities. Ha. Ambition--hum--purpose, consciousness of--ha--position,
    determination to support that position--ha, hum--grace, beauty, and
    native nobility.'

    'No doubt,' said Mrs General (with a little extra stiffness).

    'Combined with these qualities, madam,' said Mr Dorrit, 'Fanny
    has--ha--manifested one blemish which has made me--hum--made me uneasy,
    and--ha--I must add, angry; but which I trust may now be considered
    at an end, even as to herself, and which is undoubtedly at an end as
    to--ha--others.'

    'To what, Mr Dorrit,' returned Mrs General, with her gloves again
    somewhat excited, 'can you allude? I am at a loss to--'

    'Do not say that, my dear madam,' interrupted Mr Dorrit.

    Mrs General's voice, as it died away, pronounced the words, 'at a loss
    to imagine.'

    After which Mr Dorrit was seized with a doze for about a minute, out of
    which he sprang with spasmodic nimbleness.

    'I refer, Mrs General, to that--ha--strong spirit of opposition,
    or--hum--I might say--ha--jealousy in Fanny, which has occasionally
    risen against the--ha--sense I entertain of--hum--the claims of--ha--the
    lady with whom I have now the honour of communing.'

    'Mr Dorrit,' returned Mrs General, 'is ever but too obliging, ever but
    too appreciative. If there have been moments when I have imagined that
    Miss Dorrit has indeed resented the favourable opinion Mr Dorrit has
    formed of my services, I have found, in that only too high opinion, my
    consolation and recompense.'

    'Opinion of your services, madam?' said Mr Dorrit.

    'Of,' Mrs General repeated, in an elegantly impressive manner, 'my
    services.'

    'Of your services alone, dear madam?' said Mr Dorrit.

    'I presume,' retorted Mrs General, in her former impressive manner, 'of
    my services alone. For, to what else,' said Mrs General, with a slightly
    interrogative action of her gloves, 'could I impute--'

    'To--ha--yourself, Mrs General. Ha, hum. To yourself and your merits,'
    was Mr Dorrit's rejoinder.

    'Mr Dorrit will pardon me,' said Mrs General, 'if I remark that this
    is not a time or place for the pursuit of the present conversation.
    Mr Dorrit will excuse me if I remind him that Miss Dorrit is in the
    adjoining room, and is visible to myself while I utter her name. Mr
    Dorrit will forgive me if I observe that I am agitated, and that I find
    there are moments when weaknesses I supposed myself to have subdued,
    return with redoubled power. Mr Dorrit will allow me to withdraw.'

    'Hum. Perhaps we may resume this--ha--interesting conversation,' said
    Mr Dorrit, 'at another time; unless it should be, what I hope it is
    not--hum--in any way disagreeable to--ah--Mrs General.'

    'Mr Dorrit,' said Mrs General, casting down her eyes as she rose with a
    bend, 'must ever claim my homage and obedience.'

    Mrs General then took herself off in a stately way, and not with that
    amount of trepidation upon her which might have been expected in a less
    remarkable woman. Mr Dorrit, who had conducted his part of the dialogue
    with a certain majestic and admiring condescension--much as some people
    may be seen to conduct themselves in Church, and to perform their part
    in the service--appeared, on the whole, very well satisfied with himself
    and with Mrs General too. On the return of that lady to tea, she had
    touched herself up with a little powder and pomatum, and was not without
    moral enchantment likewise: the latter showing itself in much sweet
    patronage of manner towards Miss Dorrit, and in an air of as tender
    interest in Mr Dorrit as was consistent with rigid propriety. At the
    close of the evening, when she rose to retire, Mr Dorrit took her by the
    hand as if he were going to lead her out into the Piazza of the people
    to walk a minuet by moonlight, and with great solemnity conducted her to
    the room door, where he raised her knuckles to his lips. Having parted
    from her with what may be conjectured to have been a rather bony kiss of
    a cosmetic flavour, he gave his daughter his blessing, graciously. And
    having thus hinted that there was something remarkable in the wind, he
    again went to bed.

    He remained in the seclusion of his own chamber next morning; but, early
    in the afternoon, sent down his best compliments to Mrs General, by Mr
    Tinkler, and begged she would accompany Miss Dorrit on an airing
    without him. His daughter was dressed for Mrs Merdle's dinner before he
    appeared. He then presented himself in a refulgent condition as to his
    attire, but looking indefinably shrunken and old. However, as he was
    plainly determined to be angry with her if she so much as asked him how
    he was, she only ventured to kiss his cheek, before accompanying him to
    Mrs Merdle's with an anxious heart.

    The distance that they had to go was very short, but he was at his
    building work again before the carriage had half traversed it. Mrs
    Merdle received him with great distinction; the bosom was in admirable
    preservation, and on the best terms with itself; the dinner was very
    choice; and the company was very select.

    It was principally English; saving that it comprised the usual French
    Count and the usual Italian Marchese--decorative social milestones,
    always to be found in certain places, and varying very little in
    appearance. The table was long, and the dinner was long; and Little
    Dorrit, overshadowed by a large pair of black whiskers and a large white
    cravat, lost sight of her father altogether, until a servant put a scrap
    of paper in her hand, with a whispered request from Mrs Merdle that she
    would read it directly. Mrs Merdle had written on it in pencil, 'Pray
    come and speak to Mr Dorrit, I doubt if he is well.'

    She was hurrying to him, unobserved, when he got up out of his chair,
    and leaning over the table called to her, supposing her to be still in
    her place:

    'Amy, Amy, my child!'

    The action was so unusual, to say nothing of his strange eager
    appearance and strange eager voice, that it instantaneously caused a
    profound silence.

    'Amy, my dear,' he repeated. 'Will you go and see if Bob is on the
    lock?'

    She was at his side, and touching him, but he still perversely supposed
    her to be in her seat, and called out, still leaning over the table,
    'Amy, Amy. I don't feel quite myself. Ha. I don't know what's the matter
    with me. I particularly wish to see Bob. Ha. Of all the turnkeys, he's
    as much my friend as yours. See if Bob is in the lodge, and beg him to
    come to me.'

    All the guests were now in consternation, and everybody rose.

    'Dear father, I am not there; I am here, by you.'

    'Oh! You are here, Amy! Good. Hum. Good. Ha. Call Bob. If he has been
    relieved, and is not on the lock, tell Mrs Bangham to go and fetch him.'

    She was gently trying to get him away; but he resisted, and would not
    go.

    'I tell you, child,' he said petulantly, 'I can't be got up the narrow
    stairs without Bob. Ha. Send for Bob. Hum. Send for Bob--best of all the
    turnkeys--send for Bob!'

    He looked confusedly about him, and, becoming conscious of the number of
    faces by which he was surrounded, addressed them:

    'Ladies and gentlemen, the duty--ha--devolves upon me of--hum--welcoming
    you to the Marshalsea! Welcome to the Marshalsea! The space
    is--ha--limited--limited--the parade might be wider; but you will
    find it apparently grow larger after a time--a time, ladies and
    gentlemen--and the air is, all things considered, very good. It blows
    over the--ha--Surrey hills. Blows over the Surrey hills. This is the
    Snuggery. Hum. Supported by a small subscription of the--ha--Collegiate
    body. In return for which--hot water--general kitchen--and little
    domestic advantages. Those who are habituated to the--ha--Marshalsea,
    are pleased to call me its father. I am accustomed to be complimented by
    strangers as the--ha--Father of the Marshalsea. Certainly, if years of
    residence may establish a claim to so--ha--honourable a title, I may
    accept the--hum--conferred distinction. My child, ladies and gentlemen.
    My daughter. Born here!'

    She was not ashamed of it, or ashamed of him. She was pale and
    frightened; but she had no other care than to soothe him and get him
    away, for his own dear sake. She was between him and the wondering
    faces, turned round upon his breast with her own face raised to his. He
    held her clasped in his left arm, and between whiles her low voice was
    heard tenderly imploring him to go away with her.

    'Born here,' he repeated, shedding tears. 'Bred here. Ladies and
    gentlemen, my daughter. Child of an unfortunate father, but--ha--always
    a gentleman. Poor, no doubt, but--hum--proud. Always proud. It
    has become a--hum--not infrequent custom for my--ha--personal
    admirers--personal admirers solely--to be pleased to express
    their desire to acknowledge my semi-official position here,
    by offering--ha--little tributes, which usually take the form
    of--ha--voluntary recognitions of my humble endeavours to--hum--to
    uphold a Tone here--a Tone--I beg it to be understood that I do not
    consider myself compromised. Ha. Not compromised. Ha. Not a beggar. No;
    I repudiate the title! At the same time far be it from me to--hum--to
    put upon the fine feelings by which my partial friends are actuated,
    the slight of scrupling to admit that those offerings are--hum--highly
    acceptable. On the contrary, they are most acceptable. In my child's
    name, if not in my own, I make the admission in the fullest manner, at
    the same time reserving--ha--shall I say my personal dignity? Ladies and
    gentlemen, God bless you all!'

    By this time, the exceeding mortification undergone by the Bosom had
    occasioned the withdrawal of the greater part of the company into other
    rooms. The few who had lingered thus long followed the rest, and Little
    Dorrit and her father were left to the servants and themselves. Dearest
    and most precious to her, he would come with her now, would he not? He
    replied to her fervid entreaties, that he would never be able to get up
    the narrow stairs without Bob; where was Bob, would nobody fetch Bob?
    Under pretence of looking for Bob, she got him out against the stream of
    gay company now pouring in for the evening assembly, and got him into a
    coach that had just set down its load, and got him home.

    The broad stairs of his Roman palace were contracted in his failing
    sight to the narrow stairs of his London prison; and he would suffer no
    one but her to touch him, his brother excepted. They got him up to his
    room without help, and laid him down on his bed. And from that hour his
    poor maimed spirit, only remembering the place where it had broken its
    wings, cancelled the dream through which it had since groped, and knew
    of nothing beyond the Marshalsea. When he heard footsteps in the street,
    he took them for the old weary tread in the yards. When the hour came
    for locking up, he supposed all strangers to be excluded for the night.
    When the time for opening came again, he was so anxious to see Bob, that
    they were fain to patch up a narrative how that Bob--many a year dead
    then, gentle turnkey--had taken cold, but hoped to be out to-morrow, or
    the next day, or the next at furthest.

    He fell away into a weakness so extreme that he could not raise his
    hand. But he still protected his brother according to his long usage;
    and would say with some complacency, fifty times a day, when he saw him
    standing by his bed, 'My good Frederick, sit down. You are very feeble
    indeed.'

    They tried him with Mrs General, but he had not the faintest knowledge
    of her. Some injurious suspicion lodged itself in his brain, that she
    wanted to supplant Mrs Bangham, and that she was given to drinking. He
    charged her with it in no measured terms; and was so urgent with his
    daughter to go round to the Marshal and entreat him to turn her out,
    that she was never reproduced after the first failure.

    Saving that he once asked 'if Tip had gone outside?' the remembrance of
    his two children not present seemed to have departed from him. But the
    child who had done so much for him and had been so poorly repaid, was
    never out of his mind. Not that he spared her, or was fearful of her
    being spent by watching and fatigue; he was not more troubled on that
    score than he had usually been. No; he loved her in his old way. They
    were in the jail again, and she tended him, and he had constant need of
    her, and could not turn without her; and he even told her, sometimes,
    that he was content to have undergone a great deal for her sake. As to
    her, she bent over his bed with her quiet face against his, and would
    have laid down her own life to restore him.

    When he had been sinking in this painless way for two or three days, she
    observed him to be troubled by the ticking of his watch--a pompous gold
    watch that made as great a to-do about its going as if nothing else
    went but itself and Time. She suffered it to run down; but he was still
    uneasy, and showed that was not what he wanted. At length he roused
    himself to explain that he wanted money to be raised on this watch. He
    was quite pleased when she pretended to take it away for the purpose,
    and afterwards had a relish for his little tastes of wine and jelly,
    that he had not had before.

    He soon made it plain that this was so; for, in another day or two
    he sent off his sleeve-buttons and finger-rings. He had an amazing
    satisfaction in entrusting her with these errands, and appeared to
    consider it equivalent to making the most methodical and provident
    arrangements. After his trinkets, or such of them as he had been able to
    see about him, were gone, his clothes engaged his attention; and it
    is as likely as not that he was kept alive for some days by the
    satisfaction of sending them, piece by piece, to an imaginary
    pawnbroker's.

    Thus for ten days Little Dorrit bent over his pillow, laying her cheek
    against his. Sometimes she was so worn out that for a few minutes
    they would slumber together. Then she would awake; to recollect with
    fast-flowing silent tears what it was that touched her face, and to see,
    stealing over the cherished face upon the pillow, a deeper shadow than
    the shadow of the Marshalsea Wall.

    Quietly, quietly, all the lines of the plan of the great Castle
    melted one after another. Quietly, quietly, the ruled and cross-ruled
    countenance on which they were traced, became fair and blank.
    Quietly, quietly, the reflected marks of the prison bars and of the
    zig-zag iron on the wall-top, faded away. Quietly, quietly, the face
    subsided into a far younger likeness of her own than she had ever seen
    under the grey hair, and sank to rest.

    At first her uncle was stark distracted. 'O my brother! O William,
    William! You to go before me; you to go alone; you to go, and I to
    remain! You, so far superior, so distinguished, so noble; I, a poor
    useless creature fit for nothing, and whom no one would have missed!'

    It did her, for the time, the good of having him to think of and to
    succour.

    'Uncle, dear uncle, spare yourself, spare me!'

    The old man was not deaf to the last words. When he did begin to
    restrain himself, it was that he might spare her. He had no care for
    himself; but, with all the remaining power of the honest heart, stunned
    so long and now awaking to be broken, he honoured and blessed her.

    'O God,' he cried, before they left the room, with his wrinkled hands
    clasped over her. 'Thou seest this daughter of my dear dead brother! All
    that I have looked upon, with my half-blind and sinful eyes, Thou hast
    discerned clearly, brightly. Not a hair of her head shall be harmed
    before Thee. Thou wilt uphold her here to her last hour. And I know Thou
    wilt reward her hereafter!'

    They remained in a dim room near, until it was almost midnight, quiet
    and sad together. At times his grief would seek relief in a burst like
    that in which it had found its earliest expression; but, besides that
    his little strength would soon have been unequal to such strains, he
    never failed to recall her words, and to reproach himself and calm
    himself. The only utterance with which he indulged his sorrow, was the
    frequent exclamation that his brother was gone, alone; that they had
    been together in the outset of their lives, that they had fallen into
    misfortune together, that they had kept together through their many
    years of poverty, that they had remained together to that day; and that
    his brother was gone alone, alone!

    They parted, heavy and sorrowful. She would not consent to leave him
    anywhere but in his own room, and she saw him lie down in his clothes
    upon his bed, and covered him with her own hands. Then she sank upon her
    own bed, and fell into a deep sleep: the sleep of exhaustion and
    rest, though not of complete release from a pervading consciousness of
    affliction. Sleep, good Little Dorrit. Sleep through the night!

    It was a moonlight night; but the moon rose late, being long past the
    full. When it was high in the peaceful firmament, it shone through
    half-closed lattice blinds into the solemn room where the stumblings and
    wanderings of a life had so lately ended. Two quiet figures were within
    the room; two figures, equally still and impassive, equally removed
    by an untraversable distance from the teeming earth and all that it
    contains, though soon to lie in it.

    One figure reposed upon the bed. The other, kneeling on the floor,
    drooped over it; the arms easily and peacefully resting on the coverlet;
the face bowed down, so that the lips touched the hand over which with
its last breath it had bent. The two brothers were before their Father;
far beyond the twilight judgment of this world; high above its mists and
obscurities.




The passengers were landing from the packet on the pier at Calais.
A low-lying place and a low-spirited place Calais was, with the tide
ebbing out towards low water-mark. There had been no more water on the
bar than had sufficed to float the packet in; and now the bar itself,
    with a shallow break of sea over it, looked like a lazy marine monster
    just risen to the surface, whose form was indistinctly shown as it lay
    asleep. The meagre lighthouse all in white, haunting the seaboard as if
    it were the ghost of an edifice that had once had colour and rotundity,
    dropped melancholy tears after its late buffeting by the waves. The long
    rows of gaunt black piles, slimy and wet and weather-worn, with funeral
    garlands of seaweed twisted about them by the late tide, might
    have represented an unsightly marine cemetery. Every wave-dashed,
    storm-beaten object, was so low and so little, under the broad grey sky,
    in the noise of the wind and sea, and before the curling lines of surf,
    making at it ferociously, that the wonder was there was any Calais left,
    and that its low gates and low wall and low roofs and low ditches and
    low sand-hills and low ramparts and flat streets, had not yielded
    long ago to the undermining and besieging sea, like the fortifications
    children make on the sea-shore.

    After slipping among oozy piles and planks, stumbling up wet steps and
    encountering many salt difficulties, the passengers entered on their
    comfortless peregrination along the pier; where all the French vagabonds
    and English outlaws in the town (half the population) attended to
    prevent their recovery from bewilderment. After being minutely inspected
    by all the English, and claimed and reclaimed and counter-claimed as
    prizes by all the French in a hand-to-hand scuffle three quarters of a
    mile long, they were at last free to enter the streets, and to make off
    in their various directions, hotly pursued.

    Clennam, harassed by more anxieties than one, was among this devoted
    band. Having rescued the most defenceless of his compatriots from
    situations of great extremity, he now went his way alone, or as nearly
    alone as he could be, with a native gentleman in a suit of grease and
    a cap of the same material, giving chase at a distance of some fifty
    yards, and continually calling after him, 'Hi! Ice-say! You! Seer!
    Ice-say! Nice Oatel!'

    Even this hospitable person, however, was left behind at last, and
    Clennam pursued his way, unmolested. There was a tranquil air in the
    town after the turbulence of the Channel and the beach, and its dulness
    in that comparison was agreeable. He met new groups of his countrymen,
    who had all a straggling air of having at one time overblown themselves,
    like certain uncomfortable kinds of flowers, and of being now mere
    weeds. They had all an air, too, of lounging out a limited round, day
    after day, which strongly reminded him of the Marshalsea. But, taking
    no further note of them than was sufficient to give birth to the
    reflection, he sought out a certain street and number which he kept in
    his mind.

    'So Pancks said,' he murmured to himself, as he stopped before a dull
    house answering to the address. 'I suppose his information to be correct
    and his discovery, among Mr Casby's loose papers, indisputable; but,
    without it, I should hardly have supposed this to be a likely place.'

    A dead sort of house, with a dead wall over the way and a dead gateway
    at the side, where a pendant bell-handle produced two dead tinkles, and
    a knocker produced a dead, flat, surface-tapping, that seemed not to
    have depth enough in it to penetrate even the cracked door. However, the
    door jarred open on a dead sort of spring; and he closed it behind him
    as he entered a dull yard, soon brought to a close by another dead wall,
    where an attempt had been made to train some creeping shrubs, which were
    dead; and to make a little fountain in a grotto, which was dry; and to
    decorate that with a little statue, which was gone.

    The entry to the house was on the left, and it was garnished as the
    outer gateway was, with two printed bills in French and English,
    announcing Furnished Apartments to let, with immediate possession. A
    strong cheerful peasant woman, all stocking, petticoat, white cap, and
    ear-ring, stood here in a dark doorway, and said with a pleasant show of
    teeth, 'Ice-say! Seer! Who?'

    Clennam, replying in French, said the English lady; he wished to see
    the English lady. 'Enter then and ascend, if you please,' returned the
    peasant woman, in French likewise. He did both, and followed her up a
    dark bare staircase to a back room on the first-floor. Hence, there was
    a gloomy view of the yard that was dull, and of the shrubs that were
    dead, and of the fountain that was dry, and of the pedestal of the
    statue that was gone.

    'Monsieur Blandois,' said Clennam.

    'With pleasure, Monsieur.'

    Thereupon the woman withdrew and left him to look at the room. It was
    the pattern of room always to be found in such a house. Cool, dull, and
    dark. Waxed floor very slippery. A room not large enough to skate in;
    nor adapted to the easy pursuit of any other occupation. Red and
    white curtained windows, little straw mat, little round table with a
    tumultuous assemblage of legs underneath, clumsy rush-bottomed chairs,
    two great red velvet arm-chairs affording plenty of space to be
    uncomfortable in, bureau, chimney-glass in several pieces pretending to
    be in one piece, pair of gaudy vases of very artificial flowers; between
    them a Greek warrior with his helmet off, sacrificing a clock to the
    Genius of France.

    After some pause, a door of communication with another room was opened,
    and a lady entered. She manifested great surprise on seeing Clennam, and
    her glance went round the room in search of some one else.

    'Pardon me, Miss Wade. I am alone.'

    'It was not your name that was brought to me.'

    'No; I know that. Excuse me. I have already had experience that my name
    does not predispose you to an interview; and I ventured to mention the
    name of one I am in search of.'

    'Pray,' she returned, motioning him to a chair so coldly that he
    remained standing, 'what name was it that you gave?'

    'I mentioned the name of Blandois.'

    'Blandois?'

    'A name you are acquainted with.'

    'It is strange,' she said, frowning, 'that you should still press an
    undesired interest in me and my acquaintances, in me and my affairs, Mr
    Clennam. I don't know what you mean.'

    'Pardon me. You know the name?'

    'What can you have to do with the name? What can I have to do with the
    name? What can you have to do with my knowing or not knowing any name?
    I know many names and I have forgotten many more. This may be in the
    one class, or it may be in the other, or I may never have heard it. I am
    acquainted with no reason for examining myself, or for being examined,
    about it.'

    'If you will allow me,' said Clennam, 'I will tell you my reason for
    pressing the subject. I admit that I do press it, and I must beg you to
    forgive me if I do so, very earnestly. The reason is all mine, I do not
    insinuate that it is in any way yours.'

    'Well, sir,' she returned, repeating a little less haughtily than before
    her former invitation to him to be seated: to which he now deferred, as
    she seated herself. 'I am at least glad to know that this is not another
    bondswoman of some friend of yours, who is bereft of free choice, and
    whom I have spirited away. I will hear your reason, if you please.'

    'First, to identify the person of whom we speak,' said Clennam, 'let me
    observe that it is the person you met in London some time back. You will
    remember meeting him near the river--in the Adelphi!'

    'You mix yourself most unaccountably with my business,' she replied,
    looking full at him with stern displeasure. 'How do you know that?'

    'I entreat you not to take it ill. By mere accident.'

    'What accident?'

    'Solely the accident of coming upon you in the street and seeing the
    meeting.'

    'Do you speak of yourself, or of some one else?'

    'Of myself. I saw it.'

    'To be sure it was in the open street,' she observed, after a few
    moments of less and less angry reflection. 'Fifty people might have seen
    it. It would have signified nothing if they had.'

    'Nor do I make my having seen it of any moment, nor (otherwise than as
            an explanation of my coming here) do I connect my visit with it or the
    favour that I have to ask.'

    'Oh! You have to ask a favour! It occurred to me,' and the handsome face
    looked bitterly at him, 'that your manner was softened, Mr Clennam.'

    He was content to protest against this by a slight action without
    contesting it in words. He then referred to Blandois' disappearance, of
    which it was probable she had heard? However probable it was to him, she
    had heard of no such thing. Let him look round him (she said) and judge
    for himself what general intelligence was likely to reach the ears of
    a woman who had been shut up there while it was rife, devouring her own
    heart. When she had uttered this denial, which he believed to be true,
    she asked him what he meant by disappearance? That led to his narrating
    the circumstances in detail, and expressing something of his anxiety
    to discover what had really become of the man, and to repel the dark
    suspicions that clouded about his mother's house. She heard him with
    evident surprise, and with more marks of suppressed interest than he
    had seen in her; still they did not overcome her distant, proud, and
    self-secluded manner. When he had finished, she said nothing but these
    words:

    'You have not yet told me, sir, what I have to do with it, or what the
    favour is? Will you be so good as come to that?'

    'I assume,' said Arthur, persevering, in his endeavour to soften
    her scornful demeanour, 'that being in communication--may I say,
    confidential communication?--with this person--'

    'You may say, of course, whatever you like,' she remarked; 'but I do not
    subscribe to your assumptions, Mr Clennam, or to any one's.'

    '--that being, at least in personal communication with him,' said
    Clennam, changing the form of his position in the hope of making
    it unobjectionable, 'you can tell me something of his antecedents,
    pursuits, habits, usual place of residence. Can give me some little clue
    by which to seek him out in the likeliest manner, and either produce
    him, or establish what has become of him. This is the favour I ask,
    and I ask it in a distress of mind for which I hope you will feel some
    consideration. If you should have any reason for imposing conditions
    upon me, I will respect it without asking what it is.'

    'You chanced to see me in the street with the man,' she observed,
    after being, to his mortification, evidently more occupied with her own
    reflections on the matter than with his appeal. 'Then you knew the man
    before?'

    'Not before; afterwards. I never saw him before, but I saw him again on
    this very night of his disappearance. In my mother's room, in fact. I
    left him there. You will read in this paper all that is known of him.'

    He handed her one of the printed bills, which she read with a steady and
    attentive face.

    'This is more than _I_ knew of him,' she said, giving it back.
    Clennam's looks expressed his heavy disappointment, perhaps his
    incredulity; for she added in the same unsympathetic tone: 'You don't
    believe it. Still, it is so. As to personal communication: it seems that
    there was personal communication between him and your mother. And yet
    you say you believe _her_ declaration that she knows no more of him!'

    A sufficiently expressive hint of suspicion was conveyed in these words,
    and in the smile by which they were accompanied, to bring the blood into
    Clennam's cheeks.

    'Come, sir,' she said, with a cruel pleasure in repeating the stab, 'I
    will be as open with you as you can desire. I will confess that if I
    cared for my credit (which I do not), or had a good name to preserve
    (which I have not, for I am utterly indifferent to its being considered
     good or bad), I should regard myself as heavily compromised by having
    had anything to do with this fellow. Yet he never passed in at _my_
    door--never sat in colloquy with _me_ until midnight.'

    She took her revenge for her old grudge in thus turning his subject
    against him. Hers was not the nature to spare him, and she had no
    compunction.

    'That he is a low, mercenary wretch; that I first saw him prowling about
    Italy (where I was, not long ago), and that I hired him there, as the
    suitable instrument of a purpose I happened to have; I have no objection
    to tell you. In short, it was worth my while, for my own pleasure--the
    gratification of a strong feeling--to pay a spy who would fetch and
    carry for money. I paid this creature. And I dare say that if I had
    wanted to make such a bargain, and if I could have paid him enough, and
    if he could have done it in the dark, free from all risk, he would have
    taken any life with as little scruple as he took my money. That, at
    least, is my opinion of him; and I see it is not very far removed from
    yours. Your mother's opinion of him, I am to assume (following your
            example of assuming this and that), was vastly different.'

    'My mother, let me remind you,' said Clennam, 'was first brought into
    communication with him in the unlucky course of business.'

    'It appears to have been an unlucky course of business that last brought
    her into communication with him,' returned Miss Wade; 'and business
    hours on that occasion were late.'

    'You imply,' said Arthur, smarting under these cool-handed thrusts, of
    which he had deeply felt the force already, 'that there was something--'

    'Mr Clennam,' she composedly interrupted, 'recollect that I do not speak
    by implication about the man. He is, I say again without disguise, a low
    mercenary wretch. I suppose such a creature goes where there is occasion
    for him. If I had not had occasion for him, you would not have seen him
    and me together.'

    Wrung by her persistence in keeping that dark side of the case before
    him, of which there was a half-hidden shadow in his own breast, Clennam
    was silent.

    'I have spoken of him as still living,' she added, 'but he may have been
    put out of the way for anything I know. For anything I care, also. I
    have no further occasion for him.'

    With a heavy sigh and a despondent air, Arthur Clennam slowly rose.
    She did not rise also, but said, having looked at him in the meanwhile
    with a fixed look of suspicion, and lips angrily compressed:

    'He was the chosen associate of your dear friend, Mr Gowan, was he not?
    Why don't you ask your dear friend to help you?'

    The denial that he was a dear friend rose to Arthur's lips; but he
    repressed it, remembering his old struggles and resolutions, and said:

    'Further than that he has never seen Blandois since Blandois set out for
    England, Mr Gowan knows nothing additional about him. He was a chance
    acquaintance, made abroad.'

    'A chance acquaintance made abroad!' she repeated. 'Yes. Your dear
    friend has need to divert himself with all the acquaintances he can
    make, seeing what a wife he has. I hate his wife, sir.'

    The anger with which she said it, the more remarkable for being so much
    under her restraint, fixed Clennam's attention, and kept him on the
    spot. It flashed out of her dark eyes as they regarded him, quivered in
    her nostrils, and fired the very breath she exhaled; but her face was
    otherwise composed into a disdainful serenity; and her attitude was as
    calmly and haughtily graceful as if she had been in a mood of complete
    indifference.

    'All I will say is, Miss Wade,' he remarked, 'that you can have received
    no provocation to a feeling in which I believe you have no sharer.'

    'You may ask your dear friend, if you choose,' she returned, 'for his
    opinion upon that subject.'

    'I am scarcely on those intimate terms with my dear friend,' said
    Arthur, in spite of his resolutions, 'that would render my approaching
    the subject very probable, Miss Wade.'

    'I hate him,' she returned. 'Worse than his wife, because I was once
    dupe enough, and false enough to myself, almost to love him. You have
    seen me, sir, only on common-place occasions, when I dare say you have
    thought me a common-place woman, a little more self-willed than the
    generality. You don't know what I mean by hating, if you know me no
    better than that; you can't know, without knowing with what care I have
    studied myself and people about me. For this reason I have for some
    time inclined to tell you what my life has been--not to propitiate your
    opinion, for I set no value on it; but that you may comprehend, when
    you think of your dear friend and his dear wife, what I mean by hating.
    Shall I give you something I have written and put by for your perusal,
    or shall I hold my hand?'

    Arthur begged her to give it to him. She went to the bureau, unlocked
    it, and took from an inner drawer a few folded sheets of paper. Without
    any conciliation of him, scarcely addressing him, rather speaking as if
    she were speaking to her own looking-glass for the justification of her
    own stubbornness, she said, as she gave them to him:

    'Now you may know what I mean by hating! No more of that. Sir, whether
    you find me temporarily and cheaply lodging in an empty London house, or
    in a Calais apartment, you find Harriet with me. You may like to see
    her before you leave. Harriet, come in!' She called Harriet again. The
    second call produced Harriet, once Tattycoram.

    'Here is Mr Clennam,' said Miss Wade; 'not come for you; he has given
    you up,--I suppose you have, by this time?'

    'Having no authority, or influence--yes,' assented Clennam.

    'Not come in search of you, you see; but still seeking some one. He
    wants that Blandois man.'

    'With whom I saw you in the Strand in London,' hinted Arthur.

    'If you know anything of him, Harriet, except that he came from
    Venice--which we all know--tell it to Mr Clennam freely.'

    'I know nothing more about him,' said the girl.

    'Are you satisfied?' Miss Wade inquired of Arthur.

    He had no reason to disbelieve them; the girl's manner being so natural
    as to be almost convincing, if he had had any previous doubts. He
    replied, 'I must seek for intelligence elsewhere.'

    He was not going in the same breath; but he had risen before the girl
    entered, and she evidently thought he was. She looked quickly at him,
    and said:

    'Are they well, sir?'

    'Who?'

    She stopped herself in saying what would have been 'all of them;'
    glanced at Miss Wade; and said 'Mr and Mrs Meagles.'

    'They were, when I last heard of them. They are not at home. By the way,
    let me ask you. Is it true that you were seen there?'

    'Where? Where does any one say I was seen?' returned the girl, sullenly
    casting down her eyes.

    'Looking in at the garden gate of the cottage.'

    'No,' said Miss Wade. 'She has never been near it.'

    'You are wrong, then,' said the girl. 'I went down there the last time
    we were in London. I went one afternoon when you left me alone. And I
    did look in.'

    'You poor-spirited girl,' returned Miss Wade with infinite contempt;
    'does all our companionship, do all our conversations, do all your old
    complainings, tell for so little as that?'

    'There was no harm in looking in at the gate for an instant,' said the
    girl. 'I saw by the windows that the family were not there.'

    'Why should you go near the place?'

    'Because I wanted to see it. Because I felt that I should like to look
    at it again.'

    As each of the two handsome faces looked at the other, Clennam felt how
    each of the two natures must be constantly tearing the other to pieces.

    'Oh!' said Miss Wade, coldly subduing and removing her glance; 'if you
    had any desire to see the place where you led the life from which I
    rescued you because you had found out what it was, that is another
    thing. But is that your truth to me? Is that your fidelity to me? Is
    that the common cause I make with you? You are not worth the confidence
    I have placed in you. You are not worth the favour I have shown you. You
    are no higher than a spaniel, and had better go back to the people who
    did worse than whip you.'

    'If you speak so of them with any one else by to hear, you'll provoke me
    to take their part,' said the girl.

    'Go back to them,' Miss Wade retorted. 'Go back to them.'

    'You know very well,' retorted Harriet in her turn, 'that I won't go
    back to them. You know very well that I have thrown them off, and never
    can, never shall, never will, go back to them. Let them alone, then,
    Miss Wade.'

    'You prefer their plenty to your less fat living here,' she rejoined.
    'You exalt them, and slight me. What else should I have expected? I
    ought to have known it.'

    'It's not so,' said the girl, flushing high, 'and you don't say what you
    mean. I know what you mean. You are reproaching me, underhanded, with
    having nobody but you to look to. And because I have nobody but you
    to look to, you think you are to make me do, or not do, everything you
    please, and are to put any affront upon me. You are as bad as they were,
    every bit. But I will not be quite tamed, and made submissive. I will
    say again that I went to look at the house, because I had often thought
    that I should like to see it once more. I will ask again how they are,
    because I once liked them and at times thought they were kind to me.'

    Hereupon Clennam said that he was sure they would still receive her
    kindly, if she should ever desire to return.

    'Never!' said the girl passionately. 'I shall never do that. Nobody
    knows that better than Miss Wade, though she taunts me because she has
    made me her dependent. And I know I am so; and I know she is overjoyed
    when she can bring it to my mind.'

    'A good pretence!' said Miss Wade, with no less anger, haughtiness, and
    bitterness; 'but too threadbare to cover what I plainly see in this. My
    poverty will not bear competition with their money. Better go back at
    once, better go back at once, and have done with it!'

    Arthur Clennam looked at them, standing a little distance asunder in the
    dull confined room, each proudly cherishing her own anger; each, with
    a fixed determination, torturing her own breast, and torturing the
    other's. He said a word or two of leave-taking; but Miss Wade barely
    inclined her head, and Harriet, with the assumed humiliation of an
    abject dependent and serf (but not without defiance for all that), made
    as if she were too low to notice or to be noticed.

    He came down the dark winding stairs into the yard with an increased
    sense upon him of the gloom of the wall that was dead, and of the shrubs
    that were dead, and of the fountain that was dry, and of the statue that
    was gone. Pondering much on what he had seen and heard in that house,
    as well as on the failure of all his efforts to trace the suspicious
    character who was lost, he returned to London and to England by the
    packet that had taken him over. On the way he unfolded the sheets of
    paper, and read in them what is reproduced in the next chapter.




I have the misfortune of not being a fool. From a very early age I have
detected what those about me thought they hid from me. If I could have
been habitually imposed upon, instead of habitually discerning the
truth, I might have lived as smoothly as most fools do.

My childhood was passed with a grandmother; that is to say, with a lady
who represented that relative to me, and who took that title on herself.
She had no claim to it, but I--being to that extent a little fool--had
no suspicion of her. She had some children of her own family in her
house, and some children of other people. All girls; ten in number,
    including me. We all lived together and were educated together.

    I must have been about twelve years old when I began to see how
    determinedly those girls patronised me. I was told I was an orphan.
    There was no other orphan among us; and I perceived (here was the
            first disadvantage of not being a fool) that they conciliated me in an
    insolent pity, and in a sense of superiority. I did not set this down
    as a discovery, rashly. I tried them often. I could hardly make them
    quarrel with me. When I succeeded with any of them, they were sure to
    come after an hour or two, and begin a reconciliation. I tried them over
    and over again, and I never knew them wait for me to begin. They were
    always forgiving me, in their vanity and condescension. Little images of
    grown people!

    One of them was my chosen friend. I loved that stupid mite in a
    passionate way that she could no more deserve than I can remember
    without feeling ashamed of, though I was but a child. She had what they
    called an amiable temper, an affectionate temper. She could distribute,
    and did distribute pretty looks and smiles to every one among them. I
    believe there was not a soul in the place, except myself, who knew that
    she did it purposely to wound and gall me!

    Nevertheless, I so loved that unworthy girl that my life was made stormy
    by my fondness for her. I was constantly lectured and disgraced for what
    was called 'trying her;' in other words charging her with her little
    perfidy and throwing her into tears by showing her that I read her
    heart. However, I loved her faithfully; and one time I went home with
    her for the holidays.

    She was worse at home than she had been at school. She had a crowd of
    cousins and acquaintances, and we had dances at her house, and went out
    to dances at other houses, and, both at home and out, she tormented my
    love beyond endurance. Her plan was, to make them all fond of her--and
    so drive me wild with jealousy. To be familiar and endearing with them
    all--and so make me mad with envying them. When we were left alone in
    our bedroom at night, I would reproach her with my perfect knowledge of
    her baseness; and then she would cry and cry and say I was cruel, and
    then I would hold her in my arms till morning: loving her as much as
    ever, and often feeling as if, rather than suffer so, I could so hold
    her in my arms and plunge to the bottom of a river--where I would still
    hold her after we were both dead.

    It came to an end, and I was relieved. In the family there was an aunt
    who was not fond of me. I doubt if any of the family liked me much; but
    I never wanted them to like me, being altogether bound up in the one
    girl. The aunt was a young woman, and she had a serious way with her
    eyes of watching me. She was an audacious woman, and openly looked
    compassionately at me. After one of the nights that I have spoken of, I
    came down into a greenhouse before breakfast. Charlotte (the name of
            my false young friend) had gone down before me, and I heard this aunt
    speaking to her about me as I entered. I stopped where I was, among the
    leaves, and listened.

    The aunt said, 'Charlotte, Miss Wade is wearing you to death, and this
    must not continue.' I repeat the very words I heard.

    Now, what did she answer? Did she say, 'It is I who am wearing her to
    death, I who am keeping her on a rack and am the executioner, yet she
    tells me every night that she loves me devotedly, though she knows what
    I make her undergo?' No; my first memorable experience was true to
    what I knew her to be, and to all my experience. She began sobbing and
    weeping (to secure the aunt's sympathy to herself), and said, 'Dear
    aunt, she has an unhappy temper; other girls at school, besides I, try
    hard to make it better; we all try hard.'

    Upon that the aunt fondled her, as if she had said something noble
    instead of despicable and false, and kept up the infamous pretence by
    replying, 'But there are reasonable limits, my dear love, to everything,
    and I see that this poor miserable girl causes you more constant and
    useless distress than even so good an effort justifies.'

    The poor miserable girl came out of her concealment, as you may be
    prepared to hear, and said, 'Send me home.' I never said another word
    to either of them, or to any of them, but 'Send me home, or I will
    walk home alone, night and day!' When I got home, I told my supposed
    grandmother that, unless I was sent away to finish my education
    somewhere else before that girl came back, or before any one of them
    came back, I would burn my sight away by throwing myself into the fire,
    rather than I would endure to look at their plotting faces.

    I went among young women next, and I found them no better. Fair
    words and fair pretences; but I penetrated below those assertions of
    themselves and depreciations of me, and they were no better. Before
    I left them, I learned that I had no grandmother and no recognised
    relation. I carried the light of that information both into my past
    and into my future. It showed me many new occasions on which people
    triumphed over me, when they made a pretence of treating me with
    consideration, or doing me a service.

    A man of business had a small property in trust for me. I was to be
    a governess; I became a governess; and went into the family of a poor
    nobleman, where there were two daughters--little children, but the
    parents wished them to grow up, if possible, under one instructress. The
    mother was young and pretty. From the first, she made a show of behaving
    to me with great delicacy. I kept my resentment to myself; but I knew
    very well that it was her way of petting the knowledge that she was my
    Mistress, and might have behaved differently to her servant if it had
    been her fancy.

    I say I did not resent it, nor did I; but I showed her, by not
    gratifying her, that I understood her. When she pressed me to take wine,
    I took water. If there happened to be anything choice at table, she
    always sent it to me: but I always declined it, and ate of the rejected
    dishes. These disappointments of her patronage were a sharp retort, and
    made me feel independent.

    I liked the children. They were timid, but on the whole disposed to
    attach themselves to me. There was a nurse, however, in the house, a
    rosy-faced woman always making an obtrusive pretence of being gay and
    good-humoured, who had nursed them both, and who had secured their
    affections before I saw them. I could almost have settled down to my
    fate but for this woman. Her artful devices for keeping herself before
    the children in constant competition with me, might have blinded many
    in my place; but I saw through them from the first. On the pretext of
    arranging my rooms and waiting on me and taking care of my wardrobe (all
            of which she did busily), she was never absent. The most crafty of her
    many subtleties was her feint of seeking to make the children fonder of
    me. She would lead them to me and coax them to me. 'Come to good Miss
    Wade, come to dear Miss Wade, come to pretty Miss Wade. She loves you
    very much. Miss Wade is a clever lady, who has read heaps of books, and
    can tell you far better and more interesting stories than I know. Come
    and hear Miss Wade!' How could I engage their attentions, when my heart
    was burning against these ignorant designs? How could I wonder, when I
    saw their innocent faces shrinking away, and their arms twining round
    her neck, instead of mine? Then she would look up at me, shaking their
    curls from her face, and say, 'They'll come round soon, Miss Wade;
    they're very simple and loving, ma'am; don't be at all cast down about
    it, ma'am'--exulting over me!

    There was another thing the woman did. At times, when she saw that she
    had safely plunged me into a black despondent brooding by these means,
    she would call the attention of the children to it, and would show them
    the difference between herself and me. 'Hush! Poor Miss Wade is not
    well. Don't make a noise, my dears, her head aches. Come and comfort
    her. Come and ask her if she is better; come and ask her to lie down. I
    hope you have nothing on your mind, ma'am. Don't take on, ma'am, and be
    sorry!'

    It became intolerable. Her ladyship, my Mistress, coming in one day when
    I was alone, and at the height of feeling that I could support it no
    longer, I told her I must go. I could not bear the presence of that
    woman Dawes.

    'Miss Wade! Poor Dawes is devoted to you; would do anything for you!'

    I knew beforehand she would say so; I was quite prepared for it; I only
    answered, it was not for me to contradict my Mistress; I must go.

    'I hope, Miss Wade,' she returned, instantly assuming the tone of
    superiority she had always so thinly concealed, 'that nothing I have
    ever said or done since we have been together, has justified your use of
    that disagreeable word, "Mistress." It must have been wholly inadvertent
    on my part. Pray tell me what it is.'

    I replied that I had no complaint to make, either of my Mistress or to
    my Mistress; but I must go.

    She hesitated a moment, and then sat down beside me, and laid her hand
    on mine. As if that honour would obliterate any remembrance!

    'Miss Wade, I fear you are unhappy, through causes over which I have no
    influence.'

    I smiled, thinking of the experience the word awakened, and said, 'I
    have an unhappy temper, I suppose.'

    'I did not say that.'

    'It is an easy way of accounting for anything,' said I.

    'It may be; but I did not say so. What I wish to approach is something
    very different. My husband and I have exchanged some remarks upon the
    subject, when we have observed with pain that you have not been easy
    with us.'

    'Easy? Oh! You are such great people, my lady,' said I.

    'I am unfortunate in using a word which may convey a meaning--and
    evidently does--quite opposite to my intention.' (She had not expected
            my reply, and it shamed her.) 'I only mean, not happy with us. It is
    a difficult topic to enter on; but, from one young woman to another,
    perhaps--in short, we have been apprehensive that you may allow some
    family circumstances of which no one can be more innocent than yourself,
    to prey upon your spirits. If so, let us entreat you not to make them
    a cause of grief. My husband himself, as is well known, formerly had a
    very dear sister who was not in law his sister, but who was universally
    beloved and respected--'

    I saw directly that they had taken me in for the sake of the dead woman,
    whoever she was, and to have that boast of me and advantage of me; I
    saw, in the nurse's knowledge of it, an encouragement to goad me as
    she had done; and I saw, in the children's shrinking away, a vague
    impression, that I was not like other people. I left that house that
    night.

    After one or two short and very similar experiences, which are not to
    the present purpose, I entered another family where I had but one pupil:
    a girl of fifteen, who was the only daughter. The parents here were
    elderly people: people of station, and rich. A nephew whom they had
    brought up was a frequent visitor at the house, among many other
    visitors; and he began to pay me attention. I was resolute in repulsing
    him; for I had determined when I went there, that no one should pity me
    or condescend to me. But he wrote me a letter. It led to our being
    engaged to be married.

    He was a year younger than I, and young-looking even when that allowance
    was made. He was on absence from India, where he had a post that was
    soon to grow into a very good one. In six months we were to be married,
    and were to go to India. I was to stay in the house, and was to be
    married from the house. Nobody objected to any part of the plan.

    I cannot avoid saying he admired me; but, if I could, I would. Vanity
    has nothing to do with the declaration, for his admiration worried me.
    He took no pains to hide it; and caused me to feel among the rich people
    as if he had bought me for my looks, and made a show of his purchase to
    justify himself. They appraised me in their own minds, I saw, and were
    curious to ascertain what my full value was. I resolved that they
    should not know. I was immovable and silent before them; and would have
    suffered any one of them to kill me sooner than I would have laid myself
    out to bespeak their approval.

    He told me I did not do myself justice. I told him I did, and it was
    because I did and meant to do so to the last, that I would not stoop to
    propitiate any of them. He was concerned and even shocked, when I added
    that I wished he would not parade his attachment before them; but he
    said he would sacrifice even the honest impulses of his affection to my
    peace.

    Under that pretence he began to retort upon me. By the hour together, he
    would keep at a distance from me, talking to any one rather than to me.
    I have sat alone and unnoticed, half an evening, while he conversed with
    his young cousin, my pupil. I have seen all the while, in people's eyes,
    that they thought the two looked nearer on an equality than he and I.
    I have sat, divining their thoughts, until I have felt that his young
    appearance made me ridiculous, and have raged against myself for ever
    loving him.

    For I did love him once. Undeserving as he was, and little as he thought
    of all these agonies that it cost me--agonies which should have made him
    wholly and gratefully mine to his life's end--I loved him. I bore with
    his cousin's praising him to my face, and with her pretending to think
    that it pleased me, but full well knowing that it rankled in my breast;
    for his sake. While I have sat in his presence recalling all my slights
    and wrongs, and deliberating whether I should not fly from the house at
    once and never see him again--I have loved him.

    His aunt (my Mistress you will please to remember) deliberately,
    wilfully, added to my trials and vexations. It was her delight to
    expatiate on the style in which we were to live in India, and on the
    establishment we should keep, and the company we should entertain when
    he got his advancement. My pride rose against this barefaced way of
    pointing out the contrast my married life was to present to my then
    dependent and inferior position. I suppressed my indignation; but I
    showed her that her intention was not lost upon me, and I repaid her
    annoyance by affecting humility. What she described would surely be
    a great deal too much honour for me, I would tell her. I was afraid
    I might not be able to support so great a change. Think of a mere
    governess, her daughter's governess, coming to that high distinction! It
    made her uneasy, and made them all uneasy, when I answered in this way.
    They knew that I fully understood her.

    It was at the time when my troubles were at their highest, and when
    I was most incensed against my lover for his ingratitude in caring as
    little as he did for the innumerable distresses and mortifications I
    underwent on his account, that your dear friend, Mr Gowan, appeared
    at the house. He had been intimate there for a long time, but had been
    abroad. He understood the state of things at a glance, and he understood
    me.

    He was the first person I had ever seen in my life who had understood
    me. He was not in the house three times before I knew that he
    accompanied every movement of my mind. In his coldly easy way with all
    of them, and with me, and with the whole subject, I saw it clearly.
    In his light protestations of admiration of my future husband, in his
    enthusiasm regarding our engagement and our prospects, in his hopeful
    congratulations on our future wealth and his despondent references to
    his own poverty--all equally hollow, and jesting, and full of mockery--I
    saw it clearly. He made me feel more and more resentful, and more and
    more contemptible, by always presenting to me everything that surrounded
    me with some new hateful light upon it, while he pretended to exhibit
    it in its best aspect for my admiration and his own. He was like the
    dressed-up Death in the Dutch series; whatever figure he took upon his
    arm, whether it was youth or age, beauty or ugliness, whether he danced
    with it, sang with it, played with it, or prayed with it, he made it
    ghastly.

    You will understand, then, that when your dear friend complimented me,
    he really condoled with me; that when he soothed me under my vexations,
    he laid bare every smarting wound I had; that when he declared my
    'faithful swain' to be 'the most loving young fellow in the world, with
    the tenderest heart that ever beat,' he touched my old misgiving that
    I was made ridiculous. These were not great services, you may say. They
    were acceptable to me, because they echoed my own mind, and confirmed
    my own knowledge. I soon began to like the society of your dear friend
    better than any other.

    When I perceived (which I did, almost as soon) that jealousy was growing
    out of this, I liked this society still better. Had I not been subject
    to jealousy, and were the endurances to be all mine? No. Let him know
    what it was! I was delighted that he should know it; I was delighted
    that he should feel keenly, and I hoped he did. More than that. He was
    tame in comparison with Mr Gowan, who knew how to address me on equal
    terms, and how to anatomise the wretched people around us.

    This went on, until the aunt, my Mistress, took it upon herself to speak
    to me. It was scarcely worth alluding to; she knew I meant nothing; but
    she suggested from herself, knowing it was only necessary to suggest,
    that it might be better if I were a little less companionable with Mr
    Gowan.

    I asked her how she could answer for what I meant? She could always
    answer, she replied, for my meaning nothing wrong. I thanked her,
    but said I would prefer to answer for myself and to myself. Her other
    servants would probably be grateful for good characters, but I wanted
    none.

    Other conversation followed, and induced me to ask her how she knew that
    it was only necessary for her to make a suggestion to me, to have it
    obeyed? Did she presume on my birth, or on my hire? I was not bought,
    body and soul. She seemed to think that her distinguished nephew had
    gone into a slave-market and purchased a wife.

    It would probably have come, sooner or later, to the end to which it did
    come, but she brought it to its issue at once. She told me, with assumed
    commiseration, that I had an unhappy temper. On this repetition of the
    old wicked injury, I withheld no longer, but exposed to her all I had
    known of her and seen in her, and all I had undergone within myself
    since I had occupied the despicable position of being engaged to her
    nephew. I told her that Mr Gowan was the only relief I had had in my
    degradation; that I had borne it too long, and that I shook it off too
    late; but that I would see none of them more. And I never did.

    Your dear friend followed me to my retreat, and was very droll on the
    severance of the connection; though he was sorry, too, for the excellent
    people (in their way the best he had ever met), and deplored the
    necessity of breaking mere house-flies on the wheel. He protested before
    long, and far more truly than I then supposed, that he was not worth
    acceptance by a woman of such endowments, and such power of character;
    but--well, well--!

    Your dear friend amused me and amused himself as long as it suited
    his inclinations; and then reminded me that we were both people of the
    world, that we both understood mankind, that we both knew there was no
    such thing as romance, that we were both prepared for going different
    ways to seek our fortunes like people of sense, and that we both foresaw
    that whenever we encountered one another again we should meet as the
    best friends on earth. So he said, and I did not contradict him.

    It was not very long before I found that he was courting his present
    wife, and that she had been taken away to be out of his reach. I hated
    her then, quite as much as I hate her now; and naturally, therefore,
    could desire nothing better than that she should marry him. But I was
    restlessly curious to look at her--so curious that I felt it to be one
    of the few sources of entertainment left to me. I travelled a little:
    travelled until I found myself in her society, and in yours. Your dear
    friend, I think, was not known to you then, and had not given you any of
    those signal marks of his friendship which he has bestowed upon you.

    In that company I found a girl, in various circumstances of whose
    position there was a singular likeness to my own, and in whose character
    I was interested and pleased to see much of the rising against swollen
    patronage and selfishness, calling themselves kindness, protection,
    benevolence, and other fine names, which I have described as inherent in
    my nature. I often heard it said, too, that she had 'an unhappy temper.'
    Well understanding what was meant by the convenient phrase, and wanting
    a companion with a knowledge of what I knew, I thought I would try to
    release the girl from her bondage and sense of injustice. I have no
    occasion to relate that I succeeded.

    We have been together ever since, sharing my small means.




Arthur Clennam had made his unavailing expedition to Calais in the midst
of a great pressure of business. A certain barbaric Power with valuable
possessions on the map of the world, had occasion for the services of
one or two engineers, quick in invention and determined in execution:
practical men, who could make the men and means their ingenuity
perceived to be wanted out of the best materials they could find
at hand; and who were as bold and fertile in the adaptation of such
materials to their purpose, as in the conception of their purpose
itself. This Power, being a barbaric one, had no idea of stowing away
a great national object in a Circumlocution Office, as strong wine is
hidden from the light in a cellar until its fire and youth are gone,
       and the labourers who worked in the vineyard and pressed the grapes are
       dust. With characteristic ignorance, it acted on the most decided and
       energetic notions of How to do it; and never showed the least respect
       for, or gave any quarter to, the great political science, How not to do
       it. Indeed it had a barbarous way of striking the latter art and mystery
       dead, in the person of any enlightened subject who practised it.

       Accordingly, the men who were wanted were sought out and found; which
       was in itself a most uncivilised and irregular way of proceeding. Being
       found, they were treated with great confidence and honour (which again
               showed dense political ignorance), and were invited to come at once and
       do what they had to do. In short, they were regarded as men who meant to
       do it, engaging with other men who meant it to be done.

       Daniel Doyce was one of the chosen. There was no foreseeing at that time
       whether he would be absent months or years. The preparations for his
       departure, and the conscientious arrangement for him of all the details
       and results of their joint business, had necessitated labour within a
       short compass of time, which had occupied Clennam day and night. He
       had slipped across the water in his first leisure, and had slipped as
       quickly back again for his farewell interview with Doyce.

       Him Arthur now showed, with pains and care, the state of their gains and
       losses, responsibilities and prospects. Daniel went through it all
       in his patient manner, and admired it all exceedingly. He audited the
       accounts, as if they were a far more ingenious piece of mechanism than
       he had ever constructed, and afterwards stood looking at them, weighing
       his hat over his head by the brims, as if he were absorbed in the
       contemplation of some wonderful engine.

       'It's all beautiful, Clennam, in its regularity and order. Nothing can
       be plainer. Nothing can be better.'

       'I am glad you approve, Doyce. Now, as to the management of your capital
       while you are away, and as to the conversion of so much of it as the
       business may need from time to time--' His partner stopped him.

       'As to that, and as to everything else of that kind, all rests with you.
       You will continue in all such matters to act for both of us, as you
       have done hitherto, and to lighten my mind of a load it is much relieved
       from.'

       'Though, as I often tell you,' returned Clennam, 'you unreasonably
       depreciate your business qualities.'

       'Perhaps so,' said Doyce, smiling. 'And perhaps not. Anyhow, I have a
       calling that I have studied more than such matters, and that I am better
       fitted for. I have perfect confidence in my partner, and I am satisfied
       that he will do what is best. If I have a prejudice connected with money
       and money figures,' continued Doyce, laying that plastic workman's thumb
       of his on the lapel of his partner's coat, 'it is against speculating.
       I don't think I have any other. I dare say I entertain that prejudice,
       only because I have never given my mind fully to the subject.'

       'But you shouldn't call it a prejudice,' said Clennam. 'My dear Doyce,
       it is the soundest sense.'

       'I am glad you think so,' returned Doyce, with his grey eye looking kind
       and bright.

       'It so happens,' said Clennam, 'that just now, not half an hour before
       you came down, I was saying the same thing to Pancks, who looked in
       here. We both agreed that to travel out of safe investments is one of
       the most dangerous, as it is one of the most common, of those follies
       which often deserve the name of vices.'

       'Pancks?' said Doyce, tilting up his hat at the back, and nodding with
       an air of confidence. 'Aye, aye, aye! That's a cautious fellow.'

       'He is a very cautious fellow indeed,' returned Arthur. 'Quite a
       specimen of caution.'

       They both appeared to derive a larger amount of satisfaction from the
       cautious character of Mr Pancks, than was quite intelligible, judged by
       the surface of their conversation.

       'And now,' said Daniel, looking at his watch, 'as time and tide wait
       for no man, my trusty partner, and as I am ready for starting, bag and
       baggage, at the gate below, let me say a last word. I want you to grant
       a request of mine.'

       'Any request you can make--Except,' Clennam was quick with his
       exception, for his partner's face was quick in suggesting it, 'except
       that I will abandon your invention.'

       'That's the request, and you know it is,' said Doyce.

       'I say, No, then. I say positively, No. Now that I have begun, I will
       have some definite reason, some responsible statement, something in the
       nature of a real answer, from those people.'

       'You will not,' returned Doyce, shaking his head. 'Take my word for it,
       you never will.'

       'At least, I'll try,' said Clennam. 'It will do me no harm to try.'

       'I am not certain of that,' rejoined Doyce, laying his hand persuasively
       on his shoulder. 'It has done me harm, my friend. It has aged me, tired
       me, vexed me, disappointed me. It does no man any good to have his
       patience worn out, and to think himself ill-used. I fancy, even already,
       that unavailing attendance on delays and evasions has made you something
       less elastic than you used to be.'

       'Private anxieties may have done that for the moment,' said Clennam,
       'but not official harrying. Not yet. I am not hurt yet.'

       'Then you won't grant my request?'

       'Decidedly, No,' said Clennam. 'I should be ashamed if I submitted to
       be so soon driven out of the field, where a much older and a much more
       sensitively interested man contended with fortitude so long.'

       As there was no moving him, Daniel Doyce returned the grasp of his hand,
       and, casting a farewell look round the counting-house, went down-stairs
       with him. Doyce was to go to Southampton to join the small staff of
       his fellow-travellers; and a coach was at the gate, well furnished and
       packed, and ready to take him there. The workmen were at the gate to see
       him off, and were mightily proud of him. 'Good luck to you, Mr Doyce!'
       said one of the number. 'Wherever you go, they'll find as they've got a
       man among 'em, a man as knows his tools and as his tools knows, a man
       as is willing and a man as is able, and if that's not a man, where is
       a man!' This oration from a gruff volunteer in the back-ground, not
       previously suspected of any powers in that way, was received with three
       loud cheers; and the speaker became a distinguished character for ever
       afterwards. In the midst of the three loud cheers, Daniel gave them all
       a hearty 'Good Bye, Men!' and the coach disappeared from sight, as if
       the concussion of the air had blown it out of Bleeding Heart Yard.

       Mr Baptist, as a grateful little fellow in a position of trust, was
       among the workmen, and had done as much towards the cheering as a mere
       foreigner could. In truth, no men on earth can cheer like Englishmen,
       who do so rally one another's blood and spirit when they cheer in
       earnest, that the stir is like the rush of their whole history, with all
       its standards waving at once, from Saxon Alfred's downwards. Mr Baptist
       had been in a manner whirled away before the onset, and was taking his
       breath in quite a scared condition when Clennam beckoned him to follow
       up-stairs, and return the books and papers to their places.

       In the lull consequent on the departure--in that first vacuity which
       ensues on every separation, foreshadowing the great separation that
       is always overhanging all mankind--Arthur stood at his desk, looking
       dreamily out at a gleam of sun. But his liberated attention soon
       reverted to the theme that was foremost in his thoughts, and began, for
       the hundredth time, to dwell upon every circumstance that had impressed
       itself upon his mind on the mysterious night when he had seen the man at
       his mother's. Again the man jostled him in the crooked street, again
       he followed the man and lost him, again he came upon the man in the
       court-yard looking at the house, again he followed the man and stood
       beside him on the door-steps.


       'Who passes by this road so late?
       Compagnon de la Majolaine;
       Who passes by this road so late?
       Always gay!'


       It was not the first time, by many, that he had recalled the song of the
       child's game, of which the fellow had hummed this verse while they stood
       side by side; but he was so unconscious of having repeated it audibly,
       that he started to hear the next verse.


       'Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
       Compagnon de la Majolaine;
Of all the king's knights 'tis the flower,
   Always gay!'


   Cavalletto had deferentially suggested the words and tune, supposing him
   to have stopped short for want of more.

   'Ah! You know the song, Cavalletto?'

   'By Bacchus, yes, sir! They all know it in France. I have heard it many
   times, sung by the little children. The last time when it I have heard,'
   said Mr Baptist, formerly Cavalletto, who usually went back to his
   native construction of sentences when his memory went near home, 'is
   from a sweet little voice. A little voice, very pretty, very innocent.
   Altro!'

   'The last time I heard it,' returned Arthur, 'was in a voice quite the
   reverse of pretty, and quite the reverse of innocent.' He said it more
   to himself than to his companion, and added to himself, repeating
   the man's next words. 'Death of my life, sir, it's my character to be
   impatient!'

   'EH!' cried Cavalletto, astounded, and with all his colour gone in a
   moment.

   'What is the matter?'

   'Sir! You know where I have heard that song the last time?'

   With his rapid native action, his hands made the outline of a high hook
   nose, pushed his eyes near together, dishevelled his hair, puffed out
   his upper lip to represent a thick moustache, and threw the heavy end
   of an ideal cloak over his shoulder. While doing this, with a swiftness
   incredible to one who has not watched an Italian peasant, he indicated a
   very remarkable and sinister smile. The whole change passed over him
   like a flash of light, and he stood in the same instant, pale and
   astonished, before his patron.

   'In the name of Fate and wonder,' said Clennam, 'what do you mean? Do
   you know a man of the name of Blandois?'

   'No!' said Mr Baptist, shaking his head.

   'You have just now described a man who was by when you heard that song;
   have you not?'

   'Yes!' said Mr Baptist, nodding fifty times.

   'And was he not called Blandois?'

   'No!' said Mr Baptist. 'Altro, Altro, Altro, Altro!' He could not reject
   the name sufficiently, with his head and his right forefinger going at
   once.

   'Stay!' cried Clennam, spreading out the handbill on his desk. 'Was this
   the man? You can understand what I read aloud?'

   'Altogether. Perfectly.'

   'But look at it, too. Come here and look over me, while I read.'

   Mr Baptist approached, followed every word with his quick eyes, saw
   and heard it all out with the greatest impatience, then clapped his
   two hands flat upon the bill as if he had fiercely caught some noxious
   creature, and cried, looking eagerly at Clennam, 'It is the man! Behold
   him!'

   'This is of far greater moment to me' said Clennam, in great agitation,
   'than you can imagine. Tell me where you knew the man.'

   Mr Baptist, releasing the paper very slowly and with much discomfiture,
   and drawing himself back two or three paces, and making as though he
   dusted his hands, returned, very much against his will:

   'At Marsiglia--Marseilles.'

   'What was he?'

   'A prisoner, and--Altro! I believe yes!--an,' Mr Baptist crept closer
   again to whisper it, 'Assassin!'

   Clennam fell back as if the word had struck him a blow: so terrible
   did it make his mother's communication with the man appear.
   Cavalletto dropped on one knee, and implored him, with a redundancy of
   gesticulation, to hear what had brought himself into such foul company.

   He told with perfect truth how it had come of a little contraband
   trading, and how he had in time been released from prison, and how he
   had gone away from those antecedents. How, at the house of entertainment
   called the Break of Day at Chalons on the Saone, he had been awakened
   in his bed at night by the same assassin, then assuming the name of
   Lagnier, though his name had formerly been Rigaud; how the assassin had
   proposed that they should join their fortunes together; how he held
   the assassin in such dread and aversion that he had fled from him at
   daylight, and how he had ever since been haunted by the fear of seeing
   the assassin again and being claimed by him as an acquaintance. When he
   had related this, with an emphasis and poise on the word, 'assassin,'
   peculiarly belonging to his own language, and which did not serve to
   render it less terrible to Clennam, he suddenly sprang to his feet,
   pounced upon the bill again, and with a vehemence that would have been
   absolute madness in any man of Northern origin, cried 'Behold the same
   assassin! Here he is!'

   In his passionate raptures, he at first forgot the fact that he had
   lately seen the assassin in London. On his remembering it, it suggested
   hope to Clennam that the recognition might be of later date than the
   night of the visit at his mother's; but Cavalletto was too exact and
   clear about time and place, to leave any opening for doubt that it had
   preceded that occasion.

   'Listen,' said Arthur, very seriously. 'This man, as we have read here,
   has wholly disappeared.'

   'Of it I am well content!' said Cavalletto, raising his eyes piously. 'A
   thousand thanks to Heaven! Accursed assassin!'

   'Not so,' returned Clennam; 'for until something more is heard of him, I
   can never know an hour's peace.'

   'Enough, Benefactor; that is quite another thing. A million of excuses!'

   'Now, Cavalletto,' said Clennam, gently turning him by the arm, so that
   they looked into each other's eyes. 'I am certain that for the little
   I have been able to do for you, you are the most sincerely grateful of
   men.'

   'I swear it!' cried the other.

   'I know it. If you could find this man, or discover what has become of
   him, or gain any later intelligence whatever of him, you would render
   me a service above any other service I could receive in the world, and
   would make me (with far greater reason) as grateful to you as you are to
   me.'

   'I know not where to look,' cried the little man, kissing Arthur's
   hand in a transport. 'I know not where to begin. I know not where to go.
   But, courage! Enough! It matters not! I go, in this instant of time!'

   'Not a word to any one but me, Cavalletto.'

   'Al-tro!' cried Cavalletto. And was gone with great speed.




        Left alone, with the expressive looks and gestures of Mr Baptist,
        otherwise Giovanni Baptista Cavalletto, vividly before him, Clennam
        entered on a weary day. It was in vain that he tried to control his
        attention by directing it to any business occupation or train of
        thought; it rode at anchor by the haunting topic, and would hold to no
        other idea. As though a criminal should be chained in a stationary boat
        on a deep clear river, condemned, whatever countless leagues of water
        flowed past him, always to see the body of the fellow-creature he had
        drowned lying at the bottom, immovable, and unchangeable, except as
        the eddies made it broad or long, now expanding, now contracting
        its terrible lineaments; so Arthur, below the shifting current of
        transparent thoughts and fancies which were gone and succeeded by others
        as soon as come, saw, steady and dark, and not to be stirred from its
        place, the one subject that he endeavoured with all his might to rid
        himself of, and that he could not fly from.

        The assurance he now had, that Blandois, whatever his right name, was
        one of the worst of characters, greatly augmented the burden of his
        anxieties. Though the disappearance should be accounted for to-morrow,
        the fact that his mother had been in communication with such a man,
        would remain unalterable. That the communication had been of a secret
        kind, and that she had been submissive to him and afraid of him, he
        hoped might be known to no one beyond himself; yet, knowing it, how
        could he separate it from his old vague fears, and how believe that
        there was nothing evil in such relations?

        Her resolution not to enter on the question with him, and his knowledge
        of her indomitable character, enhanced his sense of helplessness. It was
        like the oppression of a dream to believe that shame and exposure were
        impending over her and his father's memory, and to be shut out, as by a
        brazen wall, from the possibility of coming to their aid. The purpose he
        had brought home to his native country, and had ever since kept in view,
        was, with her greatest determination, defeated by his mother herself, at
        the time of all others when he feared that it pressed most. His advice,
        energy, activity, money, credit, all his resources whatsoever, were all
        made useless. If she had been possessed of the old fabled influence, and
        had turned those who looked upon her into stone, she could not have
        rendered him more completely powerless (so it seemed to him in his
                distress of mind) than she did, when she turned her unyielding face to
        his in her gloomy room.

        But the light of that day's discovery, shining on these considerations,
        roused him to take a more decided course of action. Confident in the
        rectitude of his purpose, and impelled by a sense of overhanging danger
        closing in around, he resolved, if his mother would still admit of no
        approach, to make a desperate appeal to Affery. If she could be brought
        to become communicative, and to do what lay in her to break the spell of
        secrecy that enshrouded the house, he might shake off the paralysis of
        which every hour that passed over his head made him more acutely
        sensible. This was the result of his day's anxiety, and this was the
        decision he put in practice when the day closed in.

        His first disappointment, on arriving at the house, was to find the door
        open, and Mr Flintwinch smoking a pipe on the steps. If circumstances
        had been commonly favourable, Mistress Affery would have opened the
        door to his knock. Circumstances being uncommonly unfavourable, the door
        stood open, and Mr Flintwinch was smoking his pipe on the steps.

        'Good evening,' said Arthur.

        'Good evening,' said Mr Flintwinch.

        The smoke came crookedly out of Mr Flintwinch's mouth, as if it
        circulated through the whole of his wry figure and came back by his wry
        throat, before coming forth to mingle with the smoke from the crooked
        chimneys and the mists from the crooked river.

        'Have you any news?' said Arthur.

        'We have no news,' said Jeremiah.

        'I mean of the foreign man,' Arthur explained.

        '_I_ mean of the foreign man,' said Jeremiah.

        He looked so grim, as he stood askew, with the knot of his cravat under
        his ear, that the thought passed into Clennam's mind, and not for the
        first time by many, could Flintwinch for a purpose of his own have got
        rid of Blandois? Could it have been his secret, and his safety, that
        were at issue? He was small and bent, and perhaps not actively strong;
        yet he was as tough as an old yew-tree, and as crusty as an old jackdaw.
        Such a man, coming behind a much younger and more vigorous man, and
        having the will to put an end to him and no relenting, might do it
        pretty surely in that solitary place at a late hour.

        While, in the morbid condition of his thoughts, these thoughts drifted
        over the main one that was always in Clennam's mind, Mr Flintwinch,
        regarding the opposite house over the gateway with his neck twisted and
        one eye shut up, stood smoking with a vicious expression upon him; more
        as if he were trying to bite off the stem of his pipe, than as if he
        were enjoying it. Yet he was enjoying it in his own way.

        'You'll be able to take my likeness, the next time you call, Arthur,
        I should think,' said Mr Flintwinch, drily, as he stooped to knock the
        ashes out.

        Rather conscious and confused, Arthur asked his pardon, if he had stared
        at him unpolitely. 'But my mind runs so much upon this matter,' he said,
        'that I lose myself.'

        'Hah! Yet I don't see,' returned Mr Flintwinch, quite at his leisure,
        'why it should trouble _you_, Arthur.'

        'No?'

        'No,' said Mr Flintwinch, very shortly and decidedly: much as if he were
        of the canine race, and snapped at Arthur's hand.

        'Is it nothing to see those placards about? Is it nothing to me to
        see my mother's name and residence hawked up and down in such an
        association?'

        'I don't see,' returned Mr Flintwinch, scraping his horny cheek, 'that
        it need signify much to you. But I'll tell you what I do see, Arthur,'
        glancing up at the windows; 'I see the light of fire and candle in your
        mother's room!'

        'And what has that to do with it?'

        'Why, sir, I read by it,' said Mr Flintwinch, screwing himself at him,
        'that if it's advisable (as the proverb says it is) to let sleeping dogs
        lie, it's just as advisable, perhaps, to let missing dogs lie. Let 'em
        be. They generally turn up soon enough.'

        Mr Flintwinch turned short round when he had made this remark, and went
        into the dark hall. Clennam stood there, following him with his eyes,
        as he dipped for a light in the phosphorus-box in the little room at the
        side, got one after three or four dips, and lighted the dim lamp against
        the wall. All the while, Clennam was pursuing the probabilities--rather
        as if they were being shown to him by an invisible hand than as if he
        himself were conjuring them up--of Mr Flintwinch's ways and means of
        doing that darker deed, and removing its traces by any of the black
        avenues of shadow that lay around them.

        'Now, sir,' said the testy Jeremiah; 'will it be agreeable to walk
        up-stairs?'

        'My mother is alone, I suppose?'

        'Not alone,' said Mr Flintwinch. 'Mr Casby and his daughter are with
        her. They came in while I was smoking, and I stayed behind to have my
        smoke out.'

        This was the second disappointment. Arthur made no remark upon it, and
        repaired to his mother's room, where Mr Casby and Flora had been
        taking tea, anchovy paste, and hot buttered toast. The relics of those
        delicacies were not yet removed, either from the table or from the
        scorched countenance of Affery, who, with the kitchen toasting-fork
        still in her hand, looked like a sort of allegorical personage; except
        that she had a considerable advantage over the general run of such
        personages in point of significant emblematical purpose.

        Flora had spread her bonnet and shawl upon the bed, with a care
        indicative of an intention to stay some time. Mr Casby, too, was beaming
        near the hob, with his benevolent knobs shining as if the warm butter of
        the toast were exuding through the patriarchal skull, and with his face
        as ruddy as if the colouring matter of the anchovy paste were mantling
        in the patriarchal visage. Seeing this, as he exchanged the
        usual salutations, Clennam decided to speak to his mother without
        postponement.

        It had long been customary, as she never changed her room, for those who
        had anything to say to her apart, to wheel her to her desk; where she
        sat, usually with the back of her chair turned towards the rest of the
        room, and the person who talked with her seated in a corner, on a stool
        which was always set in that place for that purpose. Except that it
        was long since the mother and son had spoken together without the
        intervention of a third person, it was an ordinary matter of course
        within the experience of visitors for Mrs Clennam to be asked, with a
        word of apology for the interruption, if she could be spoken with on
        a matter of business, and, on her replying in the affirmative, to be
        wheeled into the position described.

        Therefore, when Arthur now made such an apology, and such a request,
        and moved her to her desk and seated himself on the stool, Mrs Finching
        merely began to talk louder and faster, as a delicate hint that she
        could overhear nothing, and Mr Casby stroked his long white locks with
        sleepy calmness.

        'Mother, I have heard something to-day which I feel persuaded you don't
        know, and which I think you should know, of the antecedents of that man
        I saw here.'

        'I know nothing of the antecedents of the man you saw here, Arthur.'

        She spoke aloud. He had lowered his own voice; but she rejected that
        advance towards confidence as she rejected every other, and spoke in her
        usual key and in her usual stern voice.

        'I have received it on no circuitous information; it has come to me
        direct.'

        She asked him, exactly as before, if he were there to tell her what it
        was?

        'I thought it right that you should know it.'

        'And what is it?'

        'He has been a prisoner in a French gaol.'

        She answered with composure, 'I should think that very likely.'

        'But in a gaol for criminals, mother. On an accusation of murder.'

        She started at the word, and her looks expressed her natural horror. Yet
        she still spoke aloud, when she demanded:--

        'Who told you so?'

        'A man who was his fellow-prisoner.'

        'That man's antecedents, I suppose, were not known to you, before he
        told you?'

        'No.'

        'Though the man himself was?'

        'Yes.'

        'My case and Flintwinch's, in respect of this other man! I dare say the
        resemblance is not so exact, though, as that your informant became known
        to you through a letter from a correspondent with whom he had deposited
        money? How does that part of the parallel stand?'

        Arthur had no choice but to say that his informant had not become known
        to him through the agency of any such credentials, or indeed of any
        credentials at all. Mrs Clennam's attentive frown expanded by degrees
        into a severe look of triumph, and she retorted with emphasis, 'Take
        care how you judge others, then. I say to you, Arthur, for your good,
        take care how you judge!'

        Her emphasis had been derived from her eyes quite as much as from the
        stress she laid upon her words. She continued to look at him; and if,
        when he entered the house, he had had any latent hope of prevailing in
        the least with her, she now looked it out of his heart.

        'Mother, shall I do nothing to assist you?'

        'Nothing.'

        'Will you entrust me with no confidence, no charge, no explanation?
        Will you take no counsel with me? Will you not let me come near you?'

        'How can you ask me? You separated yourself from my affairs. It was not
        my act; it was yours. How can you consistently ask me such a question?
        You know that you left me to Flintwinch, and that he occupies your
        place.'

        Glancing at Jeremiah, Clennam saw in his very gaiters that his attention
        was closely directed to them, though he stood leaning against the wall
        scraping his jaw, and pretended to listen to Flora as she held forth in
        a most distracting manner on a chaos of subjects, in which mackerel, and
        Mr F.'s Aunt in a swing, had become entangled with cockchafers and the
        wine trade.

        'A prisoner, in a French gaol, on an accusation of murder,' repeated
        Mrs Clennam, steadily going over what her son had said. 'That is all you
        know of him from the fellow-prisoner?'

        'In substance, all.'

        'And was the fellow-prisoner his accomplice and a murderer, too? But, of
        course, he gives a better account of himself than of his friend; it is
        needless to ask. This will supply the rest of them here with something
        new to talk about. Casby, Arthur tells me--'

        'Stay, mother! Stay, stay!' He interrupted her hastily, for it had not
        entered his imagination that she would openly proclaim what he had told
        her.

        'What now?' she said with displeasure. 'What more?'

        'I beg you to excuse me, Mr Casby--and you, too, Mrs Finching--for one
        other moment with my mother--'

        He had laid his hand upon her chair, or she would otherwise have wheeled
        it round with the touch of her foot upon the ground. They were still
        face to face. She looked at him, as he ran over the possibilities of
        some result he had not intended, and could not foresee, being influenced
        by Cavalletto's disclosure becoming a matter of notoriety, and hurriedly
        arrived at the conclusion that it had best not be talked about; though
        perhaps he was guided by no more distinct reason than that he had taken
        it for granted that his mother would reserve it to herself and her
        partner.

        'What now?' she said again, impatiently. 'What is it?'

        'I did not mean, mother, that you should repeat what I have
        communicated. I think you had better not repeat it.'

        'Do you make that a condition with me?'

        'Well! Yes.'

        'Observe, then! It is you who make this a secret,' said she, holding
        up her hand, 'and not I. It is you, Arthur, who bring here doubts and
        suspicions and entreaties for explanations, and it is you, Arthur, who
        bring secrets here. What is it to me, do you think, where the man has
        been, or what he has been? What can it be to me? The whole world may
        know it, if they care to know it; it is nothing to me. Now, let me go.'

        He yielded to her imperious but elated look, and turned her chair back
        to the place from which he had wheeled it. In doing so he saw elation
        in the face of Mr Flintwinch, which most assuredly was not inspired by
        Flora. This turning of his intelligence and of his whole attempt and
        design against himself, did even more than his mother's fixedness and
        firmness to convince him that his efforts with her were idle. Nothing
        remained but the appeal to his old friend Affery.

        But even to get the very doubtful and preliminary stage of making the
        appeal, seemed one of the least promising of human undertakings. She
        was so completely under the thrall of the two clever ones, was so
        systematically kept in sight by one or other of them, and was so afraid
        to go about the house besides, that every opportunity of speaking to her
        alone appeared to be forestalled. Over and above that, Mistress Affery,
        by some means (it was not very difficult to guess, through the sharp
                arguments of her liege lord), had acquired such a lively conviction
        of the hazard of saying anything under any circumstances, that she had
        remained all this time in a corner guarding herself from approach with
        that symbolical instrument of hers; so that, when a word or two had
        been addressed to her by Flora, or even by the bottle-green patriarch
        himself, she had warded off conversation with the toasting-fork like a
        dumb woman.

        After several abortive attempts to get Affery to look at him while
        she cleared the table and washed the tea-service, Arthur thought of an
        expedient which Flora might originate. To whom he therefore whispered,
        'Could you say you would like to go through the house?'

        Now, poor Flora, being always in fluctuating expectation of the time
        when Clennam would renew his boyhood and be madly in love with her
        again, received the whisper with the utmost delight; not only as
        rendered precious by its mysterious character, but as preparing the
        way for a tender interview in which he would declare the state of his
        affections. She immediately began to work out the hint.

        'Ah dear me the poor old room,' said Flora, glancing round, 'looks just
        as ever Mrs Clennam I am touched to see except for being smokier which
        was to be expected with time and which we must all expect and reconcile
        ourselves to being whether we like it or not as I am sure I have had to
        do myself if not exactly smokier dreadfully stouter which is the same or
        worse, to think of the days when papa used to bring me here the least of
        girls a perfect mass of chilblains to be stuck upon a chair with my feet
        on the rails and stare at Arthur--pray excuse me--Mr Clennam--the
        least of boys in the frightfullest of frills and jackets ere yet Mr
        F. appeared a misty shadow on the horizon paying attentions like the
        well-known spectre of some place in Germany beginning with a B is a
        moral lesson inculcating that all the paths in life are similar to the
        paths down in the North of England where they get the coals and make the
        iron and things gravelled with ashes!'

        Having paid the tribute of a sigh to the instability of human existence,
        Flora hurried on with her purpose.

        'Not that at any time,' she proceeded, 'its worst enemy could have said
        it was a cheerful house for that it was never made to be but always
        highly impressive, fond memory recalls an occasion in youth ere yet the
        judgment was mature when Arthur--confirmed habit--Mr Clennam--took
        me down into an unused kitchen eminent for mouldiness and proposed to
        secrete me there for life and feed me on what he could hide from his
        meals when he was not at home for the holidays and on dry bread in
        disgrace which at that halcyon period too frequently occurred, would
        it be inconvenient or asking too much to beg to be permitted to revive
        those scenes and walk through the house?'

        Mrs Clennam, who responded with a constrained grace to Mrs Finching's
        good nature in being there at all, though her visit (before Arthur's
                unexpected arrival) was undoubtedly an act of pure good nature and no
        self-gratification, intimated that all the house was open to her. Flora
        rose and looked to Arthur for his escort. 'Certainly,' said he, aloud;
        'and Affery will light us, I dare say.'

        Affery was excusing herself with 'Don't ask nothing of me, Arthur!' when
        Mr Flintwinch stopped her with 'Why not? Affery, what's the matter with
        you, woman? Why not, jade!' Thus expostulated with, she came unwillingly
        out of her corner, resigned the toasting-fork into one of her husband's
        hands, and took the candlestick he offered from the other.

        'Go before, you fool!' said Jeremiah. 'Are you going up, or down, Mrs
        Finching?'

        Flora answered, 'Down.'

        'Then go before, and down, you Affery,' said Jeremiah. 'And do it
        properly, or I'll come rolling down the banisters, and tumbling over
        you!'

        Affery headed the exploring party; Jeremiah closed it. He had no
        intention of leaving them. Clennam looking back, and seeing him
        following three stairs behind, in the coolest and most methodical
        manner exclaimed in a low voice, 'Is there no getting rid of him!' Flora
        reassured his mind by replying promptly, 'Why though not exactly
        proper Arthur and a thing I couldn't think of before a younger man or
        a stranger still I don't mind him if you so particularly wish it and
        provided you'll have the goodness not to take me too tight.'

        Wanting the heart to explain that this was not at all what he meant,
        Arthur extended his supporting arm round Flora's figure. 'Oh my goodness
        me,' said she. 'You are very obedient indeed really and it's extremely
        honourable and gentlemanly in you I am sure but still at the same time
        if you would like to be a little tighter than that I shouldn't consider
        it intruding.'

        In this preposterous attitude, unspeakably at variance with his anxious
        mind, Clennam descended to the basement of the house; finding that
        wherever it became darker than elsewhere, Flora became heavier, and
        that when the house was lightest she was too. Returning from the dismal
        kitchen regions, which were as dreary as they could be, Mistress Affery
        passed with the light into his father's old room, and then into the old
        dining-room; always passing on before like a phantom that was not to be
        overtaken, and neither turning nor answering when he whispered, 'Affery!
        I want to speak to you!'

        In the dining-room, a sentimental desire came over Flora to look into
        the dragon closet which had so often swallowed Arthur in the days of his
        boyhood--not improbably because, as a very dark closet, it was a likely
        place to be heavy in. Arthur, fast subsiding into despair, had opened
        it, when a knock was heard at the outer door.

        Mistress Affery, with a suppressed cry, threw her apron over her head.

        'What? You want another dose!' said Mr Flintwinch. 'You shall have it,
        my woman, you shall have a good one! Oh! You shall have a sneezer, you
        shall have a teaser!'

        'In the meantime is anybody going to the door?' said Arthur.

        'In the meantime, _I_ am going to the door, sir,' returned the old man so
        savagely, as to render it clear that in a choice of difficulties he felt
        he must go, though he would have preferred not to go. 'Stay here the
        while, all! Affery, my woman, move an inch, or speak a word in your
        foolishness, and I'll treble your dose!'

        The moment he was gone, Arthur released Mrs Finching: with some
        difficulty, by reason of that lady misunderstanding his intentions, and
        making arrangements with a view to tightening instead of slackening.

        'Affery, speak to me now!'

        'Don't touch me, Arthur!' she cried, shrinking from him. 'Don't come
        near me. He'll see you. Jeremiah will. Don't.'

        'He can't see me,' returned Arthur, suiting the action to the word, 'if
        I blow the candle out.'

        'He'll hear you,' cried Affery.

        'He can't hear me,' returned Arthur, suiting the action to the words
        again, 'if I draw you into this black closet, and speak here. Why do
        you hide your face?'

        'Because I am afraid of seeing something.'

        'You can't be afraid of seeing anything in this darkness, Affery.'

        'Yes I am. Much more than if it was light.'

        'Why are you afraid?'

        'Because the house is full of mysteries and secrets; because it's full
        of whisperings and counsellings; because it's full of noises. There
        never was such a house for noises. I shall die of 'em, if Jeremiah don't
        strangle me first. As I expect he will.'

        'I have never heard any noises here, worth speaking of.'

        'Ah! But you would, though, if you lived in the house, and was obliged
        to go about it as I am,' said Affery; 'and you'd feel that they was so
        well worth speaking of, that you'd feel you was nigh bursting through
        not being allowed to speak of 'em. Here's Jeremiah! You'll get me
        killed.'

        'My good Affery, I solemnly declare to you that I can see the light of
        the open door on the pavement of the hall, and so could you if you would
        uncover your face and look.'

        'I durstn't do it,' said Affery, 'I durstn't never, Arthur. I'm always
        blind-folded when Jeremiah an't a looking, and sometimes even when he
        is.'

        'He cannot shut the door without my seeing him,' said Arthur. 'You are
        as safe with me as if he was fifty miles away.'

        ('I wish he was!' cried Affery.)

        'Affery, I want to know what is amiss here; I want some light thrown
        on the secrets of this house.'

        'I tell you, Arthur,' she interrupted, 'noises is the secrets, rustlings
        and stealings about, tremblings, treads overhead and treads underneath.'

        'But those are not all the secrets.'

        'I don't know,' said Affery. 'Don't ask me no more. Your old sweetheart
        an't far off, and she's a blabber.'

        His old sweetheart, being in fact so near at hand that she was then
        reclining against him in a flutter, a very substantial angle of
        forty-five degrees, here interposed to assure Mistress Affery with
        greater earnestness than directness of asseveration, that what she heard
        should go no further, but should be kept inviolate, 'if on no other
        account on Arthur's--sensible of intruding in being too familiar Doyce
        and Clennam's.'

        'I make an imploring appeal to you, Affery, to you, one of the few
        agreeable early remembrances I have, for my mother's sake, for your
        husband's sake, for my own, for all our sakes. I am sure you can tell me
        something connected with the coming here of this man, if you will.'

        'Why, then I'll tell you, Arthur,' returned Affery--'Jeremiah's coming!'

        'No, indeed he is not. The door is open, and he is standing outside,
        talking.'

        'I'll tell you then,' said Affery, after listening, 'that the first time
        he ever come he heard the noises his own self. "What's that?" he said to
        me. "I don't know what it is," I says to him, catching hold of him,
        "but I have heard it over and over again." While I says it, he stands a
        looking at me, all of a shake, he do.'

        'Has he been here often?'

        'Only that night, and the last night.'

        'What did you see of him on the last night, after I was gone?'

        'Them two clever ones had him all alone to themselves. Jeremiah come
        a dancing at me sideways, after I had let you out (he always comes a
                dancing at me sideways when he's going to hurt me), and he said to me,
        "Now, Affery," he said, "I am a coming behind you, my woman, and a going
        to run you up." So he took and squeezed the back of my neck in his hand,
        till it made me open my mouth, and then he pushed me before him to bed,
        squeezing all the way. That's what he calls running me up, he do. Oh,
        he's a wicked one!'

        'And did you hear or see no more, Affery?'

        'Don't I tell you I was sent to bed, Arthur! Here he is!'

        'I assure you he is still at the door. Those whisperings and
        counsellings, Affery, that you have spoken of. What are they?'

        'How should I know? Don't ask me nothing about 'em, Arthur. Get away!'

        'But my dear Affery; unless I can gain some insight into these hidden
        things, in spite of your husband and in spite of my mother, ruin will
        come of it.'

        'Don't ask me nothing,' repeated Affery. 'I have been in a dream for
        ever so long. Go away, go away!'

        'You said that before,' returned Arthur. 'You used the same expression
        that night, at the door, when I asked you what was going on here. What
        do you mean by being in a dream?'

        'I an't a going to tell you. Get away! I shouldn't tell you, if you was
        by yourself; much less with your old sweetheart here.'

        It was equally vain for Arthur to entreat, and for Flora to protest.
        Affery, who had been trembling and struggling the whole time, turned a
        deaf ear to all adjuration, and was bent on forcing herself out of the
        closet.

        'I'd sooner scream to Jeremiah than say another word! I'll call out to
        him, Arthur, if you don't give over speaking to me. Now here's the very
        last word I'll say afore I call to him--If ever you begin to get the
        better of them two clever ones your own self (you ought to it, as I told
                you when you first come home, for you haven't been a living here long
                years, to be made afeared of your life as I have), then do you get the
        better of 'em afore my face; and then do you say to me, Affery tell your
        dreams! Maybe, then I'll tell 'em!'

        The shutting of the door stopped Arthur from replying. They glided into
        the places where Jeremiah had left them; and Clennam, stepping forward
        as that old gentleman returned, informed him that he had accidentally
        extinguished the candle. Mr Flintwinch looked on as he re-lighted it at
        the lamp in the hall, and preserved a profound taciturnity respecting
        the person who had been holding him in conversation. Perhaps his
        irascibility demanded compensation for some tediousness that the visitor
        had expended on him; however that was, he took such umbrage at seeing
        his wife with her apron over her head, that he charged at her, and
        taking her veiled nose between his thumb and finger, appeared to throw
        the whole screw-power of his person into the wring he gave it.

        Flora, now permanently heavy, did not release Arthur from the survey of
        the house, until it had extended even to his old garret bedchamber. His
        thoughts were otherwise occupied than with the tour of inspection; yet
        he took particular notice at the time, as he afterwards had occasion to
        remember, of the airlessness and closeness of the house; that they left
        the track of their footsteps in the dust on the upper floors; and that
        there was a resistance to the opening of one room door, which occasioned
        Affery to cry out that somebody was hiding inside, and to continue to
        believe so, though somebody was sought and not discovered. When they at
        last returned to his mother's room, they found her shading her face
        with her muffled hand, and talking in a low voice to the Patriarch as he
        stood before the fire, whose blue eyes, polished head, and silken locks,
        turning towards them as they came in, imparted an inestimable value and
        inexhaustible love of his species to his remark:

        'So you have been seeing the premises, seeing the premises--premises--
        seeing the premises!'

        It was not in itself a jewel of benevolence or wisdom, yet he made it an
        exemplar of both that one would have liked to have a copy of.




