{"name": "Chapter 15", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210515081630/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/treasure-island-book/summary/chapter-15", "summary": "Jim sees a shadow jump behind a rock. Jim tries to retrace his steps back to the beach and the Hispaniola. The dark figure reappears and catches up with Jim. Jim is so afraid of Long John Silver that he decides not to call for help; instead, he turns to face the figure. Jim is totally surprised when the figure throws himself to his knees as though begging Jim for mercy. The figure introduces himself as Ben Gunn. He has been marooned alone on this island for three years, living off oysters, berries, and goat meat. All he wants is a bit of toasted cheese. Ben tells Jim that he's become a god-fearing man again after all this time on the island. Ben promises Jim that he'll give him riches if he helps him. Ben asks Jim if he has come to the island on Flint's ship. Jim says no, but some of the men on the ship were Flint's men. Ben asks if one of them is a man with one leg, Long John Silver. Jim says yes, and Ben asks if he is on Long John Silver's side or not. Jim realizes that Ben may be an enemy of Long John Silver, so he explains the whole story of the Hispaniola's voyage. Ben promises to help in exchange for 1,000 British pounds of the treasure and free passage home. Ben tells Jim that he was sailing with Captain Flint when Flint buried his treasure on this island. Somehow Flint managed to murder six sailors single-handedly in order to keep the treasure's burial place secret. Billy Bones and Long John Silver were both on the ship at this time. Three years ago, Ben was sailing aboard another ship when they passed this island. Ben suggested that they stop and look for Flint's treasure. The captain of the boat wasn't happy about it, but the men insisted. They spent twelve days looking for the treasure but couldn't find it. After wasting almost two weeks, the sailors turned on Ben Gunn. They marooned him on the island along with a gun, a spade, and a pickax so that he could keep looking for Flint's treasure by himself. Having spent three years on the island by himself, Ben seems to have gone a little nuts. Still, he asks Jim to put in a good word for him with Squire Trelawney. Jim asks how he's supposed to get back on board the Hispaniola. Ben says he has a small boat and suggests that they try using it to row to the Hispaniola after dark. Ben and Jim hear the sounds of a fight breaking out. They run over quietly to see what's happening. They hear the sound of a cannon going off, followed by gunfire. There is a pause, then Jim sees the Union Jack flying over the forest.", "analysis": ""}