{"name": "Chapter 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210515081630/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/treasure-island-book/summary/chapter-4", "summary": "Jim tells his mother all about the captain's last words. They decide to go together into town to look for help. They're shocked that no one will go back with them to the Admiral Benbow. They are all too afraid, especially hearing the name of Captain Flint. The most anyone is willing to do is to ride to Doctor Livesey's to let him know what has happened. Jim's mother tells them they're all cowards and announces her intention to go back to the inn and open the captain's sea-chest. Jim's mother expects the chest to be full of treasure, at least some of which the captain owes her for his lodgings. They creep slowly into the parlor of the inn, where they find the captain lying exactly where they left him. Jim finds a piece of paper blackened on one side , which says that the captain has until ten that night. The clock has only just struck six. Jim finds the key to the chest hanging around the dead captain's neck. Jim's mother unlocks the chest. They find a bunch of random things - clothes, a compass, a few trinkets, and coins from many different places. Jim's mother starts counting out the amount she's owed from these spare bits of change. Suddenly Jim hears the tapping of the blind man's stick outside; it approaches and then seems to go away. Jim's mother is afraid, but she won't stop carefully counting the money. She refuses to just take it all. Then both Jim and his mother hear a low whistle. Jim's mother decides to take what she has. Jim also grabs a bunch of what seem to be papers. They both sneak downstairs and out the back door. They can see a lantern and hear approaching footsteps. Jim's mother tells Jim to take the money because she's going to faint. Jim is sure they are both going to be murdered. Jim grabs his mother and helps her down underneath a nearby bridge to hide from sight.", "analysis": ""}