{"name": "Chapter 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210515081630/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/treasure-island-book/summary/chapter-2", "summary": "The winter is bitter cold, and Jim's father is dying. One January morning, the captain is sitting at the beach with his telescope on his arm. Jim is setting the breakfast table when a pale man missing two fingers on his left hand comes in. The man sits down, orders a rum, and asks Jim about a friend of his named Bill, who has a cut on his right cheek. Jim answers that they know a man like that, whom they call the captain. The man asks where the captain is and Jim says he'll be coming back to the inn soon. The man physically pushes Jim into another room and makes him hide behind a door. The man half draws his sword and stands waiting in silence for the captain. The captain walks in at last, strolling straight for the breakfast table. The man calls out, \"Bill,\" and the captain whirls around, paling. The captain gasps out the man's name: \"Black Dog!\" Black Dog invites the captain to sit down and share some rum like proper shipmates. Jim clears out of the room, but soon he hears a few things: the captain says if anyone's going to hang, they should all hang. Then Jim hears the captain swearing a lot, and Black Dog comes running out with the captain hot on his heels. Their swords are both drawn, and Black Dog is bleeding. Black Dog is fast enough to run away, leaving the captain looking confused. The captain orders rum and collapses on the floor. Jim's mother is worried that the inn is going to be disgraced by this fight. Doctor Livesey has arrived at the inn to treat Jim's father. He realizes that the captain has had a stroke. Doctor Livesey bleeds the captain to try to improve his circulation. The captain wakes up and asks where Black Dog is. Doctor Livesey says there's no Black Dog there, and then warns the captain that he'll die if he keeps drinking so much rum. Doctor Livesey leaves after recommending that the captain stay in bed for a week.", "analysis": ""}