{"name": "Chapter 22", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 22<PARAGRAPH>That night, Dr. Rivers is haunted by images of the \"treatment\" he witnessed, describing his memories of the incident as \"hallucinatory\". He is distracted and unable to work on his upcoming paper, so he leaves his room to walk around a darkened London. Even then, the images from the afternoon will not leave his thoughts; the psychologist eventually returns home and goes to bed. PARAGRAPH>Dr. Rivers dreams that he is walking down the eerie corridor of Queen Square Hospital, where he runs into the disfigured patient from that morning. The man is chanting the first lines of Sassoon's letter protesting the war. Suddenly, Rivers finds himself with an electrode in his hand and a man's open mouth in front of him. Dr. Rivers attempts to push the electrode into the patient's mouth, but it is too big. He realizes that the electrode has metamorphosed into a horse bit, which he is cruelly jamming into the patient's mouth. The psychologist is awoken by his own scream, deeply disturbed by the images his brain has created. PARAGRAPH>Dr. Rivers notes that though his dream featured a scene of \"oral rape,\" it did not feel sexual. He traces the dream to his discomfort with Dr. Yealland's methods; Rivers recalls that his own stutter had been getting worse throughout the day. Dr. Rivers speculates that the disfigured man in his dream must represent Sassoon, since he was reciting his letter, but he cannot figure out who the second patient  could represent. PARAGRAPH>Rivers remembers that he once scraped a spoon across the back of Prior's throat to try and induce speech and feels disgusted with himself. Suddenly, Rivers feels as though there is no difference between him and Dr. Yealland: both men are tasked with pushing ill men back into a deadly situation that they are trying desperately to escape. The silence of men like Callan and Prior is their protest against an unjust system, Rivers muses, and the doctors are the ones silencing the soldiers' protest by forcing them to speak. Trying but failing to avoid the realization, Dr. Rivers discovers the identity of the man he silenced and therefore, was seated in the dentist's chair in his dream: Sassoon", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20170909142712/http://www.gradesaver.com/regeneration/study-guide/summary-part-iv-chapters-20-23"}