{"name": "Chapter 16", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 16<PARAGRAPH>Dr. Rivers returns to Craiglockhart and tells Bryce about the job offer in London. Bryce encourages him to accept it, explaining that he will most likely leave soon anyway due to his ongoing disagreements with his superiors on how the hospital should be run. Dr. Rivers cannot imagine being at Craiglockhart without Bryce and and Bryce feels the same. Yet Dr. Rivers still sees his work at the hospital as meaningful. PARAGRAPH>Later, Sassoon comes to see Dr. Rivers and asks him for a new roommate. His current one is insufferable, Sassoon claims, because he waves away the pain and damage of the war with simple platitudes. Dr. Rivers encourages Sassoon to wait the ten days until his roommate's transfer. PARAGRAPH>Sassoon then starts describing his hallucinations, explaining that they are subdued enough to feel real. Dr. Rivers shares that he once heard the whistling of the dead when he was studying native practices in the Solomon Islands. He was attending a funeral, during which the dead are expected to make noise; Rivers cannot be sure whether he was pulled into a mass hallucination or if he really heard dead souls whistling. Sassoon explains that in his visions, departed soldiers look at him puzzlingly, wondering why he is not on the front lines. Consumed by his guilt, Sassoon tells the doctor that he has agreed to return to the front. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>In Part III of Regeneration, Barker explores the theme of religion. The young men in the novel have been called upon to sacrifice their lives like the Biblical figures of Jesus Christ or Isaac, yet Dr. Rivers senses that this sacrifice is deeply unfair. The religious establishment has supported the government in a brutal, senseless, and continuous war. Like the apostles in his father's painting, Dr. Rivers describes Isaac and Abraham as smug, which is reminiscent of the self-satisfied way in which middle-aged civilians speak of honor while younger men die in the mud. In Dr. Rivers's eyes, religion has become a weak justification for slaughter, and it also distracts from the horror of the war. Meanwhile, even Dr. Rivers has used religion to escape the reality of war, imaging Burns as Jonah or Jesus Christ in order to prevent Burns  from having to confront the indignity of his experience. PARAGRAPH>If Regeneration seems to condemn religion, it treats the supernatural with more ambiguity. Two of the most sane and logical characters in the novel, Sassoon and Dr. Rivers, have experiences that could qualify as supernatural. Both characters seem inclined to believe that what they heard or saw was something truly outside of the natural world. The book neither substantiates nor denies these feelings, allowing the visions to remain ambiguous. While the experiences could easily be hallucinations, Pat Barker stops short of providing decisive evidence. PARAGRAPH>In these chapters, readers also become more acquainted with Dr. Rivers's background. We learn that the psychologist had a complicated relationship with his father, both rejecting and imitating his life's work. This reflects the complex dynamic between Dr. Rivers and his patients, who become surrogate sons that both need and push away their paternal figure. The psychologist's childhood memories and his time on the farm serve to humanize him, showing him in a less authoritative and more personal light. Since Dr. Rivers acts a bridge character, pulling together the disparate experiences of his patients, it is important that readers identify with and trust him. The character not only holds the novel together structurally, but also illustrates changes in English society. Likely because he is several decades older than his patients, Dr. Rivers begins the novel with a traditional perspective that allows him to rationalize the war. As the novel goes on, however, Rivers evolves, and, like English society, he eventually comes to admit that there is no justifying the incredible toll of the war. PARAGRAPH>Compared to the other mental health professionals depicted, Dr. Rivers is deeply compassionate. He believes that he has found his purpose at Craiglockhart and is inclined to reject an incredible job offer because of his loyalty to his superiors and patients. Moreover, he readily spends his medical leave caring for a man who has been released from hospital custody and is no longer his responsibility. In contrast, the hospital where Sarah and Prior meet is run with a stunning lack of compassion: the most severely wounded men are hidden from view in a greenhouse behind the building. When Prior attends his appointment, a contemptuous doctor implies that his shell-shock is an excuse to avoid combat. In response, Prior speaks very little, determined not to share any personal information with the obnoxious doctor. Barker shows this contrasting reality in more explicit detail later in the novel when Dr. Rivers witnesses a callous psychologist treat a mute patient. PARAGRAPH>Part III focuses heavily on the breadth of the war's effects on England. Dr. Rivers reflects that the death rate is so high, it has disrupted society's central bargain with young men: do what we say and you shall inherit the world. In his mind, there soon won't be anyone left to inherit anything: too many men have lost their youth on the battlefield. Even though Dr. Rivers is a military psychologist tasked with defending the war, he despairs after witnessing Burns's meltdown, pronouncing that nothing could justify so much anguish. The man or, more accurately, the boy that Burns once was no longer exists; an emaciated wraith has taken his place. Burns's memories of war align with Prior and Sassoon's experiences: men being slaughtered for useless and absurd reasons. Like his fellow officers, Burns courted injury to be able to escape the thresher of combat. Furthermore, unimaginable horror like what Burns experienced is widespread; Dr. Rivers reveals that in the trenches, dead bodies are often used \"to strengthen parapets, to prop up sagging doorways, to fill in the gaps in the duckboards\". PARAGRAPH>At the end of Part III, guilt finally overwhelms Sassoon and he decides to return to the front. Despite his condemnation of the war, Sassoon feels a tugging loyalty to his men, many of whom are still fighting, and he is embarrassed to stay at Craiglockhart any longer. The lieutenant's humiliation implies that he believes the refusal to fight to be dishonorable, while the honorable choice is to return to combat. Owen's poem encapsulates the irony of Sassoon's beliefs--that the war is aimless and must be stopped but there is still pride in fighting. Neither Sassoon nor Owen can bear to face the futility of war - both cling to the hope that these men have not died in vain, but that their service is worthy of pride. Despite the fact that Sassoon is disturbed by this contradiction in Owen's work, he still wants to return to the front", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20170909142712/http://www.gradesaver.com/regeneration/study-guide/summary-part-iii-chapters-14-16"}