{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 39", "summary": "Chapter 39  Emma looks back on her talk with Mr. Knightley at the ball with pleasure, and she rejoices that the Eltons' rudeness has cured Harriet of her infatuation with Mr. Elton. Suddenly, Frank appears with Harriet, fainting, on his arm. When revived, Harriet tells the story of how she was walking with a friend, Miss Bickerton, when a Gypsy child approached to beg from them. Miss Bickerton, frightened, ran away, but Harriet was unable to follow because of a cramp she had gotten at the ball. Just as she started to panic, a group of Gypsies surrounded her and demanded money. Frank happened to be walking along and frightened the Gypsies away. Emma cannot help but wonder whether this romantic circumstance might make Harriet and Frank interesting to each other. The episode alarms Mr. Woodhouse and is occasion for gossip, but the Gypsies leave the neighborhood and no harm is done", "analysis": "Chapters 37-39 Emma's honest reflections about her lack of substantive feelings for Frank reveal her growing maturity. She no longer sees him as a character in the scenes she imagines for herself, someone who is important simply because he gives her the opportunity to show off her accomplishments and elegance. She recognizes that if their two-month separation has not cooled his love, \"there were dangers and evils before her: caution for him and for herself would be necessary.\" Rather than anticipating a dramatic scene, she now hopes that \"she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration. That would be so very painful a conclusion of their present acquaintance.\" Emma's decision to observe Frank to see how he feels, rather than to begin with an assumption about how he feels, enables her to understand that Frank is not in love with her. The narrator makes clear that Emma's vanity is not at issue in this case--she is relieved, not offended, that Frank's feelings are cooled, and at the dance, she seems to find more interest in puzzling about his odd mood than in courting his attention. When Frank and Emma dance, instead of imagining how elegant they look to others, she admires how elegant Mr. Knightley looks. Emma has become more concerned with observing others, and less concerned with being observed by others. \tThe Gypsies Harriet describes encountering in Chapter 39 seem a strange intrusion into the domestic realism of the story. It is almost as if they have wandered in from a different novel entirely. In the episode, Austen plays with the conventions of romantic melodrama, one of which was the rescue of a \"damsel in distress\" as the beginning to a romantic relationship. Yet, in the calculating context established by the novel, the encounter seems to predict a lack of destiny rather than a fated match. The improbability of Harriet's encounter with Frank alerts us to the improbability of their ending up together. We can see that the extraordinary circumstances that have thrown Harriet and Frank together owe nothing to their shared values or qualities--a chance meeting and rescue present no evidence that the two belong together. And while Harriet's passivity is in keeping with the conventions of a romance, it is not something that we would expect Austen's novel to reward. The happiest women in the novel are not weak and passive, but both mentally and physically vigorous.<PARAGRAPH>Emma's willingness to accept the improbability of Harriet's encounter with Frank as proof that there must be some sort of connection between the two indicates that her fancy has not been entirely cured of its tendency toward ungrounded speculation. Emma may be learning to place Mr. Knightley's approval of her more recent actions above Frank Churchill's charms, but she has a few more lessons to learn before she gains a full understanding of herself.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227043948/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/emma/section13/"}