{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 41", "summary": "Chapter 41  Mr. Knightley begins to suspect that there is some secret understanding between Frank and Jane. During a walk with Emma, Harriet, Mr. and Mrs. Weston, Frank, Jane, and Miss Bates, Knightley witnesses a strange exchange. Frank asks Mrs. Weston if anything has come of Mr. Perry's plan to buy a carriage. She has no idea what he is talking about, and he swears that she wrote of it in a letter to him some months ago. She denies it, and Frank decides he must have dreamed it. Miss Bates remembers that there was talk of the Perrys getting a carriage at her house  but that it was a secret. Mr. Knightley observes Frank trying to catch Jane's eye after this. The party reaches Hartfield, and Emma persuades everyone to come in for tea. A word game ensues, which Mr. Knightley watches. Frank constructs the word \"blunder\" using alphabet tiles, which he shows to Jane. Then he constructs the word \"Dixon,\" shows it to Emma, who laughs, and then shows it to Jane, who pushes the puzzle away in anger. When the party breaks up, Knightley stays behind to speak to Emma--he knows that everyone considers her the object of Frank's affection, and he wishes to warn her. Knightley asks Emma about the \"Dixon\" joke, and, embarrassed, she refuses to explain. He tells her his suspicion about Jane and Frank, and she laughs at him, stating unequivocally that she can answer for Frank's indifference to Jane. Knightley is silenced and irritated by Emma's implication that she is in Frank's confidence", "analysis": "Chapters 40-42 Even though Emma has resolved to use more discretion in promoting a match between Harriet and Frank than she used when encouraging Harriet's affection for Mr. Elton, she manages to cause a misunderstanding precisely because she shies away from explicit statements. When Emma says of Harriet's new object of affection, \"The service he rendered you was enough to warm your heart,\" she is referring to Frank, who saved Harriet from the Gypsies. Harriet, however, thinks of Mr. Knightley, who saved her from humiliation by asking her to dance. \tIn the way it keeps us in the dark about the truth of various characters' feelings, Emma reads like a detective novel. The picnic presents subtle mysteries: Jane's agitation is not explained, nor is Frank's sudden ill temper. We suspect that Jane's and Frank's bad moods must be linked, but Austen keeps us in suspense as to what exactly has transpired. Even straightforward Mr. Knightley is drawn into the atmosphere of speculation when he suggests that Jane and Frank have been corresponding throughout Frank's absence. Also, Knightley wrongly takes Emma's statement that Frank has no feelings for Jane as a suggestion that Frank and Emma have some sort of romantic association. In truth, Emma's confidence is purely the result of the unflattering things Frank has said to her about Jane.<PARAGRAPH>The word game the party plays in Chapter 41 functions as a metaphor for all the games of private concealment and revelation that characterize Highbury society. Emma and Mr. Knightley are both able to decode the words that Frank makes, but, because they possess different kinds of information, they interpret these words differently. Knightley understands that the word \"blunder\" must refer to Frank's misplaced question to Mrs. Weston about Mr. Perry's carriage, a message that Emma is unable to decode. Emma interprets \"Dixon\" as a cruel joke on Jane, but Knightley rightly understands that Frank's presentation of the word to Jane is a mark of some intimacy between them. When Knightley observes to himself, \"These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick. It was a child's play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank Churchill's part,\" he makes explicit the novel's suggestion that social intercourse is a game with particular rules. Like a game, social interaction requires skill and sometimes produces winners and losers. \tAlthough the narrator typically describes all events from Emma's point of view, Chapter 41 is unique in that it is narrated entirely from Mr. Knightley's point of view, depending on what he can see of the word games transpiring in the parlor. By shifting to Mr. Knightley's point of view, we get a new perspective on the mixture of knowledge and bewilderment that each character experiences. This new emphasis on Mr. Knightley's character and point of view subtly alerts us that he is becoming a central character.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227043948/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/emma/section14/"}