{"name": "Chapter 20", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219184317/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/the-goose-girl/summary/chapter-20", "summary": "Ani and posse ride quickly for a day, hoping to get to the king in time. When Ani starts to feel a little uncertain of herself, Talone reminds her of Falada's last words to her: Princess. Once they arrive, Ani announces herself as Princess Napralina-Victery Talianna Isilee, a.k.a. her younger sister--she figures she's got a better chance of getting before the king that way rather than telling the truth. No one moves a muscle. If she's Princess Napralina, how come they haven't heard about her coming before this? Ani apologizes and asks to speak to the king--her sister's getting married and she's traveled a long way to see it. The guards agree to let Ani in to see the king, but without her guard and crew; Talone protests, but Ani knows it's her only chance. Inside the gate, Ungolad, Selia, and other Kildenrean guards greet her. Uh-oh. She's got nowhere to run, but just then--there's a knock at the door. The king heard about the princess's arrival and wants to greet her. The king and his fellows come in the room, including Geric, who's a little confused when he sees Ani, to say the least. Ani explains that she is the real Princess Anidori-Kiladra Talianna Isilee, and this other chick was her lady in waiting. Of course Selia denies it and makes up another story, one far more convincing, about how Ani is a runaway from the forest and a little confused. An attendant suggests the little prince be dismissed since he's getting tired, but Ani thinks he should stay and hear who his bride is. Wait a second... Princess Anidori-Kiladra isn't engaged to the little obnoxious, thirteen-year-old prince... she's betrothed to Prince Geric. Huh? So this whole time, Ani's been falling for the prince that she's supposed to marry? No wonder Geric sent her that cryptic note about love back when she was a goose girl. Amid all this identity theft, the Prime Minister jumps in and says the king should really be thinking more about the war with Kildenree, but Ani coughs up the truth about that too--it's all a ruse started by Selia. No one's really sure who to believe. It's all one big he said, she said mess. The king asks Selia what the punishment for treason is in her country, and while she knows it's banishment, Selia instead says it involves being thrown in a barrel full of nails and dragged through the streets by horses. Ouch. Geric suggests he and his dad leave all the Kildenreans together alone to talk over matters--it's not really Bayern's concern right now who is who and all that. Ani's hurt and confused. These people are murderers and she doesn't want to be left alone with them, but Geric tells her it's for the best and leaves.", "analysis": ""}