{"name": "Chapter 21", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219184317/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/the-goose-girl/summary/chapter-21", "summary": "Once all the Bayern peeps are gone, Selia and Ungolad celebrate their success. Their story worked. Phew. Selia tells Ani she's been waiting to rub her position in the real princess's face this whole time. It's such a thrill for Ani to see her--a lady in waiting--being a better princess than she ever was. Burn. Ani asks Selia where Yulan is, knowing full well that Talone killed him back at the palace. In a split second, it all makes sense to Selia--she notices Ani's dress and figures out Yulan is gone; she's upset, but gets over it quickly. Too bad the prince will still marry me, Selia counters--oh and by the way, that horse you love so much is dead, but Ungolad made sure he went mad first. Ungolad isn't so sure the prince will marry Selia, now that Ani has arrived on the scene though, so he and Selia hatch a new plan. He will cut Selia, and then when the Bayern people come back, they will claim Ani's gone mad and attacked poor Selia--if they kill Ani in the process, oh well. Someone shouts out that they'd better not lay a hand on Ani, but no one in the room is sure where this exclamation came from--then, from the curtains, Geric emerges and announces himself. He and his dad have been hiding in a secret passage this whole time and heard every word they said to one another. It was Geric's idea to figure all this out. Now that everyone knows their secret, Ungolad and Selia scramble to escape. They threaten the princess, then run at her with a sword, but Ani is too quick for them. She summons the wind to choke Ungolad until he falls to the ground, but even that doesn't stop him. Talone rushes in, fights with Ungolad, and several other men grab weapons and duke it out. Talone fights long and hard, but Ungolad strikes him down and Geric steps in. Even though Talone is safe, Ani worries--she doesn't want Ungolad to hurt Geric, and she doesn't get why everyone stops fighting and watches the prince and corrupt guard go at it. One of the guards explains to Ani: this is about Geric's honor since this is his first battle. Ani watches in fear, but eventually, Geric overcomes Ungolad, and the evil guard dies, uttering Selia's name as he does.", "analysis": ""}