{"name": "chapter 12", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island16.html", "summary": "The call of land was the call of relief for Jim. He sneaks out of the barrel and jumps up on the open deck to join Hunter and Dr. Livesey on the bow. They look around, Jim is unable to believe his eyes considering the state he was in moments ago. They are approaching an island and when Captain Smollet asks the crew if anybody had been here before, Silver answers positively. He tells them that the island is called Skeleton Island which was the main place for pirates. The hill to the north, Silver says, is called Foremast hill and the ones running south are fore, main and mizzen. The main one is called Spyglass. When Captain Smollet hands the map to Silver for his confirmation, he nods his agreement though he is thoroughly disappointed to find only a copy of the original map without any markings. Jim is amazed at Silvers cool headedness, when he reveals his knowledge. Jim almost shudders when he places his hand on Jim and tells him about the good times that awaited him on shore. Jim, without wasting anytime, sneaks next to Dr. Livesey and asks him to call a meeting with the Captain and the Squire. He makes him aware of the seriousness of the situation. Dr. Livesey acts quickly and all four assemble in the cabin. Jim narrates the details he had overheard. All three listen to him with acute concentration. Impressed by Jims information, Dr. Livesey offers him a seat with them and treats him as an equal. The Squire is open and accepts his mistake in front of the Captain for his wrong judgment. The Captain is equally surprised at the conduct of the crew, as he didnt suspect anyone. The Captain takes charge of the situation and tells them that they should go on with the mission as they have time and a few faithful men with them. Dr. Livesey acknowledges Jims efforts and entrusts him with more responsibilities. Jim feels pressured and helpless at this but nevertheless realizes the important task he has on hand.", "analysis": ""}