{"name": "chapter 27", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island31.html", "summary": "Hands rises just once in a lather of foam and blood before he sinks. This sight together with the pain of the wound, caused by Hands dagger, sickens Jim. What terrifies Jim most is the thought of falling into the water. He manages to regain his composure and learns that the knife wasn't stuck very deep. He pulls it out with a jerk and tries to regain his composure over himself. The wound bleeds profusely. As he looks around he sees the only companion he is left with is dead OBrien. Jim gets rid of his body as well. It is almost evening. Jim has difficulty controlling the ship. He cant do much and he leaves the fate of the ship on luck, just like himself. Few minutes pass by and suddenly Jim notices that the ship is in shallow waters. Finally Jim steps on land. He cant wait to get to the stockade to tell them about his achievement. He thinks that the news of recapturing the Hispaniola would make them happy. Jim finds the topography of the land quite familiar. He is familiar with Captain Kid's anchorage, the two peaks on his left and the place where he met Ben Gunn for the first time. He notices a glow of fire against the sky and presumes that someone is cooking supper. The night grows darker and darker. Strange sounds in the jungle fill Jims ears. Jim notices firewood burning and notices a strangeness in the way it is lit. Terror strikes him. He wonders if anything wrong has happened at the stockade in his absence. He draws a little closer on his knees. He hears, as Jim says, the sweet sound of his friend snoring. He was sure that nothing had gone wrong, for it were Silvers men he wouldnt have lived to tell the story. As he doesnt find a sentry, he blames himself for this, as he had run away from his duty. Suddenly he trips on a leg as he made his way to the sleeping place allotted to him by his Captain. A shrill voice breaks the silence. It is Captains Flint, Silvers parrot. This scream awakens the sleeping men. Jim knows he was in the wrong camp. As he tries to make his way back, he is held by a tight hand. He sees his end near when he hears Silver shouting for a torch to recognize the intruder.", "analysis": ""}