{"name": "chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island11.html", "summary": "The voyage to Skeleton Island/Treasure Island doesnt work out as fast as they planned. Neither does the plan to keep Jim with Dr. Livesey as he leaves for London to find a doctor to take care of his medical practice in his absence. Since the Squire was still detained in Bristol trying to obtain a sailing vessel and crew, Jim stays with Tom Redruth. Weeks pass by with no news. During these days Jim spends his time imagining things about the Treasure Island and what it will be like. One day, he receives a letter from the Squire. The letter informs him about the ship named Hispaniola that the Squire has purchased. He states that his old friend Blandly who has assisted immensely in buying the ship. He writes that all the people who were aware of the voyage helped him very much, especially after they learned that they were to set sail for treasure. Jim doesnt like this and is sure that Dr. Livesey wont either, as the purpose of the voyage was supposed to strictly remain a secret. The Squire goes on to describe the troubles he went through to appoint the right crew for the Hispaniola. He writes about the Sea Cook he had appointed. He is a seasoned old seaman named Long John Silver with only one leg. According to the Squire, Silver is a very experienced hand with an ability to recognize the right men with right spirits. He informs Jim and the Doctor that he feeling strong and is looking forward to the voyage. He gives Jim permission to visit his mother with Redruth and spend a night with her. After which they should hurry for Bristol to board the ship for the voyage. Jim is delighted on reading this. He starts his journey back to the Inn to see his mother with Redruth, who, Jim says, is a grumbling old man. Jim returns to his mother to find a refurbished and newly painted Admiral Benbow Inn. The Squire has also appointed an apprentice to help his mother. Jims eyes fill with tears when he finds another guy replacing him at the inn. He feels jealous of the boy, as he is privileged to stay beside his mother all day long. Redruth and Jim hit the road the next day. Jim turns a bit nostalgic while leaving the cove. They leave for Bristol. Jim sleeps like a log in the whole journey. When they reach Bristol and walk towards the Squires hotel, Jim observes old sailors sitting around and imagines himself on a voyage to an unknown island in search of treasure. The Squire is delighted to see them, as now the ships crew is complete. The doctor had already arrived from London. The next day they would leave on the voyage.", "analysis": ""}