{"name": "chapter 22", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island26.html", "summary": "The mutineers did not regroup and attack again, as they expected. So the Captain and his men took time off to cook dinner and then help the wounded men. In spite of danger, they cook outside. Hunter doesnt regain his consciousness and breathes heavily. The Captains condition is not as bad as Hunters. He has a broken shoulder blade and has sustained minor injuries to his lungs. Hunter, on the other hand, is unconscious with a fractured skull and a broken chest bone. Jims had a minor cut across his knuckles that Dr. Livesey patches up for him. The trio assembles again after dinner to discuss their plans. And soon after the discussion, the doctor steps out into the woods with a pistol and his cutlass. Gray who is sitting with Jim is surprised at the doctors move but Jim is not. He knows that the doctor was going to meet Ben Gunn. It is mid-day and the heat is taking its toll on Jim. He feels envious of the doctor. The thought of sitting amidst dead bodies inside the stockade disgusts him and he decides to escape. He fills his pockets with biscuits and picks up a pistol and bullets. Jim plans to head for the white rock and as soon as he finds the right opportunity, to slip out. He heads straight towards the east coast of the island, being careful not to get caught or noticed. He enjoys his walk beside the surf. Jim sees the Hispaniola clearly with a gig tied along side the ship with Silver and his men. As he is at a distance, Jim cant hear their conversation. But the screaming of Silvers parrot-named Captain Flint-was clearly audible. The sun has gone down and Jim realizes the urgency to find Ben Gunns boat. Though tired, Jim makes it to the white rock and finds a little tent made of goat skins. Inside the tent Jim is surprised to see Ben Gunns boat. It is an extremely small boat made with a wood frame covered by stretched goat-skin. The only advantage that Jim can see is its lightness and portability. Jim now has a boat, and he wants to do something really adventurous. He decides to go to the Hispaniola and cut it's anchor line. Once it is sufficiently dark, Jim takes the small boat to the water. He notices two dots of light. One on the shore and the other on the ship. Jim places his boat on water. He sets out to accomplish his mission when the right water current will help him.", "analysis": ""}