{"name": "chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025221/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Treasure_Island/Treasure_Island14.html", "summary": "After a busy night of getting ready for the voyage, they set sail. Jim finds all this very thrilling. When Long John Silver, at the request of his mates, sings the old sea song Jim was so familiar with. Jim momentarily travels back in his mind to Admiral Benbow and is reminded of the Captain. The anchor is drawn and they set sail. The voyage to the island had begun. Jim says, the voyage was quite a pleasant one except for a couple of incidents. Mr. Arrow turns out to be a complete drunk who had no command on the people under him. Nobody had a clue as to where he got his rum from. With time, he also turned out to be a bad influence among others. One fine morning he disappears, never to be seen again, hardly surprising anybody. Job Anderson, the boatswain takes Arrows position and Mr. Trelawney watched the weather. Jim observes Silver on the deck. His activities make him a favorite amongst the sailors and they call him Barbecue. Israel Hands, a friend of Silver, tell Jim that Silver is no ordinary man. He says that Silver was educated in the best institutions and he was also as brave as a lion. Jim takes a liking to him and the feeling is mutual. Silver often invites Jim to listen to his parrot Captain Flint. The Parrot, wherever asked any question, would reply Pieces of eight, Pieces of eight. Silver often talked about the bird and the amount of wickedness it has seen in its 200 years old long lifetime. The Squire and the Captain, like at the start of the journey, are always at odds. The Squire often loses control over himself. The weather changes drastically but the ship proves its worth when it withstands the test of nature. The crew is tired of the journey and are spoiled as the ration of booze doubles for any trifling reason. They also have a barrel of apples ready for anyone to help himself, though nobody cares for them. Jim says some good did come of the apple barrel as the Hispaniola approached its destination. After sundown when Jim got into the barrel to pick up an apple for himself he finds the whole barrel empty. He fell asleep in the barrel with the calming motion and quiet of the ship. Jim wakes when a man sits down next to the barrel. He hears the voice of Silver. His words surprise and terrify him and Jim is convinced that the lives of men on board are at risk and depend upon him and him alone.", "analysis": ""}