
As Mrs. Touchett had foretold, Isabel and Madame Merle were thrown
much together during the illness of their host, so that if they had
not become intimate it would have been almost a breach of good manners.
Their manners were of the best, but in addition to this they happened
to please each other. It is perhaps too much to say that they swore
an eternal friendship, but tacitly at least they called the future to
witness. Isabel did so with a perfectly good conscience, though she
would have hesitated to admit she was intimate with her new friend in
the high sense she privately attached to this term. She often wondered
indeed if she ever had been, or ever could be, intimate with any one.
She had an ideal of friendship as well as of several other sentiments,
which it failed to seem to her in this case--it had not seemed to her
in other cases--that the actual completely expressed. But she often
reminded herself that there were essential reasons why one's ideal
could never become concrete. It was a thing to believe in, not to see--a
matter of faith, not of experience. Experience, however, might supply
us with very creditable imitations of it, and the part of wisdom was
to make the best of these. Certainly, on the whole, Isabel had never
encountered a more agreeable and interesting figure than Madame Merle;
she had never met a person having less of that fault which is the
principal obstacle to friendship--the air of reproducing the more
tiresome, the stale, the too-familiar parts of one's own character.
The gates of the girl's confidence were opened wider than they had ever
been; she said things to this amiable auditress that she had not yet
said to any one. Sometimes she took alarm at her candour: it was as
if she had given to a comparative stranger the key to her cabinet of
jewels. These spiritual gems were the only ones of any magnitude that
Isabel possessed, but there was all the greater reason for their being
carefully guarded. Afterwards, however, she always remembered that one
should never regret a generous error and that if Madame Merle had not
the merits she attributed to her, so much the worse for Madame Merle.
There was no doubt she had great merits--she was charming, sympathetic,
intelligent, cultivated. More than this (for it had not been Isabel's
ill-fortune to go through life without meeting in her own sex several
persons of whom no less could fairly be said), she was rare, superior
and preeminent. There are many amiable people in the world, and Madame
Merle was far from being vulgarly good-natured and restlessly witty. She
knew how to think--an accomplishment rare in women; and she had thought
to very good purpose. Of course, too, she knew how to feel; Isabel
couldn't have spent a week with her without being sure of that. This was
indeed Madame Merle's great talent, her most perfect gift. Life had told
upon her; she had felt it strongly, and it was part of the satisfaction
to be taken in her society that when the girl talked of what she was
pleased to call serious matters this lady understood her so easily and
quickly. Emotion, it is true, had become with her rather historic; she
made no secret of the fact that the fount of passion, thanks to having
been rather violently tapped at one period, didn't flow quite so
freely as of yore. She proposed moreover, as well as expected, to cease
feeling; she freely admitted that of old she had been a little mad, and
now she pretended to be perfectly sane.

"I judge more than I used to," she said to Isabel, "but it seems to me
one has earned the right. One can't judge till one's forty; before that
we're too eager, too hard, too cruel, and in addition much too ignorant.
I'm sorry for you; it will be a long time before you're forty. But every
gain's a loss of some kind; I often think that after forty one can't
really feel. The freshness, the quickness have certainly gone. You'll
keep them longer than most people; it will be a great satisfaction to me
to see you some years hence. I want to see what life makes of you. One
thing's certain--it can't spoil you. It may pull you about horribly, but
I defy it to break you up."

Isabel received this assurance as a young soldier, still panting from
a slight skirmish in which he has come off with honour, might receive a
pat on the shoulder from his colonel. Like such a recognition of merit
it seemed to come with authority. How could the lightest word do less
on the part of a person who was prepared to say, of almost everything
Isabel told her, "Oh, I've been in that, my dear; it passes, like
everything else." On many of her interlocutors Madame Merle might have
produced an irritating effect; it was disconcertingly difficult to
surprise her. But Isabel, though by no means incapable of desiring to
be effective, had not at present this impulse. She was too sincere, too
interested in her judicious companion. And then moreover Madame Merle
never said such things in the tone of triumph or of boastfulness; they
dropped from her like cold confessions.

A period of bad weather had settled upon Gardencourt; the days grew
shorter and there was an end to the pretty tea-parties on the lawn. But
our young woman had long indoor conversations with her fellow visitor,
and in spite of the rain the two ladies often sallied forth for a walk,
equipped with the defensive apparatus which the English climate and
the English genius have between them brought to such perfection. Madame
Merle liked almost everything, including the English rain. "There's
always a little of it and never too much at once," she said; "and it
never wets you and it always smells good." She declared that in England
the pleasures of smell were great--that in this inimitable island there
was a certain mixture of fog and beer and soot which, however odd it
might sound, was the national aroma, and was most agreeable to the
nostril; and she used to lift the sleeve of her British overcoat and
bury her nose in it, inhaling the clear, fine scent of the wool. Poor
Ralph Touchett, as soon as the autumn had begun to define itself, became
almost a prisoner; in bad weather he was unable to step out of the
house, and he used sometimes to stand at one of the windows with his
hands in his pockets and, from a countenance half-rueful, half-critical,
watch Isabel and Madame Merle as they walked down the avenue under a
pair of umbrellas. The roads about Gardencourt were so firm, even in the
worst weather, that the two ladies always came back with a healthy glow
in their cheeks, looking at the soles of their neat, stout boots and
declaring that their walk had done them inexpressible good. Before
luncheon, always, Madame Merle was engaged; Isabel admired and envied
her rigid possession of her morning. Our heroine had always passed for a
person of resources and had taken a certain pride in being one; but she
wandered, as by the wrong side of the wall of a private garden, round
the enclosed talents, accomplishments, aptitudes of Madame Merle. She
found herself desiring to emulate them, and in twenty such ways this
lady presented herself as a model. "I should like awfully to be so!"
Isabel secretly exclaimed, more than once, as one after another of her
friend's fine aspects caught the light, and before long she knew that
she had learned a lesson from a high authority. It took no great time
indeed for her to feel herself, as the phrase is, under an influence.
"What's the harm," she wondered, "so long as it's a good one? The more
one's under a good influence the better. The only thing is to see our
steps as we take them--to understand them as we go. That, no doubt, I
shall always do. I needn't be afraid of becoming too pliable; isn't it
my fault that I'm not pliable enough?" It is said that imitation is the
sincerest flattery; and if Isabel was sometimes moved to gape at her
friend aspiringly and despairingly it was not so much because she
desired herself to shine as because she wished to hold up the lamp for
Madame Merle. She liked her extremely, but was even more dazzled than
attracted. She sometimes asked herself what Henrietta Stackpole would
say to her thinking so much of this perverted product of their common
soil, and had a conviction that it would be severely judged. Henrietta
would not at all subscribe to Madame Merle; for reasons she could not
have defined this truth came home to the girl. On the other hand she
was equally sure that, should the occasion offer, her new friend would
strike off some happy view of her old: Madame Merle was too humorous,
too observant, not to do justice to Henrietta, and on becoming
acquainted with her would probably give the measure of a tact which
Miss Stackpole couldn't hope to emulate. She appeared to have in her
experience a touchstone for everything, and somewhere in the capacious
pocket of her genial memory she would find the key to Henrietta's value.
"That's the great thing," Isabel solemnly pondered; "that's the supreme
good fortune: to be in a better position for appreciating people than
they are for appreciating you." And she added that such, when one
considered it, was simply the essence of the aristocratic situation.
In this light, if in none other, one should aim at the aristocratic
situation.

I may not count over all the links in the chain which led Isabel to
think of Madame Merle's situation as aristocratic--a view of it never
expressed in any reference made to it by that lady herself. She had
known great things and great people, but she had never played a great
part. She was one of the small ones of the earth; she had not been born
to honours; she knew the world too well to nourish fatuous illusions
on the article of her own place in it. She had encountered many of the
fortunate few and was perfectly aware of those points at which their
fortune differed from hers. But if by her informed measure she was no
figure for a high scene, she had yet to Isabel's imagination a sort of
greatness. To be so cultivated and civilised, so wise and so easy,
and still make so light of it--that was really to be a great lady,
especially when one so carried and presented one's self. It was as if
somehow she had all society under contribution, and all the arts and
graces it practised--or was the effect rather that of charming uses
found for her, even from a distance, subtle service rendered by her to
a clamorous world wherever she might be? After breakfast she wrote a
succession of letters, as those arriving for her appeared innumerable:
her correspondence was a source of surprise to Isabel when they
sometimes walked together to the village post-office to deposit Madame
Merle's offering to the mail. She knew more people, as she told Isabel,
than she knew what to do with, and something was always turning up to be
written about. Of painting she was devotedly fond, and made no more of
brushing in a sketch than of pulling off her gloves. At Gardencourt she
was perpetually taking advantage of an hour's sunshine to go out with a
camp-stool and a box of water-colours. That she was a brave musician we
have already perceived, and it was evidence of the fact that when she
seated herself at the piano, as she always did in the evening, her
listeners resigned themselves without a murmur to losing the grace
of her talk. Isabel, since she had known her, felt ashamed of her own
facility, which she now looked upon as basely inferior; and indeed,
though she had been thought rather a prodigy at home, the loss to
society when, in taking her place upon the music-stool, she turned her
back to the room, was usually deemed greater than the gain. When Madame
Merle was neither writing, nor painting, nor touching the piano, she
was usually employed upon wonderful tasks of rich embroidery, cushions,
curtains, decorations for the chimneypiece; an art in which her bold,
free invention was as noted as the agility of her needle. She was never
idle, for when engaged in none of the ways I have mentioned she was
either reading (she appeared to Isabel to read "everything important"),
or walking out, or playing patience with the cards, or talking with her
fellow inmates. And with all this she had always the social quality, was
never rudely absent and yet never too seated. She laid down her pastimes
as easily as she took them up; she worked and talked at the same time,
and appeared to impute scant worth to anything she did. She gave away
her sketches and tapestries; she rose from the piano or remained
there, according to the convenience of her auditors, which she always
unerringly divined. She was in short the most comfortable, profitable,
amenable person to live with. If for Isabel she had a fault it was that
she was not natural; by which the girl meant, not that she was either
affected or pretentious, since from these vulgar vices no woman could
have been more exempt, but that her nature had been too much overlaid by
custom and her angles too much rubbed away. She had become too flexible,
too useful, was too ripe and too final. She was in a word too perfectly
the social animal that man and woman are supposed to have been intended
to be; and she had rid herself of every remnant of that tonic wildness
which we may assume to have belonged even to the most amiable persons
in the ages before country-house life was the fashion. Isabel found it
difficult to think of her in any detachment or privacy, she existed only
in her relations, direct or indirect, with her fellow mortals. One might
wonder what commerce she could possibly hold with her own spirit.
One always ended, however, by feeling that a charming surface doesn't
necessarily prove one superficial; this was an illusion in which, in
one's youth, one had but just escaped being nourished. Madame Merle was
not superficial--not she. She was deep, and her nature spoke none the
less in her behaviour because it spoke a conventional tongue. "What's
language at all but a convention?" said Isabel. "She has the good
taste not to pretend, like some people I've met, to express herself by
original signs."

"I'm afraid you've suffered much," she once found occasion to say to her
friend in response to some allusion that had appeared to reach far.

"What makes you think that?" Madame Merle asked with the amused smile
of a person seated at a game of guesses. "I hope I haven't too much the
droop of the misunderstood."

"No; but you sometimes say things that I think people who have always
been happy wouldn't have found out."

"I haven't always been happy," said Madame Merle, smiling still, but
with a mock gravity, as if she were telling a child a secret. "Such a
wonderful thing!"

But Isabel rose to the irony. "A great many people give me the
impression of never having for a moment felt anything."

"It's very true; there are many more iron pots certainly than porcelain.
But you may depend on it that every one bears some mark; even the
hardest iron pots have a little bruise, a little hole somewhere. I
flatter myself that I'm rather stout, but if I must tell you the truth
I've been shockingly chipped and cracked. I do very well for service
yet, because I've been cleverly mended; and I try to remain in the
cupboard--the quiet, dusky cupboard where there's an odour of stale
spices--as much as I can. But when I've to come out and into a strong
light--then, my dear, I'm a horror!"

I know not whether it was on this occasion or on some other that the
conversation had taken the turn I have just indicated she said to Isabel
that she would some day a tale unfold. Isabel assured her she should
delight to listen to one, and reminded her more than once of this
engagement. Madame Merle, however, begged repeatedly for a respite, and
at last frankly told her young companion that they must wait till they
knew each other better. This would be sure to happen, a long friendship
so visibly lay before them. Isabel assented, but at the same time
enquired if she mightn't be trusted--if she appeared capable of a
betrayal of confidence.

"It's not that I'm afraid of your repeating what I say," her fellow
visitor answered; "I'm afraid, on the contrary, of your taking it too
much to yourself. You'd judge me too harshly; you're of the cruel age."
She preferred for the present to talk to Isabel of Isabel, and exhibited
the greatest interest in our heroine's history, sentiments, opinions,
prospects. She made her chatter and listened to her chatter with
infinite good nature. This flattered and quickened the girl, who was
struck with all the distinguished people her friend had known and with
her having lived, as Mrs. Touchett said, in the best company in Europe.
Isabel thought the better of herself for enjoying the favour of a person
who had so large a field of comparison; and it was perhaps partly to
gratify the sense of profiting by comparison that she often appealed to
these stores of reminiscence. Madame Merle had been a dweller in many
lands and had social ties in a dozen different countries. "I don't
pretend to be educated," she would say, "but I think I know my Europe;"
and she spoke one day of going to Sweden to stay with an old friend,
and another of proceeding to Malta to follow up a new acquaintance. With
England, where she had often dwelt, she was thoroughly familiar, and
for Isabel's benefit threw a great deal of light upon the customs of
the country and the character of the people, who "after all," as she was
fond of saying, were the most convenient in the world to live with.

"You mustn't think it strange her remaining here at such a time as this,
when Mr. Touchett's passing away," that gentleman's wife remarked to her
niece. "She is incapable of a mistake; she's the most tactful woman I
know. It's a favour to me that she stays; she's putting off a lot of
visits at great houses," said Mrs. Touchett, who never forgot that when
she herself was in England her social value sank two or three degrees in
the scale. "She has her pick of places; she's not in want of a shelter.
But I've asked her to put in this time because I wish you to know her. I
think it will be a good thing for you. Serena Merle hasn't a fault."

"If I didn't already like her very much that description might alarm
me," Isabel returned.

"She's never the least little bit 'off.' I've brought you out here and I
wish to do the best for you. Your sister Lily told me she hoped I would
give you plenty of opportunities. I give you one in putting you in
relation with Madame Merle. She's one of the most brilliant women in
Europe."

"I like her better than I like your description of her," Isabel
persisted in saying.

"Do you flatter yourself that you'll ever feel her open to criticism? I
hope you'll let me know when you do."

"That will be cruel--to you," said Isabel.

"You needn't mind me. You won't discover a fault in her."

"Perhaps not. But I dare say I shan't miss it."

"She knows absolutely everything on earth there is to know," said Mrs.
Touchett.

Isabel after this observed to their companion that she hoped she knew
Mrs. Touchett considered she hadn't a speck on her perfection. On which
"I'm obliged to you," Madame Merle replied, "but I'm afraid your aunt
imagines, or at least alludes to, no aberrations that the clock-face
doesn't register."

"So that you mean you've a wild side that's unknown to her?"

"Ah no, I fear my darkest sides are my tamest. I mean that having no
faults, for your aunt, means that one's never late for dinner--that is
for her dinner. I was not late, by the way, the other day, when you
came back from London; the clock was just at eight when I came into the
drawing-room: it was the rest of you that were before the time. It means
that one answers a letter the day one gets it and that when one comes to
stay with her one doesn't bring too much luggage and is careful not to
be taken ill. For Mrs. Touchett those things constitute virtue; it's a
blessing to be able to reduce it to its elements."

Madame Merle's own conversation, it will be perceived, was enriched with
bold, free touches of criticism, which, even when they had a restrictive
effect, never struck Isabel as ill-natured. It couldn't occur to the
girl for instance that Mrs. Touchett's accomplished guest was abusing
her; and this for very good reasons. In the first place Isabel rose
eagerly to the sense of her shades; in the second Madame Merle implied
that there was a great deal more to say; and it was clear in the
third that for a person to speak to one without ceremony of one's near
relations was an agreeable sign of that person's intimacy with one's
self. These signs of deep communion multiplied as the days elapsed, and
there was none of which Isabel was more sensible than of her companion's
preference for making Miss Archer herself a topic. Though she referred
frequently to the incidents of her own career she never lingered upon
them; she was as little of a gross egotist as she was of a flat gossip.

"I'm old and stale and faded," she said more than once; "I'm of no
more interest than last week's newspaper. You're young and fresh and of
to-day; you've the great thing--you've actuality. I once had it--we all
have it for an hour. You, however, will have it for longer. Let us talk
about you then; you can say nothing I shall not care to hear. It's a
sign that I'm growing old--that I like to talk with younger people. I
think it's a very pretty compensation. If we can't have youth within us
we can have it outside, and I really think we see it and feel it better
that way. Of course we must be in sympathy with it--that I shall always
be. I don't know that I shall ever be ill-natured with old people--I
hope not; there are certainly some old people I adore. But I shall never
be anything but abject with the young; they touch me and appeal to me
too much. I give you carte blanche then; you can even be impertinent if
you like; I shall let it pass and horribly spoil you. I speak as if I
were a hundred years old, you say? Well, I am, if you please; I was born
before the French Revolution. Ah, my dear, je viens de loin; I belong to
the old, old world. But it's not of that I want to talk; I want to talk
about the new. You must tell me more about America; you never tell me
enough. Here I've been since I was brought here as a helpless child, and
it's ridiculous, or rather it's scandalous, how little I know about that
splendid, dreadful, funny country--surely the greatest and drollest of
them all. There are a great many of us like that in these parts, and I
must say I think we're a wretched set of people. You should live in your
own land; whatever it may be you have your natural place there. If we're
not good Americans we're certainly poor Europeans; we've no natural
place here. We're mere parasites, crawling over the surface; we haven't
our feet in the soil. At least one can know it and not have illusions. A
woman perhaps can get on; a woman, it seems to me, has no natural place
anywhere; wherever she finds herself she has to remain on the surface
and, more or less, to crawl. You protest, my dear? you're horrified?
you declare you'll never crawl? It's very true that I don't see you
crawling; you stand more upright than a good many poor creatures.
Very good; on the whole, I don't think you'll crawl. But the men, the
Americans; je vous demande un peu, what do they make of it over here?
I don't envy them trying to arrange themselves. Look at poor Ralph
Touchett: what sort of a figure do you call that? Fortunately he has a
consumption; I say fortunately, because it gives him something to do.
His consumption's his carriere it's a kind of position. You can say:
'Oh, Mr. Touchett, he takes care of his lungs, he knows a great deal
about climates.' But without that who would he be, what would he
represent? 'Mr. Ralph Touchett: an American who lives in Europe.' That
signifies absolutely nothing--it's impossible anything should signify
less. 'He's very cultivated,' they say: 'he has a very pretty collection
of old snuff-boxes.' The collection is all that's wanted to make it
pitiful. I'm tired of the sound of the word; I think it's grotesque.
With the poor old father it's different; he has his identity, and it's
rather a massive one. He represents a great financial house, and that,
in our day, is as good as anything else. For an American, at any rate,
that will do very well. But I persist in thinking your cousin very lucky
to have a chronic malady so long as he doesn't die of it. It's much
better than the snuffboxes. If he weren't ill, you say, he'd do
something?--he'd take his father's place in the house. My poor child, I
doubt it; I don't think he's at all fond of the house. However, you know
him better than I, though I used to know him rather well, and he may
have the benefit of the doubt. The worst case, I think, is a friend
of mine, a countryman of ours, who lives in Italy (where he also was
brought before he knew better), and who is one of the most delightful
men I know. Some day you must know him. I'll bring you together and then
you'll see what I mean. He's Gilbert Osmond--he lives in Italy; that's
all one can say about him or make of him. He's exceedingly clever, a
man made to be distinguished; but, as I tell you, you exhaust the
description when you say he's Mr. Osmond who lives tout betement in
Italy. No career, no name, no position, no fortune, no past, no future,
no anything. Oh yes, he paints, if you please--paints in water-colours;
like me, only better than I. His painting's pretty bad; on the whole I'm
rather glad of that. Fortunately he's very indolent, so indolent that
it amounts to a sort of position. He can say, 'Oh, I do nothing; I'm too
deadly lazy. You can do nothing to-day unless you get up at five o'clock
in the morning.' In that way he becomes a sort of exception; you feel
he might do something if he'd only rise early. He never speaks of his
painting to people at large; he's too clever for that. But he has a
little girl--a dear little girl; he does speak of her. He's devoted
to her, and if it were a career to be an excellent father he'd be very
distinguished. But I'm afraid that's no better than the snuff-boxes;
perhaps not even so good. Tell me what they do in America," pursued
Madame Merle, who, it must be observed parenthetically, did not deliver
herself all at once of these reflexions, which are presented in a
cluster for the convenience of the reader. She talked of Florence, where
Mr. Osmond lived and where Mrs. Touchett occupied a medieval palace; she
talked of Rome, where she herself had a little pied-a-terre with some
rather good old damask. She talked of places, of people and even, as the
phrase is, of "subjects"; and from time to time she talked of their kind
old host and of the prospect of his recovery. From the first she
had thought this prospect small, and Isabel had been struck with the
positive, discriminating, competent way in which she took the measure
of his remainder of life. One evening she announced definitely that he
wouldn't live.

"Sir Matthew Hope told me so as plainly as was proper," she said;
"standing there, near the fire, before dinner. He makes himself very
agreeable, the great doctor. I don't mean his saying that has anything
to do with it. But he says such things with great tact. I had told him
I felt ill at my ease, staying here at such a time; it seemed to me so
indiscreet--it wasn't as if I could nurse. 'You must remain, you must
remain,' he answered; 'your office will come later.' Wasn't that a very
delicate way of saying both that poor Mr. Touchett would go and that I
might be of some use as a consoler? In fact, however, I shall not be of
the slightest use. Your aunt will console herself; she, and she alone,
knows just how much consolation she'll require. It would be a very
delicate matter for another person to undertake to administer the dose.
With your cousin it will be different; he'll miss his father immensely.
But I should never presume to condole with Mr. Ralph; we're not on
those terms." Madame Merle had alluded more than once to some undefined
incongruity in her relations with Ralph Touchett; so Isabel took this
occasion of asking her if they were not good friends.

"Perfectly, but he doesn't like me."

"What have you done to him?"

"Nothing whatever. But one has no need of a reason for that."

"For not liking you? I think one has need of a very good reason."

"You're very kind. Be sure you have one ready for the day you begin."

"Begin to dislike you? I shall never begin."

"I hope not; because if you do you'll never end. That's the way with
your cousin; he doesn't get over it. It's an antipathy of nature--if
I can call it that when it's all on his side. I've nothing whatever
against him and don't bear him the least little grudge for not doing me
justice. Justice is all I want. However, one feels that he's a gentleman
and would never say anything underhand about one. Cartes sur table,"
Madame Merle subjoined in a moment, "I'm not afraid of him."

"I hope not indeed," said Isabel, who added something about his being
the kindest creature living. She remembered, however, that on her first
asking him about Madame Merle he had answered her in a manner which
this lady might have thought injurious without being explicit. There
was something between them, Isabel said to herself, but she said nothing
more than this. If it were something of importance it should inspire
respect; if it were not it was not worth her curiosity. With all her
love of knowledge she had a natural shrinking from raising curtains and
looking into unlighted corners. The love of knowledge coexisted in her
mind with the finest capacity for ignorance.

But Madame Merle sometimes said things that startled her, made her raise
her clear eyebrows at the time and think of the words afterwards. "I'd
give a great deal to be your age again," she broke out once with a
bitterness which, though diluted in her customary amplitude of ease, was
imperfectly disguised by it. "If I could only begin again--if I could
have my life before me!"

"Your life's before you yet," Isabel answered gently, for she was
vaguely awe-struck.

"No; the best part's gone, and gone for nothing."

"Surely not for nothing," said Isabel.

"Why not--what have I got? Neither husband, nor child, nor fortune, nor
position, nor the traces of a beauty that I never had."

"You have many friends, dear lady."

"I'm not so sure!" cried Madame Merle.

"Ah, you're wrong. You have memories, graces, talents--"

But Madame Merle interrupted her. "What have my talents brought me?
Nothing but the need of using them still, to get through the hours,
the years, to cheat myself with some pretence of movement, of
unconsciousness. As for my graces and memories the less said about them
the better. You'll be my friend till you find a better use for your
friendship."

"It will be for you to see that I don't then," said Isabel.

"Yes; I would make an effort to keep you." And her companion looked at
her gravely. "When I say I should like to be your age I mean with your
qualities--frank, generous, sincere like you. In that case I should have
made something better of my life."

"What should you have liked to do that you've not done?"

Madame Merle took a sheet of music--she was seated at the piano and
had abruptly wheeled about on the stool when she first spoke--and
mechanically turned the leaves. "I'm very ambitious!" she at last
replied.

"And your ambitions have not been satisfied? They must have been great."

"They WERE great. I should make myself ridiculous by talking of them."

Isabel wondered what they could have been--whether Madame Merle had
aspired to wear a crown. "I don't know what your idea of success may be,
but you seem to me to have been successful. To me indeed you're a vivid
image of success."

Madame Merle tossed away the music with a smile. "What's YOUR idea of
success?"

"You evidently think it must be a very tame one. It's to see some dream
of one's youth come true."

"Ah," Madame Merle exclaimed, "that I've never seen! But my dreams were
so great--so preposterous. Heaven forgive me, I'm dreaming now!" And she
turned back to the piano and began grandly to play. On the morrow she
said to Isabel that her definition of success had been very pretty,
yet frightfully sad. Measured in that way, who had ever succeeded? The
dreams of one's youth, why they were enchanting, they were divine! Who
had ever seen such things come to pass?

"I myself--a few of them," Isabel ventured to answer.

"Already? They must have been dreams of yesterday."

"I began to dream very young," Isabel smiled.

"Ah, if you mean the aspirations of your childhood--that of having a
pink sash and a doll that could close her eyes."

"No, I don't mean that."

"Or a young man with a fine moustache going down on his knees to you."

"No, nor that either," Isabel declared with still more emphasis.

Madame Merle appeared to note this eagerness. "I suspect that's what
you do mean. We've all had the young man with the moustache. He's the
inevitable young man; he doesn't count."

Isabel was silent a little but then spoke with extreme and
characteristic inconsequence. "Why shouldn't he count? There are young
men and young men."

"And yours was a paragon--is that what you mean?" asked her friend with
a laugh. "If you've had the identical young man you dreamed of, then
that was success, and I congratulate you with all my heart. Only in that
case why didn't you fly with him to his castle in the Apennines?"

"He has no castle in the Apennines."

"What has he? An ugly brick house in Fortieth Street? Don't tell me
that; I refuse to recognise that as an ideal."

"I don't care anything about his house," said Isabel.

"That's very crude of you. When you've lived as long as I you'll see
that every human being has his shell and that you must take the shell
into account. By the shell I mean the whole envelope of circumstances.
There's no such thing as an isolated man or woman; we're each of us
made up of some cluster of appurtenances. What shall we call our 'self'?
Where does it begin? where does it end? It overflows into everything
that belongs to us--and then it flows back again. I know a large part
of myself is in the clothes I choose to wear. I've a great respect for
THINGS! One's self--for other people--is one's expression of one's self;
and one's house, one's furniture, one's garments, the books one reads,
the company one keeps--these things are all expressive."

This was very metaphysical; not more so, however, than several
observations Madame Merle had already made. Isabel was fond of
metaphysics, but was unable to accompany her friend into this bold
analysis of the human personality. "I don't agree with you. I think just
the other way. I don't know whether I succeed in expressing myself, but
I know that nothing else expresses me. Nothing that belongs to me is any
measure of me; everything's on the contrary a limit, a barrier, and
a perfectly arbitrary one. Certainly the clothes which, as you say, I
choose to wear, don't express me; and heaven forbid they should!"

"You dress very well," Madame Merle lightly interposed.

"Possibly; but I don't care to be judged by that. My clothes may express
the dressmaker, but they don't express me. To begin with it's not my own
choice that I wear them; they're imposed upon me by society."

"Should you prefer to go without them?" Madame Merle enquired in a tone
which virtually terminated the discussion.

I am bound to confess, though it may cast some discredit on the sketch I
have given of the youthful loyalty practised by our heroine toward this
accomplished woman, that Isabel had said nothing whatever to her about
Lord Warburton and had been equally reticent on the subject of Caspar
Goodwood. She had not, however, concealed the fact that she had had
opportunities of marrying and had even let her friend know of how
advantageous a kind they had been. Lord Warburton had left Lockleigh
and was gone to Scotland, taking his sisters with him; and though he had
written to Ralph more than once to ask about Mr. Touchett's health the
girl was not liable to the embarrassment of such enquiries as, had he
still been in the neighbourhood, he would probably have felt bound to
make in person. He had excellent ways, but she felt sure that if he had
come to Gardencourt he would have seen Madame Merle, and that if he had
seen her he would have liked her and betrayed to her that he was in love
with her young friend. It so happened that during this lady's previous
visits to Gardencourt--each of them much shorter than the present--he
had either not been at Lockleigh or had not called at Mr. Touchett's.
Therefore, though she knew him by name as the great man of that
county, she had no cause to suspect him as a suitor of Mrs. Touchett's
freshly-imported niece.

"You've plenty of time," she had said to Isabel in return for the
mutilated confidences which our young woman made her and which didn't
pretend to be perfect, though we have seen that at moments the girl
had compunctions at having said so much. "I'm glad you've done nothing
yet--that you have it still to do. It's a very good thing for a girl to
have refused a few good offers--so long of course as they are not the
best she's likely to have. Pardon me if my tone seems horribly corrupt;
one must take the worldly view sometimes. Only don't keep on refusing
for the sake of refusing. It's a pleasant exercise of power; but
accepting's after all an exercise of power as well. There's always the
danger of refusing once too often. It was not the one I fell into--I
didn't refuse often enough. You're an exquisite creature, and I should
like to see you married to a prime minister. But speaking strictly, you
know, you're not what is technically called a parti. You're extremely
good-looking and extremely clever; in yourself you're quite exceptional.
You appear to have the vaguest ideas about your earthly possessions; but
from what I can make out you're not embarrassed with an income. I wish
you had a little money."

"I wish I had!" said Isabel, simply, apparently forgetting for the
moment that her poverty had been a venial fault for two gallant
gentlemen.

In spite of Sir Matthew Hope's benevolent recommendation Madame Merle
did not remain to the end, as the issue of poor Mr. Touchett's malady
had now come frankly to be designated. She was under pledges to other
people which had at last to be redeemed, and she left Gardencourt with
the understanding that she should in any event see Mrs. Touchett there
again, or else in town, before quitting England. Her parting with Isabel
was even more like the beginning of a friendship than their meeting had
been. "I'm going to six places in succession, but I shall see no one I
like so well as you. They'll all be old friends, however; one doesn't
make new friends at my age. I've made a great exception for you. You
must remember that and must think as well of me as possible. You must
reward me by believing in me."

By way of answer Isabel kissed her, and, though some women kiss with
facility, there are kisses and kisses, and this embrace was satisfactory
to Madame Merle. Our young lady, after this, was much alone; she saw her
aunt and cousin only at meals, and discovered that of the hours during
which Mrs. Touchett was invisible only a minor portion was now devoted
to nursing her husband. She spent the rest in her own apartments, to
which access was not allowed even to her niece, apparently occupied
there with mysterious and inscrutable exercises. At table she was grave
and silent; but her solemnity was not an attitude--Isabel could see it
was a conviction. She wondered if her aunt repented of having taken her
own way so much; but there was no visible evidence of this--no tears, no
sighs, no exaggeration of a zeal always to its own sense adequate. Mrs.
Touchett seemed simply to feel the need of thinking things over and
summing them up; she had a little moral account-book--with columns
unerringly ruled and a sharp steel clasp--which she kept with exemplary
neatness. Uttered reflection had with her ever, at any rate, a practical
ring. "If I had foreseen this I'd not have proposed your coming abroad
now," she said to Isabel after Madame Merle had left the house. "I'd
have waited and sent for you next year."

"So that perhaps I should never have known my uncle? It's a great
happiness to me to have come now."

"That's very well. But it was not that you might know your uncle that
I brought you to Europe." A perfectly veracious speech; but, as Isabel
thought, not as perfectly timed. She had leisure to think of this and
other matters. She took a solitary walk every day and spent vague hours
in turning over books in the library. Among the subjects that engaged
her attention were the adventures of her friend Miss Stackpole, with
whom she was in regular correspondence. Isabel liked her friend's
private epistolary style better than her public; that is she felt her
public letters would have been excellent if they had not been printed.
Henrietta's career, however, was not so successful as might have been
wished even in the interest of her private felicity; that view of the
inner life of Great Britain which she was so eager to take appeared to
dance before her like an ignis fatuus. The invitation from Lady Pensil,
for mysterious reasons, had never arrived; and poor Mr. Bantling
himself, with all his friendly ingenuity, had been unable to explain
so grave a dereliction on the part of a missive that had obviously been
sent. He had evidently taken Henrietta's affairs much to heart,
and believed that he owed her a set-off to this illusory visit to
Bedfordshire. "He says he should think I would go to the Continent,"
Henrietta wrote; "and as he thinks of going there himself I suppose his
advice is sincere. He wants to know why I don't take a view of French
life; and it's a fact that I want very much to see the new Republic. Mr.
Bantling doesn't care much about the Republic, but he thinks of going
over to Paris anyway. I must say he's quite as attentive as I could
wish, and at least I shall have seen one polite Englishman. I keep
telling Mr. Bantling that he ought to have been an American, and you
should see how that pleases him. Whenever I say so he always breaks out
with the same exclamation--'Ah, but really, come now!" A few days later
she wrote that she had decided to go to Paris at the end of the week and
that Mr. Bantling had promised to see her off--perhaps even would go
as far as Dover with her. She would wait in Paris till Isabel should
arrive, Henrietta added; speaking quite as if Isabel were to start on
her continental journey alone and making no allusion to Mrs. Touchett.
Bearing in mind his interest in their late companion, our heroine
communicated several passages from this correspondence to Ralph,
who followed with an emotion akin to suspense the career of the
representative of the Interviewer.

"It seems to me she's doing very well," he said, "going over to Paris
with an ex-Lancer! If she wants something to write about she has only to
describe that episode."

"It's not conventional, certainly," Isabel answered; "but if you mean
that--as far as Henrietta is concerned--it's not perfectly innocent,
you're very much mistaken. You'll never understand Henrietta."

"Pardon me, I understand her perfectly. I didn't at all at first, but
now I've the point of view. I'm afraid, however, that Bantling hasn't;
he may have some surprises. Oh, I understand Henrietta as well as if I
had made her!"

Isabel was by no means sure of this, but she abstained from expressing
further doubt, for she was disposed in these days to extend a great
charity to her cousin. One afternoon less than a week after Madame
Merle's departure she was seated in the library with a volume to
which her attention was not fastened. She had placed herself in a deep
window-bench, from which she looked out into the dull, damp park; and as
the library stood at right angles to the entrance-front of the house she
could see the doctor's brougham, which had been waiting for the last two
hours before the door. She was struck with his remaining so long, but at
last she saw him appear in the portico, stand a moment slowly drawing on
his gloves and looking at the knees of his horse, and then get into the
vehicle and roll away. Isabel kept her place for half an hour; there was
a great stillness in the house. It was so great that when she at last
heard a soft, slow step on the deep carpet of the room she was almost
startled by the sound. She turned quickly away from the window and saw
Ralph Touchett standing there with his hands still in his pockets, but
with a face absolutely void of its usual latent smile. She got up and
her movement and glance were a question.

"It's all over," said Ralph.

"Do you mean that my uncle...?" And Isabel stopped.

"My dear father died an hour ago."

"Ah, my poor Ralph!" she gently wailed, putting out her two hands to
him.



Some fortnight after this Madame Merle drove up in a hansom cab to
the house in Winchester Square. As she descended from her vehicle she
observed, suspended between the dining-room windows, a large, neat,
wooden tablet, on whose fresh black ground were inscribed in white paint
the words--"This noble freehold mansion to be sold"; with the name of
the agent to whom application should be made. "They certainly lose no
time," said the visitor as, after sounding the big brass knocker, she
waited to be admitted; "it's a practical country!" And within the house,
as she ascended to the drawing-room, she perceived numerous signs of
abdication; pictures removed from the walls and placed upon sofas,
windows undraped and floors laid bare. Mrs. Touchett presently received
her and intimated in a few words that condolences might be taken for
granted.

"I know what you're going to say--he was a very good man. But I know it
better than any one, because I gave him more chance to show it. In that
I think I was a good wife." Mrs. Touchett added that at the end her
husband apparently recognised this fact. "He has treated me most
liberally," she said; "I won't say more liberally than I expected,
because I didn't expect. You know that as a general thing I don't
expect. But he chose, I presume, to recognise the fact that though I
lived much abroad and mingled--you may say freely--in foreign life, I
never exhibited the smallest preference for any one else."

"For any one but yourself," Madame Merle mentally observed; but the
reflexion was perfectly inaudible.

"I never sacrificed my husband to another," Mrs. Touchett continued with
her stout curtness.

"Oh no," thought Madame Merle; "you never did anything for another!"

There was a certain cynicism in these mute comments which demands an
explanation; the more so as they are not in accord either with the
view--somewhat superficial perhaps--that we have hitherto enjoyed of
Madame Merle's character or with the literal facts of Mrs. Touchett's
history; the more so, too, as Madame Merle had a well-founded conviction
that her friend's last remark was not in the least to be construed as a
side-thrust at herself. The truth is that the moment she had crossed the
threshold she received an impression that Mr. Touchett's death had had
subtle consequences and that these consequences had been profitable to
a little circle of persons among whom she was not numbered. Of course
it was an event which would naturally have consequences; her imagination
had more than once rested upon this fact during her stay at Gardencourt.
But it had been one thing to foresee such a matter mentally and another
to stand among its massive records. The idea of a distribution of
property--she would almost have said of spoils--just now pressed upon
her senses and irritated her with a sense of exclusion. I am far from
wishing to picture her as one of the hungry mouths or envious hearts of
the general herd, but we have already learned of her having desires
that had never been satisfied. If she had been questioned, she would
of course have admitted--with a fine proud smile--that she had not the
faintest claim to a share in Mr. Touchett's relics. "There was never
anything in the world between us," she would have said. "There was never
that, poor man!"--with a fillip of her thumb and her third finger. I
hasten to add, moreover, that if she couldn't at the present moment keep
from quite perversely yearning she was careful not to betray herself.
She had after all as much sympathy for Mrs. Touchett's gains as for her
losses.

"He has left me this house," the newly-made widow said; "but of course
I shall not live in it; I've a much better one in Florence. The will
was opened only three days since, but I've already offered the house for
sale. I've also a share in the bank; but I don't yet understand if I'm
obliged to leave it there. If not I shall certainly take it out. Ralph,
of course, has Gardencourt; but I'm not sure that he'll have means to
keep up the place. He's naturally left very well off, but his father has
given away an immense deal of money; there are bequests to a string of
third cousins in Vermont. Ralph, however, is very fond of Gardencourt
and would be quite capable of living there--in summer--with a
maid-of-all-work and a gardener's boy. There's one remarkable clause
in my husband's will," Mrs. Touchett added. "He has left my niece a
fortune."

"A fortune!" Madame Merle softly repeated.

"Isabel steps into something like seventy thousand pounds." Madame
Merle's hands were clasped in her lap; at this she raised them, still
clasped, and held them a moment against her bosom while her eyes, a
little dilated, fixed themselves on those of her friend. "Ah," she
cried, "the clever creature!"

Mrs. Touchett gave her a quick look. "What do you mean by that?"

For an instant Madame Merle's colour rose and she dropped her eyes. "It
certainly is clever to achieve such results--without an effort!"

"There assuredly was no effort. Don't call it an achievement."

Madame Merle was seldom guilty of the awkwardness of retracting what she
had said; her wisdom was shown rather in maintaining it and placing it
in a favourable light. "My dear friend, Isabel would certainly not
have had seventy thousand pounds left her if she had not been the most
charming girl in the world. Her charm includes great cleverness."

"She never dreamed, I'm sure, of my husband's doing anything for her;
and I never dreamed of it either, for he never spoke to me of his
intention," Mrs. Touchett said. "She had no claim upon him whatever; it
was no great recommendation to him that she was my niece. Whatever she
achieved she achieved unconsciously."

"Ah," rejoined Madame Merle, "those are the greatest strokes!" Mrs.
Touchett reserved her opinion. "The girl's fortunate; I don't deny that.
But for the present she's simply stupefied."

"Do you mean that she doesn't know what to do with the money?"

"That, I think, she has hardly considered. She doesn't know what to
think about the matter at all. It has been as if a big gun were suddenly
fired off behind her; she's feeling herself to see if she be hurt. It's
but three days since she received a visit from the principal executor,
who came in person, very gallantly, to notify her. He told me afterwards
that when he had made his little speech she suddenly burst into tears.
The money's to remain in the affairs of the bank, and she's to draw the
interest."

Madame Merle shook her head with a wise and now quite benignant smile.
"How very delicious! After she has done that two or three times she'll
get used to it." Then after a silence, "What does your son think of it?"
she abruptly asked.

"He left England before the will was read--used up by his fatigue and
anxiety and hurrying off to the south. He's on his way to the Riviera
and I've not yet heard from him. But it's not likely he'll ever object
to anything done by his father."

"Didn't you say his own share had been cut down?"

"Only at his wish. I know that he urged his father to do something for
the people in America. He's not in the least addicted to looking after
number one."

"It depends upon whom he regards as number one!" said Madame Merle. And
she remained thoughtful a moment, her eyes bent on the floor.

"Am I not to see your happy niece?" she asked at last as she raised
them.

"You may see her; but you'll not be struck with her being happy. She
has looked as solemn, these three days, as a Cimabue Madonna!" And Mrs.
Touchett rang for a servant.

Isabel came in shortly after the footman had been sent to call her; and
Madame Merle thought, as she appeared, that Mrs. Touchett's comparison
had its force. The girl was pale and grave--an effect not mitigated by
her deeper mourning; but the smile of her brightest moments came into
her face as she saw Madame Merle, who went forward, laid her hand on our
heroine's shoulder and, after looking at her a moment, kissed her as if
she were returning the kiss she had received from her at Gardencourt.
This was the only allusion the visitor, in her great good taste, made
for the present to her young friend's inheritance.

Mrs. Touchett had no purpose of awaiting in London the sale of her
house. After selecting from among its furniture the objects she wished
to transport to her other abode, she left the rest of its contents to be
disposed of by the auctioneer and took her departure for the Continent.
She was of course accompanied on this journey by her niece, who now had
plenty of leisure to measure and weigh and otherwise handle the windfall
on which Madame Merle had covertly congratulated her. Isabel thought
very often of the fact of her accession of means, looking at it in a
dozen different lights; but we shall not now attempt to follow her train
of thought or to explain exactly why her new consciousness was at first
oppressive. This failure to rise to immediate joy was indeed but brief;
the girl presently made up her mind that to be rich was a virtue because
it was to be able to do, and that to do could only be sweet. It was
the graceful contrary of the stupid side of weakness--especially the
feminine variety. To be weak was, for a delicate young person, rather
graceful, but, after all, as Isabel said to herself, there was a larger
grace than that. Just now, it is true, there was not much to do--once
she had sent off a cheque to Lily and another to poor Edith; but she was
thankful for the quiet months which her mourning robes and her aunt's
fresh widowhood compelled them to spend together. The acquisition of
power made her serious; she scrutinised her power with a kind of tender
ferocity, but was not eager to exercise it. She began to do so during
a stay of some weeks which she eventually made with her aunt in Paris,
though in ways that will inevitably present themselves as trivial. They
were the ways most naturally imposed in a city in which the shops are
the admiration of the world, and that were prescribed unreservedly by
the guidance of Mrs. Touchett, who took a rigidly practical view of the
transformation of her niece from a poor girl to a rich one. "Now that
you're a young woman of fortune you must know how to play the part--I
mean to play it well," she said to Isabel once for all; and she added
that the girl's first duty was to have everything handsome. "You don't
know how to take care of your things, but you must learn," she went on;
this was Isabel's second duty. Isabel submitted, but for the present
her imagination was not kindled; she longed for opportunities, but these
were not the opportunities she meant.

Mrs. Touchett rarely changed her plans, and, having intended before her
husband's death to spend a part of the winter in Paris, saw no reason to
deprive herself--still less to deprive her companion--of this advantage.
Though they would live in great retirement she might still present
her niece, informally, to the little circle of her fellow countrymen
dwelling upon the skirts of the Champs Elysees. With many of these
amiable colonists Mrs. Touchett was intimate; she shared their
expatriation, their convictions, their pastimes, their ennui. Isabel
saw them arrive with a good deal of assiduity at her aunt's hotel, and
pronounced on them with a trenchancy doubtless to be accounted for by
the temporary exaltation of her sense of human duty. She made up her
mind that their lives were, though luxurious, inane, and incurred some
disfavour by expressing this view on bright Sunday afternoons, when the
American absentees were engaged in calling on each other. Though her
listeners passed for people kept exemplarily genial by their cooks and
dressmakers, two or three of them thought her cleverness, which was
generally admitted, inferior to that of the new theatrical pieces. "You
all live here this way, but what does it lead to?" she was pleased to
ask. "It doesn't seem to lead to anything, and I should think you'd get
very tired of it."

Mrs. Touchett thought the question worthy of Henrietta Stackpole. The
two ladies had found Henrietta in Paris, and Isabel constantly saw her;
so that Mrs. Touchett had some reason for saying to herself that if her
niece were not clever enough to originate almost anything, she might be
suspected of having borrowed that style of remark from her journalistic
friend. The first occasion on which Isabel had spoken was that of
a visit paid by the two ladies to Mrs. Luce, an old friend of Mrs.
Touchett's and the only person in Paris she now went to see. Mrs. Luce
had been living in Paris since the days of Louis Philippe; she used to
say jocosely that she was one of the generation of 1830--a joke of
which the point was not always taken. When it failed Mrs. Luce used to
explain--"Oh yes, I'm one of the romantics;" her French had never
become quite perfect. She was always at home on Sunday afternoons and
surrounded by sympathetic compatriots, usually the same. In fact she
was at home at all times, and reproduced with wondrous truth in her
well-cushioned little corner of the brilliant city, the domestic tone of
her native Baltimore. This reduced Mr. Luce, her worthy husband, a tall,
lean, grizzled, well-brushed gentleman who wore a gold eye-glass and
carried his hat a little too much on the back of his head, to mere
platonic praise of the "distractions" of Paris--they were his great
word--since you would never have guessed from what cares he escaped to
them. One of them was that he went every day to the American banker's,
where he found a post-office that was almost as sociable and colloquial
an institution as in an American country town. He passed an hour (in
fine weather) in a chair in the Champs Elysees, and he dined uncommonly
well at his own table, seated above a waxed floor which it was Mrs.
Luce's happiness to believe had a finer polish than any other in the
French capital. Occasionally he dined with a friend or two at the Cafe
Anglais, where his talent for ordering a dinner was a source of felicity
to his companions and an object of admiration even to the headwaiter
of the establishment. These were his only known pastimes, but they had
beguiled his hours for upwards of half a century, and they doubtless
justified his frequent declaration that there was no place like Paris.
In no other place, on these terms, could Mr. Luce flatter himself that
he was enjoying life. There was nothing like Paris, but it must be
confessed that Mr. Luce thought less highly of this scene of his
dissipations than in earlier days. In the list of his resources his
political reflections should not be omitted, for they were doubtless the
animating principle of many hours that superficially seemed vacant.
Like many of his fellow colonists Mr. Luce was a high--or rather a
deep--conservative, and gave no countenance to the government lately
established in France. He had no faith in its duration and would assure
you from year to year that its end was close at hand. "They want to be
kept down, sir, to be kept down; nothing but the strong hand--the iron
heel--will do for them," he would frequently say of the French people;
and his ideal of a fine showy clever rule was that of the superseded
Empire. "Paris is much less attractive than in the days of the Emperor;
HE knew how to make a city pleasant," Mr. Luce had often remarked to
Mrs. Touchett, who was quite of his own way of thinking and wished to
know what one had crossed that odious Atlantic for but to get away from
republics.

"Why, madam, sitting in the Champs Elysees, opposite to the Palace of
Industry, I've seen the court-carriages from the Tuileries pass up and
down as many as seven times a day. I remember one occasion when they
went as high as nine. What do you see now? It's no use talking, the
style's all gone. Napoleon knew what the French people want, and
there'll be a dark cloud over Paris, our Paris, till they get the Empire
back again."

Among Mrs. Luce's visitors on Sunday afternoons was a young man with
whom Isabel had had a good deal of conversation and whom she found
full of valuable knowledge. Mr. Edward Rosier--Ned Rosier as he was
called--was native to New York and had been brought up in Paris, living
there under the eye of his father who, as it happened, had been an early
and intimate friend of the late Mr. Archer. Edward Rosier remembered
Isabel as a little girl; it had been his father who came to the rescue
of the small Archers at the inn at Neufchatel (he was travelling that
way with the boy and had stopped at the hotel by chance), after their
bonne had gone off with the Russian prince and when Mr. Archer's
whereabouts remained for some days a mystery. Isabel remembered
perfectly the neat little male child whose hair smelt of a delicious
cosmetic and who had a bonne all his own, warranted to lose sight of him
under no provocation. Isabel took a walk with the pair beside the lake
and thought little Edward as pretty as an angel--a comparison by no
means conventional in her mind, for she had a very definite conception
of a type of features which she supposed to be angelic and which her
new friend perfectly illustrated. A small pink face surmounted by a blue
velvet bonnet and set off by a stiff embroidered collar had become the
countenance of her childish dreams; and she had firmly believed for some
time afterwards that the heavenly hosts conversed among themselves in
a queer little dialect of French-English, expressing the properest
sentiments, as when Edward told her that he was "defended" by his bonne
to go near the edge of the lake, and that one must always obey to one's
bonne. Ned Rosier's English had improved; at least it exhibited in a
less degree the French variation. His father was dead and his bonne
dismissed, but the young man still conformed to the spirit of their
teaching--he never went to the edge of the lake. There was still
something agreeable to the nostrils about him and something not
offensive to nobler organs. He was a very gentle and gracious youth,
with what are called cultivated tastes--an acquaintance with old china,
with good wine, with the bindings of books, with the Almanach de Gotha,
with the best shops, the best hotels, the hours of railway-trains. He
could order a dinner almost as well as Mr. Luce, and it was probable
that as his experience accumulated he would be a worthy successor to
that gentleman, whose rather grim politics he also advocated in a soft
and innocent voice. He had some charming rooms in Paris, decorated with
old Spanish altar-lace, the envy of his female friends, who declared
that his chimney-piece was better draped than the high shoulders of many
a duchess. He usually, however, spent a part of every winter at Pau, and
had once passed a couple of months in the United States.

He took a great interest in Isabel and remembered perfectly the walk at
Neufchatel, when she would persist in going so near the edge. He seemed
to recognise this same tendency in the subversive enquiry that I quoted
a moment ago, and set himself to answer our heroine's question with
greater urbanity than it perhaps deserved. "What does it lead to, Miss
Archer? Why Paris leads everywhere. You can't go anywhere unless you
come here first. Every one that comes to Europe has got to pass through.
You don't mean it in that sense so much? You mean what good it does you?
Well, how can you penetrate futurity? How can you tell what lies ahead?
If it's a pleasant road I don't care where it leads. I like the road,
Miss Archer; I like the dear old asphalte. You can't get tired of
it--you can't if you try. You think you would, but you wouldn't;
there's always something new and fresh. Take the Hotel Drouot, now;
they sometimes have three and four sales a week. Where can you get such
things as you can here? In spite of all they say I maintain they're
cheaper too, if you know the right places. I know plenty of places,
but I keep them to myself. I'll tell you, if you like, as a particular
favour; only you mustn't tell any one else. Don't you go anywhere
without asking me first; I want you to promise me that. As a general
thing avoid the Boulevards; there's very little to be done on the
Boulevards. Speaking conscientiously--sans blague--I don't believe
any one knows Paris better than I. You and Mrs. Touchett must come and
breakfast with me some day, and I'll show you my things; je ne vous dis
que ca! There has been a great deal of talk about London of late; it's
the fashion to cry up London. But there's nothing in it--you can't
do anything in London. No Louis Quinze--nothing of the First Empire;
nothing but their eternal Queen Anne. It's good for one's bed-room,
Queen Anne--for one's washing-room; but it isn't proper for a salon. Do
I spend my life at the auctioneer's?" Mr. Rosier pursued in answer to
another question of Isabel's. "Oh no; I haven't the means. I wish I
had. You think I'm a mere trifler; I can tell by the expression of your
face--you've got a wonderfully expressive face. I hope you don't mind
my saying that; I mean it as a kind of warning. You think I ought to do
something, and so do I, so long as you leave it vague. But when you
come to the point you see you have to stop. I can't go home and be
a shopkeeper. You think I'm very well fitted? Ah, Miss Archer, you
overrate me. I can buy very well, but I can't sell; you should see when
I sometimes try to get rid of my things. It takes much more ability to
make other people buy than to buy yourself. When I think how clever they
must be, the people who make ME buy! Ah no; I couldn't be a shopkeeper.
I can't be a doctor; it's a repulsive business. I can't be a clergyman;
I haven't got convictions. And then I can't pronounce the names right in
the Bible. They're very difficult, in the Old Testament particularly. I
can't be a lawyer; I don't understand--how do you call it?--the American
procedure. Is there anything else? There's nothing for a gentleman
in America. I should like to be a diplomatist; but American
diplomacy--that's not for gentlemen either. I'm sure if you had seen the
last min--"

Henrietta Stackpole, who was often with her friend when Mr. Rosier,
coming to pay his compliments late in the afternoon, expressed himself
after the fashion I have sketched, usually interrupted the young man at
this point and read him a lecture on the duties of the American citizen.
She thought him most unnatural; he was worse than poor Ralph Touchett.
Henrietta, however, was at this time more than ever addicted to fine
criticism, for her conscience had been freshly alarmed as regards
Isabel. She had not congratulated this young lady on her augmentations
and begged to be excused from doing so.

"If Mr. Touchett had consulted me about leaving you the money," she
frankly asserted, "I'd have said to him 'Never!"

"I see," Isabel had answered. "You think it will prove a curse in
disguise. Perhaps it will."

"Leave it to some one you care less for--that's what I should have
said."

"To yourself for instance?" Isabel suggested jocosely. And then, "Do you
really believe it will ruin me?" she asked in quite another tone.

"I hope it won't ruin you; but it will certainly confirm your dangerous
tendencies."

"Do you mean the love of luxury--of extravagance?"

"No, no," said Henrietta; "I mean your exposure on the moral side. I
approve of luxury; I think we ought to be as elegant as possible. Look
at the luxury of our western cities; I've seen nothing over here to
compare with it. I hope you'll never become grossly sensual; but I'm not
afraid of that. The peril for you is that you live too much in the world
of your own dreams. You're not enough in contact with reality--with
the toiling, striving, suffering, I may even say sinning, world
that surrounds you. You're too fastidious; you've too many graceful
illusions. Your newly-acquired thousands will shut you up more and
more to the society of a few selfish and heartless people who will be
interested in keeping them up."

Isabel's eyes expanded as she gazed at this lurid scene. "What are my
illusions?" she asked. "I try so hard not to have any."

"Well," said Henrietta, "you think you can lead a romantic life, that
you can live by pleasing yourself and pleasing others. You'll find
you're mistaken. Whatever life you lead you must put your soul in it--to
make any sort of success of it; and from the moment you do that it
ceases to be romance, I assure you: it becomes grim reality! And you
can't always please yourself; you must sometimes please other people.
That, I admit, you're very ready to do; but there's another thing that's
still more important--you must often displease others. You must always
be ready for that--you must never shrink from it. That doesn't suit you
at all--you're too fond of admiration, you like to be thought well
of. You think we can escape disagreeable duties by taking romantic
views--that's your great illusion, my dear. But we can't. You must be
prepared on many occasions in life to please no one at all--not even
yourself."

Isabel shook her head sadly; she looked troubled and frightened. "This,
for you, Henrietta," she said, "must be one of those occasions!"

It was certainly true that Miss Stackpole, during her visit to Paris,
which had been professionally more remunerative than her English
sojourn, had not been living in the world of dreams. Mr. Bantling, who
had now returned to England, was her companion for the first four weeks
of her stay; and about Mr. Bantling there was nothing dreamy. Isabel
learned from her friend that the two had led a life of great personal
intimacy and that this had been a peculiar advantage to Henrietta,
owing to the gentleman's remarkable knowledge of Paris. He had
explained everything, shown her everything, been her constant guide and
interpreter. They had breakfasted together, dined together, gone to
the theatre together, supped together, really in a manner quite lived
together. He was a true friend, Henrietta more than once assured our
heroine; and she had never supposed that she could like any Englishman
so well. Isabel could not have told you why, but she found something
that ministered to mirth in the alliance the correspondent of the
Interviewer had struck with Lady Pensil's brother; her amusement
moreover subsisted in face of the fact that she thought it a credit to
each of them. Isabel couldn't rid herself of a suspicion that they were
playing somehow at cross-purposes--that the simplicity of each had
been entrapped. But this simplicity was on either side none the less
honourable. It was as graceful on Henrietta's part to believe that Mr.
Bantling took an interest in the diffusion of lively journalism and in
consolidating the position of lady-correspondents as it was on the
part of his companion to suppose that the cause of the Interviewer--a
periodical of which he never formed a very definite conception--was, if
subtly analysed (a task to which Mr. Bantling felt himself quite equal),
but the cause of Miss Stackpole's need of demonstrative affection. Each
of these groping celibates supplied at any rate a want of which the
other was impatiently conscious. Mr. Bantling, who was of rather a slow
and a discursive habit, relished a prompt, keen, positive woman, who
charmed him by the influence of a shining, challenging eye and a kind of
bandbox freshness, and who kindled a perception of raciness in a mind
to which the usual fare of life seemed unsalted. Henrietta, on the other
hand, enjoyed the society of a gentleman who appeared somehow, in his
way, made, by expensive, roundabout, almost "quaint" processes, for
her use, and whose leisured state, though generally indefensible, was a
decided boon to a breathless mate, and who was furnished with an easy,
traditional, though by no means exhaustive, answer to almost any social
or practical question that could come up. She often found Mr. Bantling's
answers very convenient, and in the press of catching the American post
would largely and showily address them to publicity. It was to be feared
that she was indeed drifting toward those abysses of sophistication as
to which Isabel, wishing for a good-humoured retort, had warned her.
There might be danger in store for Isabel; but it was scarcely to be
hoped that Miss Stackpole, on her side, would find permanent rest in any
adoption of the views of a class pledged to all the old abuses. Isabel
continued to warn her good-humouredly; Lady Pensil's obliging brother
was sometimes, on our heroine's lips, an object of irreverent and
facetious allusion. Nothing, however, could exceed Henrietta's
amiability on this point; she used to abound in the sense of Isabel's
irony and to enumerate with elation the hours she had spent with this
perfect man of the world--a term that had ceased to make with her, as
previously, for opprobrium. Then, a few moments later, she would forget
that they had been talking jocosely and would mention with impulsive
earnestness some expedition she had enjoyed in his company. She would
say: "Oh, I know all about Versailles; I went there with Mr. Bantling. I
was bound to see it thoroughly--I warned him when we went out there that
I was thorough: so we spent three days at the hotel and wandered all
over the place. It was lovely weather--a kind of Indian summer, only not
so good. We just lived in that park. Oh yes; you can't tell me anything
about Versailles." Henrietta appeared to have made arrangements to meet
her gallant friend during the spring in Italy.



Mrs. Touchett, before arriving in Paris, had fixed the day for her
departure and by the middle of February had begun to travel southward.
She interrupted her journey to pay a visit to her son, who at San Remo,
on the Italian shore of the Mediterranean, had been spending a dull,
bright winter beneath a slow-moving white umbrella. Isabel went with her
aunt as a matter of course, though Mrs. Touchett, with homely, customary
logic, had laid before her a pair of alternatives.

"Now, of course, you're completely your own mistress and are as free as
the bird on the bough. I don't mean you were not so before, but you're
at present on a different footing--property erects a kind of barrier.
You can do a great many things if you're rich which would be severely
criticised if you were poor. You can go and come, you can travel alone,
you can have your own establishment: I mean of course if you'll take
a companion--some decayed gentlewoman, with a darned cashmere and dyed
hair, who paints on velvet. You don't think you'd like that? Of course
you can do as you please; I only want you to understand how much you're
at liberty. You might take Miss Stackpole as your dame de compagnie;
she'd keep people off very well. I think, however, that it's a great
deal better you should remain with me, in spite of there being no
obligation. It's better for several reasons, quite apart from your
liking it. I shouldn't think you'd like it, but I recommend you to make
the sacrifice. Of course whatever novelty there may have been at first
in my society has quite passed away, and you see me as I am--a dull,
obstinate, narrow-minded old woman."

"I don't think you're at all dull," Isabel had replied to this.

"But you do think I'm obstinate and narrow-minded? I told you so!" said
Mrs. Touchett with much elation at being justified.

Isabel remained for the present with her aunt, because, in spite of
eccentric impulses, she had a great regard for what was usually deemed
decent, and a young gentlewoman without visible relations had always
struck her as a flower without foliage. It was true that Mrs. Touchett's
conversation had never again appeared so brilliant as that first
afternoon in Albany, when she sat in her damp waterproof and sketched
the opportunities that Europe would offer to a young person of taste.
This, however, was in a great measure the girl's own fault; she had
got a glimpse of her aunt's experience, and her imagination constantly
anticipated the judgements and emotions of a woman who had very little
of the same faculty. Apart from this, Mrs. Touchett had a great merit;
she was as honest as a pair of compasses. There was a comfort in her
stiffness and firmness; you knew exactly where to find her and were
never liable to chance encounters and concussions. On her own ground
she was perfectly present, but was never over-inquisitive as regards
the territory of her neighbour. Isabel came at last to have a kind of
undemonstrable pity for her; there seemed something so dreary in
the condition of a person whose nature had, as it were, so little
surface--offered so limited a face to the accretions of human contact.
Nothing tender, nothing sympathetic, had ever had a chance to fasten
upon it--no wind-sown blossom, no familiar softening moss. Her offered,
her passive extent, in other words, was about that of a knife-edge.
Isabel had reason to believe none the less that as she advanced in life
she made more of those concessions to the sense of something obscurely
distinct from convenience--more of them than she independently exacted.
She was learning to sacrifice consistency to considerations of that
inferior order for which the excuse must be found in the particular
case. It was not to the credit of her absolute rectitude that she should
have gone the longest way round to Florence in order to spend a few
weeks with her invalid son; since in former years it had been one of her
most definite convictions that when Ralph wished to see her he was at
liberty to remember that Palazzo Crescentini contained a large apartment
known as the quarter of the signorino.

"I want to ask you something," Isabel said to this young man the day
after her arrival at San Remo--"something I've thought more than once
of asking you by letter, but that I've hesitated on the whole to write
about. Face to face, nevertheless, my question seems easy enough. Did
you know your father intended to leave me so much money?"

Ralph stretched his legs a little further than usual and gazed a little
more fixedly at the Mediterranean.

"What does it matter, my dear Isabel, whether I knew? My father was very
obstinate."

"So," said the girl, "you did know."

"Yes; he told me. We even talked it over a little." "What did he do it
for?" asked Isabel abruptly. "Why, as a kind of compliment."

"A compliment on what?"

"On your so beautifully existing."

"He liked me too much," she presently declared.

"That's a way we all have."

"If I believed that I should be very unhappy. Fortunately I don't
believe it. I want to be treated with justice; I want nothing but that."

"Very good. But you must remember that justice to a lovely being is
after all a florid sort of sentiment."

"I'm not a lovely being. How can you say that, at the very moment when
I'm asking such odious questions? I must seem to you delicate!"

"You seem to me troubled," said Ralph.

"I am troubled."

"About what?"

For a moment she answered nothing; then she broke out: "Do you think it
good for me suddenly to be made so rich? Henrietta doesn't."

"Oh, hang Henrietta!" said Ralph coarsely, "If you ask me I'm delighted
at it."

"Is that why your father did it--for your amusement?"

"I differ with Miss Stackpole," Ralph went on more gravely. "I think it
very good for you to have means."

Isabel looked at him with serious eyes. "I wonder whether you know
what's good for me--or whether you care."

"If I know depend upon it I care. Shall I tell you what it is? Not to
torment yourself."

"Not to torment you, I suppose you mean."

"You can't do that; I'm proof. Take things more easily. Don't ask
yourself so much whether this or that is good for you. Don't question
your conscience so much--it will get out of tune like a strummed
piano. Keep it for great occasions. Don't try so much to form your
character--it's like trying to pull open a tight, tender young rose.
Live as you like best, and your character will take care of itself. Most
things are good for you; the exceptions are very rare, and a comfortable
income's not one of them." Ralph paused, smiling; Isabel had listened
quickly. "You've too much power of thought--above all too much
conscience," Ralph added. "It's out of all reason, the number of things
you think wrong. Put back your watch. Diet your fever. Spread your
wings; rise above the ground. It's never wrong to do that."

She had listened eagerly, as I say; and it was her nature to understand
quickly. "I wonder if you appreciate what you say. If you do, you take a
great responsibility."

"You frighten me a little, but I think I'm right," said Ralph,
persisting in cheer.

"All the same what you say is very true," Isabel pursued. "You could say
nothing more true. I'm absorbed in myself--I look at life too much as
a doctor's prescription. Why indeed should we perpetually be thinking
whether things are good for us, as if we were patients lying in a
hospital? Why should I be so afraid of not doing right? As if it
mattered to the world whether I do right or wrong!"

"You're a capital person to advise," said Ralph; "you take the wind out
of my sails!"

She looked at him as if she had not heard him--though she was following
out the train of reflexion which he himself had kindled. "I try to
care more about the world than about myself--but I always come back to
myself. It's because I'm afraid." She stopped; her voice had trembled
a little. "Yes, I'm afraid; I can't tell you. A large fortune means
freedom, and I'm afraid of that. It's such a fine thing, and one should
make such a good use of it. If one shouldn't one would be ashamed. And
one must keep thinking; it's a constant effort. I'm not sure it's not a
greater happiness to be powerless."

"For weak people I've no doubt it's a greater happiness. For weak people
the effort not to be contemptible must be great."

"And how do you know I'm not weak?" Isabel asked.

"Ah," Ralph answered with a flush that the girl noticed, "if you are I'm
awfully sold!"

The charm of the Mediterranean coast only deepened for our heroine
on acquaintance, for it was the threshold of Italy, the gate of
admirations. Italy, as yet imperfectly seen and felt, stretched before
her as a land of promise, a land in which a love of the beautiful might
be comforted by endless knowledge. Whenever she strolled upon the shore
with her cousin--and she was the companion of his daily walk--she looked
across the sea, with longing eyes, to where she knew that Genoa lay. She
was glad to pause, however, on the edge of this larger adventure; there
was such a thrill even in the preliminary hovering. It affected her
moreover as a peaceful interlude, as a hush of the drum and fife in a
career which she had little warrant as yet for regarding as agitated,
but which nevertheless she was constantly picturing to herself by
the light of her hopes, her fears, her fancies, her ambitions, her
predilections, and which reflected these subjective accidents in
a manner sufficiently dramatic. Madame Merle had predicted to Mrs.
Touchett that after their young friend had put her hand into her pocket
half a dozen times she would be reconciled to the idea that it had been
filled by a munificent uncle; and the event justified, as it had so
often justified before, that lady's perspicacity. Ralph Touchett had
praised his cousin for being morally inflammable, that is for being
quick to take a hint that was meant as good advice. His advice had
perhaps helped the matter; she had at any rate before leaving San Remo
grown used to feeling rich. The consciousness in question found a
proper place in rather a dense little group of ideas that she had about
herself, and often it was by no means the least agreeable. It took
perpetually for granted a thousand good intentions. She lost herself in
a maze of visions; the fine things to be done by a rich, independent,
generous girl who took a large human view of occasions and obligations
were sublime in the mass. Her fortune therefore became to her mind a
part of her better self; it gave her importance, gave her even, to her
own imagination, a certain ideal beauty. What it did for her in the
imagination of others is another affair, and on this point we must also
touch in time. The visions I have just spoken of were mixed with other
debates. Isabel liked better to think of the future than of the past;
but at times, as she listened to the murmur of the Mediterranean waves,
her glance took a backward flight. It rested upon two figures which, in
spite of increasing distance, were still sufficiently salient; they were
recognisable without difficulty as those of Caspar Goodwood and Lord
Warburton. It was strange how quickly these images of energy had fallen
into the background of our young lady's life. It was in her disposition
at all times to lose faith in the reality of absent things; she could
summon back her faith, in case of need, with an effort, but the effort
was often painful even when the reality had been pleasant. The past was
apt to look dead and its revival rather to show the livid light of a
judgement-day. The girl moreover was not prone to take for granted that
she herself lived in the mind of others--she had not the fatuity to
believe she left indelible traces. She was capable of being wounded by
the discovery that she had been forgotten; but of all liberties the one
she herself found sweetest was the liberty to forget. She had not given
her last shilling, sentimentally speaking, either to Caspar Goodwood or
to Lord Warburton, and yet couldn't but feel them appreciably in debt
to her. She had of course reminded herself that she was to hear from Mr.
Goodwood again; but this was not to be for another year and a half, and
in that time a great many things might happen. She had indeed failed to
say to herself that her American suitor might find some other girl more
comfortable to woo; because, though it was certain many other girls
would prove so, she had not the smallest belief that this merit
would attract him. But she reflected that she herself might know the
humiliation of change, might really, for that matter, come to the end of
the things that were not Caspar (even though there appeared so many of
them), and find rest in those very elements of his presence which struck
her now as impediments to the finer respiration. It was conceivable
that these impediments should some day prove a sort of blessing
in disguise--a clear and quiet harbour enclosed by a brave granite
breakwater. But that day could only come in its order, and she couldn't
wait for it with folded hands. That Lord Warburton should continue
to cherish her image seemed to her more than a noble humility or an
enlightened pride ought to wish to reckon with. She had so definitely
undertaken to preserve no record of what had passed between them that a
corresponding effort on his own part would be eminently just. This
was not, as it may seem, merely a theory tinged with sarcasm. Isabel
candidly believed that his lordship would, in the usual phrase, get over
his disappointment. He had been deeply affected--this she believed, and
she was still capable of deriving pleasure from the belief; but it
was absurd that a man both so intelligent and so honourably dealt with
should cultivate a scar out of proportion to any wound. Englishmen
liked moreover to be comfortable, said Isabel, and there could be
little comfort for Lord Warburton, in the long run, in brooding over a
self-sufficient American girl who had been but a casual acquaintance.
She flattered herself that, should she hear from one day to another that
he had married some young woman of his own country who had done more
to deserve him, she should receive the news without a pang even of
surprise. It would have proved that he believed she was firm--which was
what she wished to seem to him. That alone was grateful to her pride.


