
On one of the first days of May, some six months after old Mr.
Touchett's death, a small group that might have been described by a
painter as composing well was gathered in one of the many rooms of an
ancient villa crowning an olive-muffled hill outside of the Roman gate
of Florence. The villa was a long, rather blank-looking structure, with
the far-projecting roof which Tuscany loves and which, on the hills that
encircle Florence, when considered from a distance, makes so harmonious
a rectangle with the straight, dark, definite cypresses that usually
rise in groups of three or four beside it. The house had a front upon
a little grassy, empty, rural piazza which occupied a part of the
hill-top; and this front, pierced with a few windows in irregular
relations and furnished with a stone bench lengthily adjusted to the
base of the structure and useful as a lounging-place to one or two
persons wearing more or less of that air of undervalued merit which in
Italy, for some reason or other, always gracefully invests any one who
confidently assumes a perfectly passive attitude--this antique,
solid, weather-worn, yet imposing front had a somewhat incommunicative
character. It was the mask, not the face of the house. It had heavy
lids, but no eyes; the house in reality looked another way--looked off
behind, into splendid openness and the range of the afternoon light.
In that quarter the villa overhung the slope of its hill and the long
valley of the Arno, hazy with Italian colour. It had a narrow garden, in
the manner of a terrace, productive chiefly of tangles of wild roses
and other old stone benches, mossy and sun-warmed. The parapet of the
terrace was just the height to lean upon, and beneath it the ground
declined into the vagueness of olive-crops and vineyards. It is not,
however, with the outside of the place that we are concerned; on this
bright morning of ripened spring its tenants had reason to prefer the
shady side of the wall. The windows of the ground-floor, as you saw
them from the piazza, were, in their noble proportions, extremely
architectural; but their function seemed less to offer communication
with the world than to defy the world to look in. They were massively
cross-barred, and placed at such a height that curiosity, even on
tiptoe, expired before it reached them. In an apartment lighted by a
row of three of these jealous apertures--one of the several distinct
apartments into which the villa was divided and which were mainly
occupied by foreigners of random race long resident in Florence--a
gentleman was seated in company with a young girl and two good sisters
from a religious house. The room was, however, less sombre than our
indications may have represented, for it had a wide, high door, which
now stood open into the tangled garden behind; and the tall iron
lattices admitted on occasion more than enough of the Italian
sunshine. It was moreover a seat of ease, indeed of luxury, telling
of arrangements subtly studied and refinements frankly proclaimed, and
containing a variety of those faded hangings of damask and tapestry,
those chests and cabinets of carved and time-polished oak, those angular
specimens of pictorial art in frames as pedantically primitive, those
perverse-looking relics of medieval brass and pottery, of which Italy
has long been the not quite exhausted storehouse. These things kept
terms with articles of modern furniture in which large allowance had
been made for a lounging generation; it was to be noticed that all the
chairs were deep and well padded and that much space was occupied by a
writing-table of which the ingenious perfection bore the stamp of London
and the nineteenth century. There were books in profusion and magazines
and newspapers, and a few small, odd, elaborate pictures, chiefly in
water-colour. One of these productions stood on a drawing-room easel
before which, at the moment we begin to be concerned with her, the young
girl I have mentioned had placed herself. She was looking at the picture
in silence.

Silence--absolute silence--had not fallen upon her companions; but their
talk had an appearance of embarrassed continuity. The two good sisters
had not settled themselves in their respective chairs; their attitude
expressed a final reserve and their faces showed the glaze of
prudence. They were plain, ample, mild-featured women, with a kind of
business-like modesty to which the impersonal aspect of their stiffened
linen and of the serge that draped them as if nailed on frames gave an
advantage. One of them, a person of a certain age, in spectacles, with a
fresh complexion and a full cheek, had a more discriminating manner
than her colleague, as well as the responsibility of their errand, which
apparently related to the young girl. This object of interest wore her
hat--an ornament of extreme simplicity and not at variance with her
plain muslin gown, too short for her years, though it must already
have been "let out." The gentleman who might have been supposed to be
entertaining the two nuns was perhaps conscious of the difficulties of
his function, it being in its way as arduous to converse with the very
meek as with the very mighty. At the same time he was clearly much
occupied with their quiet charge, and while she turned her back to
him his eyes rested gravely on her slim, small figure. He was a man of
forty, with a high but well-shaped head, on which the hair, still dense,
but prematurely grizzled, had been cropped close. He had a fine, narrow,
extremely modelled and composed face, of which the only fault was just
this effect of its running a trifle too much to points; an appearance to
which the shape of the beard contributed not a little. This beard, cut
in the manner of the portraits of the sixteenth century and surmounted
by a fair moustache, of which the ends had a romantic upward flourish,
gave its wearer a foreign, traditionary look and suggested that he was a
gentleman who studied style. His conscious, curious eyes, however, eyes
at once vague and penetrating, intelligent and hard, expressive of
the observer as well as of the dreamer, would have assured you that
he studied it only within well-chosen limits, and that in so far as he
sought it he found it. You would have been much at a loss to determine
his original clime and country; he had none of the superficial signs
that usually render the answer to this question an insipidly easy one.
If he had English blood in his veins it had probably received some
French or Italian commixture; but he suggested, fine gold coin as he
was, no stamp nor emblem of the common mintage that provides for general
circulation; he was the elegant complicated medal struck off for a
special occasion. He had a light, lean, rather languid-looking figure,
and was apparently neither tall nor short. He was dressed as a man
dresses who takes little other trouble about it than to have no vulgar
things.

"Well, my dear, what do you think of it?" he asked of the young girl. He
used the Italian tongue, and used it with perfect ease; but this would
not have convinced you he was Italian.

The child turned her head earnestly to one side and the other. "It's
very pretty, papa. Did you make it yourself?"

"Certainly I made it. Don't you think I'm clever?"

"Yes, papa, very clever; I also have learned to make pictures." And
she turned round and showed a small, fair face painted with a fixed and
intensely sweet smile.

"You should have brought me a specimen of your powers."

"I've brought a great many; they're in my trunk."

"She draws very--very carefully," the elder of the nuns remarked,
speaking in French.

"I'm glad to hear it. Is it you who have instructed her?"

"Happily no," said the good sister, blushing a little. "Ce n'est pas ma
partie. I teach nothing; I leave that to those who are wiser. We've an
excellent drawing-master, Mr.--Mr.--what is his name?" she asked of her
companion.

Her companion looked about at the carpet. "It's a German name," she said
in Italian, as if it needed to be translated.

"Yes," the other went on, "he's a German, and we've had him many years."

The young girl, who was not heeding the conversation, had wandered away
to the open door of the large room and stood looking into the garden.
"And you, my sister, are French," said the gentleman.

"Yes, sir," the visitor gently replied. "I speak to the pupils in my
own tongue. I know no other. But we have sisters of other
countries--English, German, Irish. They all speak their proper
language."

The gentleman gave a smile. "Has my daughter been under the care of one
of the Irish ladies?" And then, as he saw that his visitors suspected
a joke, though failing to understand it, "You're very complete," he
instantly added.

"Oh, yes, we're complete. We've everything, and everything's of the
best."

"We have gymnastics," the Italian sister ventured to remark. "But not
dangerous."

"I hope not. Is that YOUR branch?" A question which provoked much candid
hilarity on the part of the two ladies; on the subsidence of which their
entertainer, glancing at his daughter, remarked that she had grown.

"Yes, but I think she has finished. She'll remain--not big," said the
French sister.

"I'm not sorry. I prefer women like books--very good and not too long.
But I know," the gentleman said, "no particular reason why my child
should be short."

The nun gave a temperate shrug, as if to intimate that such things might
be beyond our knowledge. "She's in very good health; that's the best
thing."

"Yes, she looks sound." And the young girl's father watched her a
moment. "What do you see in the garden?" he asked in French.

"I see many flowers," she replied in a sweet, small voice and with an
accent as good as his own.

"Yes, but not many good ones. However, such as they are, go out and
gather some for ces dames."

The child turned to him with her smile heightened by pleasure. "May I,
truly?"

"Ah, when I tell you," said her father.

The girl glanced at the elder of the nuns. "May I, truly, ma mere?"

"Obey monsieur your father, my child," said the sister, blushing again.

The child, satisfied with this authorisation, descended from the
threshold and was presently lost to sight. "You don't spoil them," said
her father gaily.

"For everything they must ask leave. That's our system. Leave is freely
granted, but they must ask it."

"Oh, I don't quarrel with your system; I've no doubt it's excellent. I
sent you my daughter to see what you'd make of her. I had faith."

"One must have faith," the sister blandly rejoined, gazing through her
spectacles.

"Well, has my faith been rewarded? What have you made of her?"

The sister dropped her eyes a moment. "A good Christian, monsieur."

Her host dropped his eyes as well; but it was probable that the movement
had in each case a different spring. "Yes, and what else?"

He watched the lady from the convent, probably thinking she would say
that a good Christian was everything; but for all her simplicity she
was not so crude as that. "A charming young lady--a real little woman--a
daughter in whom you will have nothing but contentment."

"She seems to me very gentille," said the father. "She's really pretty."

"She's perfect. She has no faults."

"She never had any as a child, and I'm glad you have given her none."

"We love her too much," said the spectacled sister with dignity.

"And as for faults, how can we give what we have not? Le couvent n'est
pas comme le monde, monsieur. She's our daughter, as you may say. We've
had her since she was so small."

"Of all those we shall lose this year she's the one we shall miss most,"
the younger woman murmured deferentially.

"Ah, yes, we shall talk long of her," said the other. "We shall hold her
up to the new ones." And at this the good sister appeared to find her
spectacles dim; while her companion, after fumbling a moment, presently
drew forth a pocket-handkerchief of durable texture.

"It's not certain you'll lose her; nothing's settled yet," their host
rejoined quickly; not as if to anticipate their tears, but in the tone
of a man saying what was most agreeable to himself. "We should be very
happy to believe that. Fifteen is very young to leave us."

"Oh," exclaimed the gentleman with more vivacity than he had yet used,
"it is not I who wish to take her away. I wish you could keep her
always!"

"Ah, monsieur," said the elder sister, smiling and getting up, "good as
she is, she's made for the world. Le monde y gagnera."

"If all the good people were hidden away in convents how would the world
get on?" her companion softly enquired, rising also.

This was a question of a wider bearing than the good woman apparently
supposed; and the lady in spectacles took a harmonising view by saying
comfortably: "Fortunately there are good people everywhere."

"If you're going there will be two less here," her host remarked
gallantly.

For this extravagant sally his simple visitors had no answer, and they
simply looked at each other in decent deprecation; but their confusion
was speedily covered by the return of the young girl with two large
bunches of roses--one of them all white, the other red.

"I give you your choice, mamman Catherine," said the child. "It's only
the colour that's different, mamman Justine; there are just as many
roses in one bunch as in the other."

The two sisters turned to each other, smiling and hesitating, with
"Which will you take?" and "No, it's for you to choose."

"I'll take the red, thank you," said Catherine in the spectacles. "I'm
so red myself. They'll comfort us on our way back to Rome."

"Ah, they won't last," cried the young girl. "I wish I could give you
something that would last!"

"You've given us a good memory of yourself, my daughter. That will
last!"

"I wish nuns could wear pretty things. I would give you my blue beads,"
the child went on.

"And do you go back to Rome to-night?" her father enquired.

"Yes, we take the train again. We've so much to do la-bas."

"Are you not tired?"

"We are never tired."

"Ah, my sister, sometimes," murmured the junior votaress.

"Not to-day, at any rate. We have rested too well here. Que Dieu vous
garde, ma fine."

Their host, while they exchanged kisses with his daughter, went forward
to open the door through which they were to pass; but as he did so he
gave a slight exclamation, and stood looking beyond. The door opened
into a vaulted ante-chamber, as high as a chapel and paved with red
tiles; and into this antechamber a lady had just been admitted by a
servant, a lad in shabby livery, who was now ushering her toward the
apartment in which our friends were grouped. The gentleman at the door,
after dropping his exclamation, remained silent; in silence too the lady
advanced. He gave her no further audible greeting and offered her no
hand, but stood aside to let her pass into the saloon. At the threshold
she hesitated. "Is there any one?" she asked.

"Some one you may see."

She went in and found herself confronted with the two nuns and their
pupil, who was coming forward, between them, with a hand in the arm of
each. At the sight of the new visitor they all paused, and the lady, who
had also stopped, stood looking at them. The young girl gave a little
soft cry: "Ah, Madame Merle!"

The visitor had been slightly startled, but her manner the next instant
was none the less gracious. "Yes, it's Madame Merle, come to welcome you
home." And she held out two hands to the girl, who immediately came up
to her, presenting her forehead to be kissed. Madame Merle saluted this
portion of her charming little person and then stood smiling at the two
nuns. They acknowledged her smile with a decent obeisance, but permitted
themselves no direct scrutiny of this imposing, brilliant woman, who
seemed to bring in with her something of the radiance of the outer
world. "These ladies have brought my daughter home, and now they return
to the convent," the gentleman explained.

"Ah, you go back to Rome? I've lately come from there. It's very lovely
now," said Madame Merle.

The good sisters, standing with their hands folded into their sleeves,
accepted this statement uncritically; and the master of the house asked
his new visitor how long it was since she had left Rome. "She came to
see me at the convent," said the young girl before the lady addressed
had time to reply.

"I've been more than once, Pansy," Madame Merle declared. "Am I not your
great friend in Rome?"

"I remember the last time best," said Pansy, "because you told me I
should come away."

"Did you tell her that?" the child's father asked.

"I hardly remember. I told her what I thought would please her. I've
been in Florence a week. I hoped you would come to see me."

"I should have done so if I had known you were there. One doesn't know
such things by inspiration--though I suppose one ought. You had better
sit down."

These two speeches were made in a particular tone of voice--a tone
half-lowered and carefully quiet, but as from habit rather than from any
definite need. Madame Merle looked about her, choosing her seat. "You're
going to the door with these women? Let me of course not interrupt the
ceremony. Je vous salue, mesdames," she added, in French, to the nuns,
as if to dismiss them.

"This lady's a great friend of ours; you will have seen her at the
convent," said their entertainer. "We've much faith in her judgement,
and she'll help me to decide whether my daughter shall return to you at
the end of the holidays."

"I hope you'll decide in our favour, madame," the sister in spectacles
ventured to remark.

"That's Mr. Osmond's pleasantry; I decide nothing," said Madame Merle,
but also as in pleasantry. "I believe you've a very good school, but
Miss Osmond's friends must remember that she's very naturally meant for
the world."

"That's what I've told monsieur," sister Catherine answered. "It's
precisely to fit her for the world," she murmured, glancing at Pansy,
who stood, at a little distance, attentive to Madame Merle's elegant
apparel.

"Do you hear that, Pansy? You're very naturally meant for the world,"
said Pansy's father.

The child fixed him an instant with her pure young eyes. "Am I not meant
for you, papa?"

Papa gave a quick, light laugh. "That doesn't prevent it! I'm of the
world, Pansy."

"Kindly permit us to retire," said sister Catherine. "Be good and wise
and happy in any case, my daughter."

"I shall certainly come back and see you," Pansy returned, recommencing
her embraces, which were presently interrupted by Madame Merle.

"Stay with me, dear child," she said, "while your father takes the good
ladies to the door."

Pansy stared, disappointed, yet not protesting. She was evidently
impregnated with the idea of submission, which was due to any one who
took the tone of authority; and she was a passive spectator of the
operation of her fate. "May I not see mamman Catherine get into the
carriage?" she nevertheless asked very gently.

"It would please me better if you'd remain with me," said Madame Merle,
while Mr. Osmond and his companions, who had bowed low again to the
other visitor, passed into the ante-chamber.

"Oh yes, I'll stay," Pansy answered; and she stood near Madame Merle,
surrendering her little hand, which this lady took. She stared out of
the window; her eyes had filled with tears.

"I'm glad they've taught you to obey," said Madame Merle. "That's what
good little girls should do."

"Oh yes, I obey very well," cried Pansy with soft eagerness, almost with
boastfulness, as if she had been speaking of her piano-playing. And then
she gave a faint, just audible sigh.

Madame Merle, holding her hand, drew it across her own fine palm and
looked at it. The gaze was critical, but it found nothing to deprecate;
the child's small hand was delicate and fair. "I hope they always see
that you wear gloves," she said in a moment. "Little girls usually
dislike them."

"I used to dislike them, but I like them now," the child made answer.

"Very good, I'll make you a present of a dozen."

"I thank you very much. What colours will they be?" Pansy demanded with
interest.

Madame Merle meditated. "Useful colours."

"But very pretty?"

"Are you very fond of pretty things?"

"Yes; but--but not too fond," said Pansy with a trace of asceticism.

"Well, they won't be too pretty," Madame Merle returned with a laugh.
She took the child's other hand and drew her nearer; after which,
looking at her a moment, "Shall you miss mother Catherine?" she went on.

"Yes--when I think of her."

"Try then not to think of her. Perhaps some day," added Madame Merle,
"you'll have another mother."

"I don't think that's necessary," Pansy said, repeating her little soft
conciliatory sigh. "I had more than thirty mothers at the convent."

Her father's step sounded again in the antechamber, and Madame Merle got
up, releasing the child. Mr. Osmond came in and closed the door; then,
without looking at Madame Merle, he pushed one or two chairs back into
their places. His visitor waited a moment for him to speak, watching him
as he moved about. Then at last she said: "I hoped you'd have come to
Rome. I thought it possible you'd have wished yourself to fetch Pansy
away."

"That was a natural supposition; but I'm afraid it's not the first time
I've acted in defiance of your calculations."

"Yes," said Madame Merle, "I think you very perverse."

Mr. Osmond busied himself for a moment in the room--there was plenty of
space in it to move about--in the fashion of a man mechanically
seeking pretexts for not giving an attention which may be embarrassing.
Presently, however, he had exhausted his pretexts; there was nothing
left for him--unless he took up a book--but to stand with his hands
behind him looking at Pansy. "Why didn't you come and see the last of
mamman Catherine?" he asked of her abruptly in French.

Pansy hesitated a moment, glancing at Madame Merle. "I asked her to stay
with me," said this lady, who had seated herself again in another place.

"Ah, that was better," Osmond conceded. With which he dropped into a
chair and sat looking at Madame Merle; bent forward a little, his elbows
on the edge of the arms and his hands interlocked.

"She's going to give me some gloves," said Pansy.

"You needn't tell that to every one, my dear," Madame Merle observed.

"You're very kind to her," said Osmond. "She's supposed to have
everything she needs."

"I should think she had had enough of the nuns."

"If we're going to discuss that matter she had better go out of the
room."

"Let her stay," said Madame Merle. "We'll talk of something else."

"If you like I won't listen," Pansy suggested with an appearance of
candour which imposed conviction.

"You may listen, charming child, because you won't understand," her
father replied. The child sat down, deferentially, near the open door,
within sight of the garden, into which she directed her innocent,
wistful eyes; and Mr. Osmond went on irrelevantly, addressing himself to
his other companion. "You're looking particularly well."

"I think I always look the same," said Madame Merle.

"You always ARE the same. You don't vary. You're a wonderful woman."

"Yes, I think I am."

"You sometimes change your mind, however. You told me on your return
from England that you wouldn't leave Rome again for the present."

"I'm pleased that you remember so well what I say. That was my
intention. But I've come to Florence to meet some friends who have
lately arrived and as to whose movements I was at that time uncertain."

"That reason's characteristic. You're always doing something for your
friends."

Madame Merle smiled straight at her host. "It's less characteristic than
your comment upon it which is perfectly insincere. I don't, however,
make a crime of that," she added, "because if you don't believe what
you say there's no reason why you should. I don't ruin myself for my
friends; I don't deserve your praise. I care greatly for myself."

"Exactly; but yourself includes so many other selves--so much of every
one else and of everything. I never knew a person whose life touched so
many other lives."

"What do you call one's life?" asked Madame Merle. "One's appearance,
one's movements, one's engagements, one's society?"

"I call YOUR life your ambitions," said Osmond.

Madame Merle looked a moment at Pansy. "I wonder if she understands
that," she murmured.

"You see she can't stay with us!" And Pansy's father gave rather a
joyless smile. "Go into the garden, mignonne, and pluck a flower or two
for Madame Merle," he went on in French.

"That's just what I wanted to do," Pansy exclaimed, rising with
promptness and noiselessly departing. Her father followed her to the
open door, stood a moment watching her, and then came back, but remained
standing, or rather strolling to and fro, as if to cultivate a sense of
freedom which in another attitude might be wanting.

"My ambitions are principally for you," said Madame Merle, looking up at
him with a certain courage.

"That comes back to what I say. I'm part of your life--I and a thousand
others. You're not selfish--I can't admit that. If you were selfish,
what should I be? What epithet would properly describe me?"

"You're indolent. For me that's your worst fault."

"I'm afraid it's really my best."

"You don't care," said Madame Merle gravely.

"No; I don't think I care much. What sort of a fault do you call that?
My indolence, at any rate, was one of the reasons I didn't go to Rome.
But it was only one of them."

"It's not of importance--to me at least--that you didn't go; though I
should have been glad to see you. I'm glad you're not in Rome now--which
you might be, would probably be, if you had gone there a month ago.
There's something I should like you to do at present in Florence."

"Please remember my indolence," said Osmond.

"I do remember it; but I beg you to forget it. In that way you'll have
both the virtue and the reward. This is not a great labour, and it
may prove a real interest. How long is it since you made a new
acquaintance?"

"I don't think I've made any since I made yours."

"It's time then you should make another. There's a friend of mine I want
you to know."

Mr. Osmond, in his walk, had gone back to the open door again and was
looking at his daughter as she moved about in the intense sunshine.
"What good will it do me?" he asked with a sort of genial crudity.

Madame Merle waited. "It will amuse you." There was nothing crude in
this rejoinder; it had been thoroughly well considered.

"If you say that, you know, I believe it," said Osmond, coming toward
her. "There are some points in which my confidence in you is complete.
I'm perfectly aware, for instance, that you know good society from bad."

"Society is all bad."

"Pardon me. That isn't--the knowledge I impute to you--a common sort
of wisdom. You've gained it in the right way--experimentally; you've
compared an immense number of more or less impossible people with each
other."

"Well, I invite you to profit by my knowledge."

"To profit? Are you very sure that I shall?"

"It's what I hope. It will depend on yourself. If I could only induce
you to make an effort!"

"Ah, there you are! I knew something tiresome was coming. What in the
world--that's likely to turn up here--is worth an effort?"

Madame Merle flushed as with a wounded intention. "Don't be foolish,
Osmond. No one knows better than you what IS worth an effort. Haven't I
seen you in old days?"

"I recognise some things. But they're none of them probable in this poor
life."

"It's the effort that makes them probable," said Madame Merle.

"There's something in that. Who then is your friend?"

"The person I came to Florence to see. She's a niece of Mrs. Touchett,
whom you'll not have forgotten."

"A niece? The word niece suggests youth and ignorance. I see what you're
coming to."

"Yes, she's young--twenty-three years old. She's a great friend of mine.
I met her for the first time in England, several months ago, and we
struck up a grand alliance. I like her immensely, and I do what I don't
do every day--I admire her. You'll do the same."

"Not if I can help it."

"Precisely. But you won't be able to help it."

"Is she beautiful, clever, rich, splendid, universally intelligent and
unprecedentedly virtuous? It's only on those conditions that I care to
make her acquaintance. You know I asked you some time ago never to speak
to me of a creature who shouldn't correspond to that description. I know
plenty of dingy people; I don't want to know any more."

"Miss Archer isn't dingy; she's as bright as the morning. She
corresponds to your description; it's for that I wish you to know her.
She fills all your requirements."

"More or less, of course."

"No; quite literally. She's beautiful, accomplished, generous and, for
an American, well-born. She's also very clever and very amiable, and she
has a handsome fortune."

Mr. Osmond listened to this in silence, appearing to turn it over in his
mind with his eyes on his informant. "What do you want to do with her?"
he asked at last.

"What you see. Put her in your way."

"Isn't she meant for something better than that?"

"I don't pretend to know what people are meant for," said Madame Merle.
"I only know what I can do with them."

"I'm sorry for Miss Archer!" Osmond declared.

Madame Merle got up. "If that's a beginning of interest in her I take
note of it."

The two stood there face to face; she settled her mantilla, looking down
at it as she did so. "You're looking very well," Osmond repeated still
less relevantly than before. "You have some idea. You're never so well
as when you've got an idea; they're always becoming to you."

In the manner and tone of these two persons, on first meeting at any
juncture, and especially when they met in the presence of others, was
something indirect and circumspect, as if they had approached each other
obliquely and addressed each other by implication. The effect of
each appeared to be to intensify to an appreciable degree the
self-consciousness of the other. Madame Merle of course carried off any
embarrassment better than her friend; but even Madame Merle had not
on this occasion the form she would have liked to have--the perfect
self-possession she would have wished to wear for her host. The point to
be made is, however, that at a certain moment the element between them,
whatever it was, always levelled itself and left them more closely
face to face than either ever was with any one else. This was what had
happened now. They stood there knowing each other well and each on the
whole willing to accept the satisfaction of knowing as a compensation
for the inconvenience--whatever it might be--of being known. "I wish
very much you were not so heartless," Madame Merle quietly said. "It has
always been against you, and it will be against you now."

"I'm not so heartless as you think. Every now and then something touches
me--as for instance your saying just now that your ambitions are for
me. I don't understand it; I don't see how or why they should be. But it
touches me, all the same."

"You'll probably understand it even less as time goes on. There are some
things you'll never understand. There's no particular need you should."

"You, after all, are the most remarkable of women," said Osmond. "You
have more in you than almost any one. I don't see why you think Mrs.
Touchett's niece should matter very much to me, when--when--" But he
paused a moment.

"When I myself have mattered so little?"

"That of course is not what I meant to say. When I've known and
appreciated such a woman as you."

"Isabel Archer's better than I," said Madame Merle.

Her companion gave a laugh. "How little you must think of her to say
that!"

"Do you suppose I'm capable of jealousy? Please answer me that."

"With regard to me? No; on the whole I don't."

"Come and see me then, two days hence. I'm staying at Mrs.
Touchett's--Palazzo Crescentini--and the girl will be there."

"Why didn't you ask me that at first simply, without speaking of the
girl?" said Osmond. "You could have had her there at any rate."

Madame Merle looked at him in the manner of a woman whom no question he
could ever put would find unprepared. "Do you wish to know why? Because
I've spoken of you to her."

Osmond frowned and turned away. "I'd rather not know that." Then in
a moment he pointed out the easel supporting the little water-colour
drawing. "Have you seen what's there--my last?"

Madame Merle drew near and considered. "Is it the Venetian Alps--one of
your last year's sketches?"

"Yes--but how you guess everything!"

She looked a moment longer, then turned away. "You know I don't care for
your drawings."

"I know it, yet I'm always surprised at it. They're really so much
better than most people's."

"That may very well be. But as the only thing you do--well, it's so
little. I should have liked you to do so many other things: those were
my ambitions."

"Yes; you've told me many times--things that were impossible."

"Things that were impossible," said Madame Merle. And then in quite a
different tone: "In itself your little picture's very good." She looked
about the room--at the old cabinets, pictures, tapestries, surfaces
of faded silk. "Your rooms at least are perfect. I'm struck with that
afresh whenever I come back; I know none better anywhere. You understand
this sort of thing as nobody anywhere does. You've such adorable taste."

"I'm sick of my adorable taste," said Gilbert Osmond.

"You must nevertheless let Miss Archer come and see it. I've told her
about it."

"I don't object to showing my things--when people are not idiots."

"You do it delightfully. As cicerone of your museum you appear to
particular advantage."

Mr. Osmond, in return for this compliment, simply looked at once colder
and more attentive. "Did you say she was rich?"

"She has seventy thousand pounds."

"En ecus bien comptes?"

"There's no doubt whatever about her fortune. I've seen it, as I may
say."

"Satisfactory woman!--I mean you. And if I go to see her shall I see the
mother?"

"The mother? She has none--nor father either."

"The aunt then--whom did you say?--Mrs. Touchett. I can easily keep her
out of the way."

"I don't object to her," said Osmond; "I rather like Mrs. Touchett.
She has a sort of old-fashioned character that's passing away--a vivid
identity. But that long jackanapes the son--is he about the place?"

"He's there, but he won't trouble you."

"He's a good deal of a donkey."

"I think you're mistaken. He's a very clever man. But he's not fond of
being about when I'm there, because he doesn't like me."

"What could he be more asinine than that? Did you say she has looks?"
Osmond went on.

"Yes; but I won't say it again, lest you should be disappointed in them.
Come and make a beginning; that's all I ask of you."

"A beginning of what?"

Madame Merle was silent a little. "I want you of course to marry her."

"The beginning of the end? Well, I'll see for myself. Have you told her
that?"

"For what do you take me? She's not so coarse a piece of machinery--nor
am I."

"Really," said Osmond after some meditation, "I don't understand your
ambitions."

"I think you'll understand this one after you've seen Miss Archer.
Suspend your judgement." Madame Merle, as she spoke, had drawn near the
open door of the garden, where she stood a moment looking out. "Pansy
has really grown pretty," she presently added.

"So it seemed to me."

"But she has had enough of the convent."

"I don't know," said Osmond. "I like what they've made of her. It's very
charming."

"That's not the convent. It's the child's nature."

"It's the combination, I think. She's as pure as a pearl."

"Why doesn't she come back with my flowers then?" Madame Merle asked.
"She's not in a hurry."

"We'll go and get them."

"She doesn't like me," the visitor murmured as she raised her parasol
and they passed into the garden.



Madame Merle, who had come to Florence on Mrs. Touchett's arrival at
the invitation of this lady--Mrs. Touchett offering her for a month the
hospitality of Palazzo Crescentini--the judicious Madame Merle spoke to
Isabel afresh about Gilbert Osmond and expressed the hope she might know
him; making, however, no such point of the matter as we have seen her do
in recommending the girl herself to Mr. Osmond's attention. The reason
of this was perhaps that Isabel offered no resistance whatever to Madame
Merle's proposal. In Italy, as in England, the lady had a multitude of
friends, both among the natives of the country and its heterogeneous
visitors. She had mentioned to Isabel most of the people the girl would
find it well to "meet"--of course, she said, Isabel could know whomever
in the wide world she would--and had placed Mr. Osmond near the top of
the list. He was an old friend of her own; she had known him these dozen
years; he was one of the cleverest and most agreeable men--well, in
Europe simply. He was altogether above the respectable average; quite
another affair. He wasn't a professional charmer--far from it, and the
effect he produced depended a good deal on the state of his nerves and
his spirits. When not in the right mood he could fall as low as any one,
saved only by his looking at such hours rather like a demoralised prince
in exile. But if he cared or was interested or rightly challenged--just
exactly rightly it had to be--then one felt his cleverness and his
distinction. Those qualities didn't depend, in him, as in so many
people, on his not committing or exposing himself. He had his
perversities--which indeed Isabel would find to be the case with all the
men really worth knowing--and didn't cause his light to shine equally
for all persons. Madame Merle, however, thought she could undertake that
for Isabel he would be brilliant. He was easily bored, too easily, and
dull people always put him out; but a quick and cultivated girl like
Isabel would give him a stimulus which was too absent from his life. At
any rate he was a person not to miss. One shouldn't attempt to live in
Italy without making a friend of Gilbert Osmond, who knew more about the
country than any one except two or three German professors. And if
they had more knowledge than he it was he who had most perception and
taste--being artistic through and through. Isabel remembered that her
friend had spoken of him during their plunge, at Gardencourt, into the
deeps of talk, and wondered a little what was the nature of the tie
binding these superior spirits. She felt that Madame Merle's ties always
somehow had histories, and such an impression was part of the interest
created by this inordinate woman. As regards her relations with Mr.
Osmond, however, she hinted at nothing but a long-established calm
friendship. Isabel said she should be happy to know a person who had
enjoyed so high a confidence for so many years. "You ought to see a
great many men," Madame Merle remarked; "you ought to see as many as
possible, so as to get used to them."

"Used to them?" Isabel repeated with that solemn stare which sometimes
seemed to proclaim her deficient in the sense of comedy. "Why, I'm not
afraid of them--I'm as used to them as the cook to the butcher-boys."

"Used to them, I mean, so as to despise them. That's what one comes to
with most of them. You'll pick out, for your society, the few whom you
don't despise."

This was a note of cynicism that Madame Merle didn't often allow herself
to sound; but Isabel was not alarmed, for she had never supposed that
as one saw more of the world the sentiment of respect became the
most active of one's emotions. It was excited, none the less, by the
beautiful city of Florence, which pleased her not less than Madame Merle
had promised; and if her unassisted perception had not been able to
gauge its charms she had clever companions as priests to the mystery.
She was--in no want indeed of esthetic illumination, for Ralph found it
a joy that renewed his own early passion to act as cicerone to his
eager young kinswoman. Madame Merle remained at home; she had seen the
treasures of Florence again and again and had always something else
to do. But she talked of all things with remarkable vividness of
memory--she recalled the right-hand corner of the large Perugino and the
position of the hands of the Saint Elizabeth in the picture next to it.
She had her opinions as to the character of many famous works of art,
differing often from Ralph with great sharpness and defending her
interpretations with as much ingenuity as good-humour. Isabel listened
to the discussions taking place between the two with a sense that
she might derive much benefit from them and that they were among the
advantages she couldn't have enjoyed for instance in Albany. In the
clear May mornings before the formal breakfast--this repast at Mrs.
Touchett's was served at twelve o'clock--she wandered with her cousin
through the narrow and sombre Florentine streets, resting a while in
the thicker dusk of some historic church or the vaulted chambers of some
dispeopled convent. She went to the galleries and palaces; she looked at
the pictures and statues that had hitherto been great names to her,
and exchanged for a knowledge which was sometimes a limitation a
presentiment which proved usually to have been a blank. She performed
all those acts of mental prostration in which, on a first visit to
Italy, youth and enthusiasm so freely indulge; she felt her heart beat
in the presence of immortal genius and knew the sweetness of rising
tears in eyes to which faded fresco and darkened marble grew dim. But
the return, every day, was even pleasanter than the going forth; the
return into the wide, monumental court of the great house in which Mrs.
Touchett, many years before, had established herself, and into the
high, cool rooms where the carven rafters and pompous frescoes of the
sixteenth century looked down on the familiar commodities of the age of
advertisement. Mrs. Touchett inhabited an historic building in a narrow
street whose very name recalled the strife of medieval factions; and
found compensation for the darkness of her frontage in the modicity of
her rent and the brightness of a garden where nature itself looked as
archaic as the rugged architecture of the palace and which cleared
and scented the rooms in regular use. To live in such a place was, for
Isabel, to hold to her ear all day a shell of the sea of the past. This
vague eternal rumour kept her imagination awake.

Gilbert Osmond came to see Madame Merle, who presented him to the young
lady lurking at the other side of the room. Isabel took on this occasion
little part in the talk; she scarcely even smiled when the others turned
to her invitingly; she sat there as if she had been at the play and had
paid even a large sum for her place. Mrs. Touchett was not present, and
these two had it, for the effect of brilliancy, all their own way. They
talked of the Florentine, the Roman, the cosmopolite world, and might
have been distinguished performers figuring for a charity. It all had
the rich readiness that would have come from rehearsal. Madame Merle
appealed to her as if she had been on the stage, but she could ignore
any learnt cue without spoiling the scene--though of course she thus put
dreadfully in the wrong the friend who had told Mr. Osmond she could be
depended on. This was no matter for once; even if more had been involved
she could have made no attempt to shine. There was something in
the visitor that checked her and held her in suspense--made it more
important she should get an impression of him than that she should
produce one herself. Besides, she had little skill in producing an
impression which she knew to be expected: nothing could be happier, in
general, than to seem dazzling, but she had a perverse unwillingness to
glitter by arrangement. Mr. Osmond, to do him justice, had a well-bred
air of expecting nothing, a quiet ease that covered everything, even the
first show of his own wit. This was the more grateful as his face, his
head, was sensitive; he was not handsome, but he was fine, as fine as
one of the drawings in the long gallery above the bridge of the
Uffizi. And his very voice was fine--the more strangely that, with its
clearness, it yet somehow wasn't sweet. This had had really to do with
making her abstain from interference. His utterance was the vibration
of glass, and if she had put out her finger she might have changed the
pitch and spoiled the concert. Yet before he went she had to speak.

"Madame Merle," he said, "consents to come up to my hill-top some day
next week and drink tea in my garden. It would give me much pleasure if
you would come with her. It's thought rather pretty--there's what they
call a general view. My daughter too would be so glad--or rather, for
she's too young to have strong emotions, I should be so glad--so very
glad." And Mr. Osmond paused with a slight air of embarrassment, leaving
his sentence unfinished. "I should be so happy if you could know my
daughter," he went on a moment afterwards.

Isabel replied that she should be delighted to see Miss Osmond and that
if Madame Merle would show her the way to the hill-top she should be
very grateful. Upon this assurance the visitor took his leave; after
which Isabel fully expected her friend would scold her for having been
so stupid. But to her surprise that lady, who indeed never fell into the
mere matter-of-course, said to her in a few moments,

"You were charming, my dear; you were just as one would have wished you.
You're never disappointing."

A rebuke might possibly have been irritating, though it is much more
probable that Isabel would have taken it in good part; but, strange
to say, the words that Madame Merle actually used caused her the first
feeling of displeasure she had known this ally to excite. "That's more
than I intended," she answered coldly. "I'm under no obligation that I
know of to charm Mr. Osmond."

Madame Merle perceptibly flushed, but we know it was not her habit to
retract. "My dear child, I didn't speak for him, poor man; I spoke for
yourself. It's not of course a question as to his liking you; it matters
little whether he likes you or not! But I thought you liked HIM."

"I did," said Isabel honestly. "But I don't see what that matters
either."

"Everything that concerns you matters to me," Madame Merle returned
with her weary nobleness; "especially when at the same time another old
friend's concerned."

Whatever Isabel's obligations may have been to Mr. Osmond, it must be
admitted that she found them sufficient to lead her to put to Ralph
sundry questions about him. She thought Ralph's judgements distorted by
his trials, but she flattered herself she had learned to make allowance
for that.

"Do I know him?" said her cousin. "Oh, yes, I 'know' him; not well,
but on the whole enough. I've never cultivated his society, and he
apparently has never found mine indispensable to his happiness. Who is
he, what is he? He's a vague, unexplained American who has been living
these thirty years, or less, in Italy. Why do I call him unexplained?
Only as a cover for my ignorance; I don't know his antecedents, his
family, his origin. For all I do know he may be a prince in disguise; he
rather looks like one, by the way--like a prince who has abdicated in a
fit of fastidiousness and has been in a state of disgust ever since. He
used to live in Rome; but of late years he has taken up his abode here;
I remember hearing him say that Rome has grown vulgar. He has a great
dread of vulgarity; that's his special line; he hasn't any other that I
know of. He lives on his income, which I suspect of not being vulgarly
large. He's a poor but honest gentleman that's what he calls himself.
He married young and lost his wife, and I believe he has a daughter. He
also has a sister, who's married to some small Count or other, of these
parts; I remember meeting her of old. She's nicer than he, I should
think, but rather impossible. I remember there used to be some stories
about her. I don't think I recommend you to know her. But why don't you
ask Madame Merle about these people? She knows them all much better than
I."

"I ask you because I want your opinion as well as hers," said Isabel.

"A fig for my opinion! If you fall in love with Mr. Osmond what will you
care for that?"

"Not much, probably. But meanwhile it has a certain importance. The more
information one has about one's dangers the better."

"I don't agree to that--it may make them dangers. We know too much about
people in these days; we hear too much. Our ears, our minds, our mouths,
are stuffed with personalities. Don't mind anything any one tells you
about any one else. Judge everyone and everything for yourself."

"That's what I try to do," said Isabel "but when you do that people call
you conceited."

"You're not to mind them--that's precisely my argument; not to mind what
they say about yourself any more than what they say about your friend or
your enemy."

Isabel considered. "I think you're right; but there are some things I
can't help minding: for instance when my friend's attacked or when I
myself am praised."

"Of course you're always at liberty to judge the critic. Judge people as
critics, however," Ralph added, "and you'll condemn them all!"

"I shall see Mr. Osmond for myself," said Isabel. "I've promised to pay
him a visit."

"To pay him a visit?"

"To go and see his view, his pictures, his daughter--I don't know
exactly what. Madame Merle's to take me; she tells me a great many
ladies call on him."

"Ah, with Madame Merle you may go anywhere, de confiance," said Ralph.
"She knows none but the best people."

Isabel said no more about Mr. Osmond, but she presently remarked to her
cousin that she was not satisfied with his tone about Madame Merle. "It
seems to me you insinuate things about her. I don't know what you mean,
but if you've any grounds for disliking her I think you should either
mention them frankly or else say nothing at all."

Ralph, however, resented this charge with more apparent earnestness than
he commonly used. "I speak of Madame Merle exactly as I speak to her:
with an even exaggerated respect."

"Exaggerated, precisely. That's what I complain of."

"I do so because Madame Merle's merits are exaggerated."

"By whom, pray? By me? If so I do her a poor service."

"No, no; by herself."

"Ah, I protest!" Isabel earnestly cried. "If ever there was a woman who
made small claims--!"

"You put your finger on it," Ralph interrupted. "Her modesty's
exaggerated. She has no business with small claims--she has a perfect
right to make large ones."

"Her merits are large then. You contradict yourself."

"Her merits are immense," said Ralph. "She's indescribably blameless; a
pathless desert of virtue; the only woman I know who never gives one a
chance."

"A chance for what?"

"Well, say to call her a fool! She's the only woman I know who has but
that one little fault."

Isabel turned away with impatience. "I don't understand you; you're too
paradoxical for my plain mind."

"Let me explain. When I say she exaggerates I don't mean it in the
vulgar sense--that she boasts, overstates, gives too fine an account of
herself. I mean literally that she pushes the search for perfection too
far--that her merits are in themselves overstrained. She's too good, too
kind, too clever, too learned, too accomplished, too everything. She's
too complete, in a word. I confess to you that she acts on my nerves and
that I feel about her a good deal as that intensely human Athenian felt
about Aristides the Just."

Isabel looked hard at her cousin; but the mocking spirit, if it lurked
in his words, failed on this occasion to peep from his face. "Do you
wish Madame Merle to be banished?"

"By no means. She's much too good company. I delight in Madame Merle,"
said Ralph Touchett simply.

"You're very odious, sir!" Isabel exclaimed. And then she asked him if
he knew anything that was not to the honour of her brilliant friend.

"Nothing whatever. Don't you see that's just what I mean? On the
character of every one else you may find some little black speck; if
I were to take half an hour to it, some day, I've no doubt I should be
able to find one on yours. For my own, of course, I'm spotted like a
leopard. But on Madame Merle's nothing, nothing, nothing!"

"That's just what I think!" said Isabel with a toss of her head. "That
is why I like her so much."

"She's a capital person for you to know. Since you wish to see the world
you couldn't have a better guide."

"I suppose you mean by that that she's worldly?"

"Worldly? No," said Ralph, "she's the great round world itself!"

It had certainly not, as Isabel for the moment took it into her head to
believe, been a refinement of malice in him to say that he delighted in
Madame Merle. Ralph Touchett took his refreshment wherever he could find
it, and he would not have forgiven himself if he had been left wholly
unbeguiled by such a mistress of the social art. There are deep-lying
sympathies and antipathies, and it may have been that, in spite of the
administered justice she enjoyed at his hands, her absence from his
mother's house would not have made life barren to him. But Ralph
Touchett had learned more or less inscrutably to attend, and there could
have been nothing so "sustained" to attend to as the general performance
of Madame Merle. He tasted her in sips, he let her stand, with an
opportuneness she herself could not have surpassed. There were moments
when he felt almost sorry for her; and these, oddly enough, were the
moments when his kindness was least demonstrative. He was sure she had
been yearningly ambitious and that what she had visibly accomplished was
far below her secret measure. She had got herself into perfect training,
but had won none of the prizes. She was always plain Madame Merle,
the widow of a Swiss negociant, with a small income and a large
acquaintance, who stayed with people a great deal and was almost as
universally "liked" as some new volume of smooth twaddle. The contrast
between this position and any one of some half-dozen others that he
supposed to have at various moments engaged her hope had an element of
the tragical. His mother thought he got on beautifully with their genial
guest; to Mrs. Touchett's sense two persons who dealt so largely in
too-ingenious theories of conduct--that is of their own--would have much
in common. He had given due consideration to Isabel's intimacy with her
eminent friend, having long since made up his mind that he could not,
without opposition, keep his cousin to himself; and he made the best of
it, as he had done of worse things. He believed it would take care of
itself; it wouldn't last forever. Neither of these two superior persons
knew the other as well as she supposed, and when each had made an
important discovery or two there would be, if not a rupture, at least
a relaxation. Meanwhile he was quite willing to admit that the
conversation of the elder lady was an advantage to the younger, who had
a great deal to learn and would doubtless learn it better from Madame
Merle than from some other instructors of the young. It was not probable
that Isabel would be injured.



