
It was not with surprise, it was with a feeling which in other
circumstances would have had much of the effect of joy, that as Isabel
descended from the Paris Mail at Charing Cross she stepped into the
arms, as it were--or at any rate into the hands--of Henrietta Stackpole.
She had telegraphed to her friend from Turin, and though she had not
definitely said to herself that Henrietta would meet her, she had felt
her telegram would produce some helpful result. On her long journey from
Rome her mind had been given up to vagueness; she was unable to question
the future. She performed this journey with sightless eyes and took
little pleasure in the countries she traversed, decked out though they
were in the richest freshness of spring. Her thoughts followed their
course through other countries--strange-looking, dimly-lighted, pathless
lands, in which there was no change of seasons, but only, as it seemed,
a perpetual dreariness of winter. She had plenty to think about; but
it was neither reflexion nor conscious purpose that filled her mind.
Disconnected visions passed through it, and sudden dull gleams of
memory, of expectation. The past and the future came and went at their
will, but she saw them only in fitful images, which rose and fell by a
logic of their own. It was extraordinary the things she remembered. Now
that she was in the secret, now that she knew something that so much
concerned her and the eclipse of which had made life resemble an attempt
to play whist with an imperfect pack of cards, the truth of things,
their mutual relations, their meaning, and for the most part their
horror, rose before her with a kind of architectural vastness. She
remembered a thousand trifles; they started to life with the spontaneity
of a shiver. She had thought them trifles at the time; now she saw that
they had been weighted with lead. Yet even now they were trifles after
all, for of what use was it to her to understand them? Nothing seemed of
use to her to-day. All purpose, all intention, was suspended; all
desire too save the single desire to reach her much-embracing refuge.
Gardencourt had been her starting-point, and to those muffled chambers
it was at least a temporary solution to return. She had gone forth in
her strength; she would come back in her weakness, and if the place had
been a rest to her before, it would be a sanctuary now. She envied Ralph
his dying, for if one were thinking of rest that was the most perfect
of all. To cease utterly, to give it all up and not know anything
more--this idea was as sweet as the vision of a cool bath in a marble
tank, in a darkened chamber, in a hot land.

She had moments indeed in her journey from Rome which were almost as
good as being dead. She sat in her corner, so motionless, so passive,
simply with the sense of being carried, so detached from hope and
regret, that she recalled to herself one of those Etruscan figures
couched upon the receptacle of their ashes. There was nothing to regret
now--that was all over. Not only the time of her folly, but the time of
her repentance was far. The only thing to regret was that Madame Merle
had been so--well, so unimaginable. Just here her intelligence dropped,
from literal inability to say what it was that Madame Merle had been.
Whatever it was it was for Madame Merle herself to regret it; and
doubtless she would do so in America, where she had announced she was
going. It concerned Isabel no more; she only had an impression that she
should never again see Madame Merle. This impression carried her into
the future, of which from time to time she had a mutilated glimpse. She
saw herself, in the distant years, still in the attitude of a woman who
had her life to live, and these intimations contradicted the spirit of
the present hour. It might be desirable to get quite away, really away,
further away than little grey-green England, but this privilege was
evidently to be denied her. Deep in her soul--deeper than any appetite
for renunciation--was the sense that life would be her business for a
long time to come. And at moments there was something inspiring, almost
enlivening, in the conviction. It was a proof of strength--it was a
proof she should some day be happy again. It couldn't be she was to live
only to suffer; she was still young, after all, and a great many things
might happen to her yet. To live only to suffer--only to feel the injury
of life repeated and enlarged--it seemed to her she was too valuable,
too capable, for that. Then she wondered if it were vain and stupid
to think so well of herself. When had it even been a guarantee to be
valuable? Wasn't all history full of the destruction of precious things?
Wasn't it much more probable that if one were fine one would suffer? It
involved then perhaps an admission that one had a certain grossness; but
Isabel recognised, as it passed before her eyes, the quick vague shadow
of a long future. She should never escape; she should last to the end.
Then the middle years wrapped her about again and the grey curtain of
her indifference closed her in.

Henrietta kissed her, as Henrietta usually kissed, as if she were afraid
she should be caught doing it; and then Isabel stood there in the crowd,
looking about her, looking for her servant. She asked nothing; she
wished to wait. She had a sudden perception that she should be helped.
She rejoiced Henrietta had come; there was something terrible in an
arrival in London. The dusky, smoky, far-arching vault of the station,
the strange, livid light, the dense, dark, pushing crowd, filled her
with a nervous fear and made her put her arm into her friend's. She
remembered she had once liked these things; they seemed part of a mighty
spectacle in which there was something that touched her. She remembered
how she walked away from Euston, in the winter dusk, in the crowded
streets, five years before. She could not have done that to-day, and the
incident came before her as the deed of another person.

"It's too beautiful that you should have come," said Henrietta, looking
at her as if she thought Isabel might be prepared to challenge the
proposition. "If you hadn't--if you hadn't; well, I don't know,"
remarked Miss Stackpole, hinting ominously at her powers of disapproval.

Isabel looked about without seeing her maid. Her eyes rested on another
figure, however, which she felt she had seen before; and in a moment
she recognised the genial countenance of Mr. Bantling. He stood a little
apart, and it was not in the power of the multitude that pressed about
him to make him yield an inch of the ground he had taken--that of
abstracting himself discreetly while the two ladies performed their
embraces.

"There's Mr. Bantling," said Isabel, gently, irrelevantly, scarcely
caring much now whether she should find her maid or not.

"Oh yes, he goes everywhere with me. Come here, Mr. Bantling!" Henrietta
exclaimed. Whereupon the gallant bachelor advanced with a smile--a smile
tempered, however, by the gravity of the occasion. "Isn't it lovely she
has come?" Henrietta asked. "He knows all about it," she added; "we had
quite a discussion. He said you wouldn't, I said you would."

"I thought you always agreed," Isabel smiled in return. She felt she
could smile now; she had seen in an instant, in Mr. Bantling's brave
eyes, that he had good news for her. They seemed to say he wished her to
remember he was an old friend of her cousin--that he understood, that
it was all right. Isabel gave him her hand; she thought of him,
extravagantly, as a beautiful blameless knight.

"Oh, I always agree," said Mr. Bantling. "But she doesn't, you know."

"Didn't I tell you that a maid was a nuisance?" Henrietta enquired.
"Your young lady has probably remained at Calais."

"I don't care," said Isabel, looking at Mr. Bantling, whom she had never
found so interesting.

"Stay with her while I go and see," Henrietta commanded, leaving the two
for a moment together.

They stood there at first in silence, and then Mr. Bantling asked Isabel
how it had been on the Channel.

"Very fine. No, I believe it was very rough," she said, to her
companion's obvious surprise. After which she added: "You've been to
Gardencourt, I know."

"Now how do you know that?"

"I can't tell you--except that you look like a person who has been to
Gardencourt."

"Do you think I look awfully sad? It's awfully sad there, you know."

"I don't believe you ever look awfully sad. You look awfully kind,"
said Isabel with a breadth that cost her no effort. It seemed to her she
should never again feel a superficial embarrassment.

Poor Mr. Bantling, however, was still in this inferior stage. He blushed
a good deal and laughed, he assured her that he was often very blue,
and that when he was blue he was awfully fierce. "You can ask Miss
Stackpole, you know. I was at Gardencourt two days ago."

"Did you see my cousin?"

"Only for a little. But he had been seeing people; Warburton had been
there the day before. Ralph was just the same as usual, except that he
was in bed and that he looks tremendously ill and that he can't speak,"
Mr. Bantling pursued. "He was awfully jolly and funny all the same. He
was just as clever as ever. It's awfully wretched."

Even in the crowded, noisy station this simple picture was vivid. "Was
that late in the day?"

"Yes; I went on purpose. We thought you'd like to know."

"I'm greatly obliged to you. Can I go down tonight?"

"Ah, I don't think SHE'LL let you go," said Mr. Bantling. "She wants you
to stop with her. I made Touchett's man promise to telegraph me to-day,
and I found the telegram an hour ago at my club. 'Quiet and easy,'
that's what it says, and it's dated two o'clock. So you see you can wait
till to-morrow. You must be awfully tired."

"Yes, I'm awfully tired. And I thank you again."

"Oh," said Mr. Bantling, "We were certain you would like the last news."
On which Isabel vaguely noted that he and Henrietta seemed after all to
agree. Miss Stackpole came back with Isabel's maid, whom she had caught
in the act of proving her utility. This excellent person, instead of
losing herself in the crowd, had simply attended to her mistress's
luggage, so that the latter was now at liberty to leave the station.
"You know you're not to think of going to the country to-night,"
Henrietta remarked to her. "It doesn't matter whether there's a train
or not. You're to come straight to me in Wimpole Street. There isn't a
corner to be had in London, but I've got you one all the same. It isn't
a Roman palace, but it will do for a night."

"I'll do whatever you wish," Isabel said.

"You'll come and answer a few questions; that's what I wish."

"She doesn't say anything about dinner, does she, Mrs. Osmond?" Mr.
Bantling enquired jocosely.

Henrietta fixed him a moment with her speculative gaze. "I see you're
in a great hurry to get your own. You'll be at the Paddington Station
to-morrow morning at ten."

"Don't come for my sake, Mr. Bantling," said Isabel.

"He'll come for mine," Henrietta declared as she ushered her friend into
a cab. And later, in a large dusky parlour in Wimpole Street--to do her
justice there had been dinner enough--she asked those questions to which
she had alluded at the station. "Did your husband make you a scene about
your coming?" That was Miss Stackpole's first enquiry.

"No; I can't say he made a scene."

"He didn't object then?"

"Yes, he objected very much. But it was not what you'd call a scene."

"What was it then?"

"It was a very quiet conversation."

Henrietta for a moment regarded her guest. "It must have been hellish,"
she then remarked. And Isabel didn't deny that it had been hellish. But
she confined herself to answering Henrietta's questions, which was easy,
as they were tolerably definite. For the present she offered her no
new information. "Well," said Miss Stackpole at last, "I've only one
criticism to make. I don't see why you promised little Miss Osmond to go
back."

"I'm not sure I myself see now," Isabel replied. "But I did then."

"If you've forgotten your reason perhaps you won't return."

Isabel waited a moment. "Perhaps I shall find another."

"You'll certainly never find a good one."

"In default of a better my having promised will do," Isabel suggested.

"Yes; that's why I hate it."

"Don't speak of it now. I've a little time. Coming away was a
complication, but what will going back be?"

"You must remember, after all, that he won't make you a scene!" said
Henrietta with much intention.

"He will, though," Isabel answered gravely. "It won't be the scene of a
moment; it will be a scene of the rest of my life."

For some minutes the two women sat and considered this remainder, and
then Miss Stackpole, to change the subject, as Isabel had requested,
announced abruptly: "I've been to stay with Lady Pensil!"

"Ah, the invitation came at last!"

"Yes; it took five years. But this time she wanted to see me."

"Naturally enough."

"It was more natural than I think you know," said Henrietta, who fixed
her eyes on a distant point. And then she added, turning suddenly:
"Isabel Archer, I beg your pardon. You don't know why? Because I
criticised you, and yet I've gone further than you. Mr. Osmond, at
least, was born on the other side!"

It was a moment before Isabel grasped her meaning; this sense was so
modestly, or at least so ingeniously, veiled. Isabel's mind was not
possessed at present with the comicality of things; but she greeted with
a quick laugh the image that her companion had raised. She immediately
recovered herself, however, and with the right excess of intensity,
"Henrietta Stackpole," she asked, "are you going to give up your
country?"

"Yes, my poor Isabel, I am. I won't pretend to deny it; I look the fact
in the face. I'm going to marry Mr. Bantling and locate right here in
London."

"It seems very strange," said Isabel, smiling now.

"Well yes, I suppose it does. I've come to it little by little. I think
I know what I'm doing; but I don't know as I can explain."

"One can't explain one's marriage," Isabel answered. "And yours doesn't
need to be explained. Mr. Bantling isn't a riddle."

"No, he isn't a bad pun--or even a high flight of American humour. He
has a beautiful nature," Henrietta went on. "I've studied him for many
years and I see right through him. He's as clear as the style of a good
prospectus. He's not intellectual, but he appreciates intellect. On the
other hand he doesn't exaggerate its claims. I sometimes think we do in
the United States."

"Ah," said Isabel, "you're changed indeed! It's the first time I've ever
heard you say anything against your native land."

"I only say that we're too infatuated with mere brain-power; that, after
all, isn't a vulgar fault. But I AM changed; a woman has to change a
good deal to marry."

"I hope you'll be very happy. You will at last--over here--see something
of the inner life."

Henrietta gave a little significant sigh. "That's the key to the
mystery, I believe. I couldn't endure to be kept off. Now I've as good
a right as any one!" she added with artless elation. Isabel was duly
diverted, but there was a certain melancholy in her view. Henrietta,
after all, had confessed herself human and feminine, Henrietta whom she
had hitherto regarded as a light keen flame, a disembodied voice. It was
a disappointment to find she had personal susceptibilities, that she was
subject to common passions, and that her intimacy with Mr. Bantling had
not been completely original. There was a want of originality in her
marrying him--there was even a kind of stupidity; and for a moment, to
Isabel's sense, the dreariness of the world took on a deeper tinge. A
little later indeed she reflected that Mr. Bantling himself at least was
original. But she didn't see how Henrietta could give up her country.
She herself had relaxed her hold of it, but it had never been her
country as it had been Henrietta's. She presently asked her if she had
enjoyed her visit to Lady Pensil.

"Oh yes," said Henrietta, "she didn't know what to make of me."

"And was that very enjoyable?"

"Very much so, because she's supposed to be a master mind. She thinks
she knows everything; but she doesn't understand a woman of my modern
type. It would be so much easier for her if I were only a little better
or a little worse. She's so puzzled; I believe she thinks it's my duty
to go and do something immoral. She thinks it's immoral that I should
marry her brother; but, after all, that isn't immoral enough. And she'll
never understand my mixture--never!"

"She's not so intelligent as her brother then," said Isabel. "He appears
to have understood."

"Oh no, he hasn't!" cried Miss Stackpole with decision. "I really
believe that's what he wants to marry me for--just to find out the
mystery and the proportions of it. That's a fixed idea--a kind of
fascination."

"It's very good in you to humour it."

"Oh well," said Henrietta, "I've something to find out too!" And Isabel
saw that she had not renounced an allegiance, but planned an attack. She
was at last about to grapple in earnest with England.

Isabel also perceived, however, on the morrow, at the Paddington
Station, where she found herself, at ten o'clock, in the company both
of Miss Stackpole and Mr. Bantling, that the gentleman bore his
perplexities lightly. If he had not found out everything he had found
out at least the great point--that Miss Stackpole would not be wanting
in initiative. It was evident that in the selection of a wife he had
been on his guard against this deficiency.

"Henrietta has told me, and I'm very glad," Isabel said as she gave him
her hand.

"I dare say you think it awfully odd," Mr. Bantling replied, resting on
his neat umbrella.

"Yes, I think it awfully odd."

"You can't think it so awfully odd as I do. But I've always rather liked
striking out a line," said Mr. Bantling serenely.




Isabel's arrival at Gardencourt on this second occasion was even
quieter than it had been on the first. Ralph Touchett kept but a small
household, and to the new servants Mrs. Osmond was a stranger; so that
instead of being conducted to her own apartment she was coldly shown
into the drawing-room and left to wait while her name was carried up to
her aunt. She waited a long time; Mrs. Touchett appeared in no hurry to
come to her. She grew impatient at last; she grew nervous and scared--as
scared as if the objects about her had begun to show for conscious
things, watching her trouble with grotesque grimaces. The day was dark
and cold; the dusk was thick in the corners of the wide brown rooms. The
house was perfectly still--with a stillness that Isabel remembered; it
had filled all the place for days before the death of her uncle. She
left the drawing-room and wandered about--strolled into the library and
along the gallery of pictures, where, in the deep silence, her footstep
made an echo. Nothing was changed; she recognised everything she had
seen years before; it might have been only yesterday she had stood
there. She envied the security of valuable "pieces" which change by no
hair's breadth, only grow in value, while their owners lose inch by
inch youth, happiness, beauty; and she became aware that she was walking
about as her aunt had done on the day she had come to see her in Albany.
She was changed enough since then--that had been the beginning. It
suddenly struck her that if her Aunt Lydia had not come that day in just
that way and found her alone, everything might have been different. She
might have had another life and she might have been a woman more blest.
She stopped in the gallery in front of a small picture--a charming and
precious Bonington--upon which her eyes rested a long time. But she was
not looking at the picture; she was wondering whether if her aunt had
not come that day in Albany she would have married Caspar Goodwood.

Mrs. Touchett appeared at last, just after Isabel had returned to the
big uninhabited drawing-room. She looked a good deal older, but her
eye was as bright as ever and her head as erect; her thin lips seemed a
repository of latent meanings. She wore a little grey dress of the most
undecorated fashion, and Isabel wondered, as she had wondered the first
time, if her remarkable kinswoman resembled more a queen-regent or the
matron of a gaol. Her lips felt very thin indeed on Isabel's hot cheek.

"I've kept you waiting because I've been sitting with Ralph," Mrs.
Touchett said. "The nurse had gone to luncheon and I had taken her
place. He has a man who's supposed to look after him, but the man's good
for nothing; he's always looking out of the window--as if there were
anything to see! I didn't wish to move, because Ralph seemed to be
sleeping and I was afraid the sound would disturb him. I waited till the
nurse came back. I remembered you knew the house."

"I find I know it better even than I thought; I've been walking
everywhere," Isabel answered. And then she asked if Ralph slept much.

"He lies with his eyes closed; he doesn't move. But I'm not sure that
it's always sleep."

"Will he see me? Can he speak to me?"

Mrs. Touchett declined the office of saying. "You can try him," was the
limit of her extravagance. And then she offered to conduct Isabel to her
room. "I thought they had taken you there; but it's not my house, it's
Ralph's; and I don't know what they do. They must at least have taken
your luggage; I don't suppose you've brought much. Not that I care,
however. I believe they've given you the same room you had before; when
Ralph heard you were coming he said you must have that one."

"Did he say anything else?"

"Ah, my dear, he doesn't chatter as he used!" cried Mrs. Touchett as she
preceded her niece up the staircase.

It was the same room, and something told Isabel it had not been slept
in since she occupied it. Her luggage was there and was not voluminous;
Mrs. Touchett sat down a moment with her eyes upon it. "Is there really
no hope?" our young woman asked as she stood before her.

"None whatever. There never has been. It has not been a successful
life."

"No--it has only been a beautiful one." Isabel found herself already
contradicting her aunt; she was irritated by her dryness.

"I don't know what you mean by that; there's no beauty without health.
That is a very odd dress to travel in."

Isabel glanced at her garment. "I left Rome at an hour's notice; I took
the first that came."

"Your sisters, in America, wished to know how you dress. That seemed to
be their principal interest. I wasn't able to tell them--but they seemed
to have the right idea: that you never wear anything less than black
brocade."

"They think I'm more brilliant than I am; I'm afraid to tell them the
truth," said Isabel. "Lily wrote me you had dined with her."

"She invited me four times, and I went once. After the second time she
should have let me alone. The dinner was very good; it must have been
expensive. Her husband has a very bad manner. Did I enjoy my visit to
America? Why should I have enjoyed it? I didn't go for my pleasure."

These were interesting items, but Mrs. Touchett soon left her niece,
whom she was to meet in half an hour at the midday meal. For this
repast the two ladies faced each other at an abbreviated table in the
melancholy dining-room. Here, after a little, Isabel saw her aunt not
to be so dry as she appeared, and her old pity for the poor woman's
inexpressiveness, her want of regret, of disappointment, came back to
her. Unmistakeably she would have found it a blessing to-day to be able
to feel a defeat, a mistake, even a shame or two. She wondered if she
were not even missing those enrichments of consciousness and privately
trying--reaching out for some aftertaste of life, dregs of the banquet;
the testimony of pain or the cold recreation of remorse. On the other
hand perhaps she was afraid; if she should begin to know remorse at all
it might take her too far. Isabel could perceive, however, how it had
come over her dimly that she had failed of something, that she saw
herself in the future as an old woman without memories. Her little
sharp face looked tragical. She told her niece that Ralph had as yet not
moved, but that he probably would be able to see her before dinner.
And then in a moment she added that he had seen Lord Warburton the day
before; an announcement which startled Isabel a little, as it seemed
an intimation that this personage was in the neighbourhood and that an
accident might bring them together. Such an accident would not be happy;
she had not come to England to struggle again with Lord Warburton. She
none the less presently said to her aunt that he had been very kind to
Ralph; she had seen something of that in Rome.

"He has something else to think of now," Mrs. Touchett returned. And she
paused with a gaze like a gimlet.

Isabel saw she meant something, and instantly guessed what she meant.
But her reply concealed her guess; her heart beat faster and she wished
to gain a moment. "Ah yes--the House of Lords and all that."

"He's not thinking of the Lords; he's thinking of the ladies. At least
he's thinking of one of them; he told Ralph he's engaged to be married."

"Ah, to be married!" Isabel mildly exclaimed.

"Unless he breaks it off. He seemed to think Ralph would like to know.
Poor Ralph can't go to the wedding, though I believe it's to take place
very soon.

"And who's the young lady?"

"A member of the aristocracy; Lady Flora, Lady Felicia--something of
that sort."

"I'm very glad," Isabel said. "It must be a sudden decision."

"Sudden enough, I believe; a courtship of three weeks. It has only just
been made public."

"I'm very glad," Isabel repeated with a larger emphasis. She knew her
aunt was watching her--looking for the signs of some imputed soreness,
and the desire to prevent her companion from seeing anything of this
kind enabled her to speak in the tone of quick satisfaction, the tone
almost of relief. Mrs. Touchett of course followed the tradition that
ladies, even married ones, regard the marriage of their old lovers as
an offence to themselves. Isabel's first care therefore was to show
that however that might be in general she was not offended now. But
meanwhile, as I say, her heart beat faster; and if she sat for some
moments thoughtful--she presently forgot Mrs. Touchett's observation--it
was not because she had lost an admirer. Her imagination had traversed
half Europe; it halted, panting, and even trembling a little, in the
city of Rome. She figured herself announcing to her husband that Lord
Warburton was to lead a bride to the altar, and she was of course
not aware how extremely wan she must have looked while she made this
intellectual effort. But at last she collected herself and said to her
aunt: "He was sure to do it some time or other."

Mrs. Touchett was silent; then she gave a sharp little shake of the
head. "Ah, my dear, you're beyond me!" she cried suddenly. They went on
with their luncheon in silence; Isabel felt as if she had heard of Lord
Warburton's death. She had known him only as a suitor, and now that was
all over. He was dead for poor Pansy; by Pansy he might have lived. A
servant had been hovering about; at last Mrs. Touchett requested him
to leave them alone. She had finished her meal; she sat with her
hands folded on the edge of the table. "I should like to ask you three
questions," she observed when the servant had gone.

"Three are a great many."

"I can't do with less; I've been thinking. They're all very good ones."

"That's what I'm afraid of. The best questions are the worst," Isabel
answered. Mrs. Touchett had pushed back her chair, and as her niece left
the table and walked, rather consciously, to one of the deep windows,
she felt herself followed by her eyes.

"Have you ever been sorry you didn't marry Lord Warburton?" Mrs.
Touchett enquired.

Isabel shook her head slowly, but not heavily. "No, dear aunt."

"Good. I ought to tell you that I propose to believe what you say."

"Your believing me's an immense temptation," she declared, smiling
still.

"A temptation to lie? I don't recommend you to do that, for when I'm
misinformed I'm as dangerous as a poisoned rat. I don't mean to crow
over you."

"It's my husband who doesn't get on with me," said Isabel.

"I could have told him he wouldn't. I don't call that crowing over YOU,"
Mrs. Touchett added. "Do you still like Serena Merle?" she went on.

"Not as I once did. But it doesn't matter, for she's going to America."

"To America? She must have done something very bad."

"Yes--very bad."

"May I ask what it is?"

"She made a convenience of me."

"Ah," cried Mrs. Touchett, "so she did of me! She does of every one."

"She'll make a convenience of America," said Isabel, smiling again and
glad that her aunt's questions were over.

It was not till the evening that she was able to see Ralph. He had been
dozing all day; at least he had been lying unconscious. The doctor was
there, but after a while went away--the local doctor, who had attended
his father and whom Ralph liked. He came three or four times a day; he
was deeply interested in his patient. Ralph had had Sir Matthew Hope,
but he had got tired of this celebrated man, to whom he had asked his
mother to send word he was now dead and was therefore without further
need of medical advice. Mrs. Touchett had simply written to Sir Matthew
that her son disliked him. On the day of Isabel's arrival Ralph gave no
sign, as I have related, for many hours; but toward evening he raised
himself and said he knew that she had come.

How he knew was not apparent, inasmuch as for fear of exciting him no
one had offered the information. Isabel came in and sat by his bed in
the dim light; there was only a shaded candle in a corner of the room.
She told the nurse she might go--she herself would sit with him for the
rest of the evening. He had opened his eyes and recognised her, and had
moved his hand, which lay helpless beside him, so that she might take
it. But he was unable to speak; he closed his eyes again and remained
perfectly still, only keeping her hand in his own. She sat with him a
long time--till the nurse came back; but he gave no further sign. He
might have passed away while she looked at him; he was already the
figure and pattern of death. She had thought him far gone in Rome,
and this was worse; there was but one change possible now. There was a
strange tranquillity in his face; it was as still as the lid of a box.
With this he was a mere lattice of bones; when he opened his eyes to
greet her it was as if she were looking into immeasurable space. It was
not till midnight that the nurse came back; but the hours, to Isabel,
had not seemed long; it was exactly what she had come for. If she had
come simply to wait she found ample occasion, for he lay three days in
a kind of grateful silence. He recognised her and at moments seemed to
wish to speak; but he found no voice. Then he closed his eyes again, as
if he too were waiting for something--for something that certainly would
come. He was so absolutely quiet that it seemed to her what was coming
had already arrived; and yet she never lost the sense that they were
still together. But they were not always together; there were other
hours that she passed in wandering through the empty house and listening
for a voice that was not poor Ralph's. She had a constant fear; she
thought it possible her husband would write to her. But he remained
silent, and she only got a letter from Florence and from the Countess
Gemini. Ralph, however, spoke at last--on the evening of the third day.

"I feel better to-night," he murmured, abruptly, in the soundless
dimness of her vigil; "I think I can say something." She sank upon her
knees beside his pillow; took his thin hand in her own; begged him
not to make an effort--not to tire himself. His face was of necessity
serious--it was incapable of the muscular play of a smile; but its owner
apparently had not lost a perception of incongruities. "What does it
matter if I'm tired when I've all eternity to rest? There's no harm in
making an effort when it's the very last of all. Don't people always
feel better just before the end? I've often heard of that; it's what I
was waiting for. Ever since you've been here I thought it would come.
I tried two or three times; I was afraid you'd get tired of sitting
there." He spoke slowly, with painful breaks and long pauses; his voice
seemed to come from a distance. When he ceased he lay with his face
turned to Isabel and his large unwinking eyes open into her own. "It
was very good of you to come," he went on. "I thought you would; but I
wasn't sure."

"I was not sure either till I came," said Isabel.

"You've been like an angel beside my bed. You know they talk about the
angel of death. It's the most beautiful of all. You've been like that;
as if you were waiting for me."

"I was not waiting for your death; I was waiting for--for this. This is
not death, dear Ralph."

"Not for you--no. There's nothing makes us feel so much alive as to see
others die. That's the sensation of life--the sense that we remain. I've
had it--even I. But now I'm of no use but to give it to others. With me
it's all over." And then he paused. Isabel bowed her head further, till
it rested on the two hands that were clasped upon his own. She couldn't
see him now; but his far-away voice was close to her ear. "Isabel," he
went on suddenly, "I wish it were over for you." She answered nothing;
she had burst into sobs; she remained so, with her buried face. He lay
silent, listening to her sobs; at last he gave a long groan. "Ah, what
is it you have done for me?"

"What is it you did for me?" she cried, her now extreme agitation half
smothered by her attitude. She had lost all her shame, all wish to hide
things. Now he must know; she wished him to know, for it brought them
supremely together, and he was beyond the reach of pain. "You did
something once--you know it. O Ralph, you've been everything! What have
I done for you--what can I do to-day? I would die if you could live.
But I don't wish you to live; I would die myself, not to lose you." Her
voice was as broken as his own and full of tears and anguish.

"You won't lose me--you'll keep me. Keep me in your heart; I shall be
nearer to you than I've ever been. Dear Isabel, life is better; for in
life there's love. Death is good--but there's no love."

"I never thanked you--I never spoke--I never was what I should be!"
Isabel went on. She felt a passionate need to cry out and accuse
herself, to let her sorrow possess her. All her troubles, for the
moment, became single and melted together into this present pain. "What
must you have thought of me? Yet how could I know? I never knew, and I
only know to-day because there are people less stupid than I."

"Don't mind people," said Ralph. "I think I'm glad to leave people."

She raised her head and her clasped hands; she seemed for a moment to
pray to him. "Is it true--is it true?" she asked.

"True that you've been stupid? Oh no," said Ralph with a sensible
intention of wit.

"That you made me rich--that all I have is yours?"

He turned away his head, and for some time said nothing. Then at last:
"Ah, don't speak of that--that was not happy." Slowly he moved his face
toward her again, and they once more saw each other. "But for that--but
for that--!" And he paused. "I believe I ruined you," he wailed.

She was full of the sense that he was beyond the reach of pain; he
seemed already so little of this world. But even if she had not had
it she would still have spoken, for nothing mattered now but the only
knowledge that was not pure anguish--the knowledge that they were
looking at the truth together.

"He married me for the money," she said. She wished to say everything;
she was afraid he might die before she had done so. He gazed at her a
little, and for the first time his fixed eyes lowered their lids. But he
raised them in a moment, and then, "He was greatly in love with you," he
answered.

"Yes, he was in love with me. But he wouldn't have married me if I had
been poor. I don't hurt you in saying that. How can I? I only want you
to understand. I always tried to keep you from understanding; but that's
all over."

"I always understood," said Ralph.

"I thought you did, and I didn't like it. But now I like it."

"You don't hurt me--you make me very happy." And as Ralph said this
there was an extraordinary gladness in his voice. She bent her
head again, and pressed her lips to the back of his hand. "I always
understood," he continued, "though it was so strange--so pitiful. You
wanted to look at life for yourself--but you were not allowed; you
were punished for your wish. You were ground in the very mill of the
conventional!"

"Oh yes, I've been punished," Isabel sobbed.

He listened to her a little, and then continued: "Was he very bad about
your coming?"

"He made it very hard for me. But I don't care."

"It is all over then between you?"

"Oh no; I don't think anything's over."

"Are you going back to him?" Ralph gasped.

"I don't know--I can't tell. I shall stay here as long as I may. I don't
want to think--I needn't think. I don't care for anything but you, and
that's enough for the present. It will last a little yet. Here on my
knees, with you dying in my arms, I'm happier than I have been for a
long time. And I want you to be happy--not to think of anything sad;
only to feel that I'm near you and I love you. Why should there be
pain--? In such hours as this what have we to do with pain? That's not
the deepest thing; there's something deeper."

Ralph evidently found from moment to moment greater difficulty in
speaking; he had to wait longer to collect himself. At first he appeared
to make no response to these last words; he let a long time elapse. Then
he murmured simply: "You must stay here."

"I should like to stay--as long as seems right."

"As seems right--as seems right?" He repeated her words. "Yes, you think
a great deal about that."

"Of course one must. You're very tired," said Isabel.

"I'm very tired. You said just now that pain's not the deepest thing.
No--no. But it's very deep. If I could stay--"

"For me you'll always be here," she softly interrupted. It was easy to
interrupt him.

But he went on, after a moment: "It passes, after all; it's passing now.
But love remains. I don't know why we should suffer so much. Perhaps I
shall find out. There are many things in life. You're very young."

"I feel very old," said Isabel.

"You'll grow young again. That's how I see you. I don't believe--I don't
believe--" But he stopped again; his strength failed him.

She begged him to be quiet now. "We needn't speak to understand each
other," she said.

"I don't believe that such a generous mistake as yours can hurt you for
more than a little."

"Oh Ralph, I'm very happy now," she cried through her tears.

"And remember this," he continued, "that if you've been hated
you've also been loved. Ah but, Isabel--ADORED!" he just audibly and
lingeringly breathed.

"Oh my brother!" she cried with a movement of still deeper prostration.


