
Osmond touched on this matter that evening for the first time; coming
very late into the drawing-room, where she was sitting alone. They had
spent the evening at home, and Pansy had gone to bed; he himself had
been sitting since dinner in a small apartment in which he had arranged
his books and which he called his study. At ten o'clock Lord Warburton
had come in, as he always did when he knew from Isabel that she was to
be at home; he was going somewhere else and he sat for half an hour.
Isabel, after asking him for news of Ralph, said very little to him, on
purpose; she wished him to talk with her stepdaughter. She pretended to
read; she even went after a little to the piano; she asked herself if
she mightn't leave the room. She had come little by little to think
well of the idea of Pansy's becoming the wife of the master of beautiful
Lockleigh, though at first it had not presented itself in a manner to
excite her enthusiasm. Madame Merle, that afternoon, had applied the
match to an accumulation of inflammable material. When Isabel was
unhappy she always looked about her--partly from impulse and partly by
theory--for some form of positive exertion. She could never rid herself
of the sense that unhappiness was a state of disease--of suffering as
opposed to doing. To "do"--it hardly mattered what--would therefore
be an escape, perhaps in some degree a remedy. Besides, she wished to
convince herself that she had done everything possible to content her
husband; she was determined not to be haunted by visions of his wife's
limpness under appeal. It would please him greatly to see Pansy married
to an English nobleman, and justly please him, since this nobleman was
so sound a character. It seemed to Isabel that if she could make it her
duty to bring about such an event she should play the part of a good
wife. She wanted to be that; she wanted to be able to believe sincerely,
and with proof of it, that she had been that. Then such an undertaking
had other recommendations. It would occupy her, and she desired
occupation. It would even amuse her, and if she could really amuse
herself she perhaps might be saved. Lastly, it would be a service to
Lord Warburton, who evidently pleased himself greatly with the charming
girl. It was a little "weird" he should--being what he was; but there
was no accounting for such impressions. Pansy might captivate any
one--any one at least but Lord Warburton. Isabel would have thought her
too small, too slight, perhaps even too artificial for that. There was
always a little of the doll about her, and that was not what he had been
looking for. Still, who could say what men ever were looking for? They
looked for what they found; they knew what pleased them only when
they saw it. No theory was valid in such matters, and nothing was more
unaccountable or more natural than anything else. If he had cared for
HER it might seem odd he should care for Pansy, who was so different;
but he had not cared for her so much as he had supposed. Or if he had,
he had completely got over it, and it was natural that, as that affair
had failed, he should think something of quite another sort might
succeed. Enthusiasm, as I say, had not come at first to Isabel, but
it came to-day and made her feel almost happy. It was astonishing what
happiness she could still find in the idea of procuring a pleasure for
her husband. It was a pity, however, that Edward Rosier had crossed
their path!

At this reflection the light that had suddenly gleamed upon that path
lost something of its brightness. Isabel was unfortunately as sure that
Pansy thought Mr. Rosier the nicest of all the young men--as sure as if
she had held an interview with her on the subject. It was very tiresome
she should be so sure, when she had carefully abstained from informing
herself; almost as tiresome as that poor Mr. Rosier should have taken it
into his own head. He was certainly very inferior to Lord Warburton. It
was not the difference in fortune so much as the difference in the men;
the young American was really so light a weight. He was much more of
the type of the useless fine gentleman than the English nobleman. It
was true that there was no particular reason why Pansy should marry a
statesman; still, if a statesman admired her, that was his affair, and
she would make a perfect little pearl of a peeress.

It may seem to the reader that Mrs. Osmond had grown of a sudden
strangely cynical, for she ended by saying to herself that this
difficulty could probably be arranged. An impediment that was embodied
in poor Rosier could not anyhow present itself as a dangerous one; there
were always means of levelling secondary obstacles. Isabel was perfectly
aware that she had not taken the measure of Pansy's tenacity, which
might prove to be inconveniently great; but she inclined to see her
as rather letting go, under suggestion, than as clutching under
deprecation--since she had certainly the faculty of assent developed in
a very much higher degree than that of protest. She would cling, yes,
she would cling; but it really mattered to her very little what she
clung to. Lord Warburton would do as well as Mr. Rosier--especially as
she seemed quite to like him; she had expressed this sentiment to Isabel
without a single reservation; she had said she thought his conversation
most interesting--he had told her all about India. His manner to Pansy
had been of the rightest and easiest--Isabel noticed that for herself,
as she also observed that he talked to her not in the least in a
patronising way, reminding himself of her youth and simplicity, but
quite as if she understood his subjects with that sufficiency with which
she followed those of the fashionable operas. This went far enough
for attention to the music and the barytone. He was careful only to be
kind--he was as kind as he had been to another fluttered young chit at
Gardencourt. A girl might well be touched by that; she remembered how
she herself had been touched, and said to herself that if she had been
as simple as Pansy the impression would have been deeper still. She
had not been simple when she refused him; that operation had been
as complicated as, later, her acceptance of Osmond had been. Pansy,
however, in spite of HER simplicity, really did understand, and was
glad that Lord Warburton should talk to her, not about her partners and
bouquets, but about the state of Italy, the condition of the peasantry,
the famous grist-tax, the pellagra, his impressions of Roman society.
She looked at him, as she drew her needle through her tapestry, with
sweet submissive eyes, and when she lowered them she gave little quiet
oblique glances at his person, his hands, his feet, his clothes, as if
she were considering him. Even his person, Isabel might have reminded
her, was better than Mr. Rosier's. But Isabel contented herself at such
moments with wondering where this gentleman was; he came no more at all
to Palazzo Roccanera. It was surprising, as I say, the hold it had taken
of her--the idea of assisting her husband to be pleased.

It was surprising for a variety of reasons which I shall presently touch
upon. On the evening I speak of, while Lord Warburton sat there, she had
been on the point of taking the great step of going out of the room and
leaving her companions alone. I say the great step, because it was in
this light that Gilbert Osmond would have regarded it, and Isabel was
trying as much as possible to take her husband's view. She succeeded
after a fashion, but she fell short of the point I mention. After all
she couldn't rise to it; something held her and made this impossible.
It was not exactly that it would be base or insidious; for women as a
general thing practise such manoeuvres with a perfectly good conscience,
and Isabel was instinctively much more true than false to the common
genius of her sex. There was a vague doubt that interposed--a sense that
she was not quite sure. So she remained in the drawing-room, and after a
while Lord Warburton went off to his party, of which he promised to give
Pansy a full account on the morrow. After he had gone she wondered
if she had prevented something which would have happened if she
had absented herself for a quarter of an hour; and then she
pronounced--always mentally--that when their distinguished visitor
should wish her to go away he would easily find means to let her know
it. Pansy said nothing whatever about him after he had gone, and Isabel
studiously said nothing, as she had taken a vow of reserve until after
he should have declared himself. He was a little longer in coming to
this than might seem to accord with the description he had given Isabel
of his feelings. Pansy went to bed, and Isabel had to admit that
she could not now guess what her stepdaughter was thinking of. Her
transparent little companion was for the moment not to be seen through.

She remained alone, looking at the fire, until, at the end of half an
hour, her husband came in. He moved about a while in silence and
then sat down; he looked at the fire like herself. But she now had
transferred her eyes from the flickering flame in the chimney to
Osmond's face, and she watched him while he kept his silence. Covert
observation had become a habit with her; an instinct, of which it is not
an exaggeration to say that it was allied to that of self-defence, had
made it habitual. She wished as much as possible to know his thoughts,
to know what he would say, beforehand, so that she might prepare her
answer. Preparing answers had not been her strong point of old; she had
rarely in this respect got further than thinking afterwards of clever
things she might have said. But she had learned caution--learned it in
a measure from her husband's very countenance. It was the same face she
had looked into with eyes equally earnest perhaps, but less penetrating,
on the terrace of a Florentine villa; except that Osmond had grown
slightly stouter since his marriage. He still, however, might strike one
as very distinguished.

"Has Lord Warburton been here?" he presently asked.

"Yes, he stayed half an hour."

"Did he see Pansy?"

"Yes; he sat on the sofa beside her."

"Did he talk with her much?"

"He talked almost only to her."

"It seems to me he's attentive. Isn't that what you call it?"

"I don't call it anything," said Isabel; "I've waited for you to give it
a name."

"That's a consideration you don't always show," Osmond answered after a
moment.

"I've determined, this time, to try and act as you'd like. I've so often
failed of that."

Osmond turned his head slowly, looking at her. "Are you trying to
quarrel with me?"

"No, I'm trying to live at peace."

"Nothing's more easy; you know I don't quarrel myself."

"What do you call it when you try to make me angry?" Isabel asked.

"I don't try; if I've done so it has been the most natural thing in the
world. Moreover I'm not in the least trying now."

Isabel smiled. "It doesn't matter. I've determined never to be angry
again."

"That's an excellent resolve. Your temper isn't good."

"No--it's not good." She pushed away the book she had been reading and
took up the band of tapestry Pansy had left on the table.

"That's partly why I've not spoken to you about this business of my
daughter's," Osmond said, designating Pansy in the manner that was most
frequent with him. "I was afraid I should encounter opposition--that you
too would have views on the subject. I've sent little Rosier about his
business."

"You were afraid I'd plead for Mr. Rosier? Haven't you noticed that I've
never spoken to you of him?"

"I've never given you a chance. We've so little conversation in these
days. I know he was an old friend of yours."

"Yes; he's an old friend of mine." Isabel cared little more for him than
for the tapestry that she held in her hand; but it was true that he
was an old friend and that with her husband she felt a desire not to
extenuate such ties. He had a way of expressing contempt for them which
fortified her loyalty to them, even when, as in the present case, they
were in themselves insignificant. She sometimes felt a sort of passion
of tenderness for memories which had no other merit than that they
belonged to her unmarried life. "But as regards Pansy," she added in a
moment, "I've given him no encouragement."

"That's fortunate," Osmond observed.

"Fortunate for me, I suppose you mean. For him it matters little."

"There's no use talking of him," Osmond said. "As I tell you, I've
turned him out."

"Yes; but a lover outside's always a lover. He's sometimes even more of
one. Mr. Rosier still has hope."

"He's welcome to the comfort of it! My daughter has only to sit
perfectly quiet to become Lady Warburton."

"Should you like that?" Isabel asked with a simplicity which was not
so affected as it may appear. She was resolved to assume nothing, for
Osmond had a way of unexpectedly turning her assumptions against her.
The intensity with which he would like his daughter to become Lady
Warburton had been the very basis of her own recent reflections. But
that was for herself; she would recognise nothing until Osmond should
have put it into words; she would not take for granted with him that
he thought Lord Warburton a prize worth an amount of effort that was
unusual among the Osmonds. It was Gilbert's constant intimation that for
him nothing in life was a prize; that he treated as from equal to equal
with the most distinguished people in the world, and that his daughter
had only to look about her to pick out a prince. It cost him therefore
a lapse from consistency to say explicitly that he yearned for Lord
Warburton and that if this nobleman should escape his equivalent might
not be found; with which moreover it was another of his customary
implications that he was never inconsistent. He would have liked his
wife to glide over the point. But strangely enough, now that she
was face to face with him and although an hour before she had almost
invented a scheme for pleasing him, Isabel was not accommodating,
would not glide. And yet she knew exactly the effect on his mind of
her question: it would operate as an humiliation. Never mind; he was
terribly capable of humiliating her--all the more so that he was also
capable of waiting for great opportunities and of showing sometimes an
almost unaccountable indifference to small ones. Isabel perhaps took a
small opportunity because she would not have availed herself of a great
one.

Osmond at present acquitted himself very honourably. "I should like it
extremely; it would be a great marriage. And then Lord Warburton has
another advantage: he's an old friend of yours. It would be pleasant for
him to come into the family. It's very odd Pansy's admirers should all
be your old friends."

"It's natural that they should come to see me. In coming to see me they
see Pansy. Seeing her it's natural they should fall in love with her."

"So I think. But you're not bound to do so."

"If she should marry Lord Warburton I should be very glad," Isabel went
on frankly. "He's an excellent man. You say, however, that she has only
to sit perfectly still. Perhaps she won't sit perfectly still. If she
loses Mr. Rosier she may jump up!"

Osmond appeared to give no heed to this; he sat gazing at the fire.
"Pansy would like to be a great lady," he remarked in a moment with a
certain tenderness of tone. "She wishes above all to please," he added.

"To please Mr. Rosier, perhaps."

"No, to please me."

"Me too a little, I think," said Isabel.

"Yes, she has a great opinion of you. But she'll do what I like."

"If you're sure of that, it's very well," she went on.

"Meantime," said Osmond, "I should like our distinguished visitor to
speak."

"He has spoken--to me. He has told me it would be a great pleasure to
him to believe she could care for him."

Osmond turned his head quickly, but at first he said nothing. Then, "Why
didn't you tell me that?" he asked sharply.

"There was no opportunity. You know how we live. I've taken the first
chance that has offered."

"Did you speak to him of Rosier?"

"Oh yes, a little."

"That was hardly necessary."

"I thought it best he should know, so that, so that--" And Isabel
paused.

"So that what?"

"So that he might act accordingly."

"So that he might back out, do you mean?"

"No, so that he might advance while there's yet time."

"That's not the effect it seems to have had."

"You should have patience," said Isabel. "You know Englishmen are shy."

"This one's not. He was not when he made love to YOU."

She had been afraid Osmond would speak of that; it was disagreeable to
her. "I beg your pardon; he was extremely so," she returned.

He answered nothing for some time; he took up a book and fingered the
pages while she sat silent and occupied herself with Pansy's tapestry.
"You must have a great deal of influence with him," Osmond went on at
last. "The moment you really wish it you can bring him to the point."

This was more offensive still; but she felt the great naturalness of
his saying it, and it was after all extremely like what she had said
to herself. "Why should I have influence?" she asked. "What have I ever
done to put him under an obligation to me?"

"You refused to marry him," said Osmond with his eyes on his book.

"I must not presume too much on that," she replied.

He threw down the book presently and got up, standing before the fire
with his hands behind him. "Well, I hold that it lies in your hands. I
shall leave it there. With a little good-will you may manage it. Think
that over and remember how much I count on you." He waited a little,
to give her time to answer; but she answered nothing, and he presently
strolled out of the room.




She had answered nothing because his words had put the situation before
her and she was absorbed in looking at it. There was something in them
that suddenly made vibrations deep, so that she had been afraid to trust
herself to speak. After he had gone she leaned back in her chair and
closed her eyes; and for a long time, far into the night and still
further, she sat in the still drawing-room, given up to her meditation.
A servant came in to attend to the fire, and she bade him bring fresh
candles and then go to bed. Osmond had told her to think of what he had
said; and she did so indeed, and of many other things. The suggestion
from another that she had a definite influence on Lord Warburton--this
had given her the start that accompanies unexpected recognition. Was it
true that there was something still between them that might be a handle
to make him declare himself to Pansy--a susceptibility, on his part, to
approval, a desire to do what would please her? Isabel had hitherto not
asked herself the question, because she had not been forced; but now
that it was directly presented to her she saw the answer, and the answer
frightened her. Yes, there was something--something on Lord Warburton's
part. When he had first come to Rome she believed the link that united
them to be completely snapped; but little by little she had been
reminded that it had yet a palpable existence. It was as thin as a hair,
but there were moments when she seemed to hear it vibrate. For herself
nothing was changed; what she once thought of him she always thought;
it was needless this feeling should change; it seemed to her in fact a
better feeling than ever. But he? had he still the idea that she might
be more to him than other women? Had he the wish to profit by the memory
of the few moments of intimacy through which they had once passed?
Isabel knew she had read some of the signs of such a disposition. But
what were his hopes, his pretensions, and in what strange way were they
mingled with his evidently very sincere appreciation of poor Pansy? Was
he in love with Gilbert Osmond's wife, and if so what comfort did he
expect to derive from it? If he was in love with Pansy he was not in
love with her stepmother, and if he was in love with her stepmother
he was not in love with Pansy. Was she to cultivate the advantage she
possessed in order to make him commit himself to Pansy, knowing he would
do so for her sake and not for the small creature's own--was this the
service her husband had asked of her? This at any rate was the duty
with which she found herself confronted--from the moment she admitted to
herself that her old friend had still an uneradicated predilection for
her society. It was not an agreeable task; it was in fact a repulsive
one. She asked herself with dismay whether Lord Warburton were
pretending to be in love with Pansy in order to cultivate another
satisfaction and what might be called other chances. Of this refinement
of duplicity she presently acquitted him; she preferred to believe him
in perfect good faith. But if his admiration for Pansy were a delusion
this was scarcely better than its being an affectation. Isabel wandered
among these ugly possibilities until she had completely lost her way;
some of them, as she suddenly encountered them, seemed ugly enough. Then
she broke out of the labyrinth, rubbing her eyes, and declared that her
imagination surely did her little honour and that her husband's did him
even less. Lord Warburton was as disinterested as he need be, and she
was no more to him than she need wish. She would rest upon this till
the contrary should be proved; proved more effectually than by a cynical
intimation of Osmond's.

Such a resolution, however, brought her this evening but little peace,
for her soul was haunted with terrors which crowded to the foreground of
thought as quickly as a place was made for them. What had suddenly set
them into livelier motion she hardly knew, unless it were the strange
impression she had received in the afternoon of her husband's being in
more direct communication with Madame Merle than she suspected. That
impression came back to her from time to time, and now she wondered it
had never come before. Besides this, her short interview with Osmond
half an hour ago was a striking example of his faculty for making
everything wither that he touched, spoiling everything for her that he
looked at. It was very well to undertake to give him a proof of loyalty;
the real fact was that the knowledge of his expecting a thing raised a
presumption against it. It was as if he had had the evil eye; as if his
presence were a blight and his favour a misfortune. Was the fault in
himself, or only in the deep mistrust she had conceived for him? This
mistrust was now the clearest result of their short married life; a gulf
had opened between them over which they looked at each other with eyes
that were on either side a declaration of the deception suffered. It
was a strange opposition, of the like of which she had never dreamed--an
opposition in which the vital principle of the one was a thing of
contempt to the other. It was not her fault--she had practised no
deception; she had only admired and believed. She had taken all the
first steps in the purest confidence, and then she had suddenly found
the infinite vista of a multiplied life to be a dark, narrow alley
with a dead wall at the end. Instead of leading to the high places of
happiness, from which the world would seem to lie below one, so that one
could look down with a sense of exaltation and advantage, and judge and
choose and pity, it led rather downward and earthward, into realms of
restriction and depression where the sound of other lives, easier
and freer, was heard as from above, and where it served to deepen the
feeling of failure. It was her deep distrust of her husband--this was
what darkened the world. That is a sentiment easily indicated, but not
so easily explained, and so composite in its character that much time
and still more suffering had been needed to bring it to its actual
perfection. Suffering, with Isabel, was an active condition; it was
not a chill, a stupor, a despair; it was a passion of thought, of
speculation, of response to every pressure. She flattered herself
that she had kept her failing faith to herself, however,--that no one
suspected it but Osmond. Oh, he knew it, and there were times when she
thought he enjoyed it. It had come gradually--it was not till the first
year of their life together, so admirably intimate at first, had closed
that she had taken the alarm. Then the shadows had begun to gather; it
was as if Osmond deliberately, almost malignantly, had put the lights
out one by one. The dusk at first was vague and thin, and she could
still see her way in it. But it steadily deepened, and if now and again
it had occasionally lifted there were certain corners of her prospect
that were impenetrably black. These shadows were not an emanation from
her own mind: she was very sure of that; she had done her best to be
just and temperate, to see only the truth. They were a part, they were
a kind of creation and consequence, of her husband's very presence. They
were not his misdeeds, his turpitudes; she accused him of nothing--that
is but of one thing, which was NOT a crime. She knew of no wrong he had
done; he was not violent, he was not cruel: she simply believed he hated
her. That was all she accused him of, and the miserable part of it was
precisely that it was not a crime, for against a crime she might have
found redress. He had discovered that she was so different, that she was
not what he had believed she would prove to be. He had thought at first
he could change her, and she had done her best to be what he would like.
But she was, after all, herself--she couldn't help that; and now there
was no use pretending, wearing a mask or a dress, for he knew her and
had made up his mind. She was not afraid of him; she had no apprehension
he would hurt her; for the ill-will he bore her was not of that sort.
He would if possible never give her a pretext, never put himself in the
wrong. Isabel, scanning the future with dry, fixed eyes, saw that he
would have the better of her there. She would give him many pretexts,
she would often put herself in the wrong. There were times when she
almost pitied him; for if she had not deceived him in intention she
understood how completely she must have done so in fact. She had effaced
herself when he first knew her; she had made herself small, pretending
there was less of her than there really was. It was because she had been
under the extraordinary charm that he, on his side, had taken pains to
put forth. He was not changed; he had not disguised himself, during the
year of his courtship, any more than she. But she had seen only half his
nature then, as one saw the disk of the moon when it was partly masked
by the shadow of the earth. She saw the full moon now--she saw the
whole man. She had kept still, as it were, so that he should have a free
field, and yet in spite of this she had mistaken a part for the whole.

Ah, she had been immensely under the charm! It had not passed away; it
was there still: she still knew perfectly what it was that made Osmond
delightful when he chose to be. He had wished to be when he made love
to her, and as she had wished to be charmed it was not wonderful he
had succeeded. He had succeeded because he had been sincere; it never
occurred to her now to deny him that. He admired her--he had told her
why: because she was the most imaginative woman he had known. It might
very well have been true; for during those months she had imagined
a world of things that had no substance. She had had a more wondrous
vision of him, fed through charmed senses and oh such a stirred
fancy!--she had not read him right. A certain combination of features
had touched her, and in them she had seen the most striking of figures.
That he was poor and lonely and yet that somehow he was noble--that was
what had interested her and seemed to give her her opportunity. There
had been an indefinable beauty about him--in his situation, in his mind,
in his face. She had felt at the same time that he was helpless and
ineffectual, but the feeling had taken the form of a tenderness
which was the very flower of respect. He was like a sceptical voyager
strolling on the beach while he waited for the tide, looking seaward yet
not putting to sea. It was in all this she had found her occasion. She
would launch his boat for him; she would be his providence; it would be
a good thing to love him. And she had loved him, she had so anxiously
and yet so ardently given herself--a good deal for what she found in
him, but a good deal also for what she brought him and what might enrich
the gift. As she looked back at the passion of those full weeks she
perceived in it a kind of maternal strain--the happiness of a woman who
felt that she was a contributor, that she came with charged hands. But
for her money, as she saw to-day, she would never have done it. And then
her mind wandered off to poor Mr. Touchett, sleeping under English turf,
the beneficent author of infinite woe! For this was the fantastic fact.
At bottom her money had been a burden, had been on her mind, which
was filled with the desire to transfer the weight of it to some other
conscience, to some more prepared receptacle. What would lighten her
own conscience more effectually than to make it over to the man with the
best taste in the world? Unless she should have given it to a hospital
there would have been nothing better she could do with it; and there was
no charitable institution in which she had been as much interested as
in Gilbert Osmond. He would use her fortune in a way that would make her
think better of it and rub off a certain grossness attaching to the good
luck of an unexpected inheritance. There had been nothing very delicate
in inheriting seventy thousand pounds; the delicacy had been all in Mr.
Touchett's leaving them to her. But to marry Gilbert Osmond and bring
him such a portion--in that there would be delicacy for her as well.
There would be less for him--that was true; but that was his affair, and
if he loved her he wouldn't object to her being rich. Had he not had the
courage to say he was glad she was rich?

Isabel's cheek burned when she asked herself if she had really married
on a factitious theory, in order to do something finely appreciable with
her money. But she was able to answer quickly enough that this was
only half the story. It was because a certain ardour took possession of
her--a sense of the earnestness of his affection and a delight in
his personal qualities. He was better than any one else. This supreme
conviction had filled her life for months, and enough of it still
remained to prove to her that she could not have done otherwise. The
finest--in the sense of being the subtlest--manly organism she had ever
known had become her property, and the recognition of her having but
to put out her hands and take it had been originally a sort of act of
devotion. She had not been mistaken about the beauty of his mind; she
knew that organ perfectly now. She had lived with it, she had lived IN
it almost--it appeared to have become her habitation. If she had been
captured it had taken a firm hand to seize her; that reflection perhaps
had some worth. A mind more ingenious, more pliant, more cultivated,
more trained to admirable exercises, she had not encountered; and it was
this exquisite instrument she had now to reckon with. She lost herself
in infinite dismay when she thought of the magnitude of HIS deception.
It was a wonder, perhaps, in view of this, that he didn't hate her more.
She remembered perfectly the first sign he had given of it--it had been
like the bell that was to ring up the curtain upon the real drama of
their life. He said to her one day that she had too many ideas and that
she must get rid of them. He had told her that already, before their
marriage; but then she had not noticed it: it had come back to her only
afterwards. This time she might well have noticed it, because he had
really meant it. The words had been nothing superficially; but when in
the light of deepening experience she had looked into them they had then
appeared portentous. He had really meant it--he would have liked her to
have nothing of her own but her pretty appearance. She had known she had
too many ideas; she had more even than he had supposed, many more than
she had expressed to him when he had asked her to marry him. Yes, she
HAD been hypocritical; she had liked him so much. She had too many ideas
for herself; but that was just what one married for, to share them with
some one else. One couldn't pluck them up by the roots, though of course
one might suppress them, be careful not to utter them. It had not been
this, however, his objecting to her opinions; this had been nothing. She
had no opinions--none that she would not have been eager to sacrifice in
the satisfaction of feeling herself loved for it. What he had meant
had been the whole thing--her character, the way she felt, the way she
judged. This was what she had kept in reserve; this was what he had not
known until he had found himself--with the door closed behind, as it
were--set down face to face with it. She had a certain way of looking at
life which he took as a personal offence. Heaven knew that now at least
it was a very humble, accommodating way! The strange thing was that
she should not have suspected from the first that his own had been so
different. She had thought it so large, so enlightened, so perfectly
that of an honest man and a gentleman. Hadn't he assured her that he had
no superstitions, no dull limitations, no prejudices that had lost their
freshness? Hadn't he all the appearance of a man living in the open air
of the world, indifferent to small considerations, caring only for truth
and knowledge and believing that two intelligent people ought to look
for them together and, whether they found them or not, find at least
some happiness in the search? He had told her he loved the conventional;
but there was a sense in which this seemed a noble declaration. In that
sense, that of the love of harmony and order and decency and of all the
stately offices of life, she went with him freely, and his warning had
contained nothing ominous. But when, as the months had elapsed, she
had followed him further and he had led her into the mansion of his own
habitation, then, THEN she had seen where she really was.

She could live it over again, the incredulous terror with which she
had taken the measure of her dwelling. Between those four walls she had
lived ever since; they were to surround her for the rest of her life.
It was the house of darkness, the house of dumbness, the house of
suffocation. Osmond's beautiful mind gave it neither light nor air;
Osmond's beautiful mind indeed seemed to peep down from a small high
window and mock at her. Of course it had not been physical suffering;
for physical suffering there might have been a remedy. She could come
and go; she had her liberty; her husband was perfectly polite. He took
himself so seriously; it was something appalling. Under all his culture,
his cleverness, his amenity, under his good-nature, his facility, his
knowledge of life, his egotism lay hidden like a serpent in a bank
of flowers. She had taken him seriously, but she had not taken him so
seriously as that. How could she--especially when she had known him
better? She was to think of him as he thought of himself--as the first
gentleman in Europe. So it was that she had thought of him at first, and
that indeed was the reason she had married him. But when she began to
see what it implied she drew back; there was more in the bond than she
had meant to put her name to. It implied a sovereign contempt for every
one but some three or four very exalted people whom he envied, and for
everything in the world but half a dozen ideas of his own. That was very
well; she would have gone with him even there a long distance; for
he pointed out to her so much of the baseness and shabbiness of life,
opened her eyes so wide to the stupidity, the depravity, the ignorance
of mankind, that she had been properly impressed with the infinite
vulgarity of things and of the virtue of keeping one's self unspotted by
it. But this base, if noble world, it appeared, was after all what one
was to live for; one was to keep it forever in one's eye, in order
not to enlighten or convert or redeem it, but to extract from it some
recognition of one's own superiority. On the one hand it was despicable,
but on the other it afforded a standard. Osmond had talked to Isabel
about his renunciation, his indifference, the ease with which he
dispensed with the usual aids to success; and all this had seemed to
her admirable. She had thought it a grand indifference, an exquisite
independence. But indifference was really the last of his qualities;
she had never seen any one who thought so much of others. For herself,
avowedly, the world had always interested her and the study of her
fellow creatures been her constant passion. She would have been willing,
however, to renounce all her curiosities and sympathies for the sake of
a personal life, if the person concerned had only been able to make her
believe it was a gain! This at least was her present conviction; and
the thing certainly would have been easier than to care for society as
Osmond cared for it.

He was unable to live without it, and she saw that he had never really
done so; he had looked at it out of his window even when he appeared
to be most detached from it. He had his ideal, just as she had tried to
have hers; only it was strange that people should seek for justice in
such different quarters. His ideal was a conception of high prosperity
and propriety, of the aristocratic life, which she now saw that he
deemed himself always, in essence at least, to have led. He had never
lapsed from it for an hour; he would never have recovered from the shame
of doing so. That again was very well; here too she would have agreed;
but they attached such different ideas, such different associations and
desires, to the same formulas. Her notion of the aristocratic life was
simply the union of great knowledge with great liberty; the knowledge
would give one a sense of duty and the liberty a sense of enjoyment. But
for Osmond it was altogether a thing of forms, a conscious, calculated
attitude. He was fond of the old, the consecrated, the transmitted;
so was she, but she pretended to do what she chose with it. He had an
immense esteem for tradition; he had told her once that the best thing
in the world was to have it, but that if one was so unfortunate as not
to have it one must immediately proceed to make it. She knew that he
meant by this that she hadn't it, but that he was better off; though
from what source he had derived his traditions she never learned. He
had a very large collection of them, however; that was very certain,
and after a little she began to see. The great thing was to act in
accordance with them; the great thing not only for him but for her.
Isabel had an undefined conviction that to serve for another person than
their proprietor traditions must be of a thoroughly superior kind; but
she nevertheless assented to this intimation that she too must march
to the stately music that floated down from unknown periods in her
husband's past; she who of old had been so free of step, so desultory,
so devious, so much the reverse of processional. There were certain
things they must do, a certain posture they must take, certain people
they must know and not know. When she saw this rigid system close about
her, draped though it was in pictured tapestries, that sense of darkness
and suffocation of which I have spoken took possession of her; she
seemed shut up with an odour of mould and decay. She had resisted of
course; at first very humorously, ironically, tenderly; then, as the
situation grew more serious, eagerly, passionately, pleadingly. She had
pleaded the cause of freedom, of doing as they chose, of not caring for
the aspect and denomination of their life--the cause of other instincts
and longings, of quite another ideal.

Then it was that her husband's personality, touched as it never had
been, stepped forth and stood erect. The things she had said were
answered only by his scorn, and she could see he was ineffably ashamed
of her. What did he think of her--that she was base, vulgar, ignoble?
He at least knew now that she had no traditions! It had not been in his
prevision of things that she should reveal such flatness; her sentiments
were worthy of a radical newspaper or a Unitarian preacher. The real
offence, as she ultimately perceived, was her having a mind of her
own at all. Her mind was to be his--attached to his own like a small
garden-plot to a deer-park. He would rake the soil gently and water the
flowers; he would weed the beds and gather an occasional nosegay.
It would be a pretty piece of property for a proprietor already
far-reaching. He didn't wish her to be stupid. On the contrary, it was
because she was clever that she had pleased him. But he expected her
intelligence to operate altogether in his favour, and so far from
desiring her mind to be a blank he had flattered himself that it would
be richly receptive. He had expected his wife to feel with him and for
him, to enter into his opinions, his ambitions, his preferences; and
Isabel was obliged to confess that this was no great insolence on the
part of a man so accomplished and a husband originally at least so
tender. But there were certain things she could never take in. To
begin with, they were hideously unclean. She was not a daughter of the
Puritans, but for all that she believed in such a thing as chastity and
even as decency. It would appear that Osmond was far from doing anything
of the sort; some of his traditions made her push back her skirts. Did
all women have lovers? Did they all lie and even the best have their
price? Were there only three or four that didn't deceive their husbands?
When Isabel heard such things she felt a greater scorn for them than for
the gossip of a village parlour--a scorn that kept its freshness in
a very tainted air. There was the taint of her sister-in-law: did her
husband judge only by the Countess Gemini? This lady very often lied,
and she had practised deceptions that were not simply verbal. It was
enough to find these facts assumed among Osmond's traditions--it was
enough without giving them such a general extension. It was her scorn
of his assumptions, it was this that made him draw himself up. He
had plenty of contempt, and it was proper his wife should be as well
furnished; but that she should turn the hot light of her disdain upon
his own conception of things--this was a danger he had not allowed for.
He believed he should have regulated her emotions before she came to
it; and Isabel could easily imagine how his ears had scorched on his
discovering he had been too confident. When one had a wife who gave one
that sensation there was nothing left but to hate her.

She was morally certain now that this feeling of hatred, which at first
had been a refuge and a refreshment, had become the occupation and
comfort of his life. The feeling was deep, because it was sincere; he
had had the revelation that she could after all dispense with him. If
to herself the idea was startling, if it presented itself at first as a
kind of infidelity, a capacity for pollution, what infinite effect might
it not be expected to have had upon HIM? It was very simple; he
despised her; she had no traditions and the moral horizon of a
Unitarian minister. Poor Isabel, who had never been able to understand
Unitarianism! This was the certitude she had been living with now for
a time that she had ceased to measure. What was coming--what was before
them? That was her constant question. What would he do--what ought SHE
to do? When a man hated his wife what did it lead to? She didn't hate
him, that she was sure of, for every little while she felt a passionate
wish to give him a pleasant surprise. Very often, however, she felt
afraid, and it used to come over her, as I have intimated, that she
had deceived him at the very first. They were strangely married, at all
events, and it was a horrible life. Until that morning he had scarcely
spoken to her for a week; his manner was as dry as a burned-out
fire. She knew there was a special reason; he was displeased at Ralph
Touchett's staying on in Rome. He thought she saw too much of her
cousin--he had told her a week before it was indecent she should go to
him at his hotel. He would have said more than this if Ralph's invalid
state had not appeared to make it brutal to denounce him; but having had
to contain himself had only deepened his disgust. Isabel read all this
as she would have read the hour on the clock-face; she was as perfectly
aware that the sight of her interest in her cousin stirred her husband's
rage as if Osmond had locked her into her room--which she was sure was
what he wanted to do. It was her honest belief that on the whole she
was not defiant, but she certainly couldn't pretend to be indifferent to
Ralph. She believed he was dying at last and that she should never see
him again, and this gave her a tenderness for him that she had never
known before. Nothing was a pleasure to her now; how could anything be
a pleasure to a woman who knew that she had thrown away her life? There
was an everlasting weight on her heart--there was a livid light on
everything. But Ralph's little visit was a lamp in the darkness; for the
hour that she sat with him her ache for herself became somehow her ache
for HIM. She felt to-day as if he had been her brother. She had never
had a brother, but if she had and she were in trouble and he were dying,
he would be dear to her as Ralph was. Ah yes, if Gilbert was jealous of
her there was perhaps some reason; it didn't make Gilbert look better to
sit for half an hour with Ralph. It was not that they talked of him--it
was not that she complained. His name was never uttered between them. It
was simply that Ralph was generous and that her husband was not. There
was something in Ralph's talk, in his smile, in the mere fact of his
being in Rome, that made the blasted circle round which she walked more
spacious. He made her feel the good of the world; he made her feel what
might have been. He was after all as intelligent as Osmond--quite apart
from his being better. And thus it seemed to her an act of devotion
to conceal her misery from him. She concealed it elaborately; she
was perpetually, in their talk, hanging out curtains and before her
again--it lived before her again,--it had never had time to die--that
morning in the garden at Florence when he had warned her against Osmond.
She had only to close her eyes to see the place, to hear his voice, to
feel the warm, sweet air. How could he have known? What a mystery,
what a wonder of wisdom! As intelligent as Gilbert? He was much more
intelligent--to arrive at such a judgement as that. Gilbert had never
been so deep, so just. She had told him then that from her at least he
should never know if he was right; and this was what she was taking
care of now. It gave her plenty to do; there was passion, exaltation,
religion in it. Women find their religion sometimes in strange
exercises, and Isabel at present, in playing a part before her cousin,
had an idea that she was doing him a kindness. It would have been a
kindness perhaps if he had been for a single instant a dupe. As it was,
the kindness consisted mainly in trying to make him believe that he had
once wounded her greatly and that the event had put him to shame, but
that, as she was very generous and he was so ill, she bore him no grudge
and even considerately forbore to flaunt her happiness in his face.
Ralph smiled to himself, as he lay on his sofa, at this extraordinary
form of consideration; but he forgave her for having forgiven him. She
didn't wish him to have the pain of knowing she was unhappy: that was
the great thing, and it didn't matter that such knowledge would rather
have righted him.

For herself, she lingered in the soundless saloon long after the fire
had gone out. There was no danger of her feeling the cold; she was in
a fever. She heard the small hours strike, and then the great ones, but
her vigil took no heed of time. Her mind, assailed by visions, was in a
state of extraordinary activity, and her visions might as well come to
her there, where she sat up to meet them, as on her pillow, to make a
mockery of rest. As I have said, she believed she was not defiant, and
what could be a better proof of it than that she should linger there
half the night, trying to persuade herself that there was no reason why
Pansy shouldn't be married as you would put a letter in the post-office?
When the clock struck four she got up; she was going to bed at last, for
the lamp had long since gone out and the candles burned down to their
sockets. But even then she stopped again in the middle of the room
and stood there gazing at a remembered vision--that of her husband and
Madame Merle unconsciously and familiarly associated.



Three nights after this she took Pansy to a great party, to which
Osmond, who never went to dances, did not accompany them. Pansy was as
ready for a dance as ever; she was not of a generalising turn and had
not extended to other pleasures the interdict she had seen placed on
those of love. If she was biding her time or hoping to circumvent her
father she must have had a prevision of success. Isabel thought this
unlikely; it was much more likely that Pansy had simply determined to
be a good girl. She had never had such a chance, and she had a proper
esteem for chances. She carried herself no less attentively than usual
and kept no less anxious an eye upon her vaporous skirts; she held her
bouquet very tight and counted over the flowers for the twentieth time.
She made Isabel feel old; it seemed so long since she had been in a
flutter about a ball. Pansy, who was greatly admired, was never in want
of partners, and very soon after their arrival she gave Isabel, who was
not dancing, her bouquet to hold. Isabel had rendered her this service
for some minutes when she became aware of the near presence of Edward
Rosier. He stood before her; he had lost his affable smile and wore a
look of almost military resolution. The change in his appearance would
have made Isabel smile if she had not felt his case to be at bottom
a hard one: he had always smelt so much more of heliotrope than of
gunpowder. He looked at her a moment somewhat fiercely, as if to notify
her he was dangerous, and then dropped his eyes on her bouquet. After
he had inspected it his glance softened and he said quickly: "It's all
pansies; it must be hers!"

Isabel smiled kindly. "Yes, it's hers; she gave it to me to hold."

"May I hold it a little, Mrs. Osmond?" the poor young man asked.

"No, I can't trust you; I'm afraid you wouldn't give it back."

"I'm not sure that I should; I should leave the house with it instantly.
But may I not at least have a single flower?"

Isabel hesitated a moment, and then, smiling still, held out the
bouquet. "Choose one yourself. It's frightful what I'm doing for you."

"Ah, if you do no more than this, Mrs. Osmond!" Rosier exclaimed with
his glass in one eye, carefully choosing his flower.

"Don't put it into your button-hole," she said. "Don't for the world!"

"I should like her to see it. She has refused to dance with me, but I
wish to show her that I believe in her still."

"It's very well to show it to her, but it's out of place to show it to
others. Her father has told her not to dance with you."

"And is that all YOU can do for me? I expected more from you, Mrs.
Osmond," said the young man in a tone of fine general reference. "You
know our acquaintance goes back very far--quite into the days of our
innocent childhood."

"Don't make me out too old," Isabel patiently answered. "You come back
to that very often, and I've never denied it. But I must tell you that,
old friends as we are, if you had done me the honour to ask me to marry
you I should have refused you on the spot."

"Ah, you don't esteem me then. Say at once that you think me a mere
Parisian trifler!"

"I esteem you very much, but I'm not in love with you. What I mean by
that, of course, is that I'm not in love with you for Pansy."

"Very good; I see. You pity me--that's all." And Edward Rosier looked
all round, inconsequently, with his single glass. It was a revelation to
him that people shouldn't be more pleased; but he was at least too proud
to show that the deficiency struck him as general.

Isabel for a moment said nothing. His manner and appearance had not the
dignity of the deepest tragedy; his little glass, among other things,
was against that. But she suddenly felt touched; her own unhappiness,
after all, had something in common with his, and it came over her, more
than before, that here, in recognisable, if not in romantic form,
was the most affecting thing in the world--young love struggling with
adversity. "Would you really be very kind to her?" she finally asked in
a low tone.

He dropped his eyes devoutly and raised the little flower that he held
in his fingers to his lips. Then he looked at her. "You pity me; but
don't you pity HER a little?"

"I don't know; I'm not sure. She'll always enjoy life."

"It will depend on what you call life!" Mr. Rosier effectively said.
"She won't enjoy being tortured."

"There'll be nothing of that."

"I'm glad to hear it. She knows what she's about. You'll see."

"I think she does, and she'll never disobey her father. But she's coming
back to me," Isabel added, "and I must beg you to go away."

Rosier lingered a moment till Pansy came in sight on the arm of her
cavalier; he stood just long enough to look her in the face. Then he
walked away, holding up his head; and the manner in which he achieved
this sacrifice to expediency convinced Isabel he was very much in love.

Pansy, who seldom got disarranged in dancing, looking perfectly fresh
and cool after this exercise, waited a moment and then took back her
bouquet. Isabel watched her and saw she was counting the flowers;
whereupon she said to herself that decidedly there were deeper forces at
play than she had recognised. Pansy had seen Rosier turn away, but she
said nothing to Isabel about him; she talked only of her partner, after
he had made his bow and retired; of the music, the floor, the rare
misfortune of having already torn her dress. Isabel was sure, however,
she had discovered her lover to have abstracted a flower; though this
knowledge was not needed to account for the dutiful grace with which she
responded to the appeal of her next partner. That perfect amenity under
acute constraint was part of a larger system. She was again led forth
by a flushed young man, this time carrying her bouquet; and she had
not been absent many minutes when Isabel saw Lord Warburton advancing
through the crowd. He presently drew near and bade her good-evening;
she had not seen him since the day before. He looked about him, and then
"Where's the little maid?" he asked. It was in this manner that he had
formed the harmless habit of alluding to Miss Osmond.

"She's dancing," said Isabel. "You'll see her somewhere."

He looked among the dancers and at last caught Pansy's eye. "She sees
me, but she won't notice me," he then remarked. "Are you not dancing?"

"As you see, I'm a wall-flower."

"Won't you dance with me?"

"Thank you; I'd rather you should dance with the little maid."

"One needn't prevent the other--especially as she's engaged."

"She's not engaged for everything, and you can reserve yourself. She
dances very hard, and you'll be the fresher."

"She dances beautifully," said Lord Warburton, following her with his
eyes. "Ah, at last," he added, "she has given me a smile." He stood
there with his handsome, easy, important physiognomy; and as Isabel
observed him it came over her, as it had done before, that it was
strange a man of his mettle should take an interest in a little maid. It
struck her as a great incongruity; neither Pansy's small fascinations,
nor his own kindness, his good-nature, not even his need for amusement,
which was extreme and constant, were sufficient to account for it. "I
should like to dance with you," he went on in a moment, turning back to
Isabel; "but I think I like even better to talk with you."

"Yes, it's better, and it's more worthy of your dignity. Great statesmen
oughtn't to waltz."

"Don't be cruel. Why did you recommend me then to dance with Miss
Osmond?"

"Ah, that's different. If you danced with her it would look simply like
a piece of kindness--as if you were doing it for her amusement. If you
dance with me you'll look as if you were doing it for your own."

"And pray haven't I a right to amuse myself?"

"No, not with the affairs of the British Empire on your hands."

"The British Empire be hanged! You're always laughing at it."

"Amuse yourself with talking to me," said Isabel.

"I'm not sure it's really a recreation. You're too pointed; I've always
to be defending myself. And you strike me as more than usually dangerous
to-night. Will you absolutely not dance?"

"I can't leave my place. Pansy must find me here."

He was silent a little. "You're wonderfully good to her," he said
suddenly.

Isabel stared a little and smiled. "Can you imagine one's not being?"

"No indeed. I know how one is charmed with her. But you must have done a
great deal for her."

"I've taken her out with me," said Isabel, smiling still. "And I've seen
that she has proper clothes."

"Your society must have been a great benefit to her. You've talked to
her, advised her, helped her to develop."

"Ah yes, if she isn't the rose she has lived near it."

She laughed, and her companion did as much; but there was a certain
visible preoccupation in his face which interfered with complete
hilarity. "We all try to live as near it as we can," he said after a
moment's hesitation.

Isabel turned away; Pansy was about to be restored to her, and she
welcomed the diversion. We know how much she liked Lord Warburton; she
thought him pleasanter even than the sum of his merits warranted; there
was something in his friendship that appeared a kind of resource in case
of indefinite need; it was like having a large balance at the bank. She
felt happier when he was in the room; there was something reassuring in
his approach; the sound of his voice reminded her of the beneficence of
nature. Yet for all that it didn't suit her that he should be too near
her, that he should take too much of her good-will for granted. She was
afraid of that; she averted herself from it; she wished he wouldn't. She
felt that if he should come too near, as it were, it might be in her to
flash out and bid him keep his distance. Pansy came back to Isabel with
another rent in her skirt, which was the inevitable consequence of the
first and which she displayed to Isabel with serious eyes. There were
too many gentlemen in uniform; they wore those dreadful spurs, which
were fatal to the dresses of little maids. It hereupon became apparent
that the resources of women are innumerable. Isabel devoted herself
to Pansy's desecrated drapery; she fumbled for a pin and repaired the
injury; she smiled and listened to her account of her adventures. Her
attention, her sympathy were immediate and active; and they were
in direct proportion to a sentiment with which they were in no way
connected--a lively conjecture as to whether Lord Warburton might be
trying to make love to her. It was not simply his words just then; it
was others as well; it was the reference and the continuity. This was
what she thought about while she pinned up Pansy's dress. If it were
so, as she feared, he was of course unwitting; he himself had not taken
account of his intention. But this made it none the more auspicious,
made the situation none less impossible. The sooner he should get back
into right relations with things the better. He immediately began
to talk to Pansy--on whom it was certainly mystifying to see that he
dropped a smile of chastened devotion. Pansy replied, as usual, with a
little air of conscientious aspiration; he had to bend toward her a good
deal in conversation, and her eyes, as usual, wandered up and down his
robust person as if he had offered it to her for exhibition. She always
seemed a little frightened; yet her fright was not of the painful
character that suggests dislike; on the contrary, she looked as if she
knew that he knew she liked him. Isabel left them together a little and
wandered toward a friend whom she saw near and with whom she talked till
the music of the following dance began, for which she knew Pansy to be
also engaged. The girl joined her presently, with a little fluttered
flush, and Isabel, who scrupulously took Osmond's view of his daughter's
complete dependence, consigned her, as a precious and momentary loan,
to her appointed partner. About all this matter she had her own
imaginations, her own reserves; there were moments when Pansy's extreme
adhesiveness made each of them, to her sense, look foolish. But Osmond
had given her a sort of tableau of her position as his daughter's
duenna, which consisted of gracious alternations of concession and
contraction; and there were directions of his which she liked to think
she obeyed to the letter. Perhaps, as regards some of them, it was
because her doing so appeared to reduce them to the absurd.

After Pansy had been led away, she found Lord Warburton drawing near her
again. She rested her eyes on him steadily; she wished she could sound
his thoughts. But he had no appearance of confusion. "She has promised
to dance with me later," he said.

"I'm glad of that. I suppose you've engaged her for the cotillion."

At this he looked a little awkward. "No, I didn't ask her for that. It's
a quadrille."

"Ah, you're not clever!" said Isabel almost angrily. "I told her to keep
the cotillion in case you should ask for it."

"Poor little maid, fancy that!" And Lord Warburton laughed frankly. "Of
course I will if you like."

"If I like? Oh, if you dance with her only because I like it--!"

"I'm afraid I bore her. She seems to have a lot of young fellows on her
book."

Isabel dropped her eyes, reflecting rapidly; Lord Warburton stood there
looking at her and she felt his eyes on her face. She felt much inclined
to ask him to remove them. She didn't do so, however; she only said to
him, after a minute, with her own raised: "Please let me understand."

"Understand what?"

"You told me ten days ago that you'd like to marry my stepdaughter.
You've not forgotten it!"

"Forgotten it? I wrote to Mr. Osmond about it this morning."

"Ah," said Isabel, "he didn't mention to me that he had heard from you."

Lord Warburton stammered a little. "I--I didn't send my letter."

"Perhaps you forgot THAT."

"No, I wasn't satisfied with it. It's an awkward sort of letter to
write, you know. But I shall send it to-night."

"At three o'clock in the morning?"

"I mean later, in the course of the day."

"Very good. You still wish then to marry her?"

"Very much indeed."

"Aren't you afraid that you'll bore her?" And as her companion stared at
this enquiry Isabel added: "If she can't dance with you for half an hour
how will she be able to dance with you for life?"

"Ah," said Lord Warburton readily, "I'll let her dance with other
people! About the cotillion, the fact is I thought that you--that you--"

"That I would do it with you? I told you I'd do nothing."

"Exactly; so that while it's going on I might find some quiet corner
where we may sit down and talk."

"Oh," said Isabel gravely, "you're much too considerate of me."

When the cotillion came Pansy was found to have engaged herself,
thinking, in perfect humility, that Lord Warburton had no intentions.
Isabel recommended him to seek another partner, but he assured her that
he would dance with no one but herself. As, however, she had, in spite
of the remonstrances of her hostess, declined other invitations on the
ground that she was not dancing at all, it was not possible for her to
make an exception in Lord Warburton's favour.

"After all I don't care to dance," he said; "it's a barbarous amusement:
I'd much rather talk." And he intimated that he had discovered exactly
the corner he had been looking for--a quiet nook in one of the smaller
rooms, where the music would come to them faintly and not interfere
with conversation. Isabel had decided to let him carry out his idea; she
wished to be satisfied. She wandered away from the ball-room with him,
though she knew her husband desired she should not lose sight of his
daughter. It was with his daughter's pretendant, however; that would
make it right for Osmond. On her way out of the ball-room she came upon
Edward Rosier, who was standing in a doorway, with folded arms, looking
at the dance in the attitude of a young man without illusions. She
stopped a moment and asked him if he were not dancing.

"Certainly not, if I can't dance with HER!" he answered.

"You had better go away then," said Isabel with the manner of good
counsel.

"I shall not go till she does!" And he let Lord Warburton pass without
giving him a look.

This nobleman, however, had noticed the melancholy youth, and he
asked Isabel who her dismal friend was, remarking that he had seen him
somewhere before.

"It's the young man I've told you about, who's in love with Pansy."

"Ah yes, I remember. He looks rather bad."

"He has reason. My husband won't listen to him."

"What's the matter with him?" Lord Warburton enquired. "He seems very
harmless."

"He hasn't money enough, and he isn't very clever."

Lord Warburton listened with interest; he seemed struck with this
account of Edward Rosier. "Dear me; he looked a well-set-up young
fellow."

"So he is, but my husband's very particular."

"Oh, I see." And Lord Warburton paused a moment. "How much money has he
got?" he then ventured to ask.

"Some forty thousand francs a year."

"Sixteen hundred pounds? Ah, but that's very good, you know."

"So I think. My husband, however, has larger ideas."

"Yes; I've noticed that your husband has very large ideas. Is he really
an idiot, the young man?"

"An idiot? Not in the least; he's charming. When he was twelve years old
I myself was in love with him."

"He doesn't look much more than twelve to-day," Lord Warburton rejoined
vaguely, looking about him. Then with more point, "Don't you think we
might sit here?" he asked.

"Wherever you please." The room was a sort of boudoir, pervaded by a
subdued, rose-coloured light; a lady and gentleman moved out of it as
our friends came in. "It's very kind of you to take such an interest in
Mr. Rosier," Isabel said.

"He seems to me rather ill-treated. He had a face a yard long. I
wondered what ailed him."

"You're a just man," said Isabel. "You've a kind thought even for a
rival."

Lord Warburton suddenly turned with a stare. "A rival! Do you call him
my rival?"

"Surely--if you both wish to marry the same person."

"Yes--but since he has no chance!"

"I like you, however that may be, for putting your self in his place. It
shows imagination."

"You like me for it?" And Lord Warburton looked at her with an uncertain
eye. "I think you mean you're laughing at me for it."

"Yes, I'm laughing at you a little. But I like you as somebody to laugh
at."

"Ah well, then, let me enter into his situation a little more. What do
you suppose one could do for him?"

"Since I have been praising your imagination I'll leave you to imagine
that yourself," Isabel said. "Pansy too would like you for that."

"Miss Osmond? Ah, she, I flatter myself, likes me already."

"Very much, I think."

He waited a little; he was still questioning her face. "Well then, I
don't understand you. You don't mean that she cares for him?"

A quick blush sprang to his brow. "You told me she would have no wish
apart from her father's, and as I've gathered that he would favour
me--!" He paused a little and then suggested "Don't you see?" through
his blush.

"Yes, I told you she has an immense wish to please her father, and that
it would probably take her very far."

"That seems to me a very proper feeling," said Lord Warburton.

"Certainly; it's a very proper feeling." Isabel remained silent for some
moments; the room continued empty; the sound of the music reached them
with its richness softened by the interposing apartments. Then at last
she said: "But it hardly strikes me as the sort of feeling to which a
man would wish to be indebted for a wife."

"I don't know; if the wife's a good one and he thinks she does well!"

"Yes, of course you must think that."

"I do; I can't help it. You call that very British, of course."

"No, I don't. I think Pansy would do wonderfully well to marry you,
and I don't know who should know it better than you. But you're not in
love."

"Ah, yes I am, Mrs. Osmond!"

Isabel shook her head. "You like to think you are while you sit here
with me. But that's not how you strike me."

"I'm not like the young man in the doorway. I admit that. But what makes
it so unnatural? Could any one in the world be more loveable than Miss
Osmond?"

"No one, possibly. But love has nothing to do with good reasons."

"I don't agree with you. I'm delighted to have good reasons."

"Of course you are. If you were really in love you wouldn't care a straw
for them."

"Ah, really in love--really in love!" Lord Warburton exclaimed, folding
his arms, leaning back his head and stretching himself a little. "You
must remember that I'm forty-two years old. I won't pretend I'm as I
once was."

"Well, if you're sure," said Isabel, "it's all right."

He answered nothing; he sat there, with his head back, looking before
him. Abruptly, however, he changed his position; he turned quickly to
his friend. "Why are you so unwilling, so sceptical?" She met his eyes,
and for a moment they looked straight at each other. If she wished to
be satisfied she saw something that satisfied her; she saw in his
expression the gleam of an idea that she was uneasy on her own
account--that she was perhaps even in fear. It showed a suspicion, not a
hope, but such as it was it told her what she wanted to know. Not for an
instant should he suspect her of detecting in his proposal of marrying
her step-daughter an implication of increased nearness to herself, or
of thinking it, on such a betrayal, ominous. In that brief, extremely
personal gaze, however, deeper meanings passed between them than they
were conscious of at the moment.

"My dear Lord Warburton," she said, smiling, "you may do, so far as I'm
concerned, whatever comes into your head."

And with this she got up and wandered into the adjoining room, where,
within her companion's view, she was immediately addressed by a pair of
gentlemen, high personages in the Roman world, who met her as if they
had been looking for her. While she talked with them she found herself
regretting she had moved; it looked a little like running away--all the
more as Lord Warburton didn't follow her. She was glad of this, however,
and at any rate she was satisfied. She was so well satisfied that
when, in passing back into the ball-room, she found Edward Rosier still
planted in the doorway, she stopped and spoke to him again. "You did
right not to go away. I've some comfort for you."

"I need it," the young man softly wailed, "when I see you so awfully
thick with him!"

"Don't speak of him; I'll do what I can for you. I'm afraid it won't be
much, but what I can I'll do."

He looked at her with gloomy obliqueness. "What has suddenly brought you
round?"

"The sense that you are an inconvenience in doorways!" she answered,
smiling as she passed him. Half an hour later she took leave, with
Pansy, and at the foot of the staircase the two ladies, with many
other departing guests, waited a while for their carriage. Just as it
approached Lord Warburton came out of the house and assisted them to
reach their vehicle. He stood a moment at the door, asking Pansy if
she had amused herself; and she, having answered him, fell back with a
little air of fatigue. Then Isabel, at the window, detaining him by
a movement of her finger, murmured gently: "Don't forget to send your
letter to her father!"



The Countess Gemini was often extremely bored--bored, in her own phrase,
to extinction. She had not been extinguished, however, and she
struggled bravely enough with her destiny, which had been to marry an
unaccommodating Florentine who insisted upon living in his native town,
where he enjoyed such consideration as might attach to a gentleman whose
talent for losing at cards had not the merit of being incidental to an
obliging disposition. The Count Gemini was not liked even by those who
won from him; and he bore a name which, having a measurable value in
Florence, was, like the local coin of the old Italian states, without
currency in other parts of the peninsula. In Rome he was simply a very
dull Florentine, and it is not remarkable that he should not have cared
to pay frequent visits to a place where, to carry it off, his dulness
needed more explanation than was convenient. The Countess lived with her
eyes upon Rome, and it was the constant grievance of her life that she
had not an habitation there. She was ashamed to say how seldom she had
been allowed to visit that city; it scarcely made the matter better that
there were other members of the Florentine nobility who never had been
there at all. She went whenever she could; that was all she could say.
Or rather not all, but all she said she could say. In fact she had much
more to say about it, and had often set forth the reasons why she hated
Florence and wished to end her days in the shadow of Saint Peter's. They
are reasons, however, that do not closely concern us, and were usually
summed up in the declaration that Rome, in short, was the Eternal City
and that Florence was simply a pretty little place like any other. The
Countess apparently needed to connect the idea of eternity with
her amusements. She was convinced that society was infinitely more
interesting in Rome, where you met celebrities all winter at evening
parties. At Florence there were no celebrities; none at least that one
had heard of. Since her brother's marriage her impatience had greatly
increased; she was so sure his wife had a more brilliant life than
herself. She was not so intellectual as Isabel, but she was intellectual
enough to do justice to Rome--not to the ruins and the catacombs, not
even perhaps to the monuments and museums, the church ceremonies and the
scenery; but certainly to all the rest. She heard a great deal about
her sister-in-law and knew perfectly that Isabel was having a beautiful
time. She had indeed seen it for herself on the only occasion on which
she had enjoyed the hospitality of Palazzo Roccanera. She had spent a
week there during the first winter of her brother's marriage, but she
had not been encouraged to renew this satisfaction. Osmond didn't want
her--that she was perfectly aware of; but she would have gone all the
same, for after all she didn't care two straws about Osmond. It was
her husband who wouldn't let her, and the money question was always
a trouble. Isabel had been very nice; the Countess, who had liked her
sister-in-law from the first, had not been blinded by envy to Isabel's
personal merits. She had always observed that she got on better with
clever women than with silly ones like herself; the silly ones could
never understand her wisdom, whereas the clever ones--the really
clever ones--always understood her silliness. It appeared to her that,
different as they were in appearance and general style, Isabel and she
had somewhere a patch of common ground that they would set their feet
upon at last. It was not very large, but it was firm, and they should
both know it when once they had really touched it. And then she lived,
with Mrs. Osmond, under the influence of a pleasant surprise; she was
constantly expecting that Isabel would "look down" on her, and she as
constantly saw this operation postponed. She asked herself when it would
begin, like fire-works, or Lent, or the opera season; not that she
cared much, but she wondered what kept it in abeyance. Her sister-in-law
regarded her with none but level glances and expressed for the poor
Countess as little contempt as admiration. In reality Isabel would as
soon have thought of despising her as of passing a moral judgement on a
grasshopper. She was not indifferent to her husband's sister, however;
she was rather a little afraid of her. She wondered at her; she thought
her very extraordinary. The Countess seemed to her to have no soul; she
was like a bright rare shell, with a polished surface and a remarkably
pink lip, in which something would rattle when you shook it. This rattle
was apparently the Countess's spiritual principle, a little loose nut
that tumbled about inside of her. She was too odd for disdain, too
anomalous for comparisons. Isabel would have invited her again (there
was no question of inviting the Count); but Osmond, after his marriage,
had not scrupled to say frankly that Amy was a fool of the worst
species--a fool whose folly had the irrepressibility of genius. He said
at another time that she had no heart; and he added in a moment that she
had given it all away--in small pieces, like a frosted wedding-cake.
The fact of not having been asked was of course another obstacle to
the Countess's going again to Rome; but at the period with which this
history has now to deal she was in receipt of an invitation to spend
several weeks at Palazzo Roccanera. The proposal had come from Osmond
himself, who wrote to his sister that she must be prepared to be very
quiet. Whether or no she found in this phrase all the meaning he had
put into it I am unable to say; but she accepted the invitation on any
terms. She was curious, moreover; for one of the impressions of her
former visit had been that her brother had found his match. Before the
marriage she had been sorry for Isabel, so sorry as to have had serious
thoughts--if any of the Countess's thoughts were serious--of putting
her on her guard. But she had let that pass, and after a little she was
reassured. Osmond was as lofty as ever, but his wife would not be an
easy victim. The Countess was not very exact at measurements, but it
seemed to her that if Isabel should draw herself up she would be the
taller spirit of the two. What she wanted to learn now was whether
Isabel had drawn herself up; it would give her immense pleasure to see
Osmond overtopped.

Several days before she was to start for Rome a servant brought her the
card of a visitor--a card with the simple superscription "Henrietta C.
Stackpole." The Countess pressed her finger-tips to her forehead; she
didn't remember to have known any such Henrietta as that. The servant
then remarked that the lady had requested him to say that if the
Countess should not recognise her name she would know her well enough on
seeing her. By the time she appeared before her visitor she had in fact
reminded herself that there was once a literary lady at Mrs. Touchett's;
the only woman of letters she had ever encountered--that is the only
modern one, since she was the daughter of a defunct poetess. She
recognised Miss Stackpole immediately, the more so that Miss Stackpole
seemed perfectly unchanged; and the Countess, who was thoroughly
good-natured, thought it rather fine to be called on by a person of that
sort of distinction. She wondered if Miss Stackpole had come on account
of her mother--whether she had heard of the American Corinne. Her mother
was not at all like Isabel's friend; the Countess could see at a
glance that this lady was much more contemporary; and she received
an impression of the improvements that were taking place--chiefly in
distant countries--in the character (the professional character) of
literary ladies. Her mother had been used to wear a Roman scarf thrown
over a pair of shoulders timorously bared of their tight black velvet
(oh the old clothes!) and a gold laurel-wreath set upon a multitude of
glossy ringlets. She had spoken softly and vaguely, with the accent of
her "Creole" ancestors, as she always confessed; she sighed a great deal
and was not at all enterprising. But Henrietta, the Countess could see,
was always closely buttoned and compactly braided; there was something
brisk and business-like in her appearance; her manner was almost
conscientiously familiar. It was as impossible to imagine her ever
vaguely sighing as to imagine a letter posted without its address. The
Countess could not but feel that the correspondent of the Interviewer
was much more in the movement than the American Corinne. She explained
that she had called on the Countess because she was the only person she
knew in Florence, and that when she visited a foreign city she liked to
see something more than superficial travellers. She knew Mrs. Touchett,
but Mrs. Touchett was in America, and even if she had been in Florence
Henrietta would not have put herself out for her, since Mrs. Touchett
was not one of her admirations.

"Do you mean by that that I am?" the Countess graciously asked.

"Well, I like you better than I do her," said Miss Stackpole. "I seem to
remember that when I saw you before you were very interesting. I don't
know whether it was an accident or whether it's your usual style. At
any rate I was a good deal struck with what you said. I made use of it
afterwards in print."

"Dear me!" cried the Countess, staring and half-alarmed; "I had no idea
I ever said anything remarkable! I wish I had known it at the time."

"It was about the position of woman in this city," Miss Stackpole
remarked. "You threw a good deal of light upon it."

"The position of woman's very uncomfortable. Is that what you mean? And
you wrote it down and published it?" the Countess went on. "Ah, do let
me see it!"

"I'll write to them to send you the paper if you like," Henrietta said.
"I didn't mention your name; I only said a lady of high rank. And then I
quoted your views."

The Countess threw herself hastily backward, tossing up her clasped
hands. "Do you know I'm rather sorry you didn't mention my name? I
should have rather liked to see my name in the papers. I forget what my
views were; I have so many! But I'm not ashamed of them. I'm not at all
like my brother--I suppose you know my brother? He thinks it a kind of
scandal to be put in the papers; if you were to quote him he'd never
forgive you."

"He needn't be afraid; I shall never refer to him," said Miss Stackpole
with bland dryness. "That's another reason," she added, "why I wanted to
come to see you. You know Mr. Osmond married my dearest friend."

"Ah, yes; you were a friend of Isabel's. I was trying to think what I
knew about you."

"I'm quite willing to be known by that," Henrietta declared. "But that
isn't what your brother likes to know me by. He has tried to break up my
relations with Isabel."

"Don't permit it," said the Countess.

"That's what I want to talk about. I'm going to Rome."

"So am I!" the Countess cried. "We'll go together."

"With great pleasure. And when I write about my journey I'll mention you
by name as my companion."

The Countess sprang from her chair and came and sat on the sofa beside
her visitor. "Ah, you must send me the paper! My husband won't like it,
but he need never see it. Besides, he doesn't know how to read."

Henrietta's large eyes became immense. "Doesn't know how to read? May I
put that into my letter?"

"Into your letter?"

"In the Interviewer. That's my paper."

"Oh yes, if you like; with his name. Are you going to stay with Isabel?"

Henrietta held up her head, gazing a little in silence at her hostess.
"She has not asked me. I wrote to her I was coming, and she answered
that she would engage a room for me at a pension. She gave no reason."

The Countess listened with extreme interest. "The reason's Osmond," she
pregnantly remarked.

"Isabel ought to make a stand," said Miss Stackpole. "I'm afraid she has
changed a great deal. I told her she would."

"I'm sorry to hear it; I hoped she would have her own way. Why doesn't
my brother like you?" the Countess ingenuously added.

"I don't know and I don't care. He's perfectly welcome not to like me;
I don't want every one to like me; I should think less of myself if some
people did. A journalist can't hope to do much good unless he gets a
good deal hated; that's the way he knows how his work goes on. And it's
just the same for a lady. But I didn't expect it of Isabel."

"Do you mean that she hates you?" the Countess enquired.

"I don't know; I want to see. That's what I'm going to Rome for."

"Dear me, what a tiresome errand!" the Countess exclaimed.

"She doesn't write to me in the same way; it's easy to see there's a
difference. If you know anything," Miss Stackpole went on, "I should
like to hear it beforehand, so as to decide on the line I shall take."

The Countess thrust out her under lip and gave a gradual shrug. "I know
very little; I see and hear very little of Osmond. He doesn't like me
any better than he appears to like you."

"Yet you're not a lady correspondent," said Henrietta pensively.

"Oh, he has plenty of reasons. Nevertheless they've invited me--I'm
to stay in the house!" And the Countess smiled almost fiercely; her
exultation, for the moment, took little account of Miss Stackpole's
disappointment.

This lady, however, regarded it very placidly. "I shouldn't have gone if
she HAD asked me. That is I think I shouldn't; and I'm glad I hadn't
to make up my mind. It would have been a very difficult question. I
shouldn't have liked to turn away from her, and yet I shouldn't have
been happy under her roof. A pension will suit me very well. But that's
not all."

"Rome's very good just now," said the Countess; "there are all sorts of
brilliant people. Did you ever hear of Lord Warburton?"

"Hear of him? I know him very well. Do you consider him very brilliant?"
Henrietta enquired.

"I don't know him, but I'm told he's extremely grand seigneur. He's
making love to Isabel."

"Making love to her?"

"So I'm told; I don't know the details," said the Countess lightly. "But
Isabel's pretty safe."

Henrietta gazed earnestly at her companion; for a moment she said
nothing. "When do you go to Rome?" she enquired abruptly.

"Not for a week, I'm afraid."

"I shall go to-morrow," Henrietta said. "I think I had better not wait."

"Dear me, I'm sorry; I'm having some dresses made. I'm told Isabel
receives immensely. But I shall see you there; I shall call on you
at your pension." Henrietta sat still--she was lost in thought; and
suddenly the Countess cried: "Ah, but if you don't go with me you can't
describe our journey!"

Miss Stackpole seemed unmoved by this consideration; she was thinking
of something else and presently expressed it. "I'm not sure that I
understand you about Lord Warburton."

"Understand me? I mean he's very nice, that's all."

"Do you consider it nice to make love to married women?" Henrietta
enquired with unprecedented distinctness.

The Countess stared, and then with a little violent laugh: "It's certain
all the nice men do it. Get married and you'll see!" she added.

"That idea would be enough to prevent me," said Miss Stackpole. "I
should want my own husband; I shouldn't want any one else's. Do you mean
that Isabel's guilty--guilty--?" And she paused a little, choosing her
expression.

"Do I mean she's guilty? Oh dear no, not yet, I hope. I only mean that
Osmond's very tiresome and that Lord Warburton, as I hear, is a great
deal at the house. I'm afraid you're scandalised."

"No, I'm just anxious," Henrietta said.

"Ah, you're not very complimentary to Isabel! You should have more
confidence. I'll tell you," the Countess added quickly: "if it will be a
comfort to you I engage to draw him off."

Miss Stackpole answered at first only with the deeper solemnity of her
gaze. "You don't understand me," she said after a while. "I haven't the
idea you seem to suppose. I'm not afraid for Isabel--in that way. I'm
only afraid she's unhappy--that's what I want to get at."

The Countess gave a dozen turns of the head; she looked impatient and
sarcastic. "That may very well be; for my part I should like to know
whether Osmond is." Miss Stackpole had begun a little to bore her.

"If she's really changed that must be at the bottom of it," Henrietta
went on.

"You'll see; she'll tell you," said the Countess.

"Ah, she may NOT tell me--that's what I'm afraid of!"

"Well, if Osmond isn't amusing himself--in his own old way--I flatter
myself I shall discover it," the Countess rejoined.

"I don't care for that," said Henrietta.

"I do immensely! If Isabel's unhappy I'm very sorry for her, but I can't
help it. I might tell her something that would make her worse, but I
can't tell her anything that would console her. What did she go and
marry him for? If she had listened to me she'd have got rid of him. I'll
forgive her, however, if I find she has made things hot for him! If she
has simply allowed him to trample upon her I don't know that I shall
even pity her. But I don't think that's very likely. I count upon
finding that if she's miserable she has at least made HIM so."

Henrietta got up; these seemed to her, naturally, very dreadful
expectations. She honestly believed she had no desire to see Mr. Osmond
unhappy; and indeed he could not be for her the subject of a flight of
fancy. She was on the whole rather disappointed in the Countess, whose
mind moved in a narrower circle than she had imagined, though with a
capacity for coarseness even there. "It will be better if they love each
other," she said for edification.

"They can't. He can't love any one."

"I presumed that was the case. But it only aggravates my fear for
Isabel. I shall positively start to-morrow."

"Isabel certainly has devotees," said the Countess, smiling very
vividly. "I declare I don't pity her."

"It may be I can't assist her," Miss Stackpole pursued, as if it were
well not to have illusions.

"You can have wanted to, at any rate; that's something. I believe that's
what you came from America for," the Countess suddenly added.

"Yes, I wanted to look after her," Henrietta said serenely.

Her hostess stood there smiling at her with small bright eyes and an
eager-looking nose; with cheeks into each of which a flush had come.
"Ah, that's very pretty c'est bien gentil! Isn't it what they call
friendship?"

"I don't know what they call it. I thought I had better come."

"She's very happy--she's very fortunate," the Countess went on. "She
has others besides." And then she broke out passionately. "She's more
fortunate than I! I'm as unhappy as she--I've a very bad husband; he's a
great deal worse than Osmond. And I've no friends. I thought I had, but
they're gone. No one, man or woman, would do for me what you've done for
her."

Henrietta was touched; there was nature in this bitter effusion. She
gazed at her companion a moment, and then: "Look here, Countess, I'll do
anything for you that you like. I'll wait over and travel with you."

"Never mind," the Countess answered with a quick change of tone: "only
describe me in the newspaper!"

Henrietta, before leaving her, however, was obliged to make her
understand that she could give no fictitious representation of her
journey to Rome. Miss Stackpole was a strictly veracious reporter. On
quitting her she took the way to the Lung' Arno, the sunny quay beside
the yellow river where the bright-faced inns familiar to tourists stand
all in a row. She had learned her way before this through the streets of
Florence (she was very quick in such matters), and was therefore able
to turn with great decision of step out of the little square which forms
the approach to the bridge of the Holy Trinity. She proceeded to the
left, toward the Ponte Vecchio, and stopped in front of one of the
hotels which overlook that delightful structure. Here she drew forth
a small pocket-book, took from it a card and a pencil and, after
meditating a moment, wrote a few words. It is our privilege to look over
her shoulder, and if we exercise it we may read the brief query: "Could
I see you this evening for a few moments on a very important matter?"
Henrietta added that she should start on the morrow for Rome. Armed with
this little document she approached the porter, who now had taken up
his station in the doorway, and asked if Mr. Goodwood were at home.
The porter replied, as porters always reply, that he had gone out about
twenty minutes before; whereupon Henrietta presented her card and begged
it might be handed him on his return. She left the inn and pursued her
course along the quay to the severe portico of the Uffizi, through which
she presently reached the entrance of the famous gallery of paintings.
Making her way in, she ascended the high staircase which leads to the
upper chambers. The long corridor, glazed on one side and decorated with
antique busts, which gives admission to these apartments, presented an
empty vista in which the bright winter light twinkled upon the marble
floor. The gallery is very cold and during the midwinter weeks but
scantily visited. Miss Stackpole may appear more ardent in her quest of
artistic beauty than she has hitherto struck us as being, but she had
after all her preferences and admirations. One of the latter was the
little Correggio of the Tribune--the Virgin kneeling down before the
sacred infant, who lies in a litter of straw, and clapping her hands
to him while he delightedly laughs and crows. Henrietta had a special
devotion to this intimate scene--she thought it the most beautiful
picture in the world. On her way, at present, from New York to Rome, she
was spending but three days in Florence, and yet reminded herself that
they must not elapse without her paying another visit to her favourite
work of art. She had a great sense of beauty in all ways, and it
involved a good many intellectual obligations. She was about to turn
into the Tribune when a gentleman came out of it; whereupon she gave a
little exclamation and stood before Caspar Goodwood.

"I've just been at your hotel," she said. "I left a card for you."

"I'm very much honoured," Caspar Goodwood answered as if he really meant
it.

"It was not to honour you I did it; I've called on you before and I know
you don't like it. It was to talk to you a little about something."

He looked for a moment at the buckle in her hat. "I shall be very glad
to hear what you wish to say."

"You don't like to talk with me," said Henrietta. "But I don't care for
that; I don't talk for your amusement. I wrote a word to ask you to come
and see me; but since I've met you here this will do as well."

"I was just going away," Goodwood stated; "but of course I'll stop." He
was civil, but not enthusiastic.

Henrietta, however, never looked for great professions, and she was
so much in earnest that she was thankful he would listen to her on
any terms. She asked him first, none the less, if he had seen all the
pictures.

"All I want to. I've been here an hour."

"I wonder if you've seen my Correggio," said Henrietta. "I came up on
purpose to have a look at it." She went into the Tribune and he slowly
accompanied her.

"I suppose I've seen it, but I didn't know it was yours. I don't
remember pictures--especially that sort." She had pointed out her
favourite work, and he asked her if it was about Correggio she wished to
talk with him.

"No," said Henrietta, "it's about something less harmonious!" They
had the small, brilliant room, a splendid cabinet of treasures, to
themselves; there was only a custode hovering about the Medicean Venus.
"I want you to do me a favour," Miss Stackpole went on.

Caspar Goodwood frowned a little, but he expressed no embarrassment at
the sense of not looking eager. His face was that of a much older man
than our earlier friend. "I'm sure it's something I shan't like," he
said rather loudly.

"No, I don't think you'll like it. If you did it would be no favour."

"Well, let's hear it," he went on in the tone of a man quite conscious
of his patience.

"You may say there's no particular reason why you should do me a favour.
Indeed I only know of one: the fact that if you'd let me I'd gladly do
you one." Her soft, exact tone, in which there was no attempt at effect,
had an extreme sincerity; and her companion, though he presented rather
a hard surface, couldn't help being touched by it. When he was touched
he rarely showed it, however, by the usual signs; he neither blushed,
nor looked away, nor looked conscious. He only fixed his attention more
directly; he seemed to consider with added firmness. Henrietta continued
therefore disinterestedly, without the sense of an advantage. "I may say
now, indeed--it seems a good time--that if I've ever annoyed you (and
I think sometimes I have) it's because I knew I was willing to suffer
annoyance for you. I've troubled you--doubtless. But I'd TAKE trouble
for you."

Goodwood hesitated. "You're taking trouble now."

"Yes, I am--some. I want you to consider whether it's better on the
whole that you should go to Rome."

"I thought you were going to say that!" he answered rather artlessly.

"You HAVE considered it then?"

"Of course I have, very carefully. I've looked all round it. Otherwise
I shouldn't have come so far as this. That's what I stayed in Paris two
months for. I was thinking it over."

"I'm afraid you decided as you liked. You decided it was best because
you were so much attracted."

"Best for whom, do you mean?" Goodwood demanded.

"Well, for yourself first. For Mrs. Osmond next."

"Oh, it won't do HER any good! I don't flatter myself that."

"Won't it do her some harm?--that's the question."

"I don't see what it will matter to her. I'm nothing to Mrs. Osmond. But
if you want to know, I do want to see her myself."

"Yes, and that's why you go."

"Of course it is. Could there be a better reason?"

"How will it help you?--that's what I want to know," said Miss
Stackpole.

"That's just what I can't tell you. It's just what I was thinking about
in Paris."

"It will make you more discontented."

"Why do you say 'more' so?" Goodwood asked rather sternly. "How do you
know I'm discontented?"

"Well," said Henrietta, hesitating a little, "you seem never to have
cared for another."

"How do you know what I care for?" he cried with a big blush. "Just now
I care to go to Rome."

Henrietta looked at him in silence, with a sad yet luminous expression.
"Well," she observed at last, "I only wanted to tell you what I think;
I had it on my mind. Of course you think it's none of my business. But
nothing is any one's business, on that principle."

"It's very kind of you; I'm greatly obliged to you for your interest,"
said Caspar Goodwood. "I shall go to Rome and I shan't hurt Mrs.
Osmond."

"You won't hurt her, perhaps. But will you help her?--that's the real
issue."

"Is she in need of help?" he asked slowly, with a penetrating look.

"Most women always are," said Henrietta, with conscientious evasiveness
and generalising less hopefully than usual. "If you go to Rome," she
added, "I hope you'll be a true friend--not a selfish one!" And she
turned off and began to look at the pictures.

Caspar Goodwood let her go and stood watching her while she wandered
round the room; but after a moment he rejoined her. "You've heard
something about her here," he then resumed. "I should like to know what
you've heard."

Henrietta had never prevaricated in her life, and, though on this
occasion there might have been a fitness in doing so, she decided, after
thinking some minutes, to make no superficial exception. "Yes, I've
heard," she answered; "but as I don't want you to go to Rome I won't
tell you."

"Just as you please. I shall see for myself," he said. Then
inconsistently, for him, "You've heard she's unhappy!" he added.

"Oh, you won't see that!" Henrietta exclaimed.

"I hope not. When do you start?"

"To-morrow, by the evening train. And you?"

Goodwood hung back; he had no desire to make his journey to Rome in Miss
Stackpole's company. His indifference to this advantage was not of the
same character as Gilbert Osmond's, but it had at this moment an equal
distinctness. It was rather a tribute to Miss Stackpole's virtues than a
reference to her faults. He thought her very remarkable, very brilliant,
and he had, in theory, no objection to the class to which she belonged.
Lady correspondents appeared to him a part of the natural scheme of
things in a progressive country, and though he never read their letters
he supposed that they ministered somehow to social prosperity. But
it was this very eminence of their position that made him wish Miss
Stackpole didn't take so much for granted. She took for granted that he
was always ready for some allusion to Mrs. Osmond; she had done so when
they met in Paris, six weeks after his arrival in Europe, and she had
repeated the assumption with every successive opportunity. He had no
wish whatever to allude to Mrs. Osmond; he was NOT always thinking of
her; he was perfectly sure of that. He was the most reserved, the least
colloquial of men, and this enquiring authoress was constantly flashing
her lantern into the quiet darkness of his soul. He wished she didn't
care so much; he even wished, though it might seem rather brutal of him,
that she would leave him alone. In spite of this, however, he just now
made other reflections--which show how widely different, in effect, his
ill-humour was from Gilbert Osmond's. He desired to go immediately to
Rome; he would have liked to go alone, in the night-train. He hated the
European railway-carriages, in which one sat for hours in a vise, knee
to knee and nose to nose with a foreigner to whom one presently found
one's self objecting with all the added vehemence of one's wish to have
the window open; and if they were worse at night even than by day, at
least at night one could sleep and dream of an American saloon-car. But
he couldn't take a night-train when Miss Stackpole was starting in the
morning; it struck him that this would be an insult to an unprotected
woman. Nor could he wait until after she had gone unless he should wait
longer than he had patience for. It wouldn't do to start the next day.
She worried him; she oppressed him; the idea of spending the day in
a European railway-carriage with her offered a complication of
irritations. Still, she was a lady travelling alone; it was his duty to
put himself out for her. There could be no two questions about that;
it was a perfectly clear necessity. He looked extremely grave for some
moments and then said, wholly without the flourish of gallantry but in a
tone of extreme distinctness, "Of course if you're going to-morrow I'll
go too, as I may be of assistance to you."

"Well, Mr. Goodwood, I should hope so!" Henrietta returned
imperturbably.


