
Some fortnight after this Madame Merle drove up in a hansom cab to
the house in Winchester Square. As she descended from her vehicle she
observed, suspended between the dining-room windows, a large, neat,
wooden tablet, on whose fresh black ground were inscribed in white paint
the words--"This noble freehold mansion to be sold"; with the name of
the agent to whom application should be made. "They certainly lose no
time," said the visitor as, after sounding the big brass knocker, she
waited to be admitted; "it's a practical country!" And within the house,
as she ascended to the drawing-room, she perceived numerous signs of
abdication; pictures removed from the walls and placed upon sofas,
windows undraped and floors laid bare. Mrs. Touchett presently received
her and intimated in a few words that condolences might be taken for
granted.

"I know what you're going to say--he was a very good man. But I know it
better than any one, because I gave him more chance to show it. In that
I think I was a good wife." Mrs. Touchett added that at the end her
husband apparently recognised this fact. "He has treated me most
liberally," she said; "I won't say more liberally than I expected,
because I didn't expect. You know that as a general thing I don't
expect. But he chose, I presume, to recognise the fact that though I
lived much abroad and mingled--you may say freely--in foreign life, I
never exhibited the smallest preference for any one else."

"For any one but yourself," Madame Merle mentally observed; but the
reflexion was perfectly inaudible.

"I never sacrificed my husband to another," Mrs. Touchett continued with
her stout curtness.

"Oh no," thought Madame Merle; "you never did anything for another!"

There was a certain cynicism in these mute comments which demands an
explanation; the more so as they are not in accord either with the
view--somewhat superficial perhaps--that we have hitherto enjoyed of
Madame Merle's character or with the literal facts of Mrs. Touchett's
history; the more so, too, as Madame Merle had a well-founded conviction
that her friend's last remark was not in the least to be construed as a
side-thrust at herself. The truth is that the moment she had crossed the
threshold she received an impression that Mr. Touchett's death had had
subtle consequences and that these consequences had been profitable to
a little circle of persons among whom she was not numbered. Of course
it was an event which would naturally have consequences; her imagination
had more than once rested upon this fact during her stay at Gardencourt.
But it had been one thing to foresee such a matter mentally and another
to stand among its massive records. The idea of a distribution of
property--she would almost have said of spoils--just now pressed upon
her senses and irritated her with a sense of exclusion. I am far from
wishing to picture her as one of the hungry mouths or envious hearts of
the general herd, but we have already learned of her having desires
that had never been satisfied. If she had been questioned, she would
of course have admitted--with a fine proud smile--that she had not the
faintest claim to a share in Mr. Touchett's relics. "There was never
anything in the world between us," she would have said. "There was never
that, poor man!"--with a fillip of her thumb and her third finger. I
hasten to add, moreover, that if she couldn't at the present moment keep
from quite perversely yearning she was careful not to betray herself.
She had after all as much sympathy for Mrs. Touchett's gains as for her
losses.

"He has left me this house," the newly-made widow said; "but of course
I shall not live in it; I've a much better one in Florence. The will
was opened only three days since, but I've already offered the house for
sale. I've also a share in the bank; but I don't yet understand if I'm
obliged to leave it there. If not I shall certainly take it out. Ralph,
of course, has Gardencourt; but I'm not sure that he'll have means to
keep up the place. He's naturally left very well off, but his father has
given away an immense deal of money; there are bequests to a string of
third cousins in Vermont. Ralph, however, is very fond of Gardencourt
and would be quite capable of living there--in summer--with a
maid-of-all-work and a gardener's boy. There's one remarkable clause
in my husband's will," Mrs. Touchett added. "He has left my niece a
fortune."

"A fortune!" Madame Merle softly repeated.

"Isabel steps into something like seventy thousand pounds." Madame
Merle's hands were clasped in her lap; at this she raised them, still
clasped, and held them a moment against her bosom while her eyes, a
little dilated, fixed themselves on those of her friend. "Ah," she
cried, "the clever creature!"

Mrs. Touchett gave her a quick look. "What do you mean by that?"

For an instant Madame Merle's colour rose and she dropped her eyes. "It
certainly is clever to achieve such results--without an effort!"

"There assuredly was no effort. Don't call it an achievement."

Madame Merle was seldom guilty of the awkwardness of retracting what she
had said; her wisdom was shown rather in maintaining it and placing it
in a favourable light. "My dear friend, Isabel would certainly not
have had seventy thousand pounds left her if she had not been the most
charming girl in the world. Her charm includes great cleverness."

"She never dreamed, I'm sure, of my husband's doing anything for her;
and I never dreamed of it either, for he never spoke to me of his
intention," Mrs. Touchett said. "She had no claim upon him whatever; it
was no great recommendation to him that she was my niece. Whatever she
achieved she achieved unconsciously."

"Ah," rejoined Madame Merle, "those are the greatest strokes!" Mrs.
Touchett reserved her opinion. "The girl's fortunate; I don't deny that.
But for the present she's simply stupefied."

"Do you mean that she doesn't know what to do with the money?"

"That, I think, she has hardly considered. She doesn't know what to
think about the matter at all. It has been as if a big gun were suddenly
fired off behind her; she's feeling herself to see if she be hurt. It's
but three days since she received a visit from the principal executor,
who came in person, very gallantly, to notify her. He told me afterwards
that when he had made his little speech she suddenly burst into tears.
The money's to remain in the affairs of the bank, and she's to draw the
interest."

Madame Merle shook her head with a wise and now quite benignant smile.
"How very delicious! After she has done that two or three times she'll
get used to it." Then after a silence, "What does your son think of it?"
she abruptly asked.

"He left England before the will was read--used up by his fatigue and
anxiety and hurrying off to the south. He's on his way to the Riviera
and I've not yet heard from him. But it's not likely he'll ever object
to anything done by his father."

"Didn't you say his own share had been cut down?"

"Only at his wish. I know that he urged his father to do something for
the people in America. He's not in the least addicted to looking after
number one."

"It depends upon whom he regards as number one!" said Madame Merle. And
she remained thoughtful a moment, her eyes bent on the floor.

"Am I not to see your happy niece?" she asked at last as she raised
them.

"You may see her; but you'll not be struck with her being happy. She
has looked as solemn, these three days, as a Cimabue Madonna!" And Mrs.
Touchett rang for a servant.

Isabel came in shortly after the footman had been sent to call her; and
Madame Merle thought, as she appeared, that Mrs. Touchett's comparison
had its force. The girl was pale and grave--an effect not mitigated by
her deeper mourning; but the smile of her brightest moments came into
her face as she saw Madame Merle, who went forward, laid her hand on our
heroine's shoulder and, after looking at her a moment, kissed her as if
she were returning the kiss she had received from her at Gardencourt.
This was the only allusion the visitor, in her great good taste, made
for the present to her young friend's inheritance.

Mrs. Touchett had no purpose of awaiting in London the sale of her
house. After selecting from among its furniture the objects she wished
to transport to her other abode, she left the rest of its contents to be
disposed of by the auctioneer and took her departure for the Continent.
She was of course accompanied on this journey by her niece, who now had
plenty of leisure to measure and weigh and otherwise handle the windfall
on which Madame Merle had covertly congratulated her. Isabel thought
very often of the fact of her accession of means, looking at it in a
dozen different lights; but we shall not now attempt to follow her train
of thought or to explain exactly why her new consciousness was at first
oppressive. This failure to rise to immediate joy was indeed but brief;
the girl presently made up her mind that to be rich was a virtue because
it was to be able to do, and that to do could only be sweet. It was
the graceful contrary of the stupid side of weakness--especially the
feminine variety. To be weak was, for a delicate young person, rather
graceful, but, after all, as Isabel said to herself, there was a larger
grace than that. Just now, it is true, there was not much to do--once
she had sent off a cheque to Lily and another to poor Edith; but she was
thankful for the quiet months which her mourning robes and her aunt's
fresh widowhood compelled them to spend together. The acquisition of
power made her serious; she scrutinised her power with a kind of tender
ferocity, but was not eager to exercise it. She began to do so during
a stay of some weeks which she eventually made with her aunt in Paris,
though in ways that will inevitably present themselves as trivial. They
were the ways most naturally imposed in a city in which the shops are
the admiration of the world, and that were prescribed unreservedly by
the guidance of Mrs. Touchett, who took a rigidly practical view of the
transformation of her niece from a poor girl to a rich one. "Now that
you're a young woman of fortune you must know how to play the part--I
mean to play it well," she said to Isabel once for all; and she added
that the girl's first duty was to have everything handsome. "You don't
know how to take care of your things, but you must learn," she went on;
this was Isabel's second duty. Isabel submitted, but for the present
her imagination was not kindled; she longed for opportunities, but these
were not the opportunities she meant.

Mrs. Touchett rarely changed her plans, and, having intended before her
husband's death to spend a part of the winter in Paris, saw no reason to
deprive herself--still less to deprive her companion--of this advantage.
Though they would live in great retirement she might still present
her niece, informally, to the little circle of her fellow countrymen
dwelling upon the skirts of the Champs Elysees. With many of these
amiable colonists Mrs. Touchett was intimate; she shared their
expatriation, their convictions, their pastimes, their ennui. Isabel
saw them arrive with a good deal of assiduity at her aunt's hotel, and
pronounced on them with a trenchancy doubtless to be accounted for by
the temporary exaltation of her sense of human duty. She made up her
mind that their lives were, though luxurious, inane, and incurred some
disfavour by expressing this view on bright Sunday afternoons, when the
American absentees were engaged in calling on each other. Though her
listeners passed for people kept exemplarily genial by their cooks and
dressmakers, two or three of them thought her cleverness, which was
generally admitted, inferior to that of the new theatrical pieces. "You
all live here this way, but what does it lead to?" she was pleased to
ask. "It doesn't seem to lead to anything, and I should think you'd get
very tired of it."

Mrs. Touchett thought the question worthy of Henrietta Stackpole. The
two ladies had found Henrietta in Paris, and Isabel constantly saw her;
so that Mrs. Touchett had some reason for saying to herself that if her
niece were not clever enough to originate almost anything, she might be
suspected of having borrowed that style of remark from her journalistic
friend. The first occasion on which Isabel had spoken was that of
a visit paid by the two ladies to Mrs. Luce, an old friend of Mrs.
Touchett's and the only person in Paris she now went to see. Mrs. Luce
had been living in Paris since the days of Louis Philippe; she used to
say jocosely that she was one of the generation of 1830--a joke of
which the point was not always taken. When it failed Mrs. Luce used to
explain--"Oh yes, I'm one of the romantics;" her French had never
become quite perfect. She was always at home on Sunday afternoons and
surrounded by sympathetic compatriots, usually the same. In fact she
was at home at all times, and reproduced with wondrous truth in her
well-cushioned little corner of the brilliant city, the domestic tone of
her native Baltimore. This reduced Mr. Luce, her worthy husband, a tall,
lean, grizzled, well-brushed gentleman who wore a gold eye-glass and
carried his hat a little too much on the back of his head, to mere
platonic praise of the "distractions" of Paris--they were his great
word--since you would never have guessed from what cares he escaped to
them. One of them was that he went every day to the American banker's,
where he found a post-office that was almost as sociable and colloquial
an institution as in an American country town. He passed an hour (in
fine weather) in a chair in the Champs Elysees, and he dined uncommonly
well at his own table, seated above a waxed floor which it was Mrs.
Luce's happiness to believe had a finer polish than any other in the
French capital. Occasionally he dined with a friend or two at the Cafe
Anglais, where his talent for ordering a dinner was a source of felicity
to his companions and an object of admiration even to the headwaiter
of the establishment. These were his only known pastimes, but they had
beguiled his hours for upwards of half a century, and they doubtless
justified his frequent declaration that there was no place like Paris.
In no other place, on these terms, could Mr. Luce flatter himself that
he was enjoying life. There was nothing like Paris, but it must be
confessed that Mr. Luce thought less highly of this scene of his
dissipations than in earlier days. In the list of his resources his
political reflections should not be omitted, for they were doubtless the
animating principle of many hours that superficially seemed vacant.
Like many of his fellow colonists Mr. Luce was a high--or rather a
deep--conservative, and gave no countenance to the government lately
established in France. He had no faith in its duration and would assure
you from year to year that its end was close at hand. "They want to be
kept down, sir, to be kept down; nothing but the strong hand--the iron
heel--will do for them," he would frequently say of the French people;
and his ideal of a fine showy clever rule was that of the superseded
Empire. "Paris is much less attractive than in the days of the Emperor;
HE knew how to make a city pleasant," Mr. Luce had often remarked to
Mrs. Touchett, who was quite of his own way of thinking and wished to
know what one had crossed that odious Atlantic for but to get away from
republics.

"Why, madam, sitting in the Champs Elysees, opposite to the Palace of
Industry, I've seen the court-carriages from the Tuileries pass up and
down as many as seven times a day. I remember one occasion when they
went as high as nine. What do you see now? It's no use talking, the
style's all gone. Napoleon knew what the French people want, and
there'll be a dark cloud over Paris, our Paris, till they get the Empire
back again."

Among Mrs. Luce's visitors on Sunday afternoons was a young man with
whom Isabel had had a good deal of conversation and whom she found
full of valuable knowledge. Mr. Edward Rosier--Ned Rosier as he was
called--was native to New York and had been brought up in Paris, living
there under the eye of his father who, as it happened, had been an early
and intimate friend of the late Mr. Archer. Edward Rosier remembered
Isabel as a little girl; it had been his father who came to the rescue
of the small Archers at the inn at Neufchatel (he was travelling that
way with the boy and had stopped at the hotel by chance), after their
bonne had gone off with the Russian prince and when Mr. Archer's
whereabouts remained for some days a mystery. Isabel remembered
perfectly the neat little male child whose hair smelt of a delicious
cosmetic and who had a bonne all his own, warranted to lose sight of him
under no provocation. Isabel took a walk with the pair beside the lake
and thought little Edward as pretty as an angel--a comparison by no
means conventional in her mind, for she had a very definite conception
of a type of features which she supposed to be angelic and which her
new friend perfectly illustrated. A small pink face surmounted by a blue
velvet bonnet and set off by a stiff embroidered collar had become the
countenance of her childish dreams; and she had firmly believed for some
time afterwards that the heavenly hosts conversed among themselves in
a queer little dialect of French-English, expressing the properest
sentiments, as when Edward told her that he was "defended" by his bonne
to go near the edge of the lake, and that one must always obey to one's
bonne. Ned Rosier's English had improved; at least it exhibited in a
less degree the French variation. His father was dead and his bonne
dismissed, but the young man still conformed to the spirit of their
teaching--he never went to the edge of the lake. There was still
something agreeable to the nostrils about him and something not
offensive to nobler organs. He was a very gentle and gracious youth,
with what are called cultivated tastes--an acquaintance with old china,
with good wine, with the bindings of books, with the Almanach de Gotha,
with the best shops, the best hotels, the hours of railway-trains. He
could order a dinner almost as well as Mr. Luce, and it was probable
that as his experience accumulated he would be a worthy successor to
that gentleman, whose rather grim politics he also advocated in a soft
and innocent voice. He had some charming rooms in Paris, decorated with
old Spanish altar-lace, the envy of his female friends, who declared
that his chimney-piece was better draped than the high shoulders of many
a duchess. He usually, however, spent a part of every winter at Pau, and
had once passed a couple of months in the United States.

He took a great interest in Isabel and remembered perfectly the walk at
Neufchatel, when she would persist in going so near the edge. He seemed
to recognise this same tendency in the subversive enquiry that I quoted
a moment ago, and set himself to answer our heroine's question with
greater urbanity than it perhaps deserved. "What does it lead to, Miss
Archer? Why Paris leads everywhere. You can't go anywhere unless you
come here first. Every one that comes to Europe has got to pass through.
You don't mean it in that sense so much? You mean what good it does you?
Well, how can you penetrate futurity? How can you tell what lies ahead?
If it's a pleasant road I don't care where it leads. I like the road,
Miss Archer; I like the dear old asphalte. You can't get tired of
it--you can't if you try. You think you would, but you wouldn't;
there's always something new and fresh. Take the Hotel Drouot, now;
they sometimes have three and four sales a week. Where can you get such
things as you can here? In spite of all they say I maintain they're
cheaper too, if you know the right places. I know plenty of places,
but I keep them to myself. I'll tell you, if you like, as a particular
favour; only you mustn't tell any one else. Don't you go anywhere
without asking me first; I want you to promise me that. As a general
thing avoid the Boulevards; there's very little to be done on the
Boulevards. Speaking conscientiously--sans blague--I don't believe
any one knows Paris better than I. You and Mrs. Touchett must come and
breakfast with me some day, and I'll show you my things; je ne vous dis
que ca! There has been a great deal of talk about London of late; it's
the fashion to cry up London. But there's nothing in it--you can't
do anything in London. No Louis Quinze--nothing of the First Empire;
nothing but their eternal Queen Anne. It's good for one's bed-room,
Queen Anne--for one's washing-room; but it isn't proper for a salon. Do
I spend my life at the auctioneer's?" Mr. Rosier pursued in answer to
another question of Isabel's. "Oh no; I haven't the means. I wish I
had. You think I'm a mere trifler; I can tell by the expression of your
face--you've got a wonderfully expressive face. I hope you don't mind
my saying that; I mean it as a kind of warning. You think I ought to do
something, and so do I, so long as you leave it vague. But when you
come to the point you see you have to stop. I can't go home and be
a shopkeeper. You think I'm very well fitted? Ah, Miss Archer, you
overrate me. I can buy very well, but I can't sell; you should see when
I sometimes try to get rid of my things. It takes much more ability to
make other people buy than to buy yourself. When I think how clever they
must be, the people who make ME buy! Ah no; I couldn't be a shopkeeper.
I can't be a doctor; it's a repulsive business. I can't be a clergyman;
I haven't got convictions. And then I can't pronounce the names right in
the Bible. They're very difficult, in the Old Testament particularly. I
can't be a lawyer; I don't understand--how do you call it?--the American
procedure. Is there anything else? There's nothing for a gentleman
in America. I should like to be a diplomatist; but American
diplomacy--that's not for gentlemen either. I'm sure if you had seen the
last min--"

Henrietta Stackpole, who was often with her friend when Mr. Rosier,
coming to pay his compliments late in the afternoon, expressed himself
after the fashion I have sketched, usually interrupted the young man at
this point and read him a lecture on the duties of the American citizen.
She thought him most unnatural; he was worse than poor Ralph Touchett.
Henrietta, however, was at this time more than ever addicted to fine
criticism, for her conscience had been freshly alarmed as regards
Isabel. She had not congratulated this young lady on her augmentations
and begged to be excused from doing so.

"If Mr. Touchett had consulted me about leaving you the money," she
frankly asserted, "I'd have said to him 'Never!"

"I see," Isabel had answered. "You think it will prove a curse in
disguise. Perhaps it will."

"Leave it to some one you care less for--that's what I should have
said."

"To yourself for instance?" Isabel suggested jocosely. And then, "Do you
really believe it will ruin me?" she asked in quite another tone.

"I hope it won't ruin you; but it will certainly confirm your dangerous
tendencies."

"Do you mean the love of luxury--of extravagance?"

"No, no," said Henrietta; "I mean your exposure on the moral side. I
approve of luxury; I think we ought to be as elegant as possible. Look
at the luxury of our western cities; I've seen nothing over here to
compare with it. I hope you'll never become grossly sensual; but I'm not
afraid of that. The peril for you is that you live too much in the world
of your own dreams. You're not enough in contact with reality--with
the toiling, striving, suffering, I may even say sinning, world
that surrounds you. You're too fastidious; you've too many graceful
illusions. Your newly-acquired thousands will shut you up more and
more to the society of a few selfish and heartless people who will be
interested in keeping them up."

Isabel's eyes expanded as she gazed at this lurid scene. "What are my
illusions?" she asked. "I try so hard not to have any."

"Well," said Henrietta, "you think you can lead a romantic life, that
you can live by pleasing yourself and pleasing others. You'll find
you're mistaken. Whatever life you lead you must put your soul in it--to
make any sort of success of it; and from the moment you do that it
ceases to be romance, I assure you: it becomes grim reality! And you
can't always please yourself; you must sometimes please other people.
That, I admit, you're very ready to do; but there's another thing that's
still more important--you must often displease others. You must always
be ready for that--you must never shrink from it. That doesn't suit you
at all--you're too fond of admiration, you like to be thought well
of. You think we can escape disagreeable duties by taking romantic
views--that's your great illusion, my dear. But we can't. You must be
prepared on many occasions in life to please no one at all--not even
yourself."

Isabel shook her head sadly; she looked troubled and frightened. "This,
for you, Henrietta," she said, "must be one of those occasions!"

It was certainly true that Miss Stackpole, during her visit to Paris,
which had been professionally more remunerative than her English
sojourn, had not been living in the world of dreams. Mr. Bantling, who
had now returned to England, was her companion for the first four weeks
of her stay; and about Mr. Bantling there was nothing dreamy. Isabel
learned from her friend that the two had led a life of great personal
intimacy and that this had been a peculiar advantage to Henrietta,
owing to the gentleman's remarkable knowledge of Paris. He had
explained everything, shown her everything, been her constant guide and
interpreter. They had breakfasted together, dined together, gone to
the theatre together, supped together, really in a manner quite lived
together. He was a true friend, Henrietta more than once assured our
heroine; and she had never supposed that she could like any Englishman
so well. Isabel could not have told you why, but she found something
that ministered to mirth in the alliance the correspondent of the
Interviewer had struck with Lady Pensil's brother; her amusement
moreover subsisted in face of the fact that she thought it a credit to
each of them. Isabel couldn't rid herself of a suspicion that they were
playing somehow at cross-purposes--that the simplicity of each had
been entrapped. But this simplicity was on either side none the less
honourable. It was as graceful on Henrietta's part to believe that Mr.
Bantling took an interest in the diffusion of lively journalism and in
consolidating the position of lady-correspondents as it was on the
part of his companion to suppose that the cause of the Interviewer--a
periodical of which he never formed a very definite conception--was, if
subtly analysed (a task to which Mr. Bantling felt himself quite equal),
but the cause of Miss Stackpole's need of demonstrative affection. Each
of these groping celibates supplied at any rate a want of which the
other was impatiently conscious. Mr. Bantling, who was of rather a slow
and a discursive habit, relished a prompt, keen, positive woman, who
charmed him by the influence of a shining, challenging eye and a kind of
bandbox freshness, and who kindled a perception of raciness in a mind
to which the usual fare of life seemed unsalted. Henrietta, on the other
hand, enjoyed the society of a gentleman who appeared somehow, in his
way, made, by expensive, roundabout, almost "quaint" processes, for
her use, and whose leisured state, though generally indefensible, was a
decided boon to a breathless mate, and who was furnished with an easy,
traditional, though by no means exhaustive, answer to almost any social
or practical question that could come up. She often found Mr. Bantling's
answers very convenient, and in the press of catching the American post
would largely and showily address them to publicity. It was to be feared
that she was indeed drifting toward those abysses of sophistication as
to which Isabel, wishing for a good-humoured retort, had warned her.
There might be danger in store for Isabel; but it was scarcely to be
hoped that Miss Stackpole, on her side, would find permanent rest in any
adoption of the views of a class pledged to all the old abuses. Isabel
continued to warn her good-humouredly; Lady Pensil's obliging brother
was sometimes, on our heroine's lips, an object of irreverent and
facetious allusion. Nothing, however, could exceed Henrietta's
amiability on this point; she used to abound in the sense of Isabel's
irony and to enumerate with elation the hours she had spent with this
perfect man of the world--a term that had ceased to make with her, as
previously, for opprobrium. Then, a few moments later, she would forget
that they had been talking jocosely and would mention with impulsive
earnestness some expedition she had enjoyed in his company. She would
say: "Oh, I know all about Versailles; I went there with Mr. Bantling. I
was bound to see it thoroughly--I warned him when we went out there that
I was thorough: so we spent three days at the hotel and wandered all
over the place. It was lovely weather--a kind of Indian summer, only not
so good. We just lived in that park. Oh yes; you can't tell me anything
about Versailles." Henrietta appeared to have made arrangements to meet
her gallant friend during the spring in Italy.



Mrs. Touchett, before arriving in Paris, had fixed the day for her
departure and by the middle of February had begun to travel southward.
She interrupted her journey to pay a visit to her son, who at San Remo,
on the Italian shore of the Mediterranean, had been spending a dull,
bright winter beneath a slow-moving white umbrella. Isabel went with her
aunt as a matter of course, though Mrs. Touchett, with homely, customary
logic, had laid before her a pair of alternatives.

"Now, of course, you're completely your own mistress and are as free as
the bird on the bough. I don't mean you were not so before, but you're
at present on a different footing--property erects a kind of barrier.
You can do a great many things if you're rich which would be severely
criticised if you were poor. You can go and come, you can travel alone,
you can have your own establishment: I mean of course if you'll take
a companion--some decayed gentlewoman, with a darned cashmere and dyed
hair, who paints on velvet. You don't think you'd like that? Of course
you can do as you please; I only want you to understand how much you're
at liberty. You might take Miss Stackpole as your dame de compagnie;
she'd keep people off very well. I think, however, that it's a great
deal better you should remain with me, in spite of there being no
obligation. It's better for several reasons, quite apart from your
liking it. I shouldn't think you'd like it, but I recommend you to make
the sacrifice. Of course whatever novelty there may have been at first
in my society has quite passed away, and you see me as I am--a dull,
obstinate, narrow-minded old woman."

"I don't think you're at all dull," Isabel had replied to this.

"But you do think I'm obstinate and narrow-minded? I told you so!" said
Mrs. Touchett with much elation at being justified.

Isabel remained for the present with her aunt, because, in spite of
eccentric impulses, she had a great regard for what was usually deemed
decent, and a young gentlewoman without visible relations had always
struck her as a flower without foliage. It was true that Mrs. Touchett's
conversation had never again appeared so brilliant as that first
afternoon in Albany, when she sat in her damp waterproof and sketched
the opportunities that Europe would offer to a young person of taste.
This, however, was in a great measure the girl's own fault; she had
got a glimpse of her aunt's experience, and her imagination constantly
anticipated the judgements and emotions of a woman who had very little
of the same faculty. Apart from this, Mrs. Touchett had a great merit;
she was as honest as a pair of compasses. There was a comfort in her
stiffness and firmness; you knew exactly where to find her and were
never liable to chance encounters and concussions. On her own ground
she was perfectly present, but was never over-inquisitive as regards
the territory of her neighbour. Isabel came at last to have a kind of
undemonstrable pity for her; there seemed something so dreary in
the condition of a person whose nature had, as it were, so little
surface--offered so limited a face to the accretions of human contact.
Nothing tender, nothing sympathetic, had ever had a chance to fasten
upon it--no wind-sown blossom, no familiar softening moss. Her offered,
her passive extent, in other words, was about that of a knife-edge.
Isabel had reason to believe none the less that as she advanced in life
she made more of those concessions to the sense of something obscurely
distinct from convenience--more of them than she independently exacted.
She was learning to sacrifice consistency to considerations of that
inferior order for which the excuse must be found in the particular
case. It was not to the credit of her absolute rectitude that she should
have gone the longest way round to Florence in order to spend a few
weeks with her invalid son; since in former years it had been one of her
most definite convictions that when Ralph wished to see her he was at
liberty to remember that Palazzo Crescentini contained a large apartment
known as the quarter of the signorino.

"I want to ask you something," Isabel said to this young man the day
after her arrival at San Remo--"something I've thought more than once
of asking you by letter, but that I've hesitated on the whole to write
about. Face to face, nevertheless, my question seems easy enough. Did
you know your father intended to leave me so much money?"

Ralph stretched his legs a little further than usual and gazed a little
more fixedly at the Mediterranean.

"What does it matter, my dear Isabel, whether I knew? My father was very
obstinate."

"So," said the girl, "you did know."

"Yes; he told me. We even talked it over a little." "What did he do it
for?" asked Isabel abruptly. "Why, as a kind of compliment."

"A compliment on what?"

"On your so beautifully existing."

"He liked me too much," she presently declared.

"That's a way we all have."

"If I believed that I should be very unhappy. Fortunately I don't
believe it. I want to be treated with justice; I want nothing but that."

"Very good. But you must remember that justice to a lovely being is
after all a florid sort of sentiment."

"I'm not a lovely being. How can you say that, at the very moment when
I'm asking such odious questions? I must seem to you delicate!"

"You seem to me troubled," said Ralph.

"I am troubled."

"About what?"

For a moment she answered nothing; then she broke out: "Do you think it
good for me suddenly to be made so rich? Henrietta doesn't."

"Oh, hang Henrietta!" said Ralph coarsely, "If you ask me I'm delighted
at it."

"Is that why your father did it--for your amusement?"

"I differ with Miss Stackpole," Ralph went on more gravely. "I think it
very good for you to have means."

Isabel looked at him with serious eyes. "I wonder whether you know
what's good for me--or whether you care."

"If I know depend upon it I care. Shall I tell you what it is? Not to
torment yourself."

"Not to torment you, I suppose you mean."

"You can't do that; I'm proof. Take things more easily. Don't ask
yourself so much whether this or that is good for you. Don't question
your conscience so much--it will get out of tune like a strummed
piano. Keep it for great occasions. Don't try so much to form your
character--it's like trying to pull open a tight, tender young rose.
Live as you like best, and your character will take care of itself. Most
things are good for you; the exceptions are very rare, and a comfortable
income's not one of them." Ralph paused, smiling; Isabel had listened
quickly. "You've too much power of thought--above all too much
conscience," Ralph added. "It's out of all reason, the number of things
you think wrong. Put back your watch. Diet your fever. Spread your
wings; rise above the ground. It's never wrong to do that."

She had listened eagerly, as I say; and it was her nature to understand
quickly. "I wonder if you appreciate what you say. If you do, you take a
great responsibility."

"You frighten me a little, but I think I'm right," said Ralph,
persisting in cheer.

"All the same what you say is very true," Isabel pursued. "You could say
nothing more true. I'm absorbed in myself--I look at life too much as
a doctor's prescription. Why indeed should we perpetually be thinking
whether things are good for us, as if we were patients lying in a
hospital? Why should I be so afraid of not doing right? As if it
mattered to the world whether I do right or wrong!"

"You're a capital person to advise," said Ralph; "you take the wind out
of my sails!"

She looked at him as if she had not heard him--though she was following
out the train of reflexion which he himself had kindled. "I try to
care more about the world than about myself--but I always come back to
myself. It's because I'm afraid." She stopped; her voice had trembled
a little. "Yes, I'm afraid; I can't tell you. A large fortune means
freedom, and I'm afraid of that. It's such a fine thing, and one should
make such a good use of it. If one shouldn't one would be ashamed. And
one must keep thinking; it's a constant effort. I'm not sure it's not a
greater happiness to be powerless."

"For weak people I've no doubt it's a greater happiness. For weak people
the effort not to be contemptible must be great."

"And how do you know I'm not weak?" Isabel asked.

"Ah," Ralph answered with a flush that the girl noticed, "if you are I'm
awfully sold!"

The charm of the Mediterranean coast only deepened for our heroine
on acquaintance, for it was the threshold of Italy, the gate of
admirations. Italy, as yet imperfectly seen and felt, stretched before
her as a land of promise, a land in which a love of the beautiful might
be comforted by endless knowledge. Whenever she strolled upon the shore
with her cousin--and she was the companion of his daily walk--she looked
across the sea, with longing eyes, to where she knew that Genoa lay. She
was glad to pause, however, on the edge of this larger adventure; there
was such a thrill even in the preliminary hovering. It affected her
moreover as a peaceful interlude, as a hush of the drum and fife in a
career which she had little warrant as yet for regarding as agitated,
but which nevertheless she was constantly picturing to herself by
the light of her hopes, her fears, her fancies, her ambitions, her
predilections, and which reflected these subjective accidents in
a manner sufficiently dramatic. Madame Merle had predicted to Mrs.
Touchett that after their young friend had put her hand into her pocket
half a dozen times she would be reconciled to the idea that it had been
filled by a munificent uncle; and the event justified, as it had so
often justified before, that lady's perspicacity. Ralph Touchett had
praised his cousin for being morally inflammable, that is for being
quick to take a hint that was meant as good advice. His advice had
perhaps helped the matter; she had at any rate before leaving San Remo
grown used to feeling rich. The consciousness in question found a
proper place in rather a dense little group of ideas that she had about
herself, and often it was by no means the least agreeable. It took
perpetually for granted a thousand good intentions. She lost herself in
a maze of visions; the fine things to be done by a rich, independent,
generous girl who took a large human view of occasions and obligations
were sublime in the mass. Her fortune therefore became to her mind a
part of her better self; it gave her importance, gave her even, to her
own imagination, a certain ideal beauty. What it did for her in the
imagination of others is another affair, and on this point we must also
touch in time. The visions I have just spoken of were mixed with other
debates. Isabel liked better to think of the future than of the past;
but at times, as she listened to the murmur of the Mediterranean waves,
her glance took a backward flight. It rested upon two figures which, in
spite of increasing distance, were still sufficiently salient; they were
recognisable without difficulty as those of Caspar Goodwood and Lord
Warburton. It was strange how quickly these images of energy had fallen
into the background of our young lady's life. It was in her disposition
at all times to lose faith in the reality of absent things; she could
summon back her faith, in case of need, with an effort, but the effort
was often painful even when the reality had been pleasant. The past was
apt to look dead and its revival rather to show the livid light of a
judgement-day. The girl moreover was not prone to take for granted that
she herself lived in the mind of others--she had not the fatuity to
believe she left indelible traces. She was capable of being wounded by
the discovery that she had been forgotten; but of all liberties the one
she herself found sweetest was the liberty to forget. She had not given
her last shilling, sentimentally speaking, either to Caspar Goodwood or
to Lord Warburton, and yet couldn't but feel them appreciably in debt
to her. She had of course reminded herself that she was to hear from Mr.
Goodwood again; but this was not to be for another year and a half, and
in that time a great many things might happen. She had indeed failed to
say to herself that her American suitor might find some other girl more
comfortable to woo; because, though it was certain many other girls
would prove so, she had not the smallest belief that this merit
would attract him. But she reflected that she herself might know the
humiliation of change, might really, for that matter, come to the end of
the things that were not Caspar (even though there appeared so many of
them), and find rest in those very elements of his presence which struck
her now as impediments to the finer respiration. It was conceivable
that these impediments should some day prove a sort of blessing
in disguise--a clear and quiet harbour enclosed by a brave granite
breakwater. But that day could only come in its order, and she couldn't
wait for it with folded hands. That Lord Warburton should continue
to cherish her image seemed to her more than a noble humility or an
enlightened pride ought to wish to reckon with. She had so definitely
undertaken to preserve no record of what had passed between them that a
corresponding effort on his own part would be eminently just. This
was not, as it may seem, merely a theory tinged with sarcasm. Isabel
candidly believed that his lordship would, in the usual phrase, get over
his disappointment. He had been deeply affected--this she believed, and
she was still capable of deriving pleasure from the belief; but it
was absurd that a man both so intelligent and so honourably dealt with
should cultivate a scar out of proportion to any wound. Englishmen
liked moreover to be comfortable, said Isabel, and there could be
little comfort for Lord Warburton, in the long run, in brooding over a
self-sufficient American girl who had been but a casual acquaintance.
She flattered herself that, should she hear from one day to another that
he had married some young woman of his own country who had done more
to deserve him, she should receive the news without a pang even of
surprise. It would have proved that he believed she was firm--which was
what she wished to seem to him. That alone was grateful to her pride.



On one of the first days of May, some six months after old Mr.
Touchett's death, a small group that might have been described by a
painter as composing well was gathered in one of the many rooms of an
ancient villa crowning an olive-muffled hill outside of the Roman gate
of Florence. The villa was a long, rather blank-looking structure, with
the far-projecting roof which Tuscany loves and which, on the hills that
encircle Florence, when considered from a distance, makes so harmonious
a rectangle with the straight, dark, definite cypresses that usually
rise in groups of three or four beside it. The house had a front upon
a little grassy, empty, rural piazza which occupied a part of the
hill-top; and this front, pierced with a few windows in irregular
relations and furnished with a stone bench lengthily adjusted to the
base of the structure and useful as a lounging-place to one or two
persons wearing more or less of that air of undervalued merit which in
Italy, for some reason or other, always gracefully invests any one who
confidently assumes a perfectly passive attitude--this antique,
solid, weather-worn, yet imposing front had a somewhat incommunicative
character. It was the mask, not the face of the house. It had heavy
lids, but no eyes; the house in reality looked another way--looked off
behind, into splendid openness and the range of the afternoon light.
In that quarter the villa overhung the slope of its hill and the long
valley of the Arno, hazy with Italian colour. It had a narrow garden, in
the manner of a terrace, productive chiefly of tangles of wild roses
and other old stone benches, mossy and sun-warmed. The parapet of the
terrace was just the height to lean upon, and beneath it the ground
declined into the vagueness of olive-crops and vineyards. It is not,
however, with the outside of the place that we are concerned; on this
bright morning of ripened spring its tenants had reason to prefer the
shady side of the wall. The windows of the ground-floor, as you saw
them from the piazza, were, in their noble proportions, extremely
architectural; but their function seemed less to offer communication
with the world than to defy the world to look in. They were massively
cross-barred, and placed at such a height that curiosity, even on
tiptoe, expired before it reached them. In an apartment lighted by a
row of three of these jealous apertures--one of the several distinct
apartments into which the villa was divided and which were mainly
occupied by foreigners of random race long resident in Florence--a
gentleman was seated in company with a young girl and two good sisters
from a religious house. The room was, however, less sombre than our
indications may have represented, for it had a wide, high door, which
now stood open into the tangled garden behind; and the tall iron
lattices admitted on occasion more than enough of the Italian
sunshine. It was moreover a seat of ease, indeed of luxury, telling
of arrangements subtly studied and refinements frankly proclaimed, and
containing a variety of those faded hangings of damask and tapestry,
those chests and cabinets of carved and time-polished oak, those angular
specimens of pictorial art in frames as pedantically primitive, those
perverse-looking relics of medieval brass and pottery, of which Italy
has long been the not quite exhausted storehouse. These things kept
terms with articles of modern furniture in which large allowance had
been made for a lounging generation; it was to be noticed that all the
chairs were deep and well padded and that much space was occupied by a
writing-table of which the ingenious perfection bore the stamp of London
and the nineteenth century. There were books in profusion and magazines
and newspapers, and a few small, odd, elaborate pictures, chiefly in
water-colour. One of these productions stood on a drawing-room easel
before which, at the moment we begin to be concerned with her, the young
girl I have mentioned had placed herself. She was looking at the picture
in silence.

Silence--absolute silence--had not fallen upon her companions; but their
talk had an appearance of embarrassed continuity. The two good sisters
had not settled themselves in their respective chairs; their attitude
expressed a final reserve and their faces showed the glaze of
prudence. They were plain, ample, mild-featured women, with a kind of
business-like modesty to which the impersonal aspect of their stiffened
linen and of the serge that draped them as if nailed on frames gave an
advantage. One of them, a person of a certain age, in spectacles, with a
fresh complexion and a full cheek, had a more discriminating manner
than her colleague, as well as the responsibility of their errand, which
apparently related to the young girl. This object of interest wore her
hat--an ornament of extreme simplicity and not at variance with her
plain muslin gown, too short for her years, though it must already
have been "let out." The gentleman who might have been supposed to be
entertaining the two nuns was perhaps conscious of the difficulties of
his function, it being in its way as arduous to converse with the very
meek as with the very mighty. At the same time he was clearly much
occupied with their quiet charge, and while she turned her back to
him his eyes rested gravely on her slim, small figure. He was a man of
forty, with a high but well-shaped head, on which the hair, still dense,
but prematurely grizzled, had been cropped close. He had a fine, narrow,
extremely modelled and composed face, of which the only fault was just
this effect of its running a trifle too much to points; an appearance to
which the shape of the beard contributed not a little. This beard, cut
in the manner of the portraits of the sixteenth century and surmounted
by a fair moustache, of which the ends had a romantic upward flourish,
gave its wearer a foreign, traditionary look and suggested that he was a
gentleman who studied style. His conscious, curious eyes, however, eyes
at once vague and penetrating, intelligent and hard, expressive of
the observer as well as of the dreamer, would have assured you that
he studied it only within well-chosen limits, and that in so far as he
sought it he found it. You would have been much at a loss to determine
his original clime and country; he had none of the superficial signs
that usually render the answer to this question an insipidly easy one.
If he had English blood in his veins it had probably received some
French or Italian commixture; but he suggested, fine gold coin as he
was, no stamp nor emblem of the common mintage that provides for general
circulation; he was the elegant complicated medal struck off for a
special occasion. He had a light, lean, rather languid-looking figure,
and was apparently neither tall nor short. He was dressed as a man
dresses who takes little other trouble about it than to have no vulgar
things.

"Well, my dear, what do you think of it?" he asked of the young girl. He
used the Italian tongue, and used it with perfect ease; but this would
not have convinced you he was Italian.

The child turned her head earnestly to one side and the other. "It's
very pretty, papa. Did you make it yourself?"

"Certainly I made it. Don't you think I'm clever?"

"Yes, papa, very clever; I also have learned to make pictures." And
she turned round and showed a small, fair face painted with a fixed and
intensely sweet smile.

"You should have brought me a specimen of your powers."

"I've brought a great many; they're in my trunk."

"She draws very--very carefully," the elder of the nuns remarked,
speaking in French.

"I'm glad to hear it. Is it you who have instructed her?"

"Happily no," said the good sister, blushing a little. "Ce n'est pas ma
partie. I teach nothing; I leave that to those who are wiser. We've an
excellent drawing-master, Mr.--Mr.--what is his name?" she asked of her
companion.

Her companion looked about at the carpet. "It's a German name," she said
in Italian, as if it needed to be translated.

"Yes," the other went on, "he's a German, and we've had him many years."

The young girl, who was not heeding the conversation, had wandered away
to the open door of the large room and stood looking into the garden.
"And you, my sister, are French," said the gentleman.

"Yes, sir," the visitor gently replied. "I speak to the pupils in my
own tongue. I know no other. But we have sisters of other
countries--English, German, Irish. They all speak their proper
language."

The gentleman gave a smile. "Has my daughter been under the care of one
of the Irish ladies?" And then, as he saw that his visitors suspected
a joke, though failing to understand it, "You're very complete," he
instantly added.

"Oh, yes, we're complete. We've everything, and everything's of the
best."

"We have gymnastics," the Italian sister ventured to remark. "But not
dangerous."

"I hope not. Is that YOUR branch?" A question which provoked much candid
hilarity on the part of the two ladies; on the subsidence of which their
entertainer, glancing at his daughter, remarked that she had grown.

"Yes, but I think she has finished. She'll remain--not big," said the
French sister.

"I'm not sorry. I prefer women like books--very good and not too long.
But I know," the gentleman said, "no particular reason why my child
should be short."

The nun gave a temperate shrug, as if to intimate that such things might
be beyond our knowledge. "She's in very good health; that's the best
thing."

"Yes, she looks sound." And the young girl's father watched her a
moment. "What do you see in the garden?" he asked in French.

"I see many flowers," she replied in a sweet, small voice and with an
accent as good as his own.

"Yes, but not many good ones. However, such as they are, go out and
gather some for ces dames."

The child turned to him with her smile heightened by pleasure. "May I,
truly?"

"Ah, when I tell you," said her father.

The girl glanced at the elder of the nuns. "May I, truly, ma mere?"

"Obey monsieur your father, my child," said the sister, blushing again.

The child, satisfied with this authorisation, descended from the
threshold and was presently lost to sight. "You don't spoil them," said
her father gaily.

"For everything they must ask leave. That's our system. Leave is freely
granted, but they must ask it."

"Oh, I don't quarrel with your system; I've no doubt it's excellent. I
sent you my daughter to see what you'd make of her. I had faith."

"One must have faith," the sister blandly rejoined, gazing through her
spectacles.

"Well, has my faith been rewarded? What have you made of her?"

The sister dropped her eyes a moment. "A good Christian, monsieur."

Her host dropped his eyes as well; but it was probable that the movement
had in each case a different spring. "Yes, and what else?"

He watched the lady from the convent, probably thinking she would say
that a good Christian was everything; but for all her simplicity she
was not so crude as that. "A charming young lady--a real little woman--a
daughter in whom you will have nothing but contentment."

"She seems to me very gentille," said the father. "She's really pretty."

"She's perfect. She has no faults."

"She never had any as a child, and I'm glad you have given her none."

"We love her too much," said the spectacled sister with dignity.

"And as for faults, how can we give what we have not? Le couvent n'est
pas comme le monde, monsieur. She's our daughter, as you may say. We've
had her since she was so small."

"Of all those we shall lose this year she's the one we shall miss most,"
the younger woman murmured deferentially.

"Ah, yes, we shall talk long of her," said the other. "We shall hold her
up to the new ones." And at this the good sister appeared to find her
spectacles dim; while her companion, after fumbling a moment, presently
drew forth a pocket-handkerchief of durable texture.

"It's not certain you'll lose her; nothing's settled yet," their host
rejoined quickly; not as if to anticipate their tears, but in the tone
of a man saying what was most agreeable to himself. "We should be very
happy to believe that. Fifteen is very young to leave us."

"Oh," exclaimed the gentleman with more vivacity than he had yet used,
"it is not I who wish to take her away. I wish you could keep her
always!"

"Ah, monsieur," said the elder sister, smiling and getting up, "good as
she is, she's made for the world. Le monde y gagnera."

"If all the good people were hidden away in convents how would the world
get on?" her companion softly enquired, rising also.

This was a question of a wider bearing than the good woman apparently
supposed; and the lady in spectacles took a harmonising view by saying
comfortably: "Fortunately there are good people everywhere."

"If you're going there will be two less here," her host remarked
gallantly.

For this extravagant sally his simple visitors had no answer, and they
simply looked at each other in decent deprecation; but their confusion
was speedily covered by the return of the young girl with two large
bunches of roses--one of them all white, the other red.

"I give you your choice, mamman Catherine," said the child. "It's only
the colour that's different, mamman Justine; there are just as many
roses in one bunch as in the other."

The two sisters turned to each other, smiling and hesitating, with
"Which will you take?" and "No, it's for you to choose."

"I'll take the red, thank you," said Catherine in the spectacles. "I'm
so red myself. They'll comfort us on our way back to Rome."

"Ah, they won't last," cried the young girl. "I wish I could give you
something that would last!"

"You've given us a good memory of yourself, my daughter. That will
last!"

"I wish nuns could wear pretty things. I would give you my blue beads,"
the child went on.

"And do you go back to Rome to-night?" her father enquired.

"Yes, we take the train again. We've so much to do la-bas."

"Are you not tired?"

"We are never tired."

"Ah, my sister, sometimes," murmured the junior votaress.

"Not to-day, at any rate. We have rested too well here. Que Dieu vous
garde, ma fine."

Their host, while they exchanged kisses with his daughter, went forward
to open the door through which they were to pass; but as he did so he
gave a slight exclamation, and stood looking beyond. The door opened
into a vaulted ante-chamber, as high as a chapel and paved with red
tiles; and into this antechamber a lady had just been admitted by a
servant, a lad in shabby livery, who was now ushering her toward the
apartment in which our friends were grouped. The gentleman at the door,
after dropping his exclamation, remained silent; in silence too the lady
advanced. He gave her no further audible greeting and offered her no
hand, but stood aside to let her pass into the saloon. At the threshold
she hesitated. "Is there any one?" she asked.

"Some one you may see."

She went in and found herself confronted with the two nuns and their
pupil, who was coming forward, between them, with a hand in the arm of
each. At the sight of the new visitor they all paused, and the lady, who
had also stopped, stood looking at them. The young girl gave a little
soft cry: "Ah, Madame Merle!"

The visitor had been slightly startled, but her manner the next instant
was none the less gracious. "Yes, it's Madame Merle, come to welcome you
home." And she held out two hands to the girl, who immediately came up
to her, presenting her forehead to be kissed. Madame Merle saluted this
portion of her charming little person and then stood smiling at the two
nuns. They acknowledged her smile with a decent obeisance, but permitted
themselves no direct scrutiny of this imposing, brilliant woman, who
seemed to bring in with her something of the radiance of the outer
world. "These ladies have brought my daughter home, and now they return
to the convent," the gentleman explained.

"Ah, you go back to Rome? I've lately come from there. It's very lovely
now," said Madame Merle.

The good sisters, standing with their hands folded into their sleeves,
accepted this statement uncritically; and the master of the house asked
his new visitor how long it was since she had left Rome. "She came to
see me at the convent," said the young girl before the lady addressed
had time to reply.

"I've been more than once, Pansy," Madame Merle declared. "Am I not your
great friend in Rome?"

"I remember the last time best," said Pansy, "because you told me I
should come away."

"Did you tell her that?" the child's father asked.

"I hardly remember. I told her what I thought would please her. I've
been in Florence a week. I hoped you would come to see me."

"I should have done so if I had known you were there. One doesn't know
such things by inspiration--though I suppose one ought. You had better
sit down."

These two speeches were made in a particular tone of voice--a tone
half-lowered and carefully quiet, but as from habit rather than from any
definite need. Madame Merle looked about her, choosing her seat. "You're
going to the door with these women? Let me of course not interrupt the
ceremony. Je vous salue, mesdames," she added, in French, to the nuns,
as if to dismiss them.

"This lady's a great friend of ours; you will have seen her at the
convent," said their entertainer. "We've much faith in her judgement,
and she'll help me to decide whether my daughter shall return to you at
the end of the holidays."

"I hope you'll decide in our favour, madame," the sister in spectacles
ventured to remark.

"That's Mr. Osmond's pleasantry; I decide nothing," said Madame Merle,
but also as in pleasantry. "I believe you've a very good school, but
Miss Osmond's friends must remember that she's very naturally meant for
the world."

"That's what I've told monsieur," sister Catherine answered. "It's
precisely to fit her for the world," she murmured, glancing at Pansy,
who stood, at a little distance, attentive to Madame Merle's elegant
apparel.

"Do you hear that, Pansy? You're very naturally meant for the world,"
said Pansy's father.

The child fixed him an instant with her pure young eyes. "Am I not meant
for you, papa?"

Papa gave a quick, light laugh. "That doesn't prevent it! I'm of the
world, Pansy."

"Kindly permit us to retire," said sister Catherine. "Be good and wise
and happy in any case, my daughter."

"I shall certainly come back and see you," Pansy returned, recommencing
her embraces, which were presently interrupted by Madame Merle.

"Stay with me, dear child," she said, "while your father takes the good
ladies to the door."

Pansy stared, disappointed, yet not protesting. She was evidently
impregnated with the idea of submission, which was due to any one who
took the tone of authority; and she was a passive spectator of the
operation of her fate. "May I not see mamman Catherine get into the
carriage?" she nevertheless asked very gently.

"It would please me better if you'd remain with me," said Madame Merle,
while Mr. Osmond and his companions, who had bowed low again to the
other visitor, passed into the ante-chamber.

"Oh yes, I'll stay," Pansy answered; and she stood near Madame Merle,
surrendering her little hand, which this lady took. She stared out of
the window; her eyes had filled with tears.

"I'm glad they've taught you to obey," said Madame Merle. "That's what
good little girls should do."

"Oh yes, I obey very well," cried Pansy with soft eagerness, almost with
boastfulness, as if she had been speaking of her piano-playing. And then
she gave a faint, just audible sigh.

Madame Merle, holding her hand, drew it across her own fine palm and
looked at it. The gaze was critical, but it found nothing to deprecate;
the child's small hand was delicate and fair. "I hope they always see
that you wear gloves," she said in a moment. "Little girls usually
dislike them."

"I used to dislike them, but I like them now," the child made answer.

"Very good, I'll make you a present of a dozen."

"I thank you very much. What colours will they be?" Pansy demanded with
interest.

Madame Merle meditated. "Useful colours."

"But very pretty?"

"Are you very fond of pretty things?"

"Yes; but--but not too fond," said Pansy with a trace of asceticism.

"Well, they won't be too pretty," Madame Merle returned with a laugh.
She took the child's other hand and drew her nearer; after which,
looking at her a moment, "Shall you miss mother Catherine?" she went on.

"Yes--when I think of her."

"Try then not to think of her. Perhaps some day," added Madame Merle,
"you'll have another mother."

"I don't think that's necessary," Pansy said, repeating her little soft
conciliatory sigh. "I had more than thirty mothers at the convent."

Her father's step sounded again in the antechamber, and Madame Merle got
up, releasing the child. Mr. Osmond came in and closed the door; then,
without looking at Madame Merle, he pushed one or two chairs back into
their places. His visitor waited a moment for him to speak, watching him
as he moved about. Then at last she said: "I hoped you'd have come to
Rome. I thought it possible you'd have wished yourself to fetch Pansy
away."

"That was a natural supposition; but I'm afraid it's not the first time
I've acted in defiance of your calculations."

"Yes," said Madame Merle, "I think you very perverse."

Mr. Osmond busied himself for a moment in the room--there was plenty of
space in it to move about--in the fashion of a man mechanically
seeking pretexts for not giving an attention which may be embarrassing.
Presently, however, he had exhausted his pretexts; there was nothing
left for him--unless he took up a book--but to stand with his hands
behind him looking at Pansy. "Why didn't you come and see the last of
mamman Catherine?" he asked of her abruptly in French.

Pansy hesitated a moment, glancing at Madame Merle. "I asked her to stay
with me," said this lady, who had seated herself again in another place.

"Ah, that was better," Osmond conceded. With which he dropped into a
chair and sat looking at Madame Merle; bent forward a little, his elbows
on the edge of the arms and his hands interlocked.

"She's going to give me some gloves," said Pansy.

"You needn't tell that to every one, my dear," Madame Merle observed.

"You're very kind to her," said Osmond. "She's supposed to have
everything she needs."

"I should think she had had enough of the nuns."

"If we're going to discuss that matter she had better go out of the
room."

"Let her stay," said Madame Merle. "We'll talk of something else."

"If you like I won't listen," Pansy suggested with an appearance of
candour which imposed conviction.

"You may listen, charming child, because you won't understand," her
father replied. The child sat down, deferentially, near the open door,
within sight of the garden, into which she directed her innocent,
wistful eyes; and Mr. Osmond went on irrelevantly, addressing himself to
his other companion. "You're looking particularly well."

"I think I always look the same," said Madame Merle.

"You always ARE the same. You don't vary. You're a wonderful woman."

"Yes, I think I am."

"You sometimes change your mind, however. You told me on your return
from England that you wouldn't leave Rome again for the present."

"I'm pleased that you remember so well what I say. That was my
intention. But I've come to Florence to meet some friends who have
lately arrived and as to whose movements I was at that time uncertain."

"That reason's characteristic. You're always doing something for your
friends."

Madame Merle smiled straight at her host. "It's less characteristic than
your comment upon it which is perfectly insincere. I don't, however,
make a crime of that," she added, "because if you don't believe what
you say there's no reason why you should. I don't ruin myself for my
friends; I don't deserve your praise. I care greatly for myself."

"Exactly; but yourself includes so many other selves--so much of every
one else and of everything. I never knew a person whose life touched so
many other lives."

"What do you call one's life?" asked Madame Merle. "One's appearance,
one's movements, one's engagements, one's society?"

"I call YOUR life your ambitions," said Osmond.

Madame Merle looked a moment at Pansy. "I wonder if she understands
that," she murmured.

"You see she can't stay with us!" And Pansy's father gave rather a
joyless smile. "Go into the garden, mignonne, and pluck a flower or two
for Madame Merle," he went on in French.

"That's just what I wanted to do," Pansy exclaimed, rising with
promptness and noiselessly departing. Her father followed her to the
open door, stood a moment watching her, and then came back, but remained
standing, or rather strolling to and fro, as if to cultivate a sense of
freedom which in another attitude might be wanting.

"My ambitions are principally for you," said Madame Merle, looking up at
him with a certain courage.

"That comes back to what I say. I'm part of your life--I and a thousand
others. You're not selfish--I can't admit that. If you were selfish,
what should I be? What epithet would properly describe me?"

"You're indolent. For me that's your worst fault."

"I'm afraid it's really my best."

"You don't care," said Madame Merle gravely.

"No; I don't think I care much. What sort of a fault do you call that?
My indolence, at any rate, was one of the reasons I didn't go to Rome.
But it was only one of them."

"It's not of importance--to me at least--that you didn't go; though I
should have been glad to see you. I'm glad you're not in Rome now--which
you might be, would probably be, if you had gone there a month ago.
There's something I should like you to do at present in Florence."

"Please remember my indolence," said Osmond.

"I do remember it; but I beg you to forget it. In that way you'll have
both the virtue and the reward. This is not a great labour, and it
may prove a real interest. How long is it since you made a new
acquaintance?"

"I don't think I've made any since I made yours."

"It's time then you should make another. There's a friend of mine I want
you to know."

Mr. Osmond, in his walk, had gone back to the open door again and was
looking at his daughter as she moved about in the intense sunshine.
"What good will it do me?" he asked with a sort of genial crudity.

Madame Merle waited. "It will amuse you." There was nothing crude in
this rejoinder; it had been thoroughly well considered.

"If you say that, you know, I believe it," said Osmond, coming toward
her. "There are some points in which my confidence in you is complete.
I'm perfectly aware, for instance, that you know good society from bad."

"Society is all bad."

"Pardon me. That isn't--the knowledge I impute to you--a common sort
of wisdom. You've gained it in the right way--experimentally; you've
compared an immense number of more or less impossible people with each
other."

"Well, I invite you to profit by my knowledge."

"To profit? Are you very sure that I shall?"

"It's what I hope. It will depend on yourself. If I could only induce
you to make an effort!"

"Ah, there you are! I knew something tiresome was coming. What in the
world--that's likely to turn up here--is worth an effort?"

Madame Merle flushed as with a wounded intention. "Don't be foolish,
Osmond. No one knows better than you what IS worth an effort. Haven't I
seen you in old days?"

"I recognise some things. But they're none of them probable in this poor
life."

"It's the effort that makes them probable," said Madame Merle.

"There's something in that. Who then is your friend?"

"The person I came to Florence to see. She's a niece of Mrs. Touchett,
whom you'll not have forgotten."

"A niece? The word niece suggests youth and ignorance. I see what you're
coming to."

"Yes, she's young--twenty-three years old. She's a great friend of mine.
I met her for the first time in England, several months ago, and we
struck up a grand alliance. I like her immensely, and I do what I don't
do every day--I admire her. You'll do the same."

"Not if I can help it."

"Precisely. But you won't be able to help it."

"Is she beautiful, clever, rich, splendid, universally intelligent and
unprecedentedly virtuous? It's only on those conditions that I care to
make her acquaintance. You know I asked you some time ago never to speak
to me of a creature who shouldn't correspond to that description. I know
plenty of dingy people; I don't want to know any more."

"Miss Archer isn't dingy; she's as bright as the morning. She
corresponds to your description; it's for that I wish you to know her.
She fills all your requirements."

"More or less, of course."

"No; quite literally. She's beautiful, accomplished, generous and, for
an American, well-born. She's also very clever and very amiable, and she
has a handsome fortune."

Mr. Osmond listened to this in silence, appearing to turn it over in his
mind with his eyes on his informant. "What do you want to do with her?"
he asked at last.

"What you see. Put her in your way."

"Isn't she meant for something better than that?"

"I don't pretend to know what people are meant for," said Madame Merle.
"I only know what I can do with them."

"I'm sorry for Miss Archer!" Osmond declared.

Madame Merle got up. "If that's a beginning of interest in her I take
note of it."

The two stood there face to face; she settled her mantilla, looking down
at it as she did so. "You're looking very well," Osmond repeated still
less relevantly than before. "You have some idea. You're never so well
as when you've got an idea; they're always becoming to you."

In the manner and tone of these two persons, on first meeting at any
juncture, and especially when they met in the presence of others, was
something indirect and circumspect, as if they had approached each other
obliquely and addressed each other by implication. The effect of
each appeared to be to intensify to an appreciable degree the
self-consciousness of the other. Madame Merle of course carried off any
embarrassment better than her friend; but even Madame Merle had not
on this occasion the form she would have liked to have--the perfect
self-possession she would have wished to wear for her host. The point to
be made is, however, that at a certain moment the element between them,
whatever it was, always levelled itself and left them more closely
face to face than either ever was with any one else. This was what had
happened now. They stood there knowing each other well and each on the
whole willing to accept the satisfaction of knowing as a compensation
for the inconvenience--whatever it might be--of being known. "I wish
very much you were not so heartless," Madame Merle quietly said. "It has
always been against you, and it will be against you now."

"I'm not so heartless as you think. Every now and then something touches
me--as for instance your saying just now that your ambitions are for
me. I don't understand it; I don't see how or why they should be. But it
touches me, all the same."

"You'll probably understand it even less as time goes on. There are some
things you'll never understand. There's no particular need you should."

"You, after all, are the most remarkable of women," said Osmond. "You
have more in you than almost any one. I don't see why you think Mrs.
Touchett's niece should matter very much to me, when--when--" But he
paused a moment.

"When I myself have mattered so little?"

"That of course is not what I meant to say. When I've known and
appreciated such a woman as you."

"Isabel Archer's better than I," said Madame Merle.

Her companion gave a laugh. "How little you must think of her to say
that!"

"Do you suppose I'm capable of jealousy? Please answer me that."

"With regard to me? No; on the whole I don't."

"Come and see me then, two days hence. I'm staying at Mrs.
Touchett's--Palazzo Crescentini--and the girl will be there."

"Why didn't you ask me that at first simply, without speaking of the
girl?" said Osmond. "You could have had her there at any rate."

Madame Merle looked at him in the manner of a woman whom no question he
could ever put would find unprepared. "Do you wish to know why? Because
I've spoken of you to her."

Osmond frowned and turned away. "I'd rather not know that." Then in
a moment he pointed out the easel supporting the little water-colour
drawing. "Have you seen what's there--my last?"

Madame Merle drew near and considered. "Is it the Venetian Alps--one of
your last year's sketches?"

"Yes--but how you guess everything!"

She looked a moment longer, then turned away. "You know I don't care for
your drawings."

"I know it, yet I'm always surprised at it. They're really so much
better than most people's."

"That may very well be. But as the only thing you do--well, it's so
little. I should have liked you to do so many other things: those were
my ambitions."

"Yes; you've told me many times--things that were impossible."

"Things that were impossible," said Madame Merle. And then in quite a
different tone: "In itself your little picture's very good." She looked
about the room--at the old cabinets, pictures, tapestries, surfaces
of faded silk. "Your rooms at least are perfect. I'm struck with that
afresh whenever I come back; I know none better anywhere. You understand
this sort of thing as nobody anywhere does. You've such adorable taste."

"I'm sick of my adorable taste," said Gilbert Osmond.

"You must nevertheless let Miss Archer come and see it. I've told her
about it."

"I don't object to showing my things--when people are not idiots."

"You do it delightfully. As cicerone of your museum you appear to
particular advantage."

Mr. Osmond, in return for this compliment, simply looked at once colder
and more attentive. "Did you say she was rich?"

"She has seventy thousand pounds."

"En ecus bien comptes?"

"There's no doubt whatever about her fortune. I've seen it, as I may
say."

"Satisfactory woman!--I mean you. And if I go to see her shall I see the
mother?"

"The mother? She has none--nor father either."

"The aunt then--whom did you say?--Mrs. Touchett. I can easily keep her
out of the way."

"I don't object to her," said Osmond; "I rather like Mrs. Touchett.
She has a sort of old-fashioned character that's passing away--a vivid
identity. But that long jackanapes the son--is he about the place?"

"He's there, but he won't trouble you."

"He's a good deal of a donkey."

"I think you're mistaken. He's a very clever man. But he's not fond of
being about when I'm there, because he doesn't like me."

"What could he be more asinine than that? Did you say she has looks?"
Osmond went on.

"Yes; but I won't say it again, lest you should be disappointed in them.
Come and make a beginning; that's all I ask of you."

"A beginning of what?"

Madame Merle was silent a little. "I want you of course to marry her."

"The beginning of the end? Well, I'll see for myself. Have you told her
that?"

"For what do you take me? She's not so coarse a piece of machinery--nor
am I."

"Really," said Osmond after some meditation, "I don't understand your
ambitions."

"I think you'll understand this one after you've seen Miss Archer.
Suspend your judgement." Madame Merle, as she spoke, had drawn near the
open door of the garden, where she stood a moment looking out. "Pansy
has really grown pretty," she presently added.

"So it seemed to me."

"But she has had enough of the convent."

"I don't know," said Osmond. "I like what they've made of her. It's very
charming."

"That's not the convent. It's the child's nature."

"It's the combination, I think. She's as pure as a pearl."

"Why doesn't she come back with my flowers then?" Madame Merle asked.
"She's not in a hurry."

"We'll go and get them."

"She doesn't like me," the visitor murmured as she raised her parasol
and they passed into the garden.



Madame Merle, who had come to Florence on Mrs. Touchett's arrival at
the invitation of this lady--Mrs. Touchett offering her for a month the
hospitality of Palazzo Crescentini--the judicious Madame Merle spoke to
Isabel afresh about Gilbert Osmond and expressed the hope she might know
him; making, however, no such point of the matter as we have seen her do
in recommending the girl herself to Mr. Osmond's attention. The reason
of this was perhaps that Isabel offered no resistance whatever to Madame
Merle's proposal. In Italy, as in England, the lady had a multitude of
friends, both among the natives of the country and its heterogeneous
visitors. She had mentioned to Isabel most of the people the girl would
find it well to "meet"--of course, she said, Isabel could know whomever
in the wide world she would--and had placed Mr. Osmond near the top of
the list. He was an old friend of her own; she had known him these dozen
years; he was one of the cleverest and most agreeable men--well, in
Europe simply. He was altogether above the respectable average; quite
another affair. He wasn't a professional charmer--far from it, and the
effect he produced depended a good deal on the state of his nerves and
his spirits. When not in the right mood he could fall as low as any one,
saved only by his looking at such hours rather like a demoralised prince
in exile. But if he cared or was interested or rightly challenged--just
exactly rightly it had to be--then one felt his cleverness and his
distinction. Those qualities didn't depend, in him, as in so many
people, on his not committing or exposing himself. He had his
perversities--which indeed Isabel would find to be the case with all the
men really worth knowing--and didn't cause his light to shine equally
for all persons. Madame Merle, however, thought she could undertake that
for Isabel he would be brilliant. He was easily bored, too easily, and
dull people always put him out; but a quick and cultivated girl like
Isabel would give him a stimulus which was too absent from his life. At
any rate he was a person not to miss. One shouldn't attempt to live in
Italy without making a friend of Gilbert Osmond, who knew more about the
country than any one except two or three German professors. And if
they had more knowledge than he it was he who had most perception and
taste--being artistic through and through. Isabel remembered that her
friend had spoken of him during their plunge, at Gardencourt, into the
deeps of talk, and wondered a little what was the nature of the tie
binding these superior spirits. She felt that Madame Merle's ties always
somehow had histories, and such an impression was part of the interest
created by this inordinate woman. As regards her relations with Mr.
Osmond, however, she hinted at nothing but a long-established calm
friendship. Isabel said she should be happy to know a person who had
enjoyed so high a confidence for so many years. "You ought to see a
great many men," Madame Merle remarked; "you ought to see as many as
possible, so as to get used to them."

"Used to them?" Isabel repeated with that solemn stare which sometimes
seemed to proclaim her deficient in the sense of comedy. "Why, I'm not
afraid of them--I'm as used to them as the cook to the butcher-boys."

"Used to them, I mean, so as to despise them. That's what one comes to
with most of them. You'll pick out, for your society, the few whom you
don't despise."

This was a note of cynicism that Madame Merle didn't often allow herself
to sound; but Isabel was not alarmed, for she had never supposed that
as one saw more of the world the sentiment of respect became the
most active of one's emotions. It was excited, none the less, by the
beautiful city of Florence, which pleased her not less than Madame Merle
had promised; and if her unassisted perception had not been able to
gauge its charms she had clever companions as priests to the mystery.
She was--in no want indeed of esthetic illumination, for Ralph found it
a joy that renewed his own early passion to act as cicerone to his
eager young kinswoman. Madame Merle remained at home; she had seen the
treasures of Florence again and again and had always something else
to do. But she talked of all things with remarkable vividness of
memory--she recalled the right-hand corner of the large Perugino and the
position of the hands of the Saint Elizabeth in the picture next to it.
She had her opinions as to the character of many famous works of art,
differing often from Ralph with great sharpness and defending her
interpretations with as much ingenuity as good-humour. Isabel listened
to the discussions taking place between the two with a sense that
she might derive much benefit from them and that they were among the
advantages she couldn't have enjoyed for instance in Albany. In the
clear May mornings before the formal breakfast--this repast at Mrs.
Touchett's was served at twelve o'clock--she wandered with her cousin
through the narrow and sombre Florentine streets, resting a while in
the thicker dusk of some historic church or the vaulted chambers of some
dispeopled convent. She went to the galleries and palaces; she looked at
the pictures and statues that had hitherto been great names to her,
and exchanged for a knowledge which was sometimes a limitation a
presentiment which proved usually to have been a blank. She performed
all those acts of mental prostration in which, on a first visit to
Italy, youth and enthusiasm so freely indulge; she felt her heart beat
in the presence of immortal genius and knew the sweetness of rising
tears in eyes to which faded fresco and darkened marble grew dim. But
the return, every day, was even pleasanter than the going forth; the
return into the wide, monumental court of the great house in which Mrs.
Touchett, many years before, had established herself, and into the
high, cool rooms where the carven rafters and pompous frescoes of the
sixteenth century looked down on the familiar commodities of the age of
advertisement. Mrs. Touchett inhabited an historic building in a narrow
street whose very name recalled the strife of medieval factions; and
found compensation for the darkness of her frontage in the modicity of
her rent and the brightness of a garden where nature itself looked as
archaic as the rugged architecture of the palace and which cleared
and scented the rooms in regular use. To live in such a place was, for
Isabel, to hold to her ear all day a shell of the sea of the past. This
vague eternal rumour kept her imagination awake.

Gilbert Osmond came to see Madame Merle, who presented him to the young
lady lurking at the other side of the room. Isabel took on this occasion
little part in the talk; she scarcely even smiled when the others turned
to her invitingly; she sat there as if she had been at the play and had
paid even a large sum for her place. Mrs. Touchett was not present, and
these two had it, for the effect of brilliancy, all their own way. They
talked of the Florentine, the Roman, the cosmopolite world, and might
have been distinguished performers figuring for a charity. It all had
the rich readiness that would have come from rehearsal. Madame Merle
appealed to her as if she had been on the stage, but she could ignore
any learnt cue without spoiling the scene--though of course she thus put
dreadfully in the wrong the friend who had told Mr. Osmond she could be
depended on. This was no matter for once; even if more had been involved
she could have made no attempt to shine. There was something in
the visitor that checked her and held her in suspense--made it more
important she should get an impression of him than that she should
produce one herself. Besides, she had little skill in producing an
impression which she knew to be expected: nothing could be happier, in
general, than to seem dazzling, but she had a perverse unwillingness to
glitter by arrangement. Mr. Osmond, to do him justice, had a well-bred
air of expecting nothing, a quiet ease that covered everything, even the
first show of his own wit. This was the more grateful as his face, his
head, was sensitive; he was not handsome, but he was fine, as fine as
one of the drawings in the long gallery above the bridge of the
Uffizi. And his very voice was fine--the more strangely that, with its
clearness, it yet somehow wasn't sweet. This had had really to do with
making her abstain from interference. His utterance was the vibration
of glass, and if she had put out her finger she might have changed the
pitch and spoiled the concert. Yet before he went she had to speak.

"Madame Merle," he said, "consents to come up to my hill-top some day
next week and drink tea in my garden. It would give me much pleasure if
you would come with her. It's thought rather pretty--there's what they
call a general view. My daughter too would be so glad--or rather, for
she's too young to have strong emotions, I should be so glad--so very
glad." And Mr. Osmond paused with a slight air of embarrassment, leaving
his sentence unfinished. "I should be so happy if you could know my
daughter," he went on a moment afterwards.

Isabel replied that she should be delighted to see Miss Osmond and that
if Madame Merle would show her the way to the hill-top she should be
very grateful. Upon this assurance the visitor took his leave; after
which Isabel fully expected her friend would scold her for having been
so stupid. But to her surprise that lady, who indeed never fell into the
mere matter-of-course, said to her in a few moments,

"You were charming, my dear; you were just as one would have wished you.
You're never disappointing."

A rebuke might possibly have been irritating, though it is much more
probable that Isabel would have taken it in good part; but, strange
to say, the words that Madame Merle actually used caused her the first
feeling of displeasure she had known this ally to excite. "That's more
than I intended," she answered coldly. "I'm under no obligation that I
know of to charm Mr. Osmond."

Madame Merle perceptibly flushed, but we know it was not her habit to
retract. "My dear child, I didn't speak for him, poor man; I spoke for
yourself. It's not of course a question as to his liking you; it matters
little whether he likes you or not! But I thought you liked HIM."

"I did," said Isabel honestly. "But I don't see what that matters
either."

"Everything that concerns you matters to me," Madame Merle returned
with her weary nobleness; "especially when at the same time another old
friend's concerned."

Whatever Isabel's obligations may have been to Mr. Osmond, it must be
admitted that she found them sufficient to lead her to put to Ralph
sundry questions about him. She thought Ralph's judgements distorted by
his trials, but she flattered herself she had learned to make allowance
for that.

"Do I know him?" said her cousin. "Oh, yes, I 'know' him; not well,
but on the whole enough. I've never cultivated his society, and he
apparently has never found mine indispensable to his happiness. Who is
he, what is he? He's a vague, unexplained American who has been living
these thirty years, or less, in Italy. Why do I call him unexplained?
Only as a cover for my ignorance; I don't know his antecedents, his
family, his origin. For all I do know he may be a prince in disguise; he
rather looks like one, by the way--like a prince who has abdicated in a
fit of fastidiousness and has been in a state of disgust ever since. He
used to live in Rome; but of late years he has taken up his abode here;
I remember hearing him say that Rome has grown vulgar. He has a great
dread of vulgarity; that's his special line; he hasn't any other that I
know of. He lives on his income, which I suspect of not being vulgarly
large. He's a poor but honest gentleman that's what he calls himself.
He married young and lost his wife, and I believe he has a daughter. He
also has a sister, who's married to some small Count or other, of these
parts; I remember meeting her of old. She's nicer than he, I should
think, but rather impossible. I remember there used to be some stories
about her. I don't think I recommend you to know her. But why don't you
ask Madame Merle about these people? She knows them all much better than
I."

"I ask you because I want your opinion as well as hers," said Isabel.

"A fig for my opinion! If you fall in love with Mr. Osmond what will you
care for that?"

"Not much, probably. But meanwhile it has a certain importance. The more
information one has about one's dangers the better."

"I don't agree to that--it may make them dangers. We know too much about
people in these days; we hear too much. Our ears, our minds, our mouths,
are stuffed with personalities. Don't mind anything any one tells you
about any one else. Judge everyone and everything for yourself."

"That's what I try to do," said Isabel "but when you do that people call
you conceited."

"You're not to mind them--that's precisely my argument; not to mind what
they say about yourself any more than what they say about your friend or
your enemy."

Isabel considered. "I think you're right; but there are some things I
can't help minding: for instance when my friend's attacked or when I
myself am praised."

"Of course you're always at liberty to judge the critic. Judge people as
critics, however," Ralph added, "and you'll condemn them all!"

"I shall see Mr. Osmond for myself," said Isabel. "I've promised to pay
him a visit."

"To pay him a visit?"

"To go and see his view, his pictures, his daughter--I don't know
exactly what. Madame Merle's to take me; she tells me a great many
ladies call on him."

"Ah, with Madame Merle you may go anywhere, de confiance," said Ralph.
"She knows none but the best people."

Isabel said no more about Mr. Osmond, but she presently remarked to her
cousin that she was not satisfied with his tone about Madame Merle. "It
seems to me you insinuate things about her. I don't know what you mean,
but if you've any grounds for disliking her I think you should either
mention them frankly or else say nothing at all."

Ralph, however, resented this charge with more apparent earnestness than
he commonly used. "I speak of Madame Merle exactly as I speak to her:
with an even exaggerated respect."

"Exaggerated, precisely. That's what I complain of."

"I do so because Madame Merle's merits are exaggerated."

"By whom, pray? By me? If so I do her a poor service."

"No, no; by herself."

"Ah, I protest!" Isabel earnestly cried. "If ever there was a woman who
made small claims--!"

"You put your finger on it," Ralph interrupted. "Her modesty's
exaggerated. She has no business with small claims--she has a perfect
right to make large ones."

"Her merits are large then. You contradict yourself."

"Her merits are immense," said Ralph. "She's indescribably blameless; a
pathless desert of virtue; the only woman I know who never gives one a
chance."

"A chance for what?"

"Well, say to call her a fool! She's the only woman I know who has but
that one little fault."

Isabel turned away with impatience. "I don't understand you; you're too
paradoxical for my plain mind."

"Let me explain. When I say she exaggerates I don't mean it in the
vulgar sense--that she boasts, overstates, gives too fine an account of
herself. I mean literally that she pushes the search for perfection too
far--that her merits are in themselves overstrained. She's too good, too
kind, too clever, too learned, too accomplished, too everything. She's
too complete, in a word. I confess to you that she acts on my nerves and
that I feel about her a good deal as that intensely human Athenian felt
about Aristides the Just."

Isabel looked hard at her cousin; but the mocking spirit, if it lurked
in his words, failed on this occasion to peep from his face. "Do you
wish Madame Merle to be banished?"

"By no means. She's much too good company. I delight in Madame Merle,"
said Ralph Touchett simply.

"You're very odious, sir!" Isabel exclaimed. And then she asked him if
he knew anything that was not to the honour of her brilliant friend.

"Nothing whatever. Don't you see that's just what I mean? On the
character of every one else you may find some little black speck; if
I were to take half an hour to it, some day, I've no doubt I should be
able to find one on yours. For my own, of course, I'm spotted like a
leopard. But on Madame Merle's nothing, nothing, nothing!"

"That's just what I think!" said Isabel with a toss of her head. "That
is why I like her so much."

"She's a capital person for you to know. Since you wish to see the world
you couldn't have a better guide."

"I suppose you mean by that that she's worldly?"

"Worldly? No," said Ralph, "she's the great round world itself!"

It had certainly not, as Isabel for the moment took it into her head to
believe, been a refinement of malice in him to say that he delighted in
Madame Merle. Ralph Touchett took his refreshment wherever he could find
it, and he would not have forgiven himself if he had been left wholly
unbeguiled by such a mistress of the social art. There are deep-lying
sympathies and antipathies, and it may have been that, in spite of the
administered justice she enjoyed at his hands, her absence from his
mother's house would not have made life barren to him. But Ralph
Touchett had learned more or less inscrutably to attend, and there could
have been nothing so "sustained" to attend to as the general performance
of Madame Merle. He tasted her in sips, he let her stand, with an
opportuneness she herself could not have surpassed. There were moments
when he felt almost sorry for her; and these, oddly enough, were the
moments when his kindness was least demonstrative. He was sure she had
been yearningly ambitious and that what she had visibly accomplished was
far below her secret measure. She had got herself into perfect training,
but had won none of the prizes. She was always plain Madame Merle,
the widow of a Swiss negociant, with a small income and a large
acquaintance, who stayed with people a great deal and was almost as
universally "liked" as some new volume of smooth twaddle. The contrast
between this position and any one of some half-dozen others that he
supposed to have at various moments engaged her hope had an element of
the tragical. His mother thought he got on beautifully with their genial
guest; to Mrs. Touchett's sense two persons who dealt so largely in
too-ingenious theories of conduct--that is of their own--would have much
in common. He had given due consideration to Isabel's intimacy with her
eminent friend, having long since made up his mind that he could not,
without opposition, keep his cousin to himself; and he made the best of
it, as he had done of worse things. He believed it would take care of
itself; it wouldn't last forever. Neither of these two superior persons
knew the other as well as she supposed, and when each had made an
important discovery or two there would be, if not a rupture, at least
a relaxation. Meanwhile he was quite willing to admit that the
conversation of the elder lady was an advantage to the younger, who had
a great deal to learn and would doubtless learn it better from Madame
Merle than from some other instructors of the young. It was not probable
that Isabel would be injured.




It would certainly have been hard to see what injury could arise to
her from the visit she presently paid to Mr. Osmond's hill-top. Nothing
could have been more charming than this occasion--a soft afternoon in
the full maturity of the Tuscan spring. The companions drove out of the
Roman Gate, beneath the enormous blank superstructure which crowns the
fine clear arch of that portal and makes it nakedly impressive, and
wound between high-walled lanes into which the wealth of blossoming
orchards over-drooped and flung a fragrance, until they reached the
small superurban piazza, of crooked shape, where the long brown wall of
the villa occupied in part by Mr. Osmond formed a principal, or at least
a very imposing, object. Isabel went with her friend through a wide,
high court, where a clear shadow rested below and a pair of light-arched
galleries, facing each other above, caught the upper sunshine upon their
slim columns and the flowering plants in which they were dressed. There
was something grave and strong in the place; it looked somehow as
if, once you were in, you would need an act of energy to get out. For
Isabel, however, there was of course as yet no thought of getting out,
but only of advancing. Mr. Osmond met her in the cold ante-chamber--it
was cold even in the month of May--and ushered her, with her
conductress, into the apartment to which we have already been
introduced. Madame Merle was in front, and while Isabel lingered a
little, talking with him, she went forward familiarly and greeted two
persons who were seated in the saloon. One of these was little Pansy, on
whom she bestowed a kiss; the other was a lady whom Mr. Osmond indicated
to Isabel as his sister, the Countess Gemini. "And that's my little
girl," he said, "who has just come out of her convent."

Pansy had on a scant white dress, and her fair hair was neatly arranged
in a net; she wore her small shoes tied sandal-fashion about her ankles.
She made Isabel a little conventual curtsey and then came to be kissed.
The Countess Gemini simply nodded without getting up: Isabel could see
she was a woman of high fashion. She was thin and dark and not at
all pretty, having features that suggested some tropical bird--a long
beak-like nose, small, quickly-moving eyes and a mouth and chin
that receded extremely. Her expression, however, thanks to various
intensities of emphasis and wonder, of horror and joy, was not inhuman,
and, as regards her appearance, it was plain she understood herself
and made the most of her points. Her attire, voluminous and delicate,
bristling with elegance, had the look of shimmering plumage, and her
attitudes were as light and sudden as those of a creature who perched
upon twigs. She had a great deal of manner; Isabel, who had never
known any one with so much manner, immediately classed her as the most
affected of women. She remembered that Ralph had not recommended her as
an acquaintance; but she was ready to acknowledge that to a casual view
the Countess Gemini revealed no depths. Her demonstrations suggested the
violent waving of some flag of general truce--white silk with fluttering
streamers.

"You'll believe I'm glad to see you when I tell you it's only because
I knew you were to be here that I came myself. I don't come and see my
brother--I make him come and see me. This hill of his is impossible--I
don't see what possesses him. Really, Osmond, you'll be the ruin of my
horses some day, and if it hurts them you'll have to give me another
pair. I heard them wheezing to-day; I assure you I did. It's very
disagreeable to hear one's horses wheezing when one's sitting in the
carriage; it sounds too as if they weren't what they should be. But
I've always had good horses; whatever else I may have lacked I've always
managed that. My husband doesn't know much, but I think he knows a
horse. In general Italians don't, but my husband goes in, according to
his poor light, for everything English. My horses are English--so it's
all the greater pity they should be ruined. I must tell you," she went
on, directly addressing Isabel, "that Osmond doesn't often invite me;
I don't think he likes to have me. It was quite my own idea, coming
to-day. I like to see new people, and I'm sure you're very new. But
don't sit there; that chair's not what it looks. There are some very
good seats here, but there are also some horrors."

These remarks were delivered with a series of little jerks and pecks, of
roulades of shrillness, and in an accent that was as some fond recall of
good English, or rather of good American, in adversity.

"I don't like to have you, my dear?" said her brother. "I'm sure you're
invaluable."

"I don't see any horrors anywhere," Isabel returned, looking about her.
"Everything seems to me beautiful and precious."

"I've a few good things," Mr. Osmond allowed; "indeed I've nothing very
bad. But I've not what I should have liked."

He stood there a little awkwardly, smiling and glancing about; his
manner was an odd mixture of the detached and the involved. He seemed to
hint that nothing but the right "values" was of any consequence. Isabel
made a rapid induction: perfect simplicity was not the badge of his
family. Even the little girl from the convent, who, in her prim white
dress, with her small submissive face and her hands locked before her,
stood there as if she were about to partake of her first communion,
even Mr. Osmond's diminutive daughter had a kind of finish that was not
entirely artless.

"You'd have liked a few things from the Uffizi and the Pitti--that's what
you'd have liked," said Madame Merle.

"Poor Osmond, with his old curtains and crucifixes!" the Countess Gemini
exclaimed: she appeared to call her brother only by his family-name. Her
ejaculation had no particular object; she smiled at Isabel as she made
it and looked at her from head to foot.

Her brother had not heard her; he seemed to be thinking what he could
say to Isabel. "Won't you have some tea?--you must be very tired," he at
last bethought himself of remarking.

"No indeed, I'm not tired; what have I done to tire me?" Isabel felt a
certain need of being very direct, of pretending to nothing; there was
something in the air, in her general impression of things--she could
hardly have said what it was--that deprived her of all disposition to
put herself forward. The place, the occasion, the combination of people,
signified more than lay on the surface; she would try to understand--she
would not simply utter graceful platitudes. Poor Isabel was doubtless
not aware that many women would have uttered graceful platitudes to
cover the working of their observation. It must be confessed that her
pride was a trifle alarmed. A man she had heard spoken of in terms
that excited interest and who was evidently capable of distinguishing
himself, had invited her, a young lady not lavish of her favours,
to come to his house. Now that she had done so the burden of the
entertainment rested naturally on his wit. Isabel was not rendered
less observant, and for the moment, we judge, she was not rendered
more indulgent, by perceiving that Mr. Osmond carried his burden less
complacently than might have been expected. "What a fool I was to
have let myself so needlessly in--!" she could fancy his exclaiming to
himself.

"You'll be tired when you go home, if he shows you all his bibelots and
gives you a lecture on each," said the Countess Gemini.

"I'm not afraid of that; but if I'm tired I shall at least have learned
something."

"Very little, I suspect. But my sister's dreadfully afraid of learning
anything," said Mr. Osmond.

"Oh, I confess to that; I don't want to know anything more--I know too
much already. The more you know the more unhappy you are."

"You should not undervalue knowledge before Pansy, who has not finished
her education," Madame Merle interposed with a smile. "Pansy will
never know any harm," said the child's father. "Pansy's a little
convent-flower."

"Oh, the convents, the convents!" cried the Countess with a flutter of
her ruffles. "Speak to me of the convents! You may learn anything there;
I'm a convent-flower myself. I don't pretend to be good, but the nuns
do. Don't you see what I mean?" she went on, appealing to Isabel.

Isabel was not sure she saw, and she answered that she was very bad
at following arguments. The Countess then declared that she herself
detested arguments, but that this was her brother's taste--he would
always discuss. "For me," she said, "one should like a thing or one
shouldn't; one can't like everything, of course. But one shouldn't
attempt to reason it out--you never know where it may lead you. There
are some very good feelings that may have bad reasons, don't you know?
And then there are very bad feelings, sometimes, that have good reasons.
Don't you see what I mean? I don't care anything about reasons, but I
know what I like."

"Ah, that's the great thing," said Isabel, smiling and suspecting that
her acquaintance with this lightly flitting personage would not lead to
intellectual repose. If the Countess objected to argument Isabel at this
moment had as little taste for it, and she put out her hand to Pansy
with a pleasant sense that such a gesture committed her to nothing that
would admit of a divergence of views. Gilbert Osmond apparently took a
rather hopeless view of his sister's tone; he turned the conversation to
another topic. He presently sat down on the other side of his daughter,
who had shyly brushed Isabel's fingers with her own; but he ended by
drawing her out of her chair and making her stand between his knees,
leaning against him while he passed his arm round her slimness. The
child fixed her eyes on Isabel with a still, disinterested gaze which
seemed void of an intention, yet conscious of an attraction. Mr. Osmond
talked of many things; Madame Merle had said he could be agreeable
when he chose, and to-day, after a little, he appeared not only to have
chosen but to have determined. Madame Merle and the Countess Gemini sat
a little apart, conversing in the effortless manner of persons who knew
each other well enough to take their ease; but every now and then Isabel
heard the Countess, at something said by her companion, plunge into the
latter's lucidity as a poodle splashes after a thrown stick. It was as
if Madame Merle were seeing how far she would go. Mr. Osmond talked of
Florence, of Italy, of the pleasure of living in that country and of the
abatements to the pleasure. There were both satisfactions and drawbacks;
the drawbacks were numerous; strangers were too apt to see such a world
as all romantic. It met the case soothingly for the human, for the
social failure--by which he meant the people who couldn't "realise," as
they said, on their sensibility: they could keep it about them there,
in their poverty, without ridicule, as you might keep an heirloom or an
inconvenient entailed place that brought you in nothing. Thus there were
advantages in living in the country which contained the greatest sum of
beauty. Certain impressions you could get only there. Others, favourable
to life, you never got, and you got some that were very bad. But from
time to time you got one of a quality that made up for everything.
Italy, all the same, had spoiled a great many people; he was even
fatuous enough to believe at times that he himself might have been a
better man if he had spent less of his life there. It made one idle and
dilettantish and second-rate; it had no discipline for the character,
didn't cultivate in you, otherwise expressed, the successful social
and other "cheek" that flourished in Paris and London. "We're sweetly
provincial," said Mr. Osmond, "and I'm perfectly aware that I myself am
as rusty as a key that has no lock to fit it. It polishes me up a little
to talk with you--not that I venture to pretend I can turn that very
complicated lock I suspect your intellect of being! But you'll be going
away before I've seen you three times, and I shall perhaps never see you
after that. That's what it is to live in a country that people come to.
When they're disagreeable here it's bad enough; when they're agreeable
it's still worse. As soon as you like them they're off again! I've been
deceived too often; I've ceased to form attachments, to permit myself
to feel attractions. You mean to stay--to settle? That would be really
comfortable. Ah yes, your aunt's a sort of guarantee; I believe she may
be depended on. Oh, she's an old Florentine; I mean literally an old
one; not a modern outsider. She's a contemporary of the Medici; she must
have been present at the burning of Savonarola, and I'm not sure she
didn't throw a handful of chips into the flame. Her face is very much
like some faces in the early pictures; little, dry, definite faces that
must have had a good deal of expression, but almost always the same one.
Indeed I can show you her portrait in a fresco of Ghirlandaio's. I hope
you don't object to my speaking that way of your aunt, eh? I've an idea
you don't. Perhaps you think that's even worse. I assure you there's
no want of respect in it, to either of you. You know I'm a particular
admirer of Mrs. Touchett."

While Isabel's host exerted himself to entertain her in this somewhat
confidential fashion she looked occasionally at Madame Merle, who met
her eyes with an inattentive smile in which, on this occasion, there
was no infelicitous intimation that our heroine appeared to advantage.
Madame Merle eventually proposed to the Countess Gemini that they
should go into the garden, and the Countess, rising and shaking out
her feathers, began to rustle toward the door. "Poor Miss Archer!" she
exclaimed, surveying the other group with expressive compassion. "She
has been brought quite into the family."

"Miss Archer can certainly have nothing but sympathy for a family to
which you belong," Mr. Osmond answered, with a laugh which, though it
had something of a mocking ring, had also a finer patience.

"I don't know what you mean by that! I'm sure she'll see no harm in
me but what you tell her. I'm better than he says, Miss Archer," the
Countess went on. "I'm only rather an idiot and a bore. Is that all he
has said? Ah then, you keep him in good-humour. Has he opened on one of
his favourite subjects? I give you notice that there are two or three
that he treats a fond. In that case you had better take off your
bonnet."

"I don't think I know what Mr. Osmond's favourite subjects are," said
Isabel, who had risen to her feet.

The Countess assumed for an instant an attitude of intense meditation,
pressing one of her hands, with the finger-tips gathered together, to
her forehead. "I'll tell you in a moment. One's Machiavelli; the other's
Vittoria Colonna; the next is Metastasio."

"Ah, with me," said Madame Merle, passing her arm into the Countess
Gemini's as if to guide her course to the garden, "Mr. Osmond's never so
historical."

"Oh you," the Countess answered as they moved away, "you yourself are
Machiavelli--you yourself are Vittoria Colonna!"

"We shall hear next that poor Madame Merle is Metastasio!" Gilbert
Osmond resignedly sighed.

Isabel had got up on the assumption that they too were to go into the
garden; but her host stood there with no apparent inclination to leave
the room, his hands in the pockets of his jacket and his daughter, who
had now locked her arm into one of his own, clinging to him and looking
up while her eyes moved from his own face to Isabel's. Isabel waited,
with a certain unuttered contentedness, to have her movements directed;
she liked Mr. Osmond's talk, his company: she had what always gave her
a very private thrill, the consciousness of a new relation. Through
the open doors of the great room she saw Madame Merle and the Countess
stroll across the fine grass of the garden; then she turned, and her
eyes wandered over the things scattered about her. The understanding
had been that Mr. Osmond should show her his treasures; his pictures and
cabinets all looked like treasures. Isabel after a moment went toward
one of the pictures to see it better; but just as she had done so he
said to her abruptly: "Miss Archer, what do you think of my sister?"

She faced him with some surprise. "Ah, don't ask me that--I've seen your
sister too little."

"Yes, you've seen her very little; but you must have observed that
there is not a great deal of her to see. What do you think of our family
tone?" he went on with his cool smile. "I should like to know how
it strikes a fresh, unprejudiced mind. I know what you're going to
say--you've had almost no observation of it. Of course this is only
a glimpse. But just take notice, in future, if you have a chance. I
sometimes think we've got into a rather bad way, living off here among
things and people not our own, without responsibilities or attachments,
with nothing to hold us together or keep us up; marrying foreigners,
forming artificial tastes, playing tricks with our natural mission. Let
me add, though, that I say that much more for myself than for my sister.
She's a very honest lady--more so than she seems. She's rather
unhappy, and as she's not of a serious turn she doesn't tend to show
it tragically: she shows it comically instead. She has got a horrid
husband, though I'm not sure she makes the best of him. Of course,
however, a horrid husband's an awkward thing. Madame Merle gives her
excellent advice, but it's a good deal like giving a child a dictionary
to learn a language with. He can look out the words, but he can't put
them together. My sister needs a grammar, but unfortunately she's not
grammatical. Pardon my troubling you with these details; my sister was
very right in saying you've been taken into the family. Let me take down
that picture; you want more light."

He took down the picture, carried it toward the window, related some
curious facts about it. She looked at the other works of art, and he
gave her such further information as might appear most acceptable to
a young lady making a call on a summer afternoon. His pictures, his
medallions and tapestries were interesting; but after a while Isabel
felt the owner much more so, and independently of them, thickly as they
seemed to overhang him. He resembled no one she had ever seen; most
of the people she knew might be divided into groups of half a dozen
specimens. There were one or two exceptions to this; she could think for
instance of no group that would contain her aunt Lydia. There were other
people who were, relatively speaking, original--original, as one might
say, by courtesy such as Mr. Goodwood, as her cousin Ralph, as Henrietta
Stackpole, as Lord Warburton, as Madame Merle. But in essentials, when
one came to look at them, these individuals belonged to types already
present to her mind. Her mind contained no class offering a natural
place to Mr. Osmond--he was a specimen apart. It was not that she
recognised all these truths at the hour, but they were falling into
order before her. For the moment she only said to herself that this "new
relation" would perhaps prove her very most distinguished. Madame Merle
had had that note of rarity, but what quite other power it immediately
gained when sounded by a man! It was not so much what he said and did,
but rather what he withheld, that marked him for her as by one of those
signs of the highly curious that he was showing her on the underside of
old plates and in the corner of sixteenth-century drawings: he indulged
in no striking deflections from common usage, he was an original without
being an eccentric. She had never met a person of so fine a grain.
The peculiarity was physical, to begin with, and it extended to
impalpabilities. His dense, delicate hair, his overdrawn, retouched
features, his clear complexion, ripe without being coarse, the very
evenness of the growth of his beard, and that light, smooth slenderness
of structure which made the movement of a single one of his fingers
produce the effect of an expressive gesture--these personal points
struck our sensitive young woman as signs of quality, of intensity,
somehow as promises of interest. He was certainly fastidious and
critical; he was probably irritable. His sensibility had governed
him--possibly governed him too much; it had made him impatient of
vulgar troubles and had led him to live by himself, in a sorted, sifted,
arranged world, thinking about art and beauty and history. He had
consulted his taste in everything--his taste alone perhaps, as a sick
man consciously incurable consults at last only his lawyer: that was
what made him so different from every one else. Ralph had something of
this same quality, this appearance of thinking that life was a matter
of connoisseurship; but in Ralph it was an anomaly, a kind of humorous
excrescence, whereas in Mr. Osmond it was the keynote, and everything
was in harmony with it. She was certainly far from understanding him
completely; his meaning was not at all times obvious. It was hard to see
what he meant for instance by speaking of his provincial side--which
was exactly the side she would have taken him most to lack. Was it a
harmless paradox, intended to puzzle her? or was it the last refinement
of high culture? She trusted she should learn in time; it would be very
interesting to learn. If it was provincial to have that harmony, what
then was the finish of the capital? And she could put this question
in spite of so feeling her host a shy personage; since such shyness as
his--the shyness of ticklish nerves and fine perceptions--was perfectly
consistent with the best breeding. Indeed it was almost a proof of
standards and touchstones other than the vulgar: he must be so sure the
vulgar would be first on the ground. He wasn't a man of easy assurance,
who chatted and gossiped with the fluency of a superficial nature; he
was critical of himself as well as of others, and, exacting a good deal
of others, to think them agreeable, probably took a rather ironical view
of what he himself offered: a proof into the bargain that he was not
grossly conceited. If he had not been shy he wouldn't have effected that
gradual, subtle, successful conversion of it to which she owed both what
pleased her in him and what mystified her. If he had suddenly asked her
what she thought of the Countess Gemini, that was doubtless a proof that
he was interested in her; it could scarcely be as a help to knowledge
of his own sister. That he should be so interested showed an enquiring
mind; but it was a little singular he should sacrifice his fraternal
feeling to his curiosity. This was the most eccentric thing he had done.

There were two other rooms, beyond the one in which she had been
received, equally full of romantic objects, and in these apartments
Isabel spent a quarter of an hour. Everything was in the last degree
curious and precious, and Mr. Osmond continued to be the kindest of
ciceroni as he led her from one fine piece to another and still held his
little girl by the hand. His kindness almost surprised our young friend,
who wondered why he should take so much trouble for her; and she was
oppressed at last with the accumulation of beauty and knowledge to which
she found herself introduced. There was enough for the present; she had
ceased to attend to what he said; she listened to him with attentive
eyes, but was not thinking of what he told her. He probably thought
her quicker, cleverer in every way, more prepared, than she was. Madame
Merle would have pleasantly exaggerated; which was a pity, because in
the end he would be sure to find out, and then perhaps even her real
intelligence wouldn't reconcile him to his mistake. A part of Isabel's
fatigue came from the effort to appear as intelligent as she believed
Madame Merle had described her, and from the fear (very unusual with
her) of exposing--not her ignorance; for that she cared comparatively
little--but her possible grossness of perception. It would have annoyed
her to express a liking for something he, in his superior enlightenment,
would think she oughtn't to like; or to pass by something at which the
truly initiated mind would arrest itself. She had no wish to fall into
that grotesqueness--in which she had seen women (and it was a warning)
serenely, yet ignobly, flounder. She was very careful therefore as to
what she said, as to what she noticed or failed to notice; more careful
than she had ever been before.

They came back into the first of the rooms, where the tea had been
served; but as the two other ladies were still on the terrace, and as
Isabel had not yet been made acquainted with the view, the paramount
distinction of the place, Mr. Osmond directed her steps into the garden
without more delay. Madame Merle and the Countess had had chairs brought
out, and as the afternoon was lovely the Countess proposed they should
take their tea in the open air. Pansy therefore was sent to bid the
servant bring out the preparations. The sun had got low, the golden
light took a deeper tone, and on the mountains and the plain that
stretched beneath them the masses of purple shadow glowed as richly
as the places that were still exposed. The scene had an extraordinary
charm. The air was almost solemnly still, and the large expanse of the
landscape, with its garden-like culture and nobleness of outline,
its teeming valley and delicately-fretted hills, its peculiarly
human-looking touches of habitation, lay there in splendid harmony and
classic grace. "You seem so well pleased that I think you can be trusted
to come back," Osmond said as he led his companion to one of the angles
of the terrace.

"I shall certainly come back," she returned, "in spite of what you say
about its being bad to live in Italy. What was that you said about one's
natural mission? I wonder if I should forsake my natural mission if I
were to settle in Florence."

"A woman's natural mission is to be where she's most appreciated."

"The point's to find out where that is."

"Very true--she often wastes a great deal of time in the enquiry. People
ought to make it very plain to her."

"Such a matter would have to be made very plain to me," smiled Isabel.

"I'm glad, at any rate, to hear you talk of settling. Madame Merle had
given me an idea that you were of a rather roving disposition. I thought
she spoke of your having some plan of going round the world."

"I'm rather ashamed of my plans; I make a new one every day."

"I don't see why you should be ashamed; it's the greatest of pleasures."

"It seems frivolous, I think," said Isabel. "One ought to choose
something very deliberately, and be faithful to that."

"By that rule then, I've not been frivolous."

"Have you never made plans?"

"Yes, I made one years ago, and I'm acting on it to-day."

"It must have been a very pleasant one," Isabel permitted herself to
observe.

"It was very simple. It was to be as quiet as possible."

"As quiet?" the girl repeated.

"Not to worry--not to strive nor struggle. To resign myself. To be
content with little." He spoke these sentences slowly, with short pauses
between, and his intelligent regard was fixed on his visitor's with the
conscious air of a man who has brought himself to confess something.

"Do you call that simple?" she asked with mild irony.

"Yes, because it's negative."

"Has your life been negative?"

"Call it affirmative if you like. Only it has affirmed my indifference.
Mind you, not my natural indifference--I HAD none. But my studied, my
wilful renunciation."

She scarcely understood him; it seemed a question whether he were
joking or not. Why should a man who struck her as having a great fund
of reserve suddenly bring himself to be so confidential? This was his
affair, however, and his confidences were interesting. "I don't see why
you should have renounced," she said in a moment.

"Because I could do nothing. I had no prospects, I was poor, and I was
not a man of genius. I had no talents even; I took my measure early in
life. I was simply the most fastidious young gentleman living. There
were two or three people in the world I envied--the Emperor of Russia,
for instance, and the Sultan of Turkey! There were even moments when I
envied the Pope of Rome--for the consideration he enjoys. I should have
been delighted to be considered to that extent; but since that couldn't
be I didn't care for anything less, and I made up my mind not to go
in for honours. The leanest gentleman can always consider himself,
and fortunately I was, though lean, a gentleman. I could do nothing in
Italy--I couldn't even be an Italian patriot. To do that I should have
had to get out of the country; and I was too fond of it to leave it, to
say nothing of my being too well satisfied with it, on the whole, as it
then was, to wish it altered. So I've passed a great many years here on
that quiet plan I spoke of. I've not been at all unhappy. I don't mean
to say I've cared for nothing; but the things I've cared for have
been definite--limited. The events of my life have been absolutely
unperceived by any one save myself; getting an old silver crucifix at a
bargain (I've never bought anything dear, of course), or discovering,
as I once did, a sketch by Correggio on a panel daubed over by some
inspired idiot."

This would have been rather a dry account of Mr. Osmond's career if
Isabel had fully believed it; but her imagination supplied the human
element which she was sure had not been wanting. His life had been
mingled with other lives more than he admitted; naturally she couldn't
expect him to enter into this. For the present she abstained from
provoking further revelations; to intimate that he had not told her
everything would be more familiar and less considerate than she now
desired to be--would in fact be uproariously vulgar. He had certainly
told her quite enough. It was her present inclination, however, to
express a measured sympathy for the success with which he had preserved
his independence. "That's a very pleasant life," she said, "to renounce
everything but Correggio!"

"Oh, I've made in my way a good thing of it. Don't imagine I'm whining
about it. It's one's own fault if one isn't happy."

This was large; she kept down to something smaller. "Have you lived here
always?"

"No, not always. I lived a long time at Naples, and many years in
Rome. But I've been here a good while. Perhaps I shall have to change,
however; to do something else. I've no longer myself to think of. My
daughter's growing up and may very possibly not care so much for the
Correggios and crucifixes as I. I shall have to do what's best for
Pansy."

"Yes, do that," said Isabel. "She's such a dear little girl."

"Ah," cried Gilbert Osmond beautifully, "she's a little saint of heaven!
She is my great happiness!"


