
It had been arranged that the two young ladies should proceed to London
under Ralph's escort, though Mrs. Touchett looked with little favour on
the plan. It was just the sort of plan, she said, that Miss Stackpole
would be sure to suggest, and she enquired if the correspondent of
the Interviewer was to take the party to stay at her favourite
boarding-house.

"I don't care where she takes us to stay, so long as there's local
colour," said Isabel. "That's what we're going to London for."

"I suppose that after a girl has refused an English lord she may do
anything," her aunt rejoined. "After that one needn't stand on trifles."

"Should you have liked me to marry Lord Warburton?" Isabel enquired.

"Of course I should."

"I thought you disliked the English so much."

"So I do; but it's all the greater reason for making use of them."

"Is that your idea of marriage?" And Isabel ventured to add that her
aunt appeared to her to have made very little use of Mr. Touchett.

"Your uncle's not an English nobleman," said Mrs. Touchett, "though even
if he had been I should still probably have taken up my residence in
Florence."

"Do you think Lord Warburton could make me any better than I am?" the
girl asked with some animation. "I don't mean I'm too good to improve. I
mean that I don't love Lord Warburton enough to marry him."

"You did right to refuse him then," said Mrs. Touchett in her smallest,
sparest voice. "Only, the next great offer you get, I hope you'll manage
to come up to your standard."

"We had better wait till the offer comes before we talk about it. I
hope very much I may have no more offers for the present. They upset me
completely."

"You probably won't be troubled with them if you adopt permanently the
Bohemian manner of life. However, I've promised Ralph not to criticise."

"I'll do whatever Ralph says is right," Isabel returned. "I've unbounded
confidence in Ralph."

"His mother's much obliged to you!" this lady dryly laughed.

"It seems to me indeed she ought to feel it!" Isabel irrepressibly
answered.

Ralph had assured her that there would be no violation of decency in
their paying a visit--the little party of three--to the sights of the
metropolis; but Mrs. Touchett took a different view. Like many ladies of
her country who had lived a long time in Europe, she had completely
lost her native tact on such points, and in her reaction, not in itself
deplorable, against the liberty allowed to young persons beyond the
seas, had fallen into gratuitous and exaggerated scruples. Ralph
accompanied their visitors to town and established them at a quiet inn
in a street that ran at right angles to Piccadilly. His first idea had
been to take them to his father's house in Winchester Square, a large,
dull mansion which at this period of the year was shrouded in silence
and brown holland; but he bethought himself that, the cook being at
Gardencourt, there was no one in the house to get them their meals,
and Pratt's Hotel accordingly became their resting-place. Ralph, on his
side, found quarters in Winchester Square, having a "den" there of which
he was very fond and being familiar with deeper fears than that of a
cold kitchen. He availed himself largely indeed of the resources of
Pratt's Hotel, beginning his day with an early visit to his fellow
travellers, who had Mr. Pratt in person, in a large bulging white
waistcoat, to remove their dish-covers. Ralph turned up, as he said,
after breakfast, and the little party made out a scheme of entertainment
for the day. As London wears in the month of September a face blank but
for its smears of prior service, the young man, who occasionally took
an apologetic tone, was obliged to remind his companion, to Miss
Stackpole's high derision, that there wasn't a creature in town.

"I suppose you mean the aristocracy are absent," Henrietta answered;
"but I don't think you could have a better proof that if they were
absent altogether they wouldn't be missed. It seems to me the place is
about as full as it can be. There's no one here, of course, but three
or four millions of people. What is it you call them--the lower-middle
class? They're only the population of London, and that's of no
consequence."

Ralph declared that for him the aristocracy left no void that Miss
Stackpole herself didn't fill, and that a more contented man was nowhere
at that moment to be found. In this he spoke the truth, for the stale
September days, in the huge half-empty town, had a charm wrapped in them
as a coloured gem might be wrapped in a dusty cloth. When he went home
at night to the empty house in Winchester Square, after a chain of hours
with his comparatively ardent friends, he wandered into the big dusky
dining-room, where the candle he took from the hall-table, after letting
himself in, constituted the only illumination. The square was still, the
house was still; when he raised one of the windows of the dining-room to
let in the air he heard the slow creak of the boots of a lone constable.
His own step, in the empty place, seemed loud and sonorous; some of the
carpets had been raised, and whenever he moved he roused a melancholy
echo. He sat down in one of the armchairs; the big dark dining table
twinkled here and there in the small candle-light; the pictures on the
wall, all of them very brown, looked vague and incoherent. There was a
ghostly presence as of dinners long since digested, of table-talk
that had lost its actuality. This hint of the supernatural perhaps had
something to do with the fact that his imagination took a flight and
that he remained in his chair a long time beyond the hour at which he
should have been in bed; doing nothing, not even reading the evening
paper. I say he did nothing, and I maintain the phrase in the face of
the fact that he thought at these moments of Isabel. To think of Isabel
could only be for him an idle pursuit, leading to nothing and profiting
little to any one. His cousin had not yet seemed to him so charming
as during these days spent in sounding, tourist-fashion, the deeps
and shallows of the metropolitan element. Isabel was full of premises,
conclusions, emotions; if she had come in search of local colour she
found it everywhere. She asked more questions than he could answer, and
launched brave theories, as to historic cause and social effect, that he
was equally unable to accept or to refute. The party went more than once
to the British Museum and to that brighter palace of art which reclaims
for antique variety so large an area of a monotonous suburb; they spent
a morning in the Abbey and went on a penny-steamer to the Tower; they
looked at pictures both in public and private collections and sat
on various occasions beneath the great trees in Kensington Gardens.
Henrietta proved an indestructible sight-seer and a more lenient judge
than Ralph had ventured to hope. She had indeed many disappointments,
and London at large suffered from her vivid remembrance of the strong
points of the American civic idea; but she made the best of its dingy
dignities and only heaved an occasional sigh and uttered a desultory
"Well!" which led no further and lost itself in retrospect. The truth
was that, as she said herself, she was not in her element. "I've not a
sympathy with inanimate objects," she remarked to Isabel at the National
Gallery; and she continued to suffer from the meagreness of the glimpse
that had as yet been vouchsafed to her of the inner life. Landscapes
by Turner and Assyrian bulls were a poor substitute for the literary
dinner-parties at which she had hoped to meet the genius and renown of
Great Britain.

"Where are your public men, where are your men and women of intellect?"
she enquired of Ralph, standing in the middle of Trafalgar Square as
if she had supposed this to be a place where she would naturally meet a
few. "That's one of them on the top of the column, you say--Lord Nelson.
Was he a lord too? Wasn't he high enough, that they had to stick him a
hundred feet in the air? That's the past--I don't care about the past; I
want to see some of the leading minds of the present. I won't say of the
future, because I don't believe much in your future." Poor Ralph had few
leading minds among his acquaintance and rarely enjoyed the pleasure
of buttonholing a celebrity; a state of things which appeared to Miss
Stackpole to indicate a deplorable want of enterprise. "If I were on the
other side I should call," she said, "and tell the gentleman, whoever
he might be, that I had heard a great deal about him and had come to see
for myself. But I gather from what you say that this is not the custom
here. You seem to have plenty of meaningless customs, but none of those
that would help along. We are in advance, certainly. I suppose I shall
have to give up the social side altogether;" and Henrietta, though
she went about with her guidebook and pencil and wrote a letter to the
Interviewer about the Tower (in which she described the execution of
Lady Jane Grey), had a sad sense of falling below her mission.

The incident that had preceded Isabel's departure from Gardencourt left
a painful trace in our young woman's mind: when she felt again in her
face, as from a recurrent wave, the cold breath of her last suitor's
surprise, she could only muffle her head till the air cleared. She could
not have done less than what she did; this was certainly true. But her
necessity, all the same, had been as graceless as some physical act in
a strained attitude, and she felt no desire to take credit for her
conduct. Mixed with this imperfect pride, nevertheless, was a feeling of
freedom which in itself was sweet and which, as she wandered through the
great city with her ill-matched companions, occasionally throbbed into
odd demonstrations. When she walked in Kensington Gardens she stopped
the children (mainly of the poorer sort) whom she saw playing on the
grass; she asked them their names and gave them sixpence and, when
they were pretty, kissed them. Ralph noticed these quaint charities;
he noticed everything she did. One afternoon, that his companions might
pass the time, he invited them to tea in Winchester Square, and he had
the house set in order as much as possible for their visit. There
was another guest to meet them, an amiable bachelor, an old friend of
Ralph's who happened to be in town and for whom prompt commerce with
Miss Stackpole appeared to have neither difficulty nor dread. Mr.
Bantling, a stout, sleek, smiling man of forty, wonderfully dressed,
universally informed and incoherently amused, laughed immoderately at
everything Henrietta said, gave her several cups of tea, examined in her
society the bric-a-brac, of which Ralph had a considerable collection,
and afterwards, when the host proposed they should go out into the
square and pretend it was a fete-champetre, walked round the limited
enclosure several times with her and, at a dozen turns of their talk,
bounded responsive--as with a positive passion for argument--to her
remarks upon the inner life.

"Oh, I see; I dare say you found it very quiet at Gardencourt. Naturally
there's not much going on there when there's such a lot of illness
about. Touchett's very bad, you know; the doctors have forbidden his
being in England at all, and he has only come back to take care of his
father. The old man, I believe, has half a dozen things the matter
with him. They call it gout, but to my certain knowledge he has organic
disease so developed that you may depend upon it he'll go, some day
soon, quite quickly. Of course that sort of thing makes a dreadfully
dull house; I wonder they have people when they can do so little for
them. Then I believe Mr. Touchett's always squabbling with his wife; she
lives away from her husband, you know, in that extraordinary American
way of yours. If you want a house where there's always something going
on, I recommend you to go down and stay with my sister, Lady Pensil,
in Bedfordshire. I'll write to her to-morrow and I'm sure she'll be
delighted to ask you. I know just what you want--you want a house
where they go in for theatricals and picnics and that sort of thing. My
sister's just that sort of woman; she's always getting up something or
other and she's always glad to have the sort of people who help her. I'm
sure she'll ask you down by return of post: she's tremendously fond of
distinguished people and writers. She writes herself, you know; but
I haven't read everything she has written. It's usually poetry, and I
don't go in much for poetry--unless it's Byron. I suppose you think a
great deal of Byron in America," Mr. Bantling continued, expanding
in the stimulating air of Miss Stackpole's attention, bringing up his
sequences promptly and changing his topic with an easy turn of hand.
Yet he none the less gracefully kept in sight of the idea, dazzling to
Henrietta, of her going to stay with Lady Pensil in Bedfordshire. "I
understand what you want; you want to see some genuine English sport.
The Touchetts aren't English at all, you know; they have their own
habits, their own language, their own food--some odd religion even, I
believe, of their own. The old man thinks it's wicked to hunt, I'm told.
You must get down to my sister's in time for the theatricals, and I'm
sure she'll be glad to give you a part. I'm sure you act well; I know
you're very clever. My sister's forty years old and has seven children,
but she's going to play the principal part. Plain as she is she makes up
awfully well--I will say for her. Of course you needn't act if you don't
want to."

In this manner Mr. Bantling delivered himself while they strolled over
the grass in Winchester Square, which, although it had been peppered
by the London soot, invited the tread to linger. Henrietta thought her
blooming, easy-voiced bachelor, with his impressibility to feminine
merit and his splendid range of suggestion, a very agreeable man, and
she valued the opportunity he offered her. "I don't know but I would go,
if your sister should ask me. I think it would be my duty. What do you
call her name?"

"Pensil. It's an odd name, but it isn't a bad one."

"I think one name's as good as another. But what's her rank?".

"Oh, she's a baron's wife; a convenient sort of rank. You're fine enough
and you're not too fine."

"I don't know but what she'd be too fine for me. What do you call the
place she lives in--Bedfordshire?"

"She lives away in the northern corner of it. It's a tiresome country,
but I dare say you won't mind it. I'll try and run down while you're
there."

All this was very pleasant to Miss Stackpole, and she was sorry to be
obliged to separate from Lady Pensil's obliging brother. But it happened
that she had met the day before, in Piccadilly, some friends whom she
had not seen for a year: the Miss Climbers, two ladies from Wilmington,
Delaware, who had been travelling on the Continent and were now
preparing to re-embark. Henrietta had had a long interview with them on
the Piccadilly pavement, and though the three ladies all talked at once
they had not exhausted their store. It had been agreed therefore that
Henrietta should come and dine with them in their lodgings in Jermyn
Street at six o'clock on the morrow, and she now bethought herself of
this engagement. She prepared to start for Jermyn Street, taking leave
first of Ralph Touchett and Isabel, who, seated on garden chairs
in another part of the enclosure, were occupied--if the term may be
used--with an exchange of amenities less pointed than the practical
colloquy of Miss Stackpole and Mr. Bantling. When it had been settled
between Isabel and her friend that they should be reunited at some
reputable hour at Pratt's Hotel, Ralph remarked that the latter must
have a cab. She couldn't walk all the way to Jermyn Street.

"I suppose you mean it's improper for me to walk alone!" Henrietta
exclaimed. "Merciful powers, have I come to this?"

"There's not the slightest need of your walking alone," Mr. Bantling
gaily interposed. "I should be greatly pleased to go with you."

"I simply meant that you'd be late for dinner," Ralph returned. "Those
poor ladies may easily believe that we refuse, at the last, to spare
you."

"You had better have a hansom, Henrietta," said Isabel.

"I'll get you a hansom if you'll trust me," Mr. Bantling went on.

"We might walk a little till we meet one."

"I don't see why I shouldn't trust him, do you?" Henrietta enquired of
Isabel.

"I don't see what Mr. Bantling could do to you," Isabel obligingly
answered; "but, if you like, we'll walk with you till you find your
cab."

"Never mind; we'll go alone. Come on, Mr. Bantling, and take care you
get me a good one."

Mr. Bantling promised to do his best, and the two took their departure,
leaving the girl and her cousin together in the square, over which
a clear September twilight had now begun to gather. It was perfectly
still; the wide quadrangle of dusky houses showed lights in none of the
windows, where the shutters and blinds were closed; the pavements were
a vacant expanse, and, putting aside two small children from a
neighbouring slum, who, attracted by symptoms of abnormal animation
in the interior, poked their faces between the rusty rails of
the enclosure, the most vivid object within sight was the big red
pillar-post on the southeast corner.

"Henrietta will ask him to get into the cab and go with her to Jermyn
Street," Ralph observed. He always spoke of Miss Stackpole as Henrietta.

"Very possibly," said his companion.

"Or rather, no, she won't," he went on. "But Bantling will ask leave to
get in."

"Very likely again. I'm glad very they're such good friends."

"She has made a conquest. He thinks her a brilliant woman. It may go
far," said Ralph.

Isabel was briefly silent. "I call Henrietta a very brilliant woman, but
I don't think it will go far. They would never really know each other.
He has not the least idea what she really is, and she has no just
comprehension of Mr. Bantling."

"There's no more usual basis of union than a mutual misunderstanding.
But it ought not to be so difficult to understand Bob Bantling," Ralph
added. "He is a very simple organism."

"Yes, but Henrietta's a simpler one still. And, pray, what am I to do?"
Isabel asked, looking about her through the fading light, in which the
limited landscape-gardening of the square took on a large and effective
appearance. "I don't imagine that you'll propose that you and I, for our
amusement, shall drive about London in a hansom."

"There's no reason we shouldn't stay here--if you don't dislike it. It's
very warm; there will be half an hour yet before dark; and if you permit
it I'll light a cigarette."

"You may do what you please," said Isabel, "if you'll amuse me till
seven o'clock. I propose at that hour to go back and partake of a simple
and solitary repast--two poached eggs and a muffin--at Pratt's Hotel."

"Mayn't I dine with you?" Ralph asked.

"No, you'll dine at your club."

They had wandered back to their chairs in the centre of the square
again, and Ralph had lighted his cigarette. It would have given him
extreme pleasure to be present in person at the modest little feast she
had sketched; but in default of this he liked even being forbidden. For
the moment, however, he liked immensely being alone with her, in the
thickening dusk, in the centre of the multitudinous town; it made her
seem to depend upon him and to be in his power. This power he could
exert but vaguely; the best exercise of it was to accept her decisions
submissively which indeed there was already an emotion in doing. "Why
won't you let me dine with you?" he demanded after a pause.

"Because I don't care for it."

"I suppose you're tired of me."

"I shall be an hour hence. You see I have the gift of foreknowledge."

"Oh, I shall be delightful meanwhile," said Ralph.

But he said nothing more, and as she made no rejoinder they sat
some time in a stillness which seemed to contradict his promise of
entertainment. It seemed to him she was preoccupied, and he wondered
what she was thinking about; there were two or three very possible
subjects. At last he spoke again. "Is your objection to my society this
evening caused by your expectation of another visitor?"

She turned her head with a glance of her clear, fair eyes. "Another
visitor? What visitor should I have?"

He had none to suggest; which made his question seem to himself silly as
well as brutal. "You've a great many friends that I don't know. You've a
whole past from which I was perversely excluded."

"You were reserved for my future. You must remember that my past is over
there across the water. There's none of it here in London."

"Very good, then, since your future is seated beside you. Capital thing
to have your future so handy." And Ralph lighted another cigarette and
reflected that Isabel probably meant she had received news that Mr.
Caspar Goodwood had crossed to Paris. After he had lighted his cigarette
he puffed it a while, and then he resumed. "I promised just now to be
very amusing; but you see I don't come up to the mark, and the fact is
there's a good deal of temerity in one's undertaking to amuse a
person like you. What do you care for my feeble attempts? You've grand
ideas--you've a high standard in such matters. I ought at least to bring
in a band of music or a company of mountebanks."

"One mountebank's enough, and you do very well. Pray go on, and in
another ten minutes I shall begin to laugh."

"I assure you I'm very serious," said Ralph. "You do really ask a great
deal."

"I don't know what you mean. I ask nothing."

"You accept nothing," said Ralph. She coloured, and now suddenly it
seemed to her that she guessed his meaning. But why should he speak
to her of such things? He hesitated a little and then he continued:
"There's something I should like very much to say to you. It's a
question I wish to ask. It seems to me I've a right to ask it, because
I've a kind of interest in the answer."

"Ask what you will," Isabel replied gently, "and I'll try to satisfy
you."

"Well then, I hope you won't mind my saying that Warburton has told me
of something that has passed between you."

Isabel suppressed a start; she sat looking at her open fan. "Very good;
I suppose it was natural he should tell you."

"I have his leave to let you know he has done so. He has some hope
still," said Ralph.

"Still?"

"He had it a few days ago."

"I don't believe he has any now," said the girl.

"I'm very sorry for him then; he's such an honest man."

"Pray, did he ask you to talk to me?"

"No, not that. But he told me because he couldn't help it. We're old
friends, and he was greatly disappointed. He sent me a line asking me
to come and see him, and I drove over to Lockleigh the day before he and
his sister lunched with us. He was very heavy-hearted; he had just got a
letter from you."

"Did he show you the letter?" asked Isabel with momentary loftiness.

"By no means. But he told me it was a neat refusal. I was very sorry for
him," Ralph repeated.

For some moments Isabel said nothing; then at last, "Do you know how
often he had seen me?" she enquired. "Five or six times."

"That's to your glory."

"It's not for that I say it."

"What then do you say it for. Not to prove that poor Warburton's state
of mind's superficial, because I'm pretty sure you don't think that."

Isabel certainly was unable to say she thought it; but presently she
said something else. "If you've not been requested by Lord Warburton to
argue with me, then you're doing it disinterestedly--or for the love of
argument."

"I've no wish to argue with you at all. I only wish to leave you alone.
I'm simply greatly interested in your own sentiments."

"I'm greatly obliged to you!" cried Isabel with a slightly nervous
laugh.

"Of course you mean that I'm meddling in what doesn't concern me. But
why shouldn't I speak to you of this matter without annoying you or
embarrassing myself? What's the use of being your cousin if I can't have
a few privileges? What's the use of adoring you without hope of a reward
if I can't have a few compensations? What's the use of being ill and
disabled and restricted to mere spectatorship at the game of life if I
really can't see the show when I've paid so much for my ticket? Tell me
this," Ralph went on while she listened to him with quickened attention.
"What had you in mind when you refused Lord Warburton?"

"What had I in mind?"

"What was the logic--the view of your situation--that dictated so
remarkable an act?"

"I didn't wish to marry him--if that's logic."

"No, that's not logic--and I knew that before. It's really nothing, you
know. What was it you said to yourself? You certainly said more than
that."

Isabel reflected a moment, then answered with a question of her own.
"Why do you call it a remarkable act? That's what your mother thinks
too."

"Warburton's such a thorough good sort; as a man, I consider he has
hardly a fault. And then he's what they call here no end of a swell. He
has immense possessions, and his wife would be thought a superior being.
He unites the intrinsic and the extrinsic advantages."

Isabel watched her cousin as to see how far he would go. "I refused him
because he was too perfect then. I'm not perfect myself, and he's too
good for me. Besides, his perfection would irritate me."

"That's ingenious rather than candid," said Ralph. "As a fact you think
nothing in the world too perfect for you."

"Do you think I'm so good?"

"No, but you're exacting, all the same, without the excuse of thinking
yourself good. Nineteen women out of twenty, however, even of the most
exacting sort, would have managed to do with Warburton. Perhaps you
don't know how he has been stalked."

"I don't wish to know. But it seems to me," said Isabel, "that one day
when we talked of him you mentioned odd things in him." Ralph smokingly
considered. "I hope that what I said then had no weight with you;
for they were not faults, the things I spoke of: they were simply
peculiarities of his position. If I had known he wished to marry you I'd
never have alluded to them. I think I said that as regards that position
he was rather a sceptic. It would have been in your power to make him a
believer."

"I think not. I don't understand the matter, and I'm not conscious of
any mission of that sort. You're evidently disappointed," Isabel added,
looking at her cousin with rueful gentleness. "You'd have liked me to
make such a marriage."

"Not in the least. I'm absolutely without a wish on the subject. I don't
pretend to advise you, and I content myself with watching you--with the
deepest interest."

She gave rather a conscious sigh. "I wish I could be as interesting to
myself as I am to you!"

"There you're not candid again; you're extremely interesting to
yourself. Do you know, however," said Ralph, "that if you've really
given Warburton his final answer I'm rather glad it has been what it
was. I don't mean I'm glad for you, and still less of course for him.
I'm glad for myself."

"Are you thinking of proposing to me?"

"By no means. From the point of view I speak of that would be fatal;
I should kill the goose that supplies me with the material of my
inimitable omelettes. I use that animal as the symbol of my insane
illusions. What I mean is that I shall have the thrill of seeing what a
young lady does who won't marry Lord Warburton."

"That's what your mother counts upon too," said Isabel.

"Ah, there will be plenty of spectators! We shall hang on the rest of
your career. I shall not see all of it, but I shall probably see the
most interesting years. Of course if you were to marry our friend you'd
still have a career--a very decent, in fact a very brilliant one. But
relatively speaking it would be a little prosaic. It would be definitely
marked out in advance; it would be wanting in the unexpected. You know
I'm extremely fond of the unexpected, and now that you've kept the game
in your hands I depend on your giving us some grand example of it."

"I don't understand you very well," said Isabel, "but I do so well
enough to be able to say that if you look for grand examples of anything
from me I shall disappoint you."

"You'll do so only by disappointing yourself and that will go hard with
you!"

To this she made no direct reply; there was an amount of truth in it
that would bear consideration. At last she said abruptly: "I don't see
what harm there is in my wishing not to tie myself. I don't want to
begin life by marrying. There are other things a woman can do."

"There's nothing she can do so well. But you're of course so
many-sided."

"If one's two-sided it's enough," said Isabel.

"You're the most charming of polygons!" her companion broke out. At a
glance from his companion, however, he became grave, and to prove it
went on: "You want to see life--you'll be hanged if you don't, as the
young men say."

"I don't think I want to see it as the young men want to see it. But I
do want to look about me."

"You want to drain the cup of experience."

"No, I don't wish to touch the cup of experience. It's a poisoned drink!
I only want to see for myself."

"You want to see, but not to feel," Ralph remarked.

"I don't think that if one's a sentient being one can make the
distinction. I'm a good deal like Henrietta. The other day when I asked
her if she wished to marry she said: 'Not till I've seen Europe!' I too
don't wish to marry till I've seen Europe."

"You evidently expect a crowned head will be struck with you."

"No, that would be worse than marrying Lord Warburton. But it's getting
very dark," Isabel continued, "and I must go home." She rose from her
place, but Ralph only sat still and looked at her. As he remained there
she stopped, and they exchanged a gaze that was full on either side, but
especially on Ralph's, of utterances too vague for words.

"You've answered my question," he said at last. "You've told me what I
wanted. I'm greatly obliged to you."

"It seems to me I've told you very little."

"You've told me the great thing: that the world interests you and that
you want to throw yourself into it."

Her silvery eyes shone a moment in the dusk. "I never said that." "I
think you meant it. Don't repudiate it. It's so fine!"

"I don't know what you're trying to fasten upon me, for I'm not in the
least an adventurous spirit. Women are not like men."

Ralph slowly rose from his seat and they walked together to the gate of
the square. "No," he said; "women rarely boast of their courage. Men do
so with a certain frequency."

"Men have it to boast of!"

"Women have it too. You've a great deal."

"Enough to go home in a cab to Pratt's Hotel, but not more."

Ralph unlocked the gate, and after they had passed out he fastened it.
"We'll find your cab," he said; and as they turned toward a neighbouring
street in which this quest might avail he asked her again if he mightn't
see her safely to the inn.

"By no means," she answered; "you're very tired; you must go home and go
to bed."

The cab was found, and he helped her into it, standing a moment at the
door. "When people forget I'm a poor creature I'm often incommoded," he
said. "But it's worse when they remember it!"



She had had no hidden motive in wishing him not to take her home; it
simply struck her that for some days past she had consumed an inordinate
quantity of his time, and the independent spirit of the American girl
whom extravagance of aid places in an attitude that she ends by finding
"affected" had made her decide that for these few hours she must suffice
to herself. She had moreover a great fondness for intervals of solitude,
which since her arrival in England had been but meagrely met. It was a
luxury she could always command at home and she had wittingly missed
it. That evening, however, an incident occurred which--had there been a
critic to note it--would have taken all colour from the theory that the
wish to be quite by herself had caused her to dispense with her cousin's
attendance. Seated toward nine o'clock in the dim illumination of
Pratt's Hotel and trying with the aid of two tall candles to lose
herself in a volume she had brought from Gardencourt, she succeeded
only to the extent of reading other words than those printed on the
page--words that Ralph had spoken to her that afternoon. Suddenly
the well-muffed knuckle of the waiter was applied to the door, which
presently gave way to his exhibition, even as a glorious trophy, of the
card of a visitor. When this memento had offered to her fixed sight the
name of Mr. Caspar Goodwood she let the man stand before her without
signifying her wishes.

"Shall I show the gentleman up, ma'am?" he asked with a slightly
encouraging inflexion.

Isabel hesitated still and while she hesitated glanced at the mirror.
"He may come in," she said at last; and waited for him not so much
smoothing her hair as girding her spirit.

Caspar Goodwood was accordingly the next moment shaking hands with her,
but saying nothing till the servant had left the room. "Why didn't you
answer my letter?" he then asked in a quick, full, slightly peremptory
tone--the tone of a man whose questions were habitually pointed and who
was capable of much insistence.

She answered by a ready question, "How did you know I was here?"

"Miss Stackpole let me know," said Caspar Goodwood. "She told me you
would probably be at home alone this evening and would be willing to see
me."

"Where did she see you--to tell you that?"

"She didn't see me; she wrote to me."

Isabel was silent; neither had sat down; they stood there with an air
of defiance, or at least of contention. "Henrietta never told me she was
writing to you," she said at last. "This is not kind of her."

"Is it so disagreeable to you to see me?" asked the young man.

"I didn't expect it. I don't like such surprises."

"But you knew I was in town; it was natural we should meet."

"Do you call this meeting? I hoped I shouldn't see you. In so big a
place as London it seemed very possible."

"It was apparently repugnant to you even to write to me," her visitor
went on.

Isabel made no reply; the sense of Henrietta Stackpole's treachery,
as she momentarily qualified it, was strong within her. "Henrietta's
certainly not a model of all the delicacies!" she exclaimed with
bitterness. "It was a great liberty to take."

"I suppose I'm not a model either--of those virtues or of any others.
The fault's mine as much as hers."

As Isabel looked at him it seemed to her that his jaw had never been
more square. This might have displeased her, but she took a different
turn. "No, it's not your fault so much as hers. What you've done was
inevitable, I suppose, for you."

"It was indeed!" cried Caspar Goodwood with a voluntary laugh.

"And now that I've come, at any rate, mayn't I stay?"

"You may sit down, certainly."

She went back to her chair again, while her visitor took the first place
that offered, in the manner of a man accustomed to pay little thought to
that sort of furtherance. "I've been hoping every day for an answer to
my letter. You might have written me a few lines."

"It wasn't the trouble of writing that prevented me; I could as easily
have written you four pages as one. But my silence was an intention,"
Isabel said. "I thought it the best thing."

He sat with his eyes fixed on hers while she spoke; then he lowered them
and attached them to a spot in the carpet as if he were making a strong
effort to say nothing but what he ought. He was a strong man in the
wrong, and he was acute enough to see that an uncompromising exhibition
of his strength would only throw the falsity of his position into
relief. Isabel was not incapable of tasting any advantage of position
over a person of this quality, and though little desirous to flaunt it
in his face she could enjoy being able to say "You know you oughtn't to
have written to me yourself!" and to say it with an air of triumph.

Caspar Goodwood raised his eyes to her own again; they seemed to shine
through the vizard of a helmet. He had a strong sense of justice and was
ready any day in the year--over and above this--to argue the question
of his rights. "You said you hoped never to hear from me again; I know
that. But I never accepted any such rule as my own. I warned you that
you should hear very soon."

"I didn't say I hoped NEVER to hear from you," said Isabel.

"Not for five years then; for ten years; twenty years. It's the same
thing."

"Do you find it so? It seems to me there's a great difference. I can
imagine that at the end of ten years we might have a very pleasant
correspondence. I shall have matured my epistolary style."

She looked away while she spoke these words, knowing them of so much
less earnest a cast than the countenance of her listener. Her eyes,
however, at last came back to him, just as he said very irrelevantly;
"Are you enjoying your visit to your uncle?"

"Very much indeed." She dropped, but then she broke out. "What good do
you expect to get by insisting?"

"The good of not losing you."

"You've no right to talk of losing what's not yours. And even from your
own point of view," Isabel added, "you ought to know when to let one
alone."

"I disgust you very much," said Caspar Goodwood gloomily; not as if to
provoke her to compassion for a man conscious of this blighting fact,
but as if to set it well before himself, so that he might endeavour to
act with his eyes on it.

"Yes, you don't at all delight me, you don't fit in, not in any way,
just now, and the worst is that your putting it to the proof in this
manner is quite unnecessary." It wasn't certainly as if his nature had
been soft, so that pin-pricks would draw blood from it; and from the
first of her acquaintance with him, and of her having to defend herself
against a certain air that he had of knowing better what was good for
her than she knew herself, she had recognised the fact that perfect
frankness was her best weapon. To attempt to spare his sensibility or to
escape from him edgewise, as one might do from a man who had barred
the way less sturdily--this, in dealing with Caspar Goodwood, who would
grasp at everything of every sort that one might give him, was wasted
agility. It was not that he had not susceptibilities, but his passive
surface, as well as his active, was large and hard, and he might always
be trusted to dress his wounds, so far as they required it, himself. She
came back, even for her measure of possible pangs and aches in him,
to her old sense that he was naturally plated and steeled, armed
essentially for aggression.

"I can't reconcile myself to that," he simply said. There was a
dangerous liberality about it; for she felt how open it was to him to
make the point that he had not always disgusted her.

"I can't reconcile myself to it either, and it's not the state of things
that ought to exist between us. If you'd only try to banish me from your
mind for a few months we should be on good terms again."

"I see. If I should cease to think of you at all for a prescribed time,
I should find I could keep it up indefinitely."

"Indefinitely is more than I ask. It's more even than I should like."

"You know that what you ask is impossible," said the young man, taking
his adjective for granted in a manner she found irritating.

"Aren't you capable of making a calculated effort?" she demanded.
"You're strong for everything else; why shouldn't you be strong for
that?"

"An effort calculated for what?" And then as she hung fire, "I'm
capable of nothing with regard to you," he went on, "but just of being
infernally in love with you. If one's strong one loves only the more
strongly."

"There's a good deal in that;" and indeed our young lady felt the
force of it--felt it thrown off, into the vast of truth and poetry,
as practically a bait to her imagination. But she promptly came round.
"Think of me or not, as you find most possible; only leave me alone."

"Until when?"

"Well, for a year or two."

"Which do you mean? Between one year and two there's all the difference
in the world."

"Call it two then," said Isabel with a studied effect of eagerness.

"And what shall I gain by that?" her friend asked with no sign of
wincing.

"You'll have obliged me greatly."

"And what will be my reward?"

"Do you need a reward for an act of generosity?"

"Yes, when it involves a great sacrifice."

"There's no generosity without some sacrifice. Men don't understand such
things. If you make the sacrifice you'll have all my admiration."

"I don't care a cent for your admiration--not one straw, with nothing to
show for it. When will you marry me? That's the only question."

"Never--if you go on making me feel only as I feel at present."

"What do I gain then by not trying to make you feel otherwise?"

"You'll gain quite as much as by worrying me to death!" Caspar Goodwood
bent his eyes again and gazed a while into the crown of his hat. A
deep flush overspread his face; she could see her sharpness had at last
penetrated. This immediately had a value--classic, romantic, redeeming,
what did she know? for her; "the strong man in pain" was one of the
categories of the human appeal, little charm as he might exert in the
given case. "Why do you make me say such things to you?" she cried in a
trembling voice. "I only want to be gentle--to be thoroughly kind. It's
not delightful to me to feel people care for me and yet to have to try
and reason them out of it. I think others also ought to be considerate;
we have each to judge for ourselves. I know you're considerate, as much
as you can be; you've good reasons for what you do. But I really don't
want to marry, or to talk about it at all now. I shall probably never
do it--no, never. I've a perfect right to feel that way, and it's no
kindness to a woman to press her so hard, to urge her against her will.
If I give you pain I can only say I'm very sorry. It's not my fault; I
can't marry you simply to please you. I won't say that I shall always
remain your friend, because when women say that, in these situations, it
passes, I believe, for a sort of mockery. But try me some day."

Caspar Goodwood, during this speech, had kept his eyes fixed upon the
name of his hatter, and it was not until some time after she had ceased
speaking that he raised them. When he did so the sight of a rosy, lovely
eagerness in Isabel's face threw some confusion into his attempt to
analyse her words. "I'll go home--I'll go to-morrow--I'll leave you
alone," he brought out at last. "Only," he heavily said, "I hate to lose
sight of you!"

"Never fear. I shall do no harm."

"You'll marry some one else, as sure as I sit here," Caspar Goodwood
declared.

"Do you think that a generous charge?"

"Why not? Plenty of men will try to make you."

"I told you just now that I don't wish to marry and that I almost
certainly never shall."

"I know you did, and I like your 'almost certainly'! I put no faith in
what you say."

"Thank you very much. Do you accuse me of lying to shake you off? You
say very delicate things."

"Why should I not say that? You've given me no pledge of anything at
all."

"No, that's all that would be wanting!"

"You may perhaps even believe you're safe--from wishing to be. But
you're not," the young man went on as if preparing himself for the
worst.

"Very well then. We'll put it that I'm not safe. Have it as you please."

"I don't know, however," said Caspar Goodwood, "that my keeping you in
sight would prevent it."

"Don't you indeed? I'm after all very much afraid of you. Do you think
I'm so very easily pleased?" she asked suddenly, changing her tone.

"No--I don't; I shall try to console myself with that. But there are a
certain number of very dazzling men in the world, no doubt; and if there
were only one it would be enough. The most dazzling of all will make
straight for you. You'll be sure to take no one who isn't dazzling."

"If you mean by dazzling brilliantly clever," Isabel said--"and I can't
imagine what else you mean--I don't need the aid of a clever man to
teach me how to live. I can find it out for myself."

"Find out how to live alone? I wish that, when you have, you'd teach
me!"

She looked at him a moment; then with a quick smile, "Oh, you ought to
marry!" she said.

He might be pardoned if for an instant this exclamation seemed to him
to sound the infernal note, and it is not on record that her motive for
discharging such a shaft had been of the clearest. He oughtn't to stride
about lean and hungry, however--she certainly felt THAT for him. "God
forgive you!" he murmured between his teeth as he turned away.

Her accent had put her slightly in the wrong, and after a moment she
felt the need to right herself. The easiest way to do it was to place
him where she had been. "You do me great injustice--you say what you
don't know!" she broke out. "I shouldn't be an easy victim--I've proved
it."

"Oh, to me, perfectly."

"I've proved it to others as well." And she paused a moment. "I refused
a proposal of marriage last week; what they call--no doubt--a dazzling
one."

"I'm very glad to hear it," said the young man gravely.

"It was a proposal many girls would have accepted; it had everything to
recommend it." Isabel had not proposed to herself to tell this story,
but, now she had begun, the satisfaction of speaking it out and doing
herself justice took possession of her. "I was offered a great position
and a great fortune--by a person whom I like extremely."

Caspar watched her with intense interest. "Is he an Englishman?"

"He's an English nobleman," said Isabel.

Her visitor received this announcement at first in silence, but at last
said: "I'm glad he's disappointed."

"Well then, as you have companions in misfortune, make the best of it."

"I don't call him a companion," said Casper grimly.

"Why not--since I declined his offer absolutely?"

"That doesn't make him my companion. Besides, he's an Englishman."

"And pray isn't an Englishman a human being?" Isabel asked.

"Oh, those people? They're not of my humanity, and I don't care what
becomes of them."

"You're very angry," said the girl. "We've discussed this matter quite
enough."

"Oh yes, I'm very angry. I plead guilty to that!"

She turned away from him, walked to the open window and stood a moment
looking into the dusky void of the street, where a turbid gaslight
alone represented social animation. For some time neither of these young
persons spoke; Caspar lingered near the chimney-piece with eyes gloomily
attached. She had virtually requested him to go--he knew that; but at
the risk of making himself odious he kept his ground. She was far too
dear to him to be easily renounced, and he had crossed the sea all to
wring from her some scrap of a vow. Presently she left the window and
stood again before him. "You do me very little justice--after my telling
you what I told you just now. I'm sorry I told you--since it matters so
little to you."

"Ah," cried the young man, "if you were thinking of ME when you did it!"
And then he paused with the fear that she might contradict so happy a
thought.

"I was thinking of you a little," said Isabel.

"A little? I don't understand. If the knowledge of what I feel for you
had any weight with you at all, calling it a 'little' is a poor account
of it."

Isabel shook her head as if to carry off a blunder. "I've refused a most
kind, noble gentleman. Make the most of that."

"I thank you then," said Caspar Goodwood gravely. "I thank you
immensely."

"And now you had better go home."

"May I not see you again?" he asked.

"I think it's better not. You'll be sure to talk of this, and you see it
leads to nothing."

"I promise you not to say a word that will annoy you."

Isabel reflected and then answered: "I return in a day or two to my
uncle's, and I can't propose to you to come there. It would be too
inconsistent."

Caspar Goodwood, on his side, considered. "You must do me justice too.
I received an invitation to your uncle's more than a week ago, and I
declined it."

She betrayed surprise. "From whom was your invitation?"

"From Mr. Ralph Touchett, whom I suppose to be your cousin. I declined
it because I had not your authorisation to accept it. The suggestion
that Mr. Touchett should invite me appeared to have come from Miss
Stackpole."

"It certainly never did from me. Henrietta really goes very far," Isabel
added.

"Don't be too hard on her--that touches ME."

"No; if you declined you did quite right, and I thank you for it." And
she gave a little shudder of dismay at the thought that Lord Warburton
and Mr. Goodwood might have met at Gardencourt: it would have been so
awkward for Lord Warburton.

"When you leave your uncle where do you go?" her companion asked.

"I go abroad with my aunt--to Florence and other places."

The serenity of this announcement struck a chill to the young man's
heart; he seemed to see her whirled away into circles from which he was
inexorably excluded. Nevertheless he went on quickly with his questions.
"And when shall you come back to America?"

"Perhaps not for a long time. I'm very happy here."

"Do you mean to give up your country?"

"Don't be an infant!"

"Well, you'll be out of my sight indeed!" said Caspar Goodwood.

"I don't know," she answered rather grandly. "The world--with all these
places so arranged and so touching each other--comes to strike one as
rather small."

"It's a sight too big for ME!" Caspar exclaimed with a simplicity
our young lady might have found touching if her face had not been set
against concessions.

This attitude was part of a system, a theory, that she had lately
embraced, and to be thorough she said after a moment: "Don't think me
unkind if I say it's just THAT--being out of your sight--that I like.
If you were in the same place I should feel you were watching me, and I
don't like that--I like my liberty too much. If there's a thing in the
world I'm fond of," she went on with a slight recurrence of grandeur,
"it's my personal independence."

But whatever there might be of the too superior in this speech moved
Caspar Goodwood's admiration; there was nothing he winced at in the
large air of it. He had never supposed she hadn't wings and the need of
beautiful free movements--he wasn't, with his own long arms and strides,
afraid of any force in her. Isabel's words, if they had been meant to
shock him, failed of the mark and only made him smile with the sense
that here was common ground. "Who would wish less to curtail your
liberty than I? What can give me greater pleasure than to see you
perfectly independent--doing whatever you like? It's to make you
independent that I want to marry you."

"That's a beautiful sophism," said the girl with a smile more beautiful
still.

"An unmarried woman--a girl of your age--isn't independent. There are
all sorts of things she can't do. She's hampered at every step."

"That's as she looks at the question," Isabel answered with much spirit.
"I'm not in my first youth--I can do what I choose--I belong quite to
the independent class. I've neither father nor mother; I'm poor and of
a serious disposition; I'm not pretty. I therefore am not bound to be
timid and conventional; indeed I can't afford such luxuries. Besides,
I try to judge things for myself; to judge wrong, I think, is more
honourable than not to judge at all. I don't wish to be a mere sheep in
the flock; I wish to choose my fate and know something of human affairs
beyond what other people think it compatible with propriety to tell me."
She paused a moment, but not long enough for her companion to reply. He
was apparently on the point of doing so when she went on: "Let me say
this to you, Mr. Goodwood. You're so kind as to speak of being afraid of
my marrying. If you should hear a rumour that I'm on the point of doing
so--girls are liable to have such things said about them--remember what
I have told you about my love of liberty and venture to doubt it."

There was something passionately positive in the tone in which she gave
him this advice, and he saw a shining candour in her eyes that helped
him to believe her. On the whole he felt reassured, and you might have
perceived it by the manner in which he said, quite eagerly: "You want
simply to travel for two years? I'm quite willing to wait two years, and
you may do what you like in the interval. If that's all you want,
pray say so. I don't want you to be conventional; do I strike you as
conventional myself? Do you want to improve your mind? Your mind's quite
good enough for me; but if it interests you to wander about a while and
see different countries I shall be delighted to help you in any way in
my power."

"You're very generous; that's nothing new to me. The best way to help me
will be to put as many hundred miles of sea between us as possible."

"One would think you were going to commit some atrocity!" said Caspar
Goodwood.

"Perhaps I am. I wish to be free even to do that if the fancy takes me."

"Well then," he said slowly, "I'll go home." And he put out his hand,
trying to look contented and confident.

Isabel's confidence in him, however, was greater than any he could feel
in her. Not that he thought her capable of committing an atrocity; but,
turn it over as he would, there was something ominous in the way she
reserved her option. As she took his hand she felt a great respect for
him; she knew how much he cared for her and she thought him magnanimous.
They stood so for a moment, looking at each other, united by a
hand-clasp which was not merely passive on her side. "That's right,"
she said very kindly, almost tenderly. "You'll lose nothing by being a
reasonable man."

"But I'll come back, wherever you are, two years hence," he returned
with characteristic grimness.

We have seen that our young lady was inconsequent, and at this she
suddenly changed her note. "Ah, remember, I promise nothing--absolutely
nothing!" Then more softly, as if to help him to leave her: "And
remember too that I shall not be an easy victim!"

"You'll get very sick of your independence."

"Perhaps I shall; it's even very probable. When that day comes I shall
be very glad to see you."

She had laid her hand on the knob of the door that led into her room,
and she waited a moment to see whether her visitor would not take his
departure. But he appeared unable to move; there was still an immense
unwillingness in his attitude and a sore remonstrance in his eyes. "I
must leave you now," said Isabel; and she opened the door and passed
into the other room.

This apartment was dark, but the darkness was tempered by a vague
radiance sent up through the window from the court of the hotel, and
Isabel could make out the masses of the furniture, the dim shining of
the mirror and the looming of the big four-posted bed. She stood still a
moment, listening, and at last she heard Caspar Goodwood walk out of
the sitting-room and close the door behind him. She stood still a little
longer, and then, by an irresistible impulse, dropped on her knees
before her bed and hid her face in her arms.


