
She was not praying; she was trembling--trembling all over. Vibration
was easy to her, was in fact too constant with her, and she found
herself now humming like a smitten harp. She only asked, however, to put
on the cover, to case herself again in brown holland, but she wished to
resist her excitement, and the attitude of devotion, which she kept for
some time, seemed to help her to be still. She intensely rejoiced that
Caspar Goodwood was gone; there was something in having thus got rid of
him that was like the payment, for a stamped receipt, of some debt
too long on her mind. As she felt the glad relief she bowed her head a
little lower; the sense was there, throbbing in her heart; it was part
of her emotion, but it was a thing to be ashamed of--it was profane and
out of place. It was not for some ten minutes that she rose from her
knees, and even when she came back to the sitting-room her tremor had
not quite subsided. It had had, verily, two causes: part of it was to be
accounted for by her long discussion with Mr. Goodwood, but it might be
feared that the rest was simply the enjoyment she found in the exercise
of her power. She sat down in the same chair again and took up her book,
but without going through the form of opening the volume. She leaned
back, with that low, soft, aspiring murmur with which she often
uttered her response to accidents of which the brighter side was not
superficially obvious, and yielded to the satisfaction of having refused
two ardent suitors in a fortnight. That love of liberty of which she
had given Caspar Goodwood so bold a sketch was as yet almost exclusively
theoretic; she had not been able to indulge it on a large scale. But it
appeared to her she had done something; she had tasted of the delight,
if not of battle, at least of victory; she had done what was truest to
her plan. In the glow of this consciousness the image of Mr. Goodwood
taking his sad walk homeward through the dingy town presented itself
with a certain reproachful force; so that, as at the same moment the
door of the room was opened, she rose with an apprehension that he
had come back. But it was only Henrietta Stackpole returning from her
dinner.

Miss Stackpole immediately saw that our young lady had been "through"
something, and indeed the discovery demanded no great penetration. She
went straight up to her friend, who received her without a greeting.
Isabel's elation in having sent Caspar Goodwood back to America
presupposed her being in a manner glad he had come to see her; but at
the same time she perfectly remembered Henrietta had had no right to set
a trap for her. "Has he been here, dear?" the latter yearningly asked.

Isabel turned away and for some moments answered nothing. "You acted
very wrongly," she declared at last.

"I acted for the best. I only hope you acted as well."

"You're not the judge. I can't trust you," said Isabel.

This declaration was unflattering, but Henrietta was much too unselfish
to heed the charge it conveyed; she cared only for what it intimated
with regard to her friend. "Isabel Archer," she observed with equal
abruptness and solemnity, "if you marry one of these people I'll never
speak to you again!"

"Before making so terrible a threat you had better wait till I'm asked,"
Isabel replied. Never having said a word to Miss Stackpole about Lord
Warburton's overtures, she had now no impulse whatever to justify
herself to Henrietta by telling her that she had refused that nobleman.

"Oh, you'll be asked quick enough, once you get off on the Continent.
Annie Climber was asked three times in Italy--poor plain little Annie."

"Well, if Annie Climber wasn't captured why should I be?"

"I don't believe Annie was pressed; but you'll be."

"That's a flattering conviction," said Isabel without alarm.

"I don't flatter you, Isabel, I tell you the truth!" cried her friend.
"I hope you don't mean to tell me that you didn't give Mr. Goodwood some
hope."

"I don't see why I should tell you anything; as I said to you just now,
I can't trust you. But since you're so much interested in Mr. Goodwood I
won't conceal from you that he returns immediately to America."

"You don't mean to say you've sent him off?" Henrietta almost shrieked.

"I asked him to leave me alone; and I ask you the same, Henrietta." Miss
Stackpole glittered for an instant with dismay, and then passed to the
mirror over the chimney-piece and took off her bonnet. "I hope you've
enjoyed your dinner," Isabel went on.

But her companion was not to be diverted by frivolous propositions. "Do
you know where you're going, Isabel Archer?"

"Just now I'm going to bed," said Isabel with persistent frivolity.

"Do you know where you're drifting?" Henrietta pursued, holding out her
bonnet delicately.

"No, I haven't the least idea, and I find it very pleasant not to know.
A swift carriage, of a dark night, rattling with four horses over roads
that one can't see--that's my idea of happiness."

"Mr. Goodwood certainly didn't teach you to say such things as
that--like the heroine of an immoral novel," said Miss Stackpole.
"You're drifting to some great mistake."

Isabel was irritated by her friend's interference, yet she still tried
to think what truth this declaration could represent. She could think
of nothing that diverted her from saying: "You must be very fond of me,
Henrietta, to be willing to be so aggressive."

"I love you intensely, Isabel," said Miss Stackpole with feeling.

"Well, if you love me intensely let me as intensely alone. I asked that
of Mr. Goodwood, and I must also ask it of you."

"Take care you're not let alone too much."

"That's what Mr. Goodwood said to me. I told him I must take the risks."

"You're a creature of risks--you make me shudder!" cried Henrietta.
"When does Mr. Goodwood return to America?"

"I don't know--he didn't tell me."

"Perhaps you didn't enquire," said Henrietta with the note of righteous
irony.

"I gave him too little satisfaction to have the right to ask questions
of him."

This assertion seemed to Miss Stackpole for a moment to bid defiance to
comment; but at last she exclaimed: "Well, Isabel, if I didn't know you
I might think you were heartless!"

"Take care," said Isabel; "you're spoiling me."

"I'm afraid I've done that already. I hope, at least," Miss Stackpole
added, "that he may cross with Annie Climber!"

Isabel learned from her the next morning that she had determined not to
return to Gardencourt (where old Mr. Touchett had promised her a renewed
welcome), but to await in London the arrival of the invitation that Mr.
Bantling had promised her from his sister Lady Pensil. Miss Stackpole
related very freely her conversation with Ralph Touchett's sociable
friend and declared to Isabel that she really believed she had now got
hold of something that would lead to something. On the receipt of Lady
Pensil's letter--Mr. Bantling had virtually guaranteed the arrival of
this document--she would immediately depart for Bedfordshire, and if
Isabel cared to look out for her impressions in the Interviewer
she would certainly find them. Henrietta was evidently going to see
something of the inner life this time.

"Do you know where you're drifting, Henrietta Stackpole?" Isabel asked,
imitating the tone in which her friend had spoken the night before.

"I'm drifting to a big position--that of the Queen of American
Journalism. If my next letter isn't copied all over the West I'll
swallow my penwiper!"

She had arranged with her friend Miss Annie Climber, the young lady
of the continental offers, that they should go together to make
those purchases which were to constitute Miss Climber's farewell to a
hemisphere in which she at least had been appreciated; and she presently
repaired to Jermyn Street to pick up her companion. Shortly after her
departure Ralph Touchett was announced, and as soon as he came in Isabel
saw he had something on his mind. He very soon took his cousin into his
confidence. He had received from his mother a telegram to the effect
that his father had had a sharp attack of his old malady, that she
was much alarmed and that she begged he would instantly return to
Gardencourt. On this occasion at least Mrs. Touchett's devotion to the
electric wire was not open to criticism.

"I've judged it best to see the great doctor, Sir Matthew Hope,
first," Ralph said; "by great good luck he's in town. He's to see me
at half-past twelve, and I shall make sure of his coming down to
Gardencourt--which he will do the more readily as he has already seen
my father several times, both there and in London. There's an express
at two-forty-five, which I shall take; and you'll come back with me or
remain here a few days longer, exactly as you prefer."

"I shall certainly go with you," Isabel returned. "I don't suppose I can
be of any use to my uncle, but if he's ill I shall like to be near him."

"I think you're fond of him," said Ralph with a certain shy pleasure
in his face. "You appreciate him, which all the world hasn't done. The
quality's too fine."

"I quite adore him," Isabel after a moment said.

"That's very well. After his son he's your greatest admirer." She
welcomed this assurance, but she gave secretly a small sigh of relief
at the thought that Mr. Touchett was one of those admirers who couldn't
propose to marry her. This, however, was not what she spoke; she went on
to inform Ralph that there were other reasons for her not remaining in
London. She was tired of it and wished to leave it; and then Henrietta
was going away--going to stay in Bedfordshire.

"In Bedfordshire?"

"With Lady Pensil, the sister of Mr. Bantling, who has answered for an
invitation."

Ralph was feeling anxious, but at this he broke into a laugh. Suddenly,
none the less, his gravity returned. "Bantling's a man of courage. But
if the invitation should get lost on the way?"

"I thought the British post-office was impeccable."

"The good Homer sometimes nods," said Ralph. "However," he went on more
brightly, "the good Bantling never does, and, whatever happens, he'll
take care of Henrietta."

Ralph went to keep his appointment with Sir Matthew Hope, and Isabel
made her arrangements for quitting Pratt's Hotel. Her uncle's danger
touched her nearly, and while she stood before her open trunk, looking
about her vaguely for what she should put into it, the tears suddenly
rose to her eyes. It was perhaps for this reason that when Ralph came
back at two o'clock to take her to the station she was not yet ready. He
found Miss Stackpole, however, in the sitting-room, where she had just
risen from her luncheon, and this lady immediately expressed her regret
at his father's illness.

"He's a grand old man," she said; "he's faithful to the last. If it's
really to be the last--pardon my alluding to it, but you must often
have thought of the possibility--I'm sorry that I shall not be at
Gardencourt."

"You'll amuse yourself much more in Bedfordshire."

"I shall be sorry to amuse myself at such a time," said Henrietta
with much propriety. But she immediately added: "I should like so to
commemorate the closing scene."

"My father may live a long time," said Ralph simply. Then, adverting
to topics more cheerful, he interrogated Miss Stackpole as to her own
future.

Now that Ralph was in trouble she addressed him in a tone of larger
allowance and told him that she was much indebted to him for having made
her acquainted with Mr. Bantling. "He has told me just the things I
want to know," she said; "all the society items and all about the royal
family. I can't make out that what he tells me about the royal family is
much to their credit; but he says that's only my peculiar way of looking
at it. Well, all I want is that he should give me the facts; I can put
them together quick enough, once I've got them." And she added that Mr.
Bantling had been so good as to promise to come and take her out that
afternoon.

"To take you where?" Ralph ventured to enquire.

"To Buckingham Palace. He's going to show me over it, so that I may get
some idea how they live."

"Ah," said Ralph, "we leave you in good hands. The first thing we shall
hear is that you're invited to Windsor Castle."

"If they ask me, I shall certainly go. Once I get started I'm not
afraid. But for all that," Henrietta added in a moment, "I'm not
satisfied; I'm not at peace about Isabel."

"What is her last misdemeanour?"

"Well, I've told you before, and I suppose there's no harm in my going
on. I always finish a subject that I take up. Mr. Goodwood was here last
night."

Ralph opened his eyes; he even blushed a little--his blush being
the sign of an emotion somewhat acute. He remembered that Isabel, in
separating from him in Winchester Square, had repudiated his suggestion
that her motive in doing so was the expectation of a visitor at Pratt's
Hotel, and it was a new pang to him to have to suspect her of duplicity.
On the other hand, he quickly said to himself, what concern was it of
his that she should have made an appointment with a lover? Had it not
been thought graceful in every age that young ladies should make a
mystery of such appointments? Ralph gave Miss Stackpole a diplomatic
answer. "I should have thought that, with the views you expressed to me
the other day, this would satisfy you perfectly."

"That he should come to see her? That was very well, as far as it went.
It was a little plot of mine; I let him know that we were in London, and
when it had been arranged that I should spend the evening out I sent him
a word--the word we just utter to the 'wise.' I hoped he would find her
alone; I won't pretend I didn't hope that you'd be out of the way. He
came to see her, but he might as well have stayed away."

"Isabel was cruel?"--and Ralph's face lighted with the relief of his
cousin's not having shown duplicity.

"I don't exactly know what passed between them. But she gave him no
satisfaction--she sent him back to America."

"Poor Mr. Goodwood!" Ralph sighed.

"Her only idea seems to be to get rid of him," Henrietta went on.

"Poor Mr. Goodwood!" Ralph repeated. The exclamation, it must be
confessed, was automatic; it failed exactly to express his thoughts,
which were taking another line.

"You don't say that as if you felt it. I don't believe you care."

"Ah," said Ralph, "you must remember that I don't know this interesting
young man--that I've never seen him."

"Well, I shall see him, and I shall tell him not to give up. If I didn't
believe Isabel would come round," Miss Stackpole added--"well, I'd give
up myself. I mean I'd give HER up!"



It had occurred to Ralph that, in the conditions, Isabel's parting with
her friend might be of a slightly embarrassed nature, and he went down
to the door of the hotel in advance of his cousin, who, after a slight
delay, followed with the traces of an unaccepted remonstrance, as he
thought, in her eyes. The two made the journey to Gardencourt in almost
unbroken silence, and the servant who met them at the station had no
better news to give them of Mr. Touchett--a fact which caused Ralph to
congratulate himself afresh on Sir Matthew Hope's having promised to
come down in the five o'clock train and spend the night. Mrs. Touchett,
he learned, on reaching home, had been constantly with the old man and
was with him at that moment; and this fact made Ralph say to himself
that, after all, what his mother wanted was just easy occasion. The
finer natures were those that shone at the larger times. Isabel went to
her own room, noting throughout the house that perceptible hush which
precedes a crisis. At the end of an hour, however, she came downstairs
in search of her aunt, whom she wished to ask about Mr. Touchett. She
went into the library, but Mrs. Touchett was not there, and as the
weather, which had been damp and chill, was now altogether spoiled, it
was not probable she had gone for her usual walk in the grounds. Isabel
was on the point of ringing to send a question to her room, when this
purpose quickly yielded to an unexpected sound--the sound of low music
proceeding apparently from the saloon. She knew her aunt never touched
the piano, and the musician was therefore probably Ralph, who played for
his own amusement. That he should have resorted to this recreation at
the present time indicated apparently that his anxiety about his father
had been relieved; so that the girl took her way, almost with restored
cheer, toward the source of the harmony. The drawing-room at Gardencourt
was an apartment of great distances, and, as the piano was placed at
the end of it furthest removed from the door at which she entered, her
arrival was not noticed by the person seated before the instrument.
This person was neither Ralph nor his mother; it was a lady whom
Isabel immediately saw to be a stranger to herself, though her back was
presented to the door. This back--an ample and well-dressed one--Isabel
viewed for some moments with surprise. The lady was of course a visitor
who had arrived during her absence and who had not been mentioned by
either of the servants--one of them her aunt's maid--of whom she had had
speech since her return. Isabel had already learned, however, with
what treasures of reserve the function of receiving orders may be
accompanied, and she was particularly conscious of having been treated
with dryness by her aunt's maid, through whose hands she had slipped
perhaps a little too mistrustfully and with an effect of plumage but
the more lustrous. The advent of a guest was in itself far from
disconcerting; she had not yet divested herself of a young faith that
each new acquaintance would exert some momentous influence on her life.
By the time she had made these reflexions she became aware that the
lady at the piano played remarkably well. She was playing something
of Schubert's--Isabel knew not what, but recognised Schubert--and she
touched the piano with a discretion of her own. It showed skill, it
showed feeling; Isabel sat down noiselessly on the nearest chair and
waited till the end of the piece. When it was finished she felt a strong
desire to thank the player, and rose from her seat to do so, while at
the same time the stranger turned quickly round, as if but just aware of
her presence.

"That's very beautiful, and your playing makes it more beautiful still,"
said Isabel with all the young radiance with which she usually uttered a
truthful rapture.

"You don't think I disturbed Mr. Touchett then?" the musician answered
as sweetly as this compliment deserved. "The house is so large and his
room so far away that I thought I might venture, especially as I played
just--just du bout des doigts."

"She's a Frenchwoman," Isabel said to herself; "she says that as if she
were French." And this supposition made the visitor more interesting to
our speculative heroine. "I hope my uncle's doing well," Isabel added.
"I should think that to hear such lovely music as that would really make
him feel better."

The lady smiled and discriminated. "I'm afraid there are moments in life
when even Schubert has nothing to say to us. We must admit, however,
that they are our worst."

"I'm not in that state now then," said Isabel. "On the contrary I should
be so glad if you would play something more."

"If it will give you pleasure--delighted." And this obliging person took
her place again and struck a few chords, while Isabel sat down nearer
the instrument. Suddenly the new-comer stopped with her hands on the
keys, half-turning and looking over her shoulder. She was forty years
old and not pretty, though her expression charmed. "Pardon me," she
said; "but are you the niece--the young American?"

"I'm my aunt's niece," Isabel replied with simplicity.

The lady at the piano sat still a moment longer, casting her air of
interest over her shoulder. "That's very well; we're compatriots." And
then she began to play.

"Ah then she's not French," Isabel murmured; and as the opposite
supposition had made her romantic it might have seemed that this
revelation would have marked a drop. But such was not the fact; rarer
even than to be French seemed it to be American on such interesting
terms.

The lady played in the same manner as before, softly and solemnly, and
while she played the shadows deepened in the room. The autumn twilight
gathered in, and from her place Isabel could see the rain, which had now
begun in earnest, washing the cold-looking lawn and the wind shaking the
great trees. At last, when the music had ceased, her companion got up
and, coming nearer with a smile, before Isabel had time to thank her
again, said: "I'm very glad you've come back; I've heard a great deal
about you."

Isabel thought her a very attractive person, but nevertheless spoke with
a certain abruptness in reply to this speech. "From whom have you heard
about me?"

The stranger hesitated a single moment and then, "From your uncle," she
answered. "I've been here three days, and the first day he let me come
and pay him a visit in his room. Then he talked constantly of you."

"As you didn't know me that must rather have bored you."

"It made me want to know you. All the more that since then--your aunt
being so much with Mr. Touchett--I've been quite alone and have got
rather tired of my own society. I've not chosen a good moment for my
visit."

A servant had come in with lamps and was presently followed by another
bearing the tea-tray. On the appearance of this repast Mrs. Touchett had
apparently been notified, for she now arrived and addressed herself to
the tea-pot. Her greeting to her niece did not differ materially from
her manner of raising the lid of this receptacle in order to glance at
the contents: in neither act was it becoming to make a show of avidity.
Questioned about her husband she was unable to say he was better; but
the local doctor was with him, and much light was expected from this
gentleman's consultation with Sir Matthew Hope.

"I suppose you two ladies have made acquaintance," she pursued. "If you
haven't I recommend you to do so; for so long as we continue--Ralph and
I--to cluster about Mr. Touchett's bed you're not likely to have much
society but each other."

"I know nothing about you but that you're a great musician," Isabel said
to the visitor.

"There's a good deal more than that to know," Mrs. Touchett affirmed in
her little dry tone.

"A very little of it, I am sure, will content Miss Archer!" the lady
exclaimed with a light laugh. "I'm an old friend of your aunt's.
I've lived much in Florence. I'm Madame Merle." She made this last
announcement as if she were referring to a person of tolerably distinct
identity. For Isabel, however, it represented little; she could only
continue to feel that Madame Merle had as charming a manner as any she
had ever encountered.

"She's not a foreigner in spite of her name," said Mrs. Touchett.

"She was born--I always forget where you were born."

"It's hardly worth while then I should tell you."

"On the contrary," said Mrs. Touchett, who rarely missed a logical
point; "if I remembered your telling me would be quite superfluous."

Madame Merle glanced at Isabel with a sort of world-wide smile, a
thing that over-reached frontiers. "I was born under the shadow of the
national banner."

"She's too fond of mystery," said Mrs. Touchett; "that's her great
fault."

"Ah," exclaimed Madame Merle, "I've great faults, but I don't think
that's one of then; it certainly isn't the greatest. I came into the
world in the Brooklyn navy-yard. My father was a high officer in the
United States Navy, and had a post--a post of responsibility--in that
establishment at the time. I suppose I ought to love the sea, but I hate
it. That's why I don't return to America. I love the land; the great
thing is to love something."

Isabel, as a dispassionate witness, had not been struck with the
force of Mrs. Touchett's characterisation of her visitor, who had an
expressive, communicative, responsive face, by no means of the sort
which, to Isabel's mind, suggested a secretive disposition. It was a
face that told of an amplitude of nature and of quick and free motions
and, though it had no regular beauty, was in the highest degree engaging
and attaching. Madame Merle was a tall, fair, smooth woman; everything
in her person was round and replete, though without those accumulations
which suggest heaviness. Her features were thick but in perfect
proportion and harmony, and her complexion had a healthy clearness.
Her grey eyes were small but full of light and incapable of
stupidity--incapable, according to some people, even of tears; she had
a liberal, full-rimmed mouth which when she smiled drew itself upward to
the left side in a manner that most people thought very odd, some very
affected and a few very graceful. Isabel inclined to range herself in
the last category. Madame Merle had thick, fair hair, arranged somehow
"classically" and as if she were a Bust, Isabel judged--a Juno or a
Niobe; and large white hands, of a perfect shape, a shape so perfect
that their possessor, preferring to leave them unadorned, wore no
jewelled rings. Isabel had taken her at first, as we have seen, for
a Frenchwoman; but extended observation might have ranked her as a
German--a German of high degree, perhaps an Austrian, a baroness, a
countess, a princess. It would never have been supposed she had come
into the world in Brooklyn--though one could doubtless not have carried
through any argument that the air of distinction marking her in so
eminent a degree was inconsistent with such a birth. It was true that
the national banner had floated immediately over her cradle, and the
breezy freedom of the stars and stripes might have shed an influence
upon the attitude she there took towards life. And yet she had evidently
nothing of the fluttered, flapping quality of a morsel of bunting in the
wind; her manner expressed the repose and confidence which come from a
large experience. Experience, however, had not quenched her youth; it
had simply made her sympathetic and supple. She was in a word a woman of
strong impulses kept in admirable order. This commended itself to Isabel
as an ideal combination.

The girl made these reflexions while the three ladies sat at their tea,
but that ceremony was interrupted before long by the arrival of the
great doctor from London, who had been immediately ushered into the
drawing-room. Mrs. Touchett took him off to the library for a private
talk; and then Madame Merle and Isabel parted, to meet again at dinner.
The idea of seeing more of this interesting woman did much to mitigate
Isabel's sense of the sadness now settling on Gardencourt.

When she came into the drawing-room before dinner she found the place
empty; but in the course of a moment Ralph arrived. His anxiety about
his father had been lightened; Sir Matthew Hope's view of his condition
was less depressed than his own had been. The doctor recommended that
the nurse alone should remain with the old man for the next three or
four hours; so that Ralph, his mother and the great physician himself
were free to dine at table. Mrs. Touchett and Sir Matthew appeared;
Madame Merle was the last.

Before she came Isabel spoke of her to Ralph, who was standing before
the fireplace. "Pray who is this Madame Merle?"

"The cleverest woman I know, not excepting yourself," said Ralph.

"I thought she seemed very pleasant."

"I was sure you'd think her very pleasant."

"Is that why you invited her?"

"I didn't invite her, and when we came back from London I didn't know
she was here. No one invited her. She's a friend of my mother's, and
just after you and I went to town my mother got a note from her. She had
arrived in England (she usually lives abroad, though she has first and
last spent a good deal of time here), and asked leave to come down for
a few days. She's a woman who can make such proposals with perfect
confidence; she's so welcome wherever she goes. And with my mother there
could be no question of hesitating; she's the one person in the world
whom my mother very much admires. If she were not herself (which she
after all much prefers), she would like to be Madame Merle. It would
indeed be a great change."

"Well, she's very charming," said Isabel. "And she plays beautifully."

"She does everything beautifully. She's complete."

Isabel looked at her cousin a moment. "You don't like her."

"On the contrary, I was once in love with her."

"And she didn't care for you, and that's why you don't like her."

"How can we have discussed such things? Monsieur Merle was then living."

"Is he dead now?"

"So she says."

"Don't you believe her?"

"Yes, because the statement agrees with the probabilities. The husband
of Madame Merle would be likely to pass away."

Isabel gazed at her cousin again. "I don't know what you mean. You mean
something--that you don't mean. What was Monsieur Merle?"

"The husband of Madame."

"You're very odious. Has she any children?"

"Not the least little child--fortunately."

"Fortunately?"

"I mean fortunately for the child. She'd be sure to spoil it."

Isabel was apparently on the point of assuring her cousin for the third
time that he was odious; but the discussion was interrupted by the
arrival of the lady who was the topic of it. She came rustling in
quickly, apologising for being late, fastening a bracelet, dressed in
dark blue satin, which exposed a white bosom that was ineffectually
covered by a curious silver necklace. Ralph offered her his arm with the
exaggerated alertness of a man who was no longer a lover.

Even if this had still been his condition, however, Ralph had other
things to think about. The great doctor spent the night at Gardencourt
and, returning to London on the morrow, after another consultation with
Mr. Touchett's own medical adviser, concurred in Ralph's desire that he
should see the patient again on the day following. On the day following
Sir Matthew Hope reappeared at Gardencourt, and now took a less
encouraging view of the old man, who had grown worse in the twenty-four
hours. His feebleness was extreme, and to his son, who constantly sat
by his bedside, it often seemed that his end must be at hand. The local
doctor, a very sagacious man, in whom Ralph had secretly more confidence
than in his distinguished colleague, was constantly in attendance, and
Sir Matthew Hope came back several times. Mr. Touchett was much of the
time unconscious; he slept a great deal; he rarely spoke. Isabel had a
great desire to be useful to him and was allowed to watch with him at
hours when his other attendants (of whom Mrs. Touchett was not the least
regular) went to take rest. He never seemed to know her, and she always
said to herself "Suppose he should die while I'm sitting here;" an idea
which excited her and kept her awake. Once he opened his eyes for a
while and fixed them upon her intelligently, but when she went to him,
hoping he would recognise her, he closed them and relapsed into stupor.
The day after this, however, he revived for a longer time; but on this
occasion Ralph only was with him. The old man began to talk, much to his
son's satisfaction, who assured him that they should presently have him
sitting up.

"No, my boy," said Mr. Touchett, "not unless you bury me in a sitting
posture, as some of the ancients--was it the ancients?--used to do."

"Ah, daddy, don't talk about that," Ralph murmured. "You mustn't deny
that you're getting better."

"There will be no need of my denying it if you don't say it," the old
man answered. "Why should we prevaricate just at the last? We never
prevaricated before. I've got to die some time, and it's better to die
when one's sick than when one's well. I'm very sick--as sick as I shall
ever be. I hope you don't want to prove that I shall ever be worse than
this? That would be too bad. You don't? Well then."

Having made this excellent point he became quiet; but the next time that
Ralph was with him he again addressed himself to conversation. The
nurse had gone to her supper and Ralph was alone in charge, having just
relieved Mrs. Touchett, who had been on guard since dinner. The room was
lighted only by the flickering fire, which of late had become necessary,
and Ralph's tall shadow was projected over wall and ceiling with an
outline constantly varying but always grotesque.

"Who's that with me--is it my son?" the old man asked.

"Yes, it's your son, daddy."

"And is there no one else?"

"No one else."

Mr. Touchett said nothing for a while; and then, "I want to talk a
little," he went on.

"Won't it tire you?" Ralph demurred.

"It won't matter if it does. I shall have a long rest. I want to talk
about YOU."

Ralph had drawn nearer to the bed; he sat leaning forward with his hand
on his father's. "You had better select a brighter topic."

"You were always bright; I used to be proud of your brightness. I should
like so much to think you'd do something."

"If you leave us," said Ralph, "I shall do nothing but miss you."

"That's just what I don't want; it's what I want to talk about. You must
get a new interest."

"I don't want a new interest, daddy. I have more old ones than I know
what to do with."

The old man lay there looking at his son; his face was the face of the
dying, but his eyes were the eyes of Daniel Touchett. He seemed to be
reckoning over Ralph's interests. "Of course you have your mother," he
said at last. "You'll take care of her."

"My mother will always take care of herself," Ralph returned.

"Well," said his father, "perhaps as she grows older she'll need a
little help."

"I shall not see that. She'll outlive me."

"Very likely she will; but that's no reason--!" Mr. Touchett let his
phrase die away in a helpless but not quite querulous sigh and remained
silent again.

"Don't trouble yourself about us," said his son, "My mother and I get on
very well together, you know."

"You get on by always being apart; that's not natural."

"If you leave us we shall probably see more of each other."

"Well," the old man observed with wandering irrelevance, "it can't be
said that my death will make much difference in your mother's life."

"It will probably make more than you think."

"Well, she'll have more money," said Mr. Touchett. "I've left her a good
wife's portion, just as if she had been a good wife."

"She has been one, daddy, according to her own theory. She has never
troubled you."

"Ah, some troubles are pleasant," Mr. Touchett murmured. "Those you've
given me for instance. But your mother has been less--less--what shall
I call it? less out of the way since I've been ill. I presume she knows
I've noticed it."

"I shall certainly tell her so; I'm so glad you mention it."

"It won't make any difference to her; she doesn't do it to please me.
She does it to please--to please--" And he lay a while trying to think
why she did it. "She does it because it suits her. But that's not what
I want to talk about," he added. "It's about you. You'll be very well
off."

"Yes," said Ralph, "I know that. But I hope you've not forgotten the
talk we had a year ago--when I told you exactly what money I should need
and begged you to make some good use of the rest."

"Yes, yes, I remember. I made a new will--in a few days. I suppose it
was the first time such a thing had happened--a young man trying to get
a will made against him."

"It is not against me," said Ralph. "It would be against me to have a
large property to take care of. It's impossible for a man in my state of
health to spend much money, and enough is as good as a feast."

"Well, you'll have enough--and something over. There will be more than
enough for one--there will be enough for two."

"That's too much," said Ralph.

"Ah, don't say that. The best thing you can do; when I'm gone, will be
to marry."

Ralph had foreseen what his father was coming to, and this suggestion
was by no means fresh. It had long been Mr. Touchett's most ingenious
way of taking the cheerful view of his son's possible duration. Ralph
had usually treated it facetiously; but present circumstances proscribed
the facetious. He simply fell back in his chair and returned his
father's appealing gaze.

"If I, with a wife who hasn't been very fond of me, have had a very
happy life," said the old man, carrying his ingenuity further still,
"what a life mightn't you have if you should marry a person different
from Mrs. Touchett. There are more different from her than there are
like her." Ralph still said nothing; and after a pause his father
resumed softly: "What do you think of your cousin?"

At this Ralph started, meeting the question with a strained smile. "Do I
understand you to propose that I should marry Isabel?"

"Well, that's what it comes to in the end. Don't you like Isabel?"

"Yes, very much." And Ralph got up from his chair and wandered over to
the fire. He stood before it an instant and then he stooped and stirred
it mechanically. "I like Isabel very much," he repeated.

"Well," said his father, "I know she likes you. She has told me how much
she likes you."

"Did she remark that she would like to marry me?"

"No, but she can't have anything against you. And she's the most
charming young lady I've ever seen. And she would be good to you. I have
thought a great deal about it."

"So have I," said Ralph, coming back to the bedside again. "I don't mind
telling you that."

"You ARE in love with her then? I should think you would be. It's as if
she came over on purpose."

"No, I'm not in love with her; but I should be if--if certain things
were different."

"Ah, things are always different from what they might be," said the old
man. "If you wait for them to change you'll never do anything. I don't
know whether you know," he went on; "but I suppose there's no harm in
my alluding to it at such an hour as this: there was some one wanted to
marry Isabel the other day, and she wouldn't have him."

"I know she refused Warburton: he told me himself."

"Well, that proves there's a chance for somebody else."

"Somebody else took his chance the other day in London--and got nothing
by it."

"Was it you?" Mr. Touchett eagerly asked.

"No, it was an older friend; a poor gentleman who came over from America
to see about it."

"Well, I'm sorry for him, whoever he was. But it only proves what I
say--that the way's open to you."

"If it is, dear father, it's all the greater pity that I'm unable to
tread it. I haven't many convictions; but I have three or four that I
hold strongly. One is that people, on the whole, had better not marry
their cousins. Another is that people in an advanced stage of pulmonary
disorder had better not marry at all."

The old man raised his weak hand and moved it to and fro before his
face. "What do you mean by that? You look at things in a way that would
make everything wrong. What sort of a cousin is a cousin that you
had never seen for more than twenty years of her life? We're all each
other's cousins, and if we stopped at that the human race would die out.
It's just the same with your bad lung. You're a great deal better than
you used to be. All you want is to lead a natural life. It is a great
deal more natural to marry a pretty young lady that you're in love with
than it is to remain single on false principles."

"I'm not in love with Isabel," said Ralph.

"You said just now that you would be if you didn't think it wrong. I
want to prove to you that it isn't wrong."

"It will only tire you, dear daddy," said Ralph, who marvelled at his
father's tenacity and at his finding strength to insist. "Then where
shall we all be?"

"Where shall you be if I don't provide for you? You won't have anything
to do with the bank, and you won't have me to take care of. You say
you've so many interests; but I can't make them out."

Ralph leaned back in his chair with folded arms; his eyes were fixed for
some time in meditation. At last, with the air of a man fairly mustering
courage, "I take a great interest in my cousin," he said, "but not the
sort of interest you desire. I shall not live many years; but I hope I
shall live long enough to see what she does with herself. She's entirely
independent of me; I can exercise very little influence upon her life.
But I should like to do something for her."

"What should you like to do?"

"I should like to put a little wind in her sails."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I should like to put it into her power to do some of the things she
wants. She wants to see the world for instance. I should like to put
money in her purse."

"Ah, I'm glad you've thought of that," said the old man. "But I've
thought of it too. I've left her a legacy--five thousand pounds."

"That's capital; it's very kind of you. But I should like to do a little
more."

Something of that veiled acuteness with which it had been on Daniel
Touchett's part the habit of a lifetime to listen to a financial
proposition still lingered in the face in which the invalid had not
obliterated the man of business. "I shall be happy to consider it," he
said softly.

"Isabel's poor then. My mother tells me that she has but a few hundred
dollars a year. I should like to make her rich."

"What do you mean by rich?"

"I call people rich when they're able to meet the requirements of their
imagination. Isabel has a great deal of imagination."

"So have you, my son," said Mr. Touchett, listening very attentively but
a little confusedly.

"You tell me I shall have money enough for two. What I want is that you
should kindly relieve me of my superfluity and make it over to Isabel.
Divide my inheritance into two equal halves and give her the second."

"To do what she likes with?"

"Absolutely what she likes."

"And without an equivalent?"

"What equivalent could there be?"

"The one I've already mentioned."

"Her marrying--some one or other? It's just to do away with anything of
that sort that I make my suggestion. If she has an easy income she'll
never have to marry for a support. That's what I want cannily to
prevent. She wishes to be free, and your bequest will make her free."

"Well, you seem to have thought it out," said Mr. Touchett. "But I don't
see why you appeal to me. The money will be yours, and you can easily
give it to her yourself."

Ralph openly stared. "Ah, dear father, I can't offer Isabel money!"

The old man gave a groan. "Don't tell me you're not in love with her! Do
you want me to have the credit of it?"

"Entirely. I should like it simply to be a clause in your will, without
the slightest reference to me."

"Do you want me to make a new will then?"

"A few words will do it; you can attend to it the next time you feel a
little lively."

"You must telegraph to Mr. Hilary then. I'll do nothing without my
solicitor."

"You shall see Mr. Hilary to-morrow."

"He'll think we've quarrelled, you and I," said the old man.

"Very probably; I shall like him to think it," said Ralph, smiling;
"and, to carry out the idea, I give you notice that I shall be very
sharp, quite horrid and strange, with you."

The humour of this appeared to touch his father, who lay a little while
taking it in. "I'll do anything you like," Mr. Touchett said at last;
"but I'm not sure it's right. You say you want to put wind in her sails;
but aren't you afraid of putting too much?"

"I should like to see her going before the breeze!" Ralph answered.

"You speak as if it were for your mere amusement."

"So it is, a good deal."

"Well, I don't think I understand," said Mr. Touchett with a sigh.
"Young men are very different from what I was. When I cared for a
girl--when I was young--I wanted to do more than look at her."

"You've scruples that I shouldn't have had, and you've ideas that I
shouldn't have had either. You say Isabel wants to be free, and that
her being rich will keep her from marrying for money. Do you think that
she's a girl to do that?"

"By no means. But she has less money than she has ever had before. Her
father then gave her everything, because he used to spend his capital.
She has nothing but the crumbs of that feast to live on, and she doesn't
really know how meagre they are--she has yet to learn it. My mother has
told me all about it. Isabel will learn it when she's really thrown upon
the world, and it would be very painful to me to think of her coming to
the consciousness of a lot of wants she should be unable to satisfy."

"I've left her five thousand pounds. She can satisfy a good many wants
with that."

"She can indeed. But she would probably spend it in two or three years."

"You think she'd be extravagant then?"

"Most certainly," said Ralph, smiling serenely.

Poor Mr. Touchett's acuteness was rapidly giving place to pure
confusion. "It would merely be a question of time then, her spending the
larger sum?"

"No--though at first I think she'd plunge into that pretty freely: she'd
probably make over a part of it to each of her sisters. But after that
she'd come to her senses, remember she has still a lifetime before her,
and live within her means."

"Well, you HAVE worked it out," said the old man helplessly. "You do
take an interest in her, certainly."

"You can't consistently say I go too far. You wished me to go further."

"Well, I don't know," Mr. Touchett answered. "I don't think I enter into
your spirit. It seems to me immoral."

"Immoral, dear daddy?"

"Well, I don't know that it's right to make everything so easy for a
person."

"It surely depends upon the person. When the person's good, your making
things easy is all to the credit of virtue. To facilitate the execution
of good impulses, what can be a nobler act?"

This was a little difficult to follow, and Mr. Touchett considered it
for a while. At last he said: "Isabel's a sweet young thing; but do you
think she's so good as that?"

"She's as good as her best opportunities," Ralph returned.

"Well," Mr. Touchett declared, "she ought to get a great many
opportunities for sixty thousand pounds."

"I've no doubt she will."

"Of course I'll do what you want," said the old man. "I only want to
understand it a little."

"Well, dear daddy, don't you understand it now?" his son caressingly
asked. "If you don't we won't take any more trouble about it. We'll
leave it alone."

Mr. Touchett lay a long time still. Ralph supposed he had given up the
attempt to follow. But at last, quite lucidly, he began again. "Tell
me this first. Doesn't it occur to you that a young lady with sixty
thousand pounds may fall a victim to the fortune-hunters?"

"She'll hardly fall a victim to more than one."

"Well, one's too many."

"Decidedly. That's a risk, and it has entered into my calculation. I
think it's appreciable, but I think it's small, and I'm prepared to take
it."

Poor Mr. Touchett's acuteness had passed into perplexity, and his
perplexity now passed into admiration. "Well, you have gone into it!" he
repeated. "But I don't see what good you're to get of it."

Ralph leaned over his father's pillows and gently smoothed them; he was
aware their talk had been unduly prolonged. "I shall get just the good
I said a few moments ago I wished to put into Isabel's reach--that of
having met the requirements of my imagination. But it's scandalous, the
way I've taken advantage of you!"


