
Madame Merle had not made her appearance at Palazzo Roccanera on the
evening of that Thursday of which I have narrated some of the incidents,
and Isabel, though she observed her absence, was not surprised by it.
Things had passed between them which added no stimulus to sociability,
and to appreciate which we must glance a little backward. It has been
mentioned that Madame Merle returned from Naples shortly after Lord
Warburton had left Rome, and that on her first meeting with Isabel
(whom, to do her justice, she came immediately to see) her first
utterance had been an enquiry as to the whereabouts of this nobleman,
for whom she appeared to hold her dear friend accountable.

"Please don't talk of him," said Isabel for answer; "we've heard so much
of him of late."

Madame Merle bent her head on one side a little, protestingly, and
smiled at the left corner of her mouth. "You've heard, yes. But you must
remember that I've not, in Naples. I hoped to find him here and to be
able to congratulate Pansy."

"You may congratulate Pansy still; but not on marrying Lord Warburton."

"How you say that! Don't you know I had set my heart on it?" Madame
Merle asked with a great deal of spirit, but still with the intonation
of good-humour.

Isabel was discomposed, but she was determined to be good-humoured too.
"You shouldn't have gone to Naples then. You should have stayed here to
watch the affair."

"I had too much confidence in you. But do you think it's too late?"

"You had better ask Pansy," said Isabel.

"I shall ask her what you've said to her."

These words seemed to justify the impulse of self-defence aroused
on Isabel's part by her perceiving that her visitor's attitude was a
critical one. Madame Merle, as we know, had been very discreet hitherto;
she had never criticised; she had been markedly afraid of intermeddling.
But apparently she had only reserved herself for this occasion, since
she now had a dangerous quickness in her eye and an air of irritation
which even her admirable ease was not able to transmute. She had
suffered a disappointment which excited Isabel's surprise--our heroine
having no knowledge of her zealous interest in Pansy's marriage; and
she betrayed it in a manner which quickened Mrs. Osmond's alarm. More
clearly than ever before Isabel heard a cold, mocking voice proceed from
she knew not where, in the dim void that surrounded her, and declare
that this bright, strong, definite, worldly woman, this incarnation of
the practical, the personal, the immediate, was a powerful agent in her
destiny. She was nearer to her than Isabel had yet discovered, and her
nearness was not the charming accident she had so long supposed. The
sense of accident indeed had died within her that day when she happened
to be struck with the manner in which the wonderful lady and her own
husband sat together in private. No definite suspicion had as yet
taken its place; but it was enough to make her view this friend with a
different eye, to have been led to reflect that there was more intention
in her past behaviour than she had allowed for at the time. Ah yes,
there had been intention, there had been intention, Isabel said to
herself; and she seemed to wake from a long pernicious dream. What was
it that brought home to her that Madame Merle's intention had not been
good? Nothing but the mistrust which had lately taken body and which
married itself now to the fruitful wonder produced by her visitor's
challenge on behalf of poor Pansy. There was something in this challenge
which had at the very outset excited an answering defiance; a nameless
vitality which she could see to have been absent from her friend's
professions of delicacy and caution. Madame Merle had been unwilling to
interfere, certainly, but only so long as there was nothing to interfere
with. It will perhaps seem to the reader that Isabel went fast in
casting doubt, on mere suspicion, on a sincerity proved by several
years of good offices. She moved quickly indeed, and with reason, for a
strange truth was filtering into her soul. Madame Merle's interest was
identical with Osmond's: that was enough. "I think Pansy will tell
you nothing that will make you more angry," she said in answer to her
companion's last remark.

"I'm not in the least angry. I've only a great desire to retrieve the
situation. Do you consider that Warburton has left us for ever?"

"I can't tell you; I don't understand you. It's all over; please let it
rest. Osmond has talked to me a great deal about it, and I've nothing
more to say or to hear. I've no doubt," Isabel added, "that he'll be
very happy to discuss the subject with you."

"I know what he thinks; he came to see me last evening."

"As soon as you had arrived? Then you know all about it and you needn't
apply to me for information."

"It isn't information I want. At bottom it's sympathy. I had set my
heart on that marriage; the idea did what so few things do--it satisfied
the imagination."

"Your imagination, yes. But not that of the persons concerned."

"You mean by that of course that I'm not concerned. Of course not
directly. But when one's such an old friend one can't help having
something at stake. You forget how long I've known Pansy. You mean,
of course," Madame Merle added, "that YOU are one of the persons
concerned."

"No; that's the last thing I mean. I'm very weary of it all."

Madame Merle hesitated a little. "Ah yes, your work's done."

"Take care what you say," said Isabel very gravely.

"Oh, I take care; never perhaps more than when it appears least. Your
husband judges you severely."

Isabel made for a moment no answer to this; she felt choked with
bitterness. It was not the insolence of Madame Merle's informing her
that Osmond had been taking her into his confidence as against his wife
that struck her most; for she was not quick to believe that this was
meant for insolence. Madame Merle was very rarely insolent, and only
when it was exactly right. It was not right now, or at least it was not
right yet. What touched Isabel like a drop of corrosive acid upon an
open wound was the knowledge that Osmond dishonoured her in his words as
well as in his thoughts. "Should you like to know how I judge HIM?" she
asked at last.

"No, because you'd never tell me. And it would be painful for me to
know."

There was a pause, and for the first time since she had known her Isabel
thought Madame Merle disagreeable. She wished she would leave her.
"Remember how attractive Pansy is, and don't despair," she said
abruptly, with a desire that this should close their interview.

But Madame Merle's expansive presence underwent no contraction. She only
gathered her mantle about her and, with the movement, scattered upon the
air a faint, agreeable fragrance. "I don't despair; I feel encouraged.
And I didn't come to scold you; I came if possible to learn the truth. I
know you'll tell it if I ask you. It's an immense blessing with you that
one can count upon that. No, you won't believe what a comfort I take in
it."

"What truth do you speak of?" Isabel asked, wondering.

"Just this: whether Lord Warburton changed his mind quite of his own
movement or because you recommended it. To please himself I mean, or to
please you. Think of the confidence I must still have in you, in spite
of having lost a little of it," Madame Merle continued with a smile, "to
ask such a question as that!" She sat looking at her friend, to judge
the effect of her words, and then went on: "Now don't be heroic, don't
be unreasonable, don't take offence. It seems to me I do you an honour
in speaking so. I don't know another woman to whom I would do it. I
haven't the least idea that any other woman would tell me the truth. And
don't you see how well it is that your husband should know it? It's
true that he doesn't appear to have had any tact whatever in trying to
extract it; he has indulged in gratuitous suppositions. But that doesn't
alter the fact that it would make a difference in his view of his
daughter's prospects to know distinctly what really occurred. If Lord
Warburton simply got tired of the poor child, that's one thing, and it's
a pity. If he gave her up to please you it's another. That's a pity too,
but in a different way. Then, in the latter case, you'd perhaps resign
yourself to not being pleased--to simply seeing your step-daughter
married. Let him off--let us have him!"

Madame Merle had proceeded very deliberately, watching her companion and
apparently thinking she could proceed safely. As she went on Isabel grew
pale; she clasped her hands more tightly in her lap. It was not that her
visitor had at last thought it the right time to be insolent; for this
was not what was most apparent. It was a worse horror than that. "Who
are you--what are you?" Isabel murmured. "What have you to do with my
husband?" It was strange that for the moment she drew as near to him as
if she had loved him.

"Ah then, you take it heroically! I'm very sorry. Don't think, however,
that I shall do so."

"What have you to do with me?" Isabel went on.

Madame Merle slowly got up, stroking her muff, but not removing her eyes
from Isabel's face. "Everything!" she answered.

Isabel sat there looking up at her, without rising; her face was almost
a prayer to be enlightened. But the light of this woman's eyes seemed
only a darkness. "Oh misery!" she murmured at last; and she fell
back, covering her face with her hands. It had come over her like a
high-surging wave that Mrs. Touchett was right. Madame Merle had married
her. Before she uncovered her face again that lady had left the room.

Isabel took a drive alone that afternoon; she wished to be far away,
under the sky, where she could descend from her carriage and tread
upon the daisies. She had long before this taken old Rome into her
confidence, for in a world of ruins the ruin of her happiness seemed a
less unnatural catastrophe. She rested her weariness upon things that
had crumbled for centuries and yet still were upright; she dropped her
secret sadness into the silence of lonely places, where its very modern
quality detached itself and grew objective, so that as she sat in a
sun-warmed angle on a winter's day, or stood in a mouldy church to which
no one came, she could almost smile at it and think of its smallness.
Small it was, in the large Roman record, and her haunting sense of the
continuity of the human lot easily carried her from the less to the
greater. She had become deeply, tenderly acquainted with Rome; it
interfused and moderated her passion. But she had grown to think of it
chiefly as the place where people had suffered. This was what came to
her in the starved churches, where the marble columns, transferred from
pagan ruins, seemed to offer her a companionship in endurance and the
musty incense to be a compound of long-unanswered prayers. There was
no gentler nor less consistent heretic than Isabel; the firmest of
worshippers, gazing at dark altar-pictures or clustered candles, could
not have felt more intimately the suggestiveness of these objects nor
have been more liable at such moments to a spiritual visitation. Pansy,
as we know, was almost always her companion, and of late the Countess
Gemini, balancing a pink parasol, had lent brilliancy to their equipage;
but she still occasionally found herself alone when it suited her
mood and where it suited the place. On such occasions she had several
resorts; the most accessible of which perhaps was a seat on the low
parapet which edges the wide grassy space before the high, cold front
of Saint John Lateran, whence you look across the Campagna at the
far-trailing outline of the Alban Mount and at that mighty plain,
between, which is still so full of all that has passed from it. After
the departure of her cousin and his companions she roamed more than
usual; she carried her sombre spirit from one familiar shrine to the
other. Even when Pansy and the Countess were with her she felt the touch
of a vanished world. The carriage, leaving the walls of Rome behind,
rolled through narrow lanes where the wild honeysuckle had begun to
tangle itself in the hedges, or waited for her in quiet places where
the fields lay near, while she strolled further and further over the
flower-freckled turf, or sat on a stone that had once had a use and
gazed through the veil of her personal sadness at the splendid sadness
of the scene--at the dense, warm light, the far gradations and soft
confusions of colour, the motionless shepherds in lonely attitudes, the
hills where the cloud-shadows had the lightness of a blush.

On the afternoon I began with speaking of, she had taken a resolution
not to think of Madame Merle; but the resolution proved vain, and this
lady's image hovered constantly before her. She asked herself, with an
almost childlike horror of the supposition, whether to this intimate
friend of several years the great historical epithet of wicked were
to be applied. She knew the idea only by the Bible and other literary
works; to the best of her belief she had had no personal acquaintance
with wickedness. She had desired a large acquaintance with human life,
and in spite of her having flattered herself that she cultivated it with
some success this elementary privilege had been denied her. Perhaps it
was not wicked--in the historic sense--to be even deeply false; for that
was what Madame Merle had been--deeply, deeply, deeply. Isabel's Aunt
Lydia had made this discovery long before, and had mentioned it to her
niece; but Isabel had flattered herself at this time that she had a much
richer view of things, especially of the spontaneity of her own
career and the nobleness of her own interpretations, than poor
stiffly-reasoning Mrs. Touchett. Madame Merle had done what she wanted;
she had brought about the union of her two friends; a reflection which
could not fail to make it a matter of wonder that she should so much
have desired such an event. There were people who had the match-making
passion, like the votaries of art for art; but Madame Merle, great
artist as she was, was scarcely one of these. She thought too ill of
marriage, too ill even of life; she had desired that particular marriage
but had not desired others. She had therefore had a conception of gain,
and Isabel asked herself where she had found her profit. It took her
naturally a long time to discover, and even then her discovery was
imperfect. It came back to her that Madame Merle, though she had seemed
to like her from their first meeting at Gardencourt, had been doubly
affectionate after Mr. Touchett's death and after learning that her
young friend had been subject to the good old man's charity. She had
found her profit not in the gross device of borrowing money, but in
the more refined idea of introducing one of her intimates to the young
woman's fresh and ingenuous fortune. She had naturally chosen her
closest intimate, and it was already vivid enough to Isabel that Gilbert
occupied this position. She found herself confronted in this manner with
the conviction that the man in the world whom she had supposed to be the
least sordid had married her, like a vulgar adventurer, for her money.
Strange to say, it had never before occurred to her; if she had thought
a good deal of harm of Osmond she had not done him this particular
injury. This was the worst she could think of, and she had been saying
to herself that the worst was still to come. A man might marry a woman
for her money perfectly well; the thing was often done. But at least
he should let her know. She wondered whether, since he had wanted her
money, her money would now satisfy him. Would he take her money and let
her go. Ah, if Mr. Touchett's great charity would but help her to-day it
would be blessed indeed! It was not slow to occur to her that if Madame
Merle had wished to do Gilbert a service his recognition to her of the
boon must have lost its warmth. What must be his feelings to-day in
regard to his too zealous benefactress, and what expression must they
have found on the part of such a master of irony? It is a singular, but
a characteristic, fact that before Isabel returned from her silent drive
she had broken its silence by the soft exclamation: "Poor, poor Madame
Merle!"

Her compassion would perhaps have been justified if on this same
afternoon she had been concealed behind one of the valuable curtains of
time-softened damask which dressed the interesting little salon of the
lady to whom it referred; the carefully-arranged apartment to which
we once paid a visit in company with the discreet Mr. Rosier. In that
apartment, towards six o'clock, Gilbert Osmond was seated, and his
hostess stood before him as Isabel had seen her stand on an occasion
commemorated in this history with an emphasis appropriate not so much to
its apparent as to its real importance.

"I don't believe you're unhappy; I believe you like it," said Madame
Merle.

"Did I say I was unhappy?" Osmond asked with a face grave enough to
suggest that he might have been.

"No, but you don't say the contrary, as you ought in common gratitude."

"Don't talk about gratitude," he returned dryly. "And don't aggravate
me," he added in a moment.

Madame Merle slowly seated herself, with her arms folded and her white
hands arranged as a support to one of them and an ornament, as it were,
to the other. She looked exquisitely calm but impressively sad. "On
your side, don't try to frighten me. I wonder if you guess some of my
thoughts."

"I trouble about them no more than I can help. I've quite enough of my
own."

"That's because they're so delightful."

Osmond rested his head against the back of his chair and looked at
his companion with a cynical directness which seemed also partly an
expression of fatigue. "You do aggravate me," he remarked in a moment.
"I'm very tired."

"Eh moi donc!" cried Madame Merle.

"With you it's because you fatigue yourself. With me it's not my own
fault."

"When I fatigue myself it's for you. I've given you an interest. That's
a great gift."

"Do you call it an interest?" Osmond enquired with detachment.

"Certainly, since it helps you to pass your time."

"The time has never seemed longer to me than this winter."

"You've never looked better; you've never been so agreeable, so
brilliant."

"Damn my brilliancy!" he thoughtfully murmured. "How little, after all,
you know me!"

"If I don't know you I know nothing," smiled Madame Merle. "You've the
feeling of complete success."

"No, I shall not have that till I've made you stop judging me."

"I did that long ago. I speak from old knowledge. But you express
yourself more too."

Osmond just hung fire. "I wish you'd express yourself less!"

"You wish to condemn me to silence? Remember that I've never been a
chatterbox. At any rate there are three or four things I should like to
say to you first. Your wife doesn't know what to do with herself," she
went on with a change of tone.

"Pardon me; she knows perfectly. She has a line sharply drawn. She means
to carry out her ideas."

"Her ideas to-day must be remarkable."

"Certainly they are. She has more of them than ever."

"She was unable to show me any this morning," said Madame Merle. "She
seemed in a very simple, almost in a stupid, state of mind. She was
completely bewildered."

"You had better say at once that she was pathetic."

"Ah no, I don't want to encourage you too much."

He still had his head against the cushion behind him; the ankle of one
foot rested on the other knee. So he sat for a while. "I should like to
know what's the matter with you," he said at last.

"The matter--the matter--!" And here Madame Merle stopped. Then she went
on with a sudden outbreak of passion, a burst of summer thunder in a
clear sky: "The matter is that I would give my right hand to be able to
weep, and that I can't!"

"What good would it do you to weep?"

"It would make me feel as I felt before I knew you."

"If I've dried your tears, that's something. But I've seen you shed
them."

"Oh, I believe you'll make me cry still. I mean make me howl like a
wolf. I've a great hope, I've a great need, of that. I was vile this
morning; I was horrid," she said.

"If Isabel was in the stupid state of mind you mention she probably
didn't perceive it," Osmond answered.

"It was precisely my deviltry that stupefied her. I couldn't help it; I
was full of something bad. Perhaps it was something good; I don't know.
You've not only dried up my tears; you've dried up my soul."

"It's not I then that am responsible for my wife's condition," Osmond
said. "It's pleasant to think that I shall get the benefit of your
influence upon her. Don't you know the soul is an immortal principle?
How can it suffer alteration?"

"I don't believe at all that it's an immortal principle. I believe it
can perfectly be destroyed. That's what has happened to mine, which
was a very good one to start with; and it's you I have to thank for it.
You're VERY bad," she added with gravity in her emphasis.

"Is this the way we're to end?" Osmond asked with the same studied
coldness.

"I don't know how we're to end. I wish I did--How do bad people
end?--especially as to their COMMON crimes. You have made me as bad as
yourself."

"I don't understand you. You seem to me quite good enough," said Osmond,
his conscious indifference giving an extreme effect to the words.

Madame Merle's self-possession tended on the contrary to diminish, and
she was nearer losing it than on any occasion on which we have had the
pleasure of meeting her. The glow of her eye turners sombre; her smile
betrayed a painful effort. "Good enough for anything that I've done with
myself? I suppose that's what you mean."

"Good enough to be always charming!" Osmond exclaimed, smiling too.

"Oh God!" his companion murmured; and, sitting there in her ripe
freshness, she had recourse to the same gesture she had provoked on
Isabel's part in the morning: she bent her face and covered it with her
hands.

"Are you going to weep after all?" Osmond asked; and on her remaining
motionless he went on: "Have I ever complained to you?"

She dropped her hands quickly. "No, you've taken your revenge
otherwise--you have taken it on HER."

Osmond threw back his head further; he looked a while at the ceiling
and might have been supposed to be appealing, in an informal way, to the
heavenly powers. "Oh, the imagination of women! It's always vulgar, at
bottom. You talk of revenge like a third-rate novelist."

"Of course you haven't complained. You've enjoyed your triumph too
much."

"I'm rather curious to know what you call my triumph."

"You've made your wife afraid of you."

Osmond changed his position; he leaned forward, resting his elbows on
his knees and looking a while at a beautiful old Persian rug, at
his feet. He had an air of refusing to accept any one's valuation
of anything, even of time, and of preferring to abide by his own; a
peculiarity which made him at moments an irritating person to converse
with. "Isabel's not afraid of me, and it's not what I wish," he said
at last. "To what do you want to provoke me when you say such things as
that?"

"I've thought over all the harm you can do me," Madame Merle answered.
"Your wife was afraid of me this morning, but in me it was really you
she feared."

"You may have said things that were in very bad taste; I'm not
responsible for that. I didn't see the use of your going to see her at
all: you're capable of acting without her. I've not made you afraid of
me that I can see," he went on; "how then should I have made her? You're
at least as brave. I can't think where you've picked up such rubbish;
one might suppose you knew me by this time." He got up as he spoke and
walked to the chimney, where he stood a moment bending his eye, as if
he had seen them for the first time, on the delicate specimens of rare
porcelain with which it was covered. He took up a small cup and held it
in his hand; then, still holding it and leaning his arm on the mantel,
he pursued: "You always see too much in everything; you overdo it; you
lose sight of the real. I'm much simpler than you think."

"I think you're very simple." And Madame Merle kept her eye on her cup.
"I've come to that with time. I judged you, as I say, of old; but it's
only since your marriage that I've understood you. I've seen better what
you have been to your wife than I ever saw what you were for me. Please
be very careful of that precious object."

"It already has a wee bit of a tiny crack," said Osmond dryly as he put
it down. "If you didn't understand me before I married it was cruelly
rash of you to put me into such a box. However, I took a fancy to my box
myself; I thought it would be a comfortable fit. I asked very little; I
only asked that she should like me."

"That she should like you so much!"

"So much, of course; in such a case one asks the maximum. That she
should adore me, if you will. Oh yes, I wanted that."

"I never adored you," said Madame Merle.

"Ah, but you pretended to!"

"It's true that you never accused me of being a comfortable fit," Madame
Merle went on.

"My wife has declined--declined to do anything of the sort," said
Osmond. "If you're determined to make a tragedy of that, the tragedy's
hardly for her."

"The tragedy's for me!" Madame Merle exclaimed, rising with a long
low sigh but having a glance at the same time for the contents of her
mantel-shelf.

"It appears that I'm to be severely taught the disadvantages of a false
position."

"You express yourself like a sentence in a copybook. We must look for
our comfort where we can find it. If my wife doesn't like me, at least
my child does. I shall look for compensations in Pansy. Fortunately I
haven't a fault to find with her."

"Ah," she said softly, "if I had a child--!"

Osmond waited, and then, with a little formal air, "The children of
others may be a great interest!" he announced.

"You're more like a copy-book than I. There's something after all that
holds us together."

"Is it the idea of the harm I may do you?" Osmond asked.

"No; it's the idea of the good I may do for you. It's that," Madame
Merle pursued, "that made me so jealous of Isabel. I want it to be
MY work," she added, with her face, which had grown hard and bitter,
relaxing to its habit of smoothness.

Her friend took up his hat and his umbrella, and after giving the
former article two or three strokes with his coat-cuff, "On the whole, I
think," he said, "you had better leave it to me."

After he had left her she went, the first thing, and lifted from the
mantel-shelf the attenuated coffee-cup in which he had mentioned the
existence of a crack; but she looked at it rather abstractedly. "Have I
been so vile all for nothing?" she vaguely wailed.



As the Countess Gemini was not acquainted with the ancient monuments
Isabel occasionally offered to introduce her to these interesting relics
and to give their afternoon drive an antiquarian aim. The Countess, who
professed to think her sister-in-law a prodigy of learning, never made
an objection, and gazed at masses of Roman brickwork as patiently as if
they had been mounds of modern drapery. She had not the historic sense,
though she had in some directions the anecdotic, and as regards herself
the apologetic, but she was so delighted to be in Rome that she only
desired to float with the current. She would gladly have passed an hour
every day in the damp darkness of the Baths of Titus if it had been a
condition of her remaining at Palazzo Roccanera. Isabel, however, was
not a severe cicerone; she used to visit the ruins chiefly because they
offered an excuse for talking about other matters than the love affairs
of the ladies of Florence, as to which her companion was never weary
of offering information. It must be added that during these visits the
Countess forbade herself every form of active research; her preference
was to sit in the carriage and exclaim that everything was most
interesting. It was in this manner that she had hitherto examined the
Coliseum, to the infinite regret of her niece, who--with all the respect
that she owed her--could not see why she should not descend from the
vehicle and enter the building. Pansy had so little chance to ramble
that her view of the case was not wholly disinterested; it may be
divined that she had a secret hope that, once inside, her parents' guest
might be induced to climb to the upper tiers. There came a day when
the Countess announced her willingness to undertake this feat--a mild
afternoon in March when the windy month expressed itself in occasional
puffs of spring. The three ladies went into the Coliseum together,
but Isabel left her companions to wander over the place. She had often
ascended to those desolate ledges from which the Roman crowd used to
bellow applause and where now the wild flowers (when they are allowed)
bloom in the deep crevices; and to-day she felt weary and disposed
to sit in the despoiled arena. It made an intermission too, for the
Countess often asked more from one's attention than she gave in return;
and Isabel believed that when she was alone with her niece she let the
dust gather for a moment on the ancient scandals of the Arnide. She so
remained below therefore, while Pansy guided her undiscriminating aunt
to the steep brick staircase at the foot of which the custodian unlocks
the tall wooden gate. The great enclosure was half in shadow; the
western sun brought out the pale red tone of the great blocks of
travertine--the latent colour that is the only living element in the
immense ruin. Here and there wandered a peasant or a tourist, looking
up at the far sky-line where, in the clear stillness, a multitude of
swallows kept circling and plunging. Isabel presently became aware
that one of the other visitors, planted in the middle of the arena, had
turned his attention to her own person and was looking at her with
a certain little poise of the head which she had some weeks before
perceived to be characteristic of baffled but indestructible purpose.
Such an attitude, to-day, could belong only to Mr. Edward Rosier; and
this gentleman proved in fact to have been considering the question of
speaking to her. When he had assured himself that she was unaccompanied
he drew near, remarking that though she would not answer his letters
she would perhaps not wholly close her ears to his spoken eloquence. She
replied that her stepdaughter was close at hand and that she could only
give him five minutes; whereupon he took out his watch and sat down upon
a broken block.

"It's very soon told," said Edward Rosier. "I've sold all my bibelots!"
Isabel gave instinctively an exclamation of horror; it was as if he had
told her he had had all his teeth drawn. "I've sold them by auction at
the Hotel Drouot," he went on. "The sale took place three days ago, and
they've telegraphed me the result. It's magnificent."

"I'm glad to hear it; but I wish you had kept your pretty things."

"I have the money instead--fifty thousand dollars. Will Mr. Osmond think
me rich enough now?"

"Is it for that you did it?" Isabel asked gently.

"For what else in the world could it be? That's the only thing I think
of. I went to Paris and made my arrangements. I couldn't stop for the
sale; I couldn't have seen them going off; I think it would have killed
me. But I put them into good hands, and they brought high prices. I
should tell you I have kept my enamels. Now I have the money in my
pocket, and he can't say I'm poor!" the young man exclaimed defiantly.

"He'll say now that you're not wise," said Isabel, as if Gilbert Osmond
had never said this before.

Rosier gave her a sharp look. "Do you mean that without my bibelots I'm
nothing? Do you mean they were the best thing about me? That's what they
told me in Paris; oh they were very frank about it. But they hadn't seen
HER!"

"My dear friend, you deserve to succeed," said Isabel very kindly.

"You say that so sadly that it's the same as if you said I shouldn't."
And he questioned her eyes with the clear trepidation of his own. He had
the air of a man who knows he has been the talk of Paris for a week and
is full half a head taller in consequence, but who also has a painful
suspicion that in spite of this increase of stature one or two persons
still have the perversity to think him diminutive. "I know what happened
here while I was away," he went on; "What does Mr. Osmond expect after
she has refused Lord Warburton?"

Isabel debated. "That she'll marry another nobleman."

"What other nobleman?"

"One that he'll pick out."

Rosier slowly got up, putting his watch into his waistcoat-pocket.
"You're laughing at some one, but this time I don't think it's at me."

"I didn't mean to laugh," said Isabel. "I laugh very seldom. Now you had
better go away."

"I feel very safe!" Rosier declared without moving. This might be; but
it evidently made him feel more so to make the announcement in rather
a loud voice, balancing himself a little complacently on his toes and
looking all round the Coliseum as if it were filled with an audience.
Suddenly Isabel saw him change colour; there was more of an audience
than he had suspected. She turned and perceived that her two companions
had returned from their excursion. "You must really go away," she said
quickly. "Ah, my dear lady, pity me!" Edward Rosier murmured in a voice
strangely at variance with the announcement I have just quoted. And then
he added eagerly, like a man who in the midst of his misery is seized by
a happy thought: "Is that lady the Countess Gemini? I've a great desire
to be presented to her."

Isabel looked at him a moment. "She has no influence with her brother."

"Ah, what a monster you make him out!" And Rosier faced the Countess,
who advanced, in front of Pansy, with an animation partly due perhaps
to the fact that she perceived her sister-in-law to be engaged in
conversation with a very pretty young man.

"I'm glad you've kept your enamels!" Isabel called as she left him. She
went straight to Pansy, who, on seeing Edward Rosier, had stopped short,
with lowered eyes. "We'll go back to the carriage," she said gently.

"Yes, it's getting late," Pansy returned more gently still. And she
went on without a murmur, without faltering or glancing back. Isabel,
however, allowing herself this last liberty, saw that a meeting had
immediately taken place between the Countess and Mr. Rosier. He had
removed his hat and was bowing and smiling; he had evidently introduced
himself, while the Countess's expressive back displayed to Isabel's eye
a gracious inclination. These facts, none the less, were presently lost
to sight, for Isabel and Pansy took their places again in the carriage.
Pansy, who faced her stepmother, at first kept her eyes fixed on her
lap; then she raised them and rested them on Isabel's. There shone out
of each of them a little melancholy ray--a spark of timid passion which
touched Isabel to the heart. At the same time a wave of envy passed over
her soul, as she compared the tremulous longing, the definite ideal
of the child with her own dry despair. "Poor little Pansy!" she
affectionately said.

"Oh never mind!" Pansy answered in the tone of eager apology. And then
there was a silence; the Countess was a long time coming. "Did you show
your aunt everything, and did she enjoy it?" Isabel asked at last.

"Yes, I showed her everything. I think she was very much pleased."

"And you're not tired, I hope."

"Oh no, thank you, I'm not tired."

The Countess still remained behind, so that Isabel requested the footman
to go into the Coliseum and tell her they were waiting. He presently
returned with the announcement that the Signora Contessa begged them not
to wait--she would come home in a cab!

About a week after this lady's quick sympathies had enlisted themselves
with Mr. Rosier, Isabel, going rather late to dress for dinner, found
Pansy sitting in her room. The girl seemed to have been awaiting her;
she got up from her low chair. "Pardon my taking the liberty," she said
in a small voice. "It will be the last--for some time."

Her voice was strange, and her eyes, widely opened, had an excited,
frightened look. "You're not going away!" Isabel exclaimed.

"I'm going to the convent."

"To the convent?"

Pansy drew nearer, till she was near enough to put her arms round
Isabel and rest her head on her shoulder. She stood this way a moment,
perfectly still; but her companion could feel her tremble. The quiver
of her little body expressed everything she was unable to say. Isabel
nevertheless pressed her. "Why are you going to the convent?"

"Because papa thinks it best. He says a young girl's better, every now
and then, for making a little retreat. He says the world, always the
world, is very bad for a young girl. This is just a chance for a little
seclusion--a little reflexion." Pansy spoke in short detached sentences,
as if she could scarce trust herself; and then she added with a triumph
of self-control: "I think papa's right; I've been so much in the world
this winter."

Her announcement had a strange effect on Isabel; it seemed to carry a
larger meaning than the girl herself knew. "When was this decided?" she
asked. "I've heard nothing of it."

"Papa told me half an hour ago; he thought it better it shouldn't be
too much talked about in advance. Madame Catherine's to come for me at a
quarter past seven, and I'm only to take two frocks. It's only for a few
weeks; I'm sure it will be very good. I shall find all those ladies who
used to be so kind to me, and I shall see the little girls who are being
educated. I'm very fond of little girls," said Pansy with an effect
of diminutive grandeur. "And I'm also very fond of Mother Catherine. I
shall be very quiet and think a great deal."

Isabel listened to her, holding her breath; she was almost awe-struck.
"Think of ME sometimes."

"Ah, come and see me soon!" cried Pansy; and the cry was very different
from the heroic remarks of which she had just delivered herself.

Isabel could say nothing more; she understood nothing; she only felt how
little she yet knew her husband. Her answer to his daughter was a long,
tender kiss.

Half an hour later she learned from her maid that Madame Catherine had
arrived in a cab and had departed again with the signorina. On going to
the drawing-room before dinner she found the Countess Gemini alone, and
this lady characterised the incident by exclaiming, with a wonderful
toss of the head, "En voila, ma chere, une pose!" But if it was an
affectation she was at a loss to see what her husband affected. She
could only dimly perceive that he had more traditions than she supposed.
It had become her habit to be so careful as to what she said to him
that, strange as it may appear, she hesitated, for several minutes after
he had come in, to allude to his daughter's sudden departure: she
spoke of it only after they were seated at table. But she had forbidden
herself ever to ask Osmond a question. All she could do was to make a
declaration, and there was one that came very naturally. "I shall miss
Pansy very much."

He looked a while, with his head inclined a little, at the basket of
flowers in the middle of the table. "Ah yes," he said at last, "I had
thought of that. You must go and see her, you know; but not too often. I
dare say you wonder why I sent her to the good sisters; but I doubt if I
can make you understand. It doesn't matter; don't trouble yourself about
it. That's why I had not spoken of it. I didn't believe you would enter
into it. But I've always had the idea; I've always thought it a part
of the education of one's daughter. One's daughter should be fresh and
fair; she should be innocent and gentle. With the manners of the present
time she is liable to become so dusty and crumpled. Pansy's a little
dusty, a little dishevelled; she has knocked about too much. This
bustling, pushing rabble that calls itself society--one should take her
out of it occasionally. Convents are very quiet, very convenient, very
salutary. I like to think of her there, in the old garden, under
the arcade, among those tranquil virtuous women. Many of them are
gentlewomen born; several of them are noble. She will have her books
and her drawing, she will have her piano. I've made the most liberal
arrangements. There is to be nothing ascetic; there's just to be a
certain little sense of sequestration. She'll have time to think, and
there's something I want her to think about." Osmond spoke deliberately,
reasonably, still with his head on one side, as if he were looking at
the basket of flowers. His tone, however, was that of a man not so
much offering an explanation as putting a thing into words--almost into
pictures--to see, himself, how it would look. He considered a while the
picture he had evoked and seemed greatly pleased with it. And then he
went on: "The Catholics are very wise after all. The convent is a great
institution; we can't do without it; it corresponds to an essential need
in families, in society. It's a school of good manners; it's a school
of repose. Oh, I don't want to detach my daughter from the world," he
added; "I don't want to make her fix her thoughts on any other. This
one's very well, as SHE should take it, and she may think of it as much
as she likes. Only she must think of it in the right way."

Isabel gave an extreme attention to this little sketch; she found
it indeed intensely interesting. It seemed to show her how far her
husband's desire to be effective was capable of going--to the point of
playing theoretic tricks on the delicate organism of his daughter. She
could not understand his purpose, no--not wholly; but she understood it
better than he supposed or desired, inasmuch as she was convinced
that the whole proceeding was an elaborate mystification, addressed to
herself and destined to act upon her imagination. He had wanted to do
something sudden and arbitrary, something unexpected and refined; to
mark the difference between his sympathies and her own, and show that
if he regarded his daughter as a precious work of art it was natural
he should be more and more careful about the finishing touches. If he
wished to be effective he had succeeded; the incident struck a chill
into Isabel's heart. Pansy had known the convent in her childhood and
had found a happy home there; she was fond of the good sisters, who were
very fond of her, and there was therefore for the moment no definite
hardship in her lot. But all the same the girl had taken fright; the
impression her father desired to make would evidently be sharp enough.
The old Protestant tradition had never faded from Isabel's imagination,
and as her thoughts attached themselves to this striking example of
her husband's genius--she sat looking, like him, at the basket of
flowers--poor little Pansy became the heroine of a tragedy. Osmond
wished it to be known that he shrank from nothing, and his wife found it
hard to pretend to eat her dinner. There was a certain relief presently,
in hearing the high, strained voice of her sister-in-law. The Countess
too, apparently, had been thinking the thing out, but had arrived at a
different conclusion from Isabel.

"It's very absurd, my dear Osmond," she said, "to invent so many pretty
reasons for poor Pansy's banishment. Why don't you say at once that you
want to get her out of my way? Haven't you discovered that I think very
well of Mr. Rosier? I do indeed; he seems to me simpaticissimo. He has
made me believe in true love; I never did before! Of course you've
made up your mind that with those convictions I'm dreadful company for
Pansy."

Osmond took a sip of a glass of wine; he looked perfectly good-humoured.
"My dear Amy," he answered, smiling as if he were uttering a piece
of gallantry, "I don't know anything about your convictions, but if
I suspected that they interfere with mine it would be much simpler to
banish YOU."



The Countess was not banished, but she felt the insecurity of her tenure
of her brother's hospitality. A week after this incident Isabel received
a telegram from England, dated from Gardencourt and bearing the stamp of
Mrs. Touchett's authorship. "Ralph cannot last many days," it ran, "and
if convenient would like to see you. Wishes me to say that you must come
only if you've not other duties. Say, for myself, that you used to talk
a good deal about your duty and to wonder what it was; shall be curious
to see whether you've found it out. Ralph is really dying, and there's
no other company." Isabel was prepared for this news, having received
from Henrietta Stackpole a detailed account of her journey to England
with her appreciative patient. Ralph had arrived more dead than alive,
but she had managed to convey him to Gardencourt, where he had taken to
his bed, which, as Miss Stackpole wrote, he evidently would never leave
again. She added that she had really had two patients on her hands
instead of one, inasmuch as Mr. Goodwood, who had been of no earthly
use, was quite as ailing, in a different way, as Mr. Touchett.
Afterwards she wrote that she had been obliged to surrender the field to
Mrs. Touchett, who had just returned from America and had promptly given
her to understand that she didn't wish any interviewing at Gardencourt.
Isabel had written to her aunt shortly after Ralph came to Rome, letting
her know of his critical condition and suggesting that she should
lose no time in returning to Europe. Mrs. Touchett had telegraphed an
acknowledgement of this admonition, and the only further news Isabel
received from her was the second telegram I have just quoted.

Isabel stood a moment looking at the latter missive; then, thrusting it
into her pocket, she went straight to the door of her husband's study.
Here she again paused an instant, after which she opened the door and
went in. Osmond was seated at the table near the window with a folio
volume before him, propped against a pile of books. This volume was open
at a page of small coloured plates, and Isabel presently saw that he
had been copying from it the drawing of an antique coin. A box of
water-colours and fine brushes lay before him, and he had already
transferred to a sheet of immaculate paper the delicate, finely-tinted
disk. His back was turned toward the door, but he recognised his wife
without looking round.

"Excuse me for disturbing you," she said.

"When I come to your room I always knock," he answered, going on with
his work.

"I forgot; I had something else to think of. My cousin's dying."

"Ah, I don't believe that," said Osmond, looking at his drawing through
a magnifying glass. "He was dying when we married; he'll outlive us
all."

Isabel gave herself no time, no thought, to appreciate the careful
cynicism of this declaration; she simply went on quickly, full of
her own intention "My aunt has telegraphed for me; I must go to
Gardencourt."

"Why must you go to Gardencourt?" Osmond asked in the tone of impartial
curiosity.

"To see Ralph before he dies."

To this, for some time, he made no rejoinder; he continued to give his
chief attention to his work, which was of a sort that would brook no
negligence. "I don't see the need of it," he said at last. "He came to
see you here. I didn't like that; I thought his being in Rome a great
mistake. But I tolerated it because it was to be the last time you
should see him. Now you tell me it's not to have been the last. Ah,
you're not grateful!"

"What am I to be grateful for?"

Gilbert Osmond laid down his little implements, blew a speck of dust
from his drawing, slowly got up, and for the first time looked at his
wife. "For my not having interfered while he was here."

"Oh yes, I am. I remember perfectly how distinctly you let me know you
didn't like it. I was very glad when he went away."

"Leave him alone then. Don't run after him."

Isabel turned her eyes away from him; they rested upon his little
drawing. "I must go to England," she said, with a full consciousness
that her tone might strike an irritable man of taste as stupidly
obstinate.

"I shall not like it if you do," Osmond remarked.

"Why should I mind that? You won't like it if I don't. You like nothing
I do or don't do. You pretend to think I lie."

Osmond turned slightly pale; he gave a cold smile. "That's why you must
go then? Not to see your cousin, but to take a revenge on me."

"I know nothing about revenge."

"I do," said Osmond. "Don't give me an occasion."

"You're only too eager to take one. You wish immensely that I would
commit some folly."

"I should be gratified in that case if you disobeyed me."

"If I disobeyed you?" said Isabel in a low tone which had the effect of
mildness.

"Let it be clear. If you leave Rome to-day it will be a piece of the
most deliberate, the most calculated, opposition."

"How can you call it calculated? I received my aunt's telegram but three
minutes ago."

"You calculate rapidly; it's a great accomplishment. I don't see why we
should prolong our discussion; you know my wish." And he stood there as
if he expected to see her withdraw.

But she never moved; she couldn't move, strange as it may seem; she
still wished to justify herself; he had the power, in an extraordinary
degree, of making her feel this need. There was something in her
imagination he could always appeal to against her judgement. "You've no
reason for such a wish," said Isabel, "and I've every reason for going.
I can't tell you how unjust you seem to me. But I think you know. It's
your own opposition that's calculated. It's malignant."

She had never uttered her worst thought to her husband before, and the
sensation of hearing it was evidently new to Osmond. But he showed no
surprise, and his coolness was apparently a proof that he had believed
his wife would in fact be unable to resist for ever his ingenious
endeavour to draw her out. "It's all the more intense then," he
answered. And he added almost as if he were giving her a friendly
counsel: "This is a very important matter." She recognised that; she
was fully conscious of the weight of the occasion; she knew that between
them they had arrived at a crisis. Its gravity made her careful; she
said nothing, and he went on. "You say I've no reason? I have the very
best. I dislike, from the bottom of my soul, what you intend to do. It's
dishonourable; it's indelicate; it's indecent. Your cousin is nothing
whatever to me, and I'm under no obligation to make concessions to him.
I've already made the very handsomest. Your relations with him, while he
was here, kept me on pins and needles; but I let that pass, because from
week to week I expected him to go. I've never liked him and he has never
liked me. That's why you like him--because he hates me," said Osmond
with a quick, barely audible tremor in his voice. "I've an ideal of what
my wife should do and should not do. She should not travel across Europe
alone, in defiance of my deepest desire, to sit at the bedside of other
men. Your cousin's nothing to you; he's nothing to us. You smile most
expressively when I talk about US, but I assure you that WE, WE, Mrs.
Osmond, is all I know. I take our marriage seriously; you appear to
have found a way of not doing so. I'm not aware that we're divorced or
separated; for me we're indissolubly united. You are nearer to me than
any human creature, and I'm nearer to you. It may be a disagreeable
proximity; it's one, at any rate, of our own deliberate making. You
don't like to be reminded of that, I know; but I'm perfectly willing,
because--because--" And he paused a moment, looking as if he had
something to say which would be very much to the point. "Because I think
we should accept the consequences of our actions, and what I value most
in life is the honour of a thing!"

He spoke gravely and almost gently; the accent of sarcasm had dropped
out of his tone. It had a gravity which checked his wife's quick
emotion; the resolution with which she had entered the room found itself
caught in a mesh of fine threads. His last words were not a command,
they constituted a kind of appeal; and, though she felt that any
expression of respect on his part could only be a refinement of egotism,
they represented something transcendent and absolute, like the sign
of the cross or the flag of one's country. He spoke in the name of
something sacred and precious--the observance of a magnificent form.
They were as perfectly apart in feeling as two disillusioned lovers
had ever been; but they had never yet separated in act. Isabel had not
changed; her old passion for justice still abode within her; and now, in
the very thick of her sense of her husband's blasphemous sophistry, it
began to throb to a tune which for a moment promised him the victory. It
came over her that in his wish to preserve appearances he was after
all sincere, and that this, as far as it went, was a merit. Ten minutes
before she had felt all the joy of irreflective action--a joy to which
she had so long been a stranger; but action had been suddenly changed to
slow renunciation, transformed by the blight of Osmond's touch. If she
must renounce, however, she would let him know she was a victim rather
than a dupe. "I know you're a master of the art of mockery," she said.
"How can you speak of an indissoluble union--how can you speak of
your being contented? Where's our union when you accuse me of falsity?
Where's your contentment when you have nothing but hideous suspicion in
your heart?"

"It is in our living decently together, in spite of such drawbacks."

"We don't live decently together!" cried Isabel.

"Indeed we don't if you go to England."

"That's very little; that's nothing. I might do much more."

He raised his eyebrows and even his shoulders a little: he had lived
long enough in Italy to catch this trick. "Ah, if you've come to
threaten me I prefer my drawing." And he walked back to his table, where
he took up the sheet of paper on which he had been working and stood
studying it.

"I suppose that if I go you'll not expect me to come back," said Isabel.

He turned quickly round, and she could see this movement at least was
not designed. He looked at her a little, and then, "Are you out of your
mind?" he enquired.

"How can it be anything but a rupture?" she went on; "especially if all
you say is true?" She was unable to see how it could be anything but a
rupture; she sincerely wished to know what else it might be.

He sat down before his table. "I really can't argue with you on the
hypothesis of your defying me," he said. And he took up one of his
little brushes again.

She lingered but a moment longer; long enough to embrace with her eye
his whole deliberately indifferent yet most expressive figure; after
which she quickly left the room. Her faculties, her energy, her passion,
were all dispersed again; she felt as if a cold, dark mist had suddenly
encompassed her. Osmond possessed in a supreme degree the art of
eliciting any weakness. On her way back to her room she found the
Countess Gemini standing in the open doorway of a little parlour in
which a small collection of heterogeneous books had been arranged.
The Countess had an open volume in her hand; she appeared to have been
glancing down a page which failed to strike her as interesting. At the
sound of Isabel's step she raised her head.

"Ah my dear," she said, "you, who are so literary, do tell me some
amusing book to read! Everything here's of a dreariness--! Do you think
this would do me any good?"

Isabel glanced at the title of the volume she held out, but without
reading or understanding it. "I'm afraid I can't advise you. I've had
bad news. My cousin, Ralph Touchett, is dying."

The Countess threw down her book. "Ah, he was so simpatico. I'm awfully
sorry for you."

"You would be sorrier still if you knew."

"What is there to know? You look very badly," the Countess added. "You
must have been with Osmond."

Half an hour before Isabel would have listened very coldly to an
intimation that she should ever feel a desire for the sympathy of
her sister-in-law, and there can be no better proof of her present
embarrassment than the fact that she almost clutched at this lady's
fluttering attention. "I've been with Osmond," she said, while the
Countess's bright eyes glittered at her.

"I'm sure then he has been odious!" the Countess cried. "Did he say he
was glad poor Mr. Touchett's dying?"

"He said it's impossible I should go to England."

The Countess's mind, when her interests were concerned, was agile; she
already foresaw the extinction of any further brightness in her visit to
Rome. Ralph Touchett would die, Isabel would go into mourning, and then
there would be no more dinner-parties. Such a prospect produced for
a moment in her countenance an expressive grimace; but this rapid,
picturesque play of feature was her only tribute to disappointment.
After all, she reflected, the game was almost played out; she had
already overstayed her invitation. And then she cared enough for
Isabel's trouble to forget her own, and she saw that Isabel's trouble
was deep.

It seemed deeper than the mere death of a cousin, and the Countess had
no hesitation in connecting her exasperating brother with the expression
of her sister-in-law's eyes. Her heart beat with an almost joyous
expectation, for if she had wished to see Osmond overtopped the
conditions looked favourable now. Of course if Isabel should go to
England she herself would immediately leave Palazzo Roccanera; nothing
would induce her to remain there with Osmond. Nevertheless she felt
an immense desire to hear that Isabel would go to England. "Nothing's
impossible for you, my dear," she said caressingly. "Why else are you
rich and clever and good?"

"Why indeed? I feel stupidly weak."

"Why does Osmond say it's impossible?" the Countess asked in a tone
which sufficiently declared that she couldn't imagine.

From the moment she thus began to question her, however, Isabel drew
back; she disengaged her hand, which the Countess had affectionately
taken. But she answered this enquiry with frank bitterness. "Because
we're so happy together that we can't separate even for a fortnight."

"Ah," cried the Countess while Isabel turned away, "when I want to make
a journey my husband simply tells me I can have no money!"

Isabel went to her room, where she walked up and down for an hour. It
may appear to some readers that she gave herself much trouble, and it is
certain that for a woman of a high spirit she had allowed herself easily
to be arrested. It seemed to her that only now she fully measured the
great undertaking of matrimony. Marriage meant that in such a case as
this, when one had to choose, one chose as a matter of course for one's
husband. "I'm afraid--yes, I'm afraid," she said to herself more than
once, stopping short in her walk. But what she was afraid of was not her
husband--his displeasure, his hatred, his revenge; it was not even her
own later judgement of her conduct a consideration which had often held
her in check; it was simply the violence there would be in going when
Osmond wished her to remain. A gulf of difference had opened between
them, but nevertheless it was his desire that she should stay, it was
a horror to him that she should go. She knew the nervous fineness with
which he could feel an objection. What he thought of her she knew, what
he was capable of saying to her she had felt; yet they were married, for
all that, and marriage meant that a woman should cleave to the man with
whom, uttering tremendous vows, she had stood at the altar. She sank
down on her sofa at last and buried her head in a pile of cushions.

When she raised her head again the Countess Gemini hovered before her.
She had come in all unperceived; she had a strange smile on her thin
lips and her whole face had grown in an hour a shining intimation. She
lived assuredly, it might be said, at the window of her spirit, but now
she was leaning far out. "I knocked," she began, "but you didn't
answer me. So I ventured in. I've been looking at you for the past five
minutes. You're very unhappy."

"Yes; but I don't think you can comfort me."

"Will you give me leave to try?" And the Countess sat down on the
sofa beside her. She continued to smile, and there was something
communicative and exultant in her expression. She appeared to have
a deal to say, and it occurred to Isabel for the first time that her
sister-in-law might say something really human. She made play with her
glittering eyes, in which there was an unpleasant fascination. "After
all," she soon resumed, "I must tell you, to begin with, that I don't
understand your state of mind. You seem to have so many scruples, so
many reasons, so many ties. When I discovered, ten years ago, that my
husband's dearest wish was to make me miserable--of late he has simply
let me alone--ah, it was a wonderful simplification! My poor Isabel,
you're not simple enough."

"No, I'm not simple enough," said Isabel.

"There's something I want you to know," the Countess declared--"because
I think you ought to know it. Perhaps you do; perhaps you've guessed it.
But if you have, all I can say is that I understand still less why you
shouldn't do as you like."

"What do you wish me to know?" Isabel felt a foreboding that made her
heart beat faster. The Countess was about to justify herself, and this
alone was portentous.

But she was nevertheless disposed to play a little with her subject.
"In your place I should have guessed it ages ago. Have you never really
suspected?"

"I've guessed nothing. What should I have suspected? I don't know what
you mean."

"That's because you've such a beastly pure mind. I never saw a woman
with such a pure mind!" cried the Countess.

Isabel slowly got up. "You're going to tell me something horrible."

"You can call it by whatever name you will!" And the Countess rose
also, while her gathered perversity grew vivid and dreadful. She stood
a moment in a sort of glare of intention and, as seemed to Isabel even
then, of ugliness; after which she said: "My first sister-in-law had no
children."

Isabel stared back at her; the announcement was an anticlimax. "Your
first sister-in-law?"

"I suppose you know at least, if one may mention it, that Osmond has
been married before! I've never spoken to you of his wife; I thought it
mightn't be decent or respectful. But others, less particular, must
have done so. The poor little woman lived hardly three years and died
childless. It wasn't till after her death that Pansy arrived."

Isabel's brow had contracted to a frown; her lips were parted in pale,
vague wonder. She was trying to follow; there seemed so much more to
follow than she could see. "Pansy's not my husband's child then?"

"Your husband's--in perfection! But no one else's husband's. Some one
else's wife's. Ah, my good Isabel," cried the Countess, "with you one
must dot one's i's!"

"I don't understand. Whose wife's?" Isabel asked.

"The wife of a horrid little Swiss who died--how long?--a dozen, more
than fifteen, years ago. He never recognised Miss Pansy, nor, knowing
what he was about, would have anything to say to her; and there was no
reason why he should. Osmond did, and that was better; though he had to
fit on afterwards the whole rigmarole of his own wife's having died in
childbirth, and of his having, in grief and horror, banished the little
girl from his sight for as long as possible before taking her home from
nurse. His wife had really died, you know, of quite another matter and
in quite another place: in the Piedmontese mountains, where they had
gone, one August, because her health appeared to require the air, but
where she was suddenly taken worse--fatally ill. The story passed,
sufficiently; it was covered by the appearances so long as nobody
heeded, as nobody cared to look into it. But of course I knew--without
researches," the Countess lucidly proceeded; "as also, you'll
understand, without a word said between us--I mean between Osmond and
me. Don't you see him looking at me, in silence, that way, to settle
it?--that is to settle ME if I should say anything. I said nothing,
right or left--never a word to a creature, if you can believe that of
me: on my honour, my dear, I speak of the thing to you now, after all
this time, as I've never, never spoken. It was to be enough for me,
from the first, that the child was my niece--from the moment she was
my brother's daughter. As for her veritable mother--!" But with this
Pansy's wonderful aunt dropped--as, involuntarily, from the impression
of her sister-in-law's face, out of which more eyes might have seemed to
look at her than she had ever had to meet.

She had spoken no name, yet Isabel could but check, on her own lips, an
echo of the unspoken. She sank to her seat again, hanging her head.
"Why have you told me this?" she asked in a voice the Countess hardly
recognised.

"Because I've been so bored with your not knowing. I've been bored,
frankly, my dear, with not having told you; as if, stupidly, all this
time I couldn't have managed! Ca me depasse, if you don't mind my saying
so, the things, all round you, that you've appeared to succeed in not
knowing. It's a sort of assistance--aid to innocent ignorance--that
I've always been a bad hand at rendering; and in this connexion, that
of keeping quiet for my brother, my virtue has at any rate finally
found itself exhausted. It's not a black lie, moreover, you know," the
Countess inimitably added. "The facts are exactly what I tell you."

"I had no idea," said Isabel presently; and looked up at her in a manner
that doubtless matched the apparent witlessness of this confession.

"So I believed--though it was hard to believe. Had it never occurred to
you that he was for six or seven years her lover?"

"I don't know. Things HAVE occurred to me, and perhaps that was what
they all meant."

"She has been wonderfully clever, she has been magnificent, about
Pansy!" the Countess, before all this view of it, cried.

"Oh, no idea, for me," Isabel went on, "ever DEFINITELY took that form."
She appeared to be making out to herself what had been and what hadn't.
"And as it is--I don't understand."

She spoke as one troubled and puzzled, yet the poor Countess seemed to
have seen her revelation fall below its possibilities of effect. She
had expected to kindle some responsive blaze, but had barely extracted a
spark. Isabel showed as scarce more impressed than she might have
been, as a young woman of approved imagination, with some fine sinister
passage of public history. "Don't you recognise how the child could
never pass for HER husband's?--that is with M. Merle himself," her
companion resumed. "They had been separated too long for that, and he
had gone to some far country--I think to South America. If she had ever
had children--which I'm not sure of--she had lost them. The conditions
happened to make it workable, under stress (I mean at so awkward a
pinch), that Osmond should acknowledge the little girl. His wife was
dead--very true; but she had not been dead too long to put a certain
accommodation of dates out of the question--from the moment, I mean,
that suspicion wasn't started; which was what they had to take care of.
What was more natural than that poor Mrs. Osmond, at a distance and
for a world not troubling about trifles, should have left behind her,
poverina, the pledge of her brief happiness that had cost her her life?
With the aid of a change of residence--Osmond had been living with her
at Naples at the time of their stay in the Alps, and he in due course
left it for ever--the whole history was successfully set going. My poor
sister-in-law, in her grave, couldn't help herself, and the real mother,
to save HER skin, renounced all visible property in the child."

"Ah, poor, poor woman!" cried Isabel, who herewith burst into tears. It
was a long time since she had shed any; she had suffered a high reaction
from weeping. But now they flowed with an abundance in which the
Countess Gemini found only another discomfiture.

"It's very kind of you to pity her!" she discordantly laughed. "Yes
indeed, you have a way of your own--!"

"He must have been false to his wife--and so very soon!" said Isabel
with a sudden check.

"That's all that's wanting--that you should take up her cause!" the
Countess went on. "I quite agree with you, however, that it was much too
soon."

"But to me, to me--?" And Isabel hesitated as if she had not heard; as
if her question--though it was sufficiently there in her eyes--were all
for herself.

"To you he has been faithful? Well, it depends, my dear, on what you
call faithful. When he married you he was no longer the lover of another
woman--SUCH a lover as he had been, cara mia, between their risks and
their precautions, while the thing lasted! That state of affairs had
passed away; the lady had repented, or at all events, for reasons of her
own, drawn back: she had always had, too, a worship of appearances
so intense that even Osmond himself had got bored with it. You may
therefore imagine what it was--when he couldn't patch it on conveniently
to ANY of those he goes in for! But the whole past was between them."

"Yes," Isabel mechanically echoed, "the whole past is between them."

"Ah, this later past is nothing. But for six or seven years, as I say,
they had kept it up."

She was silent a little. "Why then did she want him to marry me?"

"Ah my dear, that's her superiority! Because you had money; and because
she believed you would be good to Pansy."

"Poor woman--and Pansy who doesn't like her!" cried Isabel.

"That's the reason she wanted some one whom Pansy would like. She knows
it; she knows everything."

"Will she know that you've told me this?"

"That will depend upon whether you tell her. She's prepared for it, and
do you know what she counts upon for her defence? On your believing that
I lie. Perhaps you do; don't make yourself uncomfortable to hide it.
Only, as it happens this time, I don't. I've told plenty of little
idiotic fibs, but they've never hurt any one but myself."

Isabel sat staring at her companion's story as at a bale of fantastic
wares some strolling gypsy might have unpacked on the carpet at her
feet. "Why did Osmond never marry her?" she finally asked.

"Because she had no money." The Countess had an answer for everything,
and if she lied she lied well. "No one knows, no one has ever known,
what she lives on, or how she has got all those beautiful things. I
don't believe Osmond himself knows. Besides, she wouldn't have married
him."

"How can she have loved him then?"

"She doesn't love him in that way. She did at first, and then, I
suppose, she would have married him; but at that time her husband was
living. By the time M. Merle had rejoined--I won't say his ancestors,
because he never had any--her relations with Osmond had changed, and she
had grown more ambitious. Besides, she has never had, about him,"
the Countess went on, leaving Isabel to wince for it so tragically
afterwards--"she HAD never had, what you might call any illusions of
INTELLIGENCE. She hoped she might marry a great man; that has always
been her idea. She has waited and watched and plotted and prayed; but
she has never succeeded. I don't call Madame Merle a success, you know.
I don't know what she may accomplish yet, but at present she has very
little to show. The only tangible result she has ever achieved--except,
of course, getting to know every one and staying with them free of
expense--has been her bringing you and Osmond together. Oh, she did
that, my dear; you needn't look as if you doubted it. I've watched
them for years; I know everything--everything. I'm thought a great
scatterbrain, but I've had enough application of mind to follow up those
two. She hates me, and her way of showing it is to pretend to be for
ever defending me. When people say I've had fifteen lovers she looks
horrified and declares that quite half of them were never proved. She
has been afraid of me for years, and she has taken great comfort in the
vile, false things people have said about me. She has been afraid I'd
expose her, and she threatened me one day when Osmond began to pay his
court to you. It was at his house in Florence; do you remember that
afternoon when she brought you there and we had tea in the garden? She
let me know then that if I should tell tales two could play at that
game. She pretends there's a good deal more to tell about me than about
her. It would be an interesting comparison! I don't care a fig what she
may say, simply because I know YOU don't care a fig. You can't trouble
your head about me less than you do already. So she may take her revenge
as she chooses; I don't think she'll frighten you very much. Her great
idea has been to be tremendously irreproachable--a kind of full-blown
lily--the incarnation of propriety. She has always worshipped that god.
There should be no scandal about Caesar's wife, you know; and, as I say,
she has always hoped to marry Caesar. That was one reason she wouldn't
marry Osmond; the fear that on seeing her with Pansy people would put
things together--would even see a resemblance. She has had a terror
lest the mother should betray herself. She has been awfully careful; the
mother has never done so."

"Yes, yes, the mother has done so," said Isabel, who had listened to
all this with a face more and more wan. "She betrayed herself to me the
other day, though I didn't recognise her. There appeared to have been a
chance of Pansy's making a great marriage, and in her disappointment at
its not coming off she almost dropped the mask."

"Ah, that's where she'd dish herself!" cried the Countess. "She has
failed so dreadfully that she's determined her daughter shall make it
up."

Isabel started at the words "her daughter," which her guest threw off
so familiarly. "It seems very wonderful," she murmured; and in this
bewildering impression she had almost lost her sense of being personally
touched by the story.

"Now don't go and turn against the poor innocent child!" the Countess
went on. "She's very nice, in spite of her deplorable origin. I myself
have liked Pansy; not, naturally, because she was hers, but because she
had become yours."

"Yes, she has become mine. And how the poor woman must have suffered at
seeing me--!" Isabel exclaimed while she flushed at the thought.

"I don't believe she has suffered; on the contrary, she has enjoyed.
Osmond's marriage has given his daughter a great little lift. Before
that she lived in a hole. And do you know what the mother thought? That
you might take such a fancy to the child that you'd do something for
her. Osmond of course could never give her a portion. Osmond was really
extremely poor; but of course you know all about that. Ah, my dear,"
cried the Countess, "why did you ever inherit money?" She stopped a
moment as if she saw something singular in Isabel's face. "Don't tell
me now that you'll give her a dot. You're capable of that, but I would
refuse to believe it. Don't try to be too good. Be a little easy and
natural and nasty; feel a little wicked, for the comfort of it, once in
your life!"

"It's very strange. I suppose I ought to know, but I'm sorry," Isabel
said. "I'm much obliged to you."

"Yes, you seem to be!" cried the Countess with a mocking laugh.
"Perhaps you are--perhaps you're not. You don't take it as I should have
thought."

"How should I take it?" Isabel asked.

"Well, I should say as a woman who has been made use of." Isabel made
no answer to this; she only listened, and the Countess went on. "They've
always been bound to each other; they remained so even after she broke
off--or HE did. But he has always been more for her than she has been
for him. When their little carnival was over they made a bargain that
each should give the other complete liberty, but that each should also
do everything possible to help the other on. You may ask me how I know
such a thing as that. I know it by the way they've behaved. Now see how
much better women are than men! She has found a wife for Osmond, but
Osmond has never lifted a little finger for HER. She has worked for him,
plotted for him, suffered for him; she has even more than once found
money for him; and the end of it is that he's tired of her. She's an old
habit; there are moments when he needs her, but on the whole he wouldn't
miss her if she were removed. And, what's more, today she knows it. So
you needn't be jealous!" the Countess added humorously.

Isabel rose from her sofa again; she felt bruised and scant of breath;
her head was humming with new knowledge. "I'm much obliged to you," she
repeated. And then she added abruptly, in quite a different tone: "How
do you know all this?"

This enquiry appeared to ruffle the Countess more than Isabel's
expression of gratitude pleased her. She gave her companion a bold
stare, with which, "Let us assume that I've invented it!" she cried. She
too, however, suddenly changed her tone and, laying her hand on Isabel's
arm, said with the penetration of her sharp bright smile: "Now will you
give up your journey?"

Isabel started a little; she turned away. But she felt weak and in a
moment had to lay her arm upon the mantel-shelf for support. She stood a
minute so, and then upon her arm she dropped her dizzy head, with closed
eyes and pale lips.

"I've done wrong to speak--I've made you ill!" the Countess cried.

"Ah, I must see Ralph!" Isabel wailed; not in resentment, not in
the quick passion her companion had looked for; but in a tone of
far-reaching, infinite sadness.


