
I have already had reason to say that Isabel knew her husband to be
displeased by the continuance of Ralph's visit to Rome. That knowledge
was very present to her as she went to her cousin's hotel the day
after she had invited Lord Warburton to give a tangible proof of his
sincerity; and at this moment, as at others, she had a sufficient
perception of the sources of Osmond's opposition. He wished her to have
no freedom of mind, and he knew perfectly well that Ralph was an apostle
of freedom. It was just because he was this, Isabel said to herself,
that it was a refreshment to go and see him. It will be perceived that
she partook of this refreshment in spite of her husband's aversion to
it, that is partook of it, as she flattered herself, discreetly. She had
not as yet undertaken to act in direct opposition to his wishes; he was
her appointed and inscribed master; she gazed at moments with a sort
of incredulous blankness at this fact. It weighed upon her imagination,
however; constantly present to her mind were all the traditionary
decencies and sanctities of marriage. The idea of violating them filled
her with shame as well as with dread, for on giving herself away she had
lost sight of this contingency in the perfect belief that her husband's
intentions were as generous as her own. She seemed to see, none the
less, the rapid approach of the day when she should have to take back
something she had solemnly bestown. Such a ceremony would be odious and
monstrous; she tried to shut her eyes to it meanwhile. Osmond would do
nothing to help it by beginning first; he would put that burden upon her
to the end. He had not yet formally forbidden her to call upon Ralph;
but she felt sure that unless Ralph should very soon depart this
prohibition would come. How could poor Ralph depart? The weather as yet
made it impossible. She could perfectly understand her husband's wish
for the event; she didn't, to be just, see how he COULD like her to be
with her cousin. Ralph never said a word against him, but Osmond's
sore, mute protest was none the less founded. If he should positively
interpose, if he should put forth his authority, she would have to
decide, and that wouldn't be easy. The prospect made her heart beat and
her cheeks burn, as I say, in advance; there were moments when, in her
wish to avoid an open rupture, she found herself wishing Ralph would
start even at a risk. And it was of no use that, when catching herself
in this state of mind, she called herself a feeble spirit, a coward.
It was not that she loved Ralph less, but that almost anything seemed
preferable to repudiating the most serious act--the single sacred
act--of her life. That appeared to make the whole future hideous.
To break with Osmond once would be to break for ever; any open
acknowledgement of irreconcilable needs would be an admission that
their whole attempt had proved a failure. For them there could be
no condonement, no compromise, no easy forgetfulness, no formal
readjustment. They had attempted only one thing, but that one thing was
to have been exquisite. Once they missed it nothing else would do; there
was no conceivable substitute for that success. For the moment, Isabel
went to the Hotel de Paris as often as she thought well; the measure
of propriety was in the canon of taste, and there couldn't have been
a better proof that morality was, so to speak, a matter of earnest
appreciation. Isabel's application of that measure had been particularly
free to-day, for in addition to the general truth that she couldn't
leave Ralph to die alone she had something important to ask of him. This
indeed was Gilbert's business as well as her own.

She came very soon to what she wished to speak of. "I want you to answer
me a question. It's about Lord Warburton."

"I think I guess your question," Ralph answered from his arm-chair, out
of which his thin legs protruded at greater length than ever.

"Very possibly you guess it. Please then answer it."

"Oh, I don't say I can do that."

"You're intimate with him," she said; "you've a great deal of
observation of him."

"Very true. But think how he must dissimulate!"

"Why should he dissimulate? That's not his nature."

"Ah, you must remember that the circumstances are peculiar," said Ralph
with an air of private amusement.

"To a certain extent--yes. But is he really in love?"

"Very much, I think. I can make that out."

"Ah!" said Isabel with a certain dryness.

Ralph looked at her as if his mild hilarity had been touched with
mystification. "You say that as if you were disappointed."

Isabel got up, slowly smoothing her gloves and eyeing them thoughtfully.
"It's after all no business of mine."

"You're very philosophic," said her cousin. And then in a moment: "May I
enquire what you're talking about?"

Isabel stared. "I thought you knew. Lord Warburton tells me he wants,
of all things in the world, to marry Pansy. I've told you that before,
without eliciting a comment from you. You might risk one this morning, I
think. Is it your belief that he really cares for her?"

"Ah, for Pansy, no!" cried Ralph very positively.

"But you said just now he did."

Ralph waited a moment. "That he cared for you, Mrs. Osmond."

Isabel shook her head gravely. "That's nonsense, you know."

"Of course it is. But the nonsense is Warburton's, not mine."

"That would be very tiresome." She spoke, as she flattered herself, with
much subtlety.

"I ought to tell you indeed," Ralph went on, "that to me he has denied
it."

"It's very good of you to talk about it together! Has he also told you
that he's in love with Pansy?"

"He has spoken very well of her--very properly. He has let me know, of
course, that he thinks she would do very well at Lockleigh."

"Does he really think it?"

"Ah, what Warburton really thinks--!" said Ralph.

Isabel fell to smoothing her gloves again; they were long, loose gloves
on which she could freely expend herself. Soon, however, she looked
up, and then, "Ah, Ralph, you give me no help!" she cried abruptly and
passionately.

It was the first time she had alluded to the need for help, and the
words shook her cousin with their violence. He gave a long murmur of
relief, of pity, of tenderness; it seemed to him that at last the gulf
between them had been bridged. It was this that made him exclaim in a
moment: "How unhappy you must be!"

He had no sooner spoken than she recovered her self-possession, and the
first use she made of it was to pretend she had not heard him. "When I
talk of your helping me I talk great nonsense," she said with a quick
smile. "The idea of my troubling you with my domestic embarrassments!
The matter's very simple; Lord Warburton must get on by himself. I can't
undertake to see him through."

"He ought to succeed easily," said Ralph.

Isabel debated. "Yes--but he has not always succeeded."

"Very true. You know, however, how that always surprised me. Is Miss
Osmond capable of giving us a surprise?"

"It will come from him, rather. I seem to see that after all he'll let
the matter drop."

"He'll do nothing dishonourable," said Ralph.

"I'm very sure of that. Nothing can be more honourable than for him to
leave the poor child alone. She cares for another person, and it's cruel
to attempt to bribe her by magnificent offers to give him up."

"Cruel to the other person perhaps--the one she cares for. But Warburton
isn't obliged to mind that."

"No, cruel to her," said Isabel. "She would be very unhappy if she were
to allow herself to be persuaded to desert poor Mr. Rosier. That idea
seems to amuse you; of course you're not in love with him. He has the
merit--for Pansy--of being in love with Pansy. She can see at a glance
that Lord Warburton isn't."

"He'd be very good to her," said Ralph.

"He has been good to her already. Fortunately, however, he has not said
a word to disturb her. He could come and bid her good-bye to-morrow with
perfect propriety."

"How would your husband like that?"

"Not at all; and he may be right in not liking it. Only he must obtain
satisfaction himself."

"Has he commissioned you to obtain it?" Ralph ventured to ask.

"It was natural that as an old friend of Lord Warburton's--an older
friend, that is, than Gilbert--I should take an interest in his
intentions."

"Take an interest in his renouncing them, you mean?"

Isabel hesitated, frowning a little. "Let me understand. Are you
pleading his cause?"

"Not in the least. I'm very glad he shouldn't become your stepdaughter's
husband. It makes such a very queer relation to you!" said Ralph,
smiling. "But I'm rather nervous lest your husband should think you
haven't pushed him enough."

Isabel found herself able to smile as well as he. "He knows me well
enough not to have expected me to push. He himself has no intention
of pushing, I presume. I'm not afraid I shall not be able to justify
myself!" she said lightly.

Her mask had dropped for an instant, but she had put it on again, to
Ralph's infinite disappointment. He had caught a glimpse of her natural
face and he wished immensely to look into it. He had an almost savage
desire to hear her complain of her husband--hear her say that she should
be held accountable for Lord Warburton's defection. Ralph was certain
that this was her situation; he knew by instinct, in advance, the form
that in such an event Osmond's displeasure would take. It could only
take the meanest and cruellest. He would have liked to warn Isabel of
it--to let her see at least how he judged for her and how he knew. It
little mattered that Isabel would know much better; it was for his own
satisfaction more than for hers that he longed to show her he was not
deceived. He tried and tried again to make her betray Osmond; he felt
cold-blooded, cruel, dishonourable almost, in doing so. But it scarcely
mattered, for he only failed. What had she come for then, and why did
she seem almost to offer him a chance to violate their tacit convention?
Why did she ask him his advice if she gave him no liberty to answer her?
How could they talk of her domestic embarrassments, as it pleased her
humorously to designate them, if the principal factor was not to be
mentioned? These contradictions were themselves but an indication of her
trouble, and her cry for help, just before, was the only thing he was
bound to consider. "You'll be decidedly at variance, all the same," he
said in a moment. And as she answered nothing, looking as if she scarce
understood, "You'll find yourselves thinking very differently," he
continued.

"That may easily happen, among the most united couples!" She took up her
parasol; he saw she was nervous, afraid of what he might say. "It's a
matter we can hardly quarrel about, however," she added; "for almost all
the interest is on his side. That's very natural. Pansy's after all his
daughter--not mine." And she put out her hand to wish him goodbye.

Ralph took an inward resolution that she shouldn't leave him without
his letting her know that he knew everything: it seemed too great an
opportunity to lose. "Do you know what his interest will make him say?"
he asked as he took her hand. She shook her head, rather dryly--not
discouragingly--and he went on. "It will make him say that your want
of zeal is owing to jealousy." He stopped a moment; her face made him
afraid.

"To jealousy?"

"To jealousy of his daughter."

She blushed red and threw back her head. "You're not kind," she said in
a voice that he had never heard on her lips.

"Be frank with me and you'll see," he answered.

But she made no reply; she only pulled her hand out of his own, which he
tried still to hold, and rapidly withdrew from the room. She made up her
mind to speak to Pansy, and she took an occasion on the same day, going
to the girl's room before dinner. Pansy was already dressed; she was
always in advance of the time: it seemed to illustrate her pretty
patience and the graceful stillness with which she could sit and wait.
At present she was seated, in her fresh array, before the bed-room
fire; she had blown out her candles on the completion of her toilet, in
accordance with the economical habits in which she had been brought up
and which she was now more careful than ever to observe; so that
the room was lighted only by a couple of logs. The rooms in Palazzo
Roccanera were as spacious as they were numerous, and Pansy's virginal
bower was an immense chamber with a dark, heavily-timbered ceiling.
Its diminutive mistress, in the midst of it, appeared but a speck of
humanity, and as she got up, with quick deference, to welcome Isabel,
the latter was more than ever struck with her shy sincerity. Isabel
had a difficult task--the only thing was to perform it as simply as
possible. She felt bitter and angry, but she warned herself against
betraying this heat. She was afraid even of looking too grave, or at
least too stern; she was afraid of causing alarm. But Pansy seemed to
have guessed she had come more or less as a confessor; for after she
had moved the chair in which she had been sitting a little nearer to the
fire and Isabel had taken her place in it, she kneeled down on a
cushion in front of her, looking up and resting her clasped hands on her
stepmother's knees. What Isabel wished to do was to hear from her own
lips that her mind was not occupied with Lord Warburton; but if she
desired the assurance she felt herself by no means at liberty to provoke
it. The girl's father would have qualified this as rank treachery; and
indeed Isabel knew that if Pansy should display the smallest germ of
a disposition to encourage Lord Warburton her own duty was to hold her
tongue. It was difficult to interrogate without appearing to suggest;
Pansy's supreme simplicity, an innocence even more complete than Isabel
had yet judged it, gave to the most tentative enquiry something of the
effect of an admonition. As she knelt there in the vague firelight, with
her pretty dress dimly shining, her hands folded half in appeal and half
in submission, her soft eyes, raised and fixed, full of the seriousness
of the situation, she looked to Isabel like a childish martyr decked
out for sacrifice and scarcely presuming even to hope to avert it. When
Isabel said to her that she had never yet spoken to her of what might
have been going on in relation to her getting married, but that her
silence had not been indifference or ignorance, had only been the desire
to leave her at liberty, Pansy bent forward, raised her face nearer
and nearer, and with a little murmur which evidently expressed a deep
longing, answered that she had greatly wished her to speak and that she
begged her to advise her now.

"It's difficult for me to advise you," Isabel returned. "I don't know
how I can undertake that. That's for your father; you must get his
advice and, above all, you must act on it."

At this Pansy dropped her eyes; for a moment she said nothing. "I think
I should like your advice better than papa's," she presently remarked.

"That's not as it should be," said Isabel coldly. "I love you very much,
but your father loves you better."

"It isn't because you love me--it's because you're a lady," Pansy
answered with the air of saying something very reasonable. "A lady can
advise a young girl better than a man."

"I advise you then to pay the greatest respect to your father's wishes."

"Ah yes," said the child eagerly, "I must do that."

"But if I speak to you now about your getting married it's not for your
own sake, it's for mine," Isabel went on. "If I try to learn from you
what you expect, what you desire, it's only that I may act accordingly."

Pansy stared, and then very quickly, "Will you do everything I want?"
she asked.

"Before I say yes I must know what such things are."

Pansy presently told her that the only thing she wanted in life was to
marry Mr. Rosier. He had asked her and she had told him she would do so
if her papa would allow it. Now her papa wouldn't allow it.

"Very well then, it's impossible," Isabel pronounced.

"Yes, it's impossible," said Pansy without a sigh and with the same
extreme attention in her clear little face.

"You must think of something else then," Isabel went on; but Pansy,
sighing at this, told her that she had attempted that feat without the
least success.

"You think of those who think of you," she said with a faint smile. "I
know Mr. Rosier thinks of me."

"He ought not to," said Isabel loftily. "Your father has expressly
requested he shouldn't."

"He can't help it, because he knows I think of HIM."

"You shouldn't think of him. There's some excuse for him, perhaps; but
there's none for you."

"I wish you would try to find one," the girl exclaimed as if she were
praying to the Madonna.

"I should be very sorry to attempt it," said the Madonna with unusual
frigidity. "If you knew some one else was thinking of you, would you
think of him?"

"No one can think of me as Mr. Rosier does; no one has the right."

"Ah, but I don't admit Mr. Rosier's right!" Isabel hypocritically cried.

Pansy only gazed at her, evidently much puzzled; and Isabel, taking
advantage of it, began to represent to her the wretched consequences of
disobeying her father. At this Pansy stopped her with the assurance that
she would never disobey him, would never marry without his consent. And
she announced, in the serenest, simplest tone, that, though she might
never marry Mr. Rosier, she would never cease to think of him. She
appeared to have accepted the idea of eternal singleness; but Isabel of
course was free to reflect that she had no conception of its meaning.
She was perfectly sincere; she was prepared to give up her lover. This
might seem an important step toward taking another, but for Pansy,
evidently, it failed to lead in that direction. She felt no bitterness
toward her father; there was no bitterness in her heart; there was only
the sweetness of fidelity to Edward Rosier, and a strange, exquisite
intimation that she could prove it better by remaining single than even
by marrying him.

"Your father would like you to make a better marriage," said Isabel.
"Mr. Rosier's fortune is not at all large."

"How do you mean better--if that would be good enough? And I have myself
so little money; why should I look for a fortune?"

"Your having so little is a reason for looking for more." With which
Isabel was grateful for the dimness of the room; she felt as if her face
were hideously insincere. It was what she was doing for Osmond; it was
what one had to do for Osmond! Pansy's solemn eyes, fixed on her own,
almost embarrassed her; she was ashamed to think she had made so light
of the girl's preference.

"What should you like me to do?" her companion softly demanded.

The question was a terrible one, and Isabel took refuge in timorous
vagueness. "To remember all the pleasure it's in your power to give your
father."

"To marry some one else, you mean--if he should ask me?"

For a moment Isabel's answer caused itself to be waited for; then she
heard herself utter it in the stillness that Pansy's attention seemed to
make. "Yes--to marry some one else."

The child's eyes grew more penetrating; Isabel believed she was doubting
her sincerity, and the impression took force from her slowly getting
up from her cushion. She stood there a moment with her small hands
unclasped and then quavered out: "Well, I hope no one will ask me!"

"There has been a question of that. Some one else would have been ready
to ask you."

"I don't think he can have been ready," said Pansy.

"It would appear so if he had been sure he'd succeed."

"If he had been sure? Then he wasn't ready!"

Isabel thought this rather sharp; she also got up and stood a moment
looking into the fire. "Lord Warburton has shown you great attention,"
she resumed; "of course you know it's of him I speak." She found
herself, against her expectation, almost placed in the position of
justifying herself; which led her to introduce this nobleman more
crudely than she had intended.

"He has been very kind to me, and I like him very much. But if you mean
that he'll propose for me I think you're mistaken."

"Perhaps I am. But your father would like it extremely."

Pansy shook her head with a little wise smile. "Lord Warburton won't
propose simply to please papa."

"Your father would like you to encourage him," Isabel went on
mechanically.

"How can I encourage him?"

"I don't know. Your father must tell you that."

Pansy said nothing for a moment; she only continued to smile as if
she were in possession of a bright assurance. "There's no danger--no
danger!" she declared at last.

There was a conviction in the way she said this, and a felicity in her
believing it, which conduced to Isabel's awkwardness. She felt accused
of dishonesty, and the idea was disgusting. To repair her self-respect
she was on the point of saying that Lord Warburton had let her know that
there was a danger. But she didn't; she only said--in her embarrassment
rather wide of the mark--that he surely had been most kind, most
friendly.

"Yes, he has been very kind," Pansy answered. "That's what I like him
for."

"Why then is the difficulty so great?"

"I've always felt sure of his knowing that I don't want--what did you
say I should do?--to encourage him. He knows I don't want to marry,
and he wants me to know that he therefore won't trouble me. That's the
meaning of his kindness. It's as if he said to me: 'I like you very
much, but if it doesn't please you I'll never say it again.' I
think that's very kind, very noble," Pansy went on with deepening
positiveness. "That is all we've said to each other. And he doesn't care
for me either. Ah no, there's no danger."

Isabel was touched with wonder at the depths of perception of which
this submissive little person was capable; she felt afraid of Pansy's
wisdom--began almost to retreat before it. "You must tell your father
that," she remarked reservedly.

"I think I'd rather not," Pansy unreservedly answered.

"You oughtn't to let him have false hopes."

"Perhaps not; but it will be good for me that he should. So long as he
believes that Lord Warburton intends anything of the kind you say, papa
won't propose any one else. And that will be an advantage for me," said
the child very lucidly.

There was something brilliant in her lucidity, and it made her companion
draw a long breath. It relieved this friend of a heavy responsibility.
Pansy had a sufficient illumination of her own, and Isabel felt that
she herself just now had no light to spare from her small stock.
Nevertheless it still clung to her that she must be loyal to Osmond,
that she was on her honour in dealing with his daughter. Under the
influence of this sentiment she threw out another suggestion before she
retired--a suggestion with which it seemed to her that she should have
done her utmost.

"Your father takes for granted at least that you would like to marry a
nobleman."

Pansy stood in the open doorway; she had drawn back the curtain for
Isabel to pass. "I think Mr. Rosier looks like one!" she remarked very
gravely.



Lord Warburton was not seen in Mrs. Osmond's drawing-room for several
days, and Isabel couldn't fail to observe that her husband said nothing
to her about having received a letter from him. She couldn't fail to
observe, either, that Osmond was in a state of expectancy and that,
though it was not agreeable to him to betray it, he thought their
distinguished friend kept him waiting quite too long. At the end of four
days he alluded to his absence.

"What has become of Warburton? What does he mean by treating one like a
tradesman with a bill?"

"I know nothing about him," Isabel said. "I saw him last Friday at the
German ball. He told me then that he meant to write to you."

"He has never written to me."

"So I supposed, from your not having told me."

"He's an odd fish," said Osmond comprehensively. And on Isabel's making
no rejoinder he went on to enquire whether it took his lordship five
days to indite a letter. "Does he form his words with such difficulty?"

"I don't know," Isabel was reduced to replying. "I've never had a letter
from him."

"Never had a letter? I had an idea that you were at one time in intimate
correspondence."

She answered that this had not been the case, and let the conversation
drop. On the morrow, however, coming into the drawing-room late in the
afternoon, her husband took it up again.

"When Lord Warburton told you of his intention of writing what did you
say to him?" he asked.

She just faltered. "I think I told him not to forget it.

"Did you believe there was a danger of that?"

"As you say, he's an odd fish."

"Apparently he has forgotten it," said Osmond. "Be so good as to remind
him."

"Should you like me to write to him?" she demanded.

"I've no objection whatever."

"You expect too much of me."

"Ah yes, I expect a great deal of you."

"I'm afraid I shall disappoint you," said Isabel.

"My expectations have survived a good deal of disappointment."

"Of course I know that. Think how I must have disappointed myself!
If you really wish hands laid on Lord Warburton you must lay them
yourself."

For a couple of minutes Osmond answered nothing; then he said: "That
won't be easy, with you working against me."

Isabel started; she felt herself beginning to tremble. He had a way of
looking at her through half-closed eyelids, as if he were thinking of
her but scarcely saw her, which seemed to her to have a wonderfully
cruel intention. It appeared to recognise her as a disagreeable
necessity of thought, but to ignore her for the time as a presence.
That effect had never been so marked as now. "I think you accuse me of
something very base," she returned.

"I accuse you of not being trustworthy. If he doesn't after all come
forward it will be because you've kept him off. I don't know that it's
base: it is the kind of thing a woman always thinks she may do. I've no
doubt you've the finest ideas about it."

"I told you I would do what I could," she went on.

"Yes, that gained you time."

It came over her, after he had said this, that she had once thought him
beautiful. "How much you must want to make sure of him!" she exclaimed
in a moment.

She had no sooner spoken than she perceived the full reach of her
words, of which she had not been conscious in uttering them. They made
a comparison between Osmond and herself, recalled the fact that she had
once held this coveted treasure in her hand and felt herself rich
enough to let it fall. A momentary exultation took possession of her--a
horrible delight in having wounded him; for his face instantly told her
that none of the force of her exclamation was lost. He expressed nothing
otherwise, however; he only said quickly: "Yes, I want it immensely."

At this moment a servant came in to usher a visitor, and he was followed
the next by Lord Warburton, who received a visible check on seeing
Osmond. He looked rapidly from the master of the house to the mistress;
a movement that seemed to denote a reluctance to interrupt or even a
perception of ominous conditions. Then he advanced, with his English
address, in which a vague shyness seemed to offer itself as an element
of good-breeding; in which the only defect was a difficulty in achieving
transitions. Osmond was embarrassed; he found nothing to say; but Isabel
remarked, promptly enough, that they had been in the act of talking
about their visitor. Upon this her husband added that they hadn't known
what was become of him--they had been afraid he had gone away. "No,"
he explained, smiling and looking at Osmond; "I'm only on the point of
going." And then he mentioned that he found himself suddenly recalled
to England: he should start on the morrow or the day after. "I'm awfully
sorry to leave poor Touchett!" he ended by exclaiming.

For a moment neither of his companions spoke; Osmond only leaned back
in his chair, listening. Isabel didn't look at him; she could only fancy
how he looked. Her eyes were on their visitor's face, where they were
the more free to rest that those of his lordship carefully avoided them.
Yet Isabel was sure that had she met his glance she would have found it
expressive. "You had better take poor Touchett with you," she heard her
husband say, lightly enough, in a moment.

"He had better wait for warmer weather," Lord Warburton answered. "I
shouldn't advise him to travel just now."

He sat there a quarter of an hour, talking as if he might not soon
see them again--unless indeed they should come to England, a course
he strongly recommended. Why shouldn't they come to England in the
autumn?--that struck him as a very happy thought. It would give him such
pleasure to do what he could for them--to have them come and spend a
month with him. Osmond, by his own admission, had been to England but
once; which was an absurd state of things for a man of his leisure and
intelligence. It was just the country for him--he would be sure to get
on well there. Then Lord Warburton asked Isabel if she remembered what
a good time she had had there and if she didn't want to try it again.
Didn't she want to see Gardencourt once more? Gardencourt was really
very good. Touchett didn't take proper care of it, but it was the sort
of place you could hardly spoil by letting it alone. Why didn't they
come and pay Touchett a visit? He surely must have asked them. Hadn't
asked them? What an ill-mannered wretch!--and Lord Warburton promised to
give the master of Gardencourt a piece of his mind. Of course it was a
mere accident; he would be delighted to have them. Spending a month with
Touchett and a month with himself, and seeing all the rest of the
people they must know there, they really wouldn't find it half bad. Lord
Warburton added that it would amuse Miss Osmond as well, who had told
him that she had never been to England and whom he had assured it was a
country she deserved to see. Of course she didn't need to go to England
to be admired--that was her fate everywhere; but she would be an immense
success there, she certainly would, if that was any inducement. He asked
if she were not at home: couldn't he say good-bye? Not that he liked
good-byes--he always funked them. When he left England the other day he
hadn't said good-bye to a two-legged creature. He had had half a mind
to leave Rome without troubling Mrs. Osmond for a final interview. What
could be more dreary than final interviews? One never said the things
one wanted--one remembered them all an hour afterwards. On the other
hand one usually said a lot of things one shouldn't, simply from a sense
that one had to say something. Such a sense was upsetting; it muddled
one's wits. He had it at present, and that was the effect it produced
on him. If Mrs. Osmond didn't think he spoke as he ought she must set
it down to agitation; it was no light thing to part with Mrs. Osmond.
He was really very sorry to be going. He had thought of writing to her
instead of calling--but he would write to her at any rate, to tell her a
lot of things that would be sure to occur to him as soon as he had left
the house. They must think seriously about coming to Lockleigh.

If there was anything awkward in the conditions of his visit or in the
announcement of his departure it failed to come to the surface. Lord
Warburton talked about his agitation; but he showed it in no other
manner, and Isabel saw that since he had determined on a retreat he was
capable of executing it gallantly. She was very glad for him; she liked
him quite well enough to wish him to appear to carry a thing off. He
would do that on any occasion--not from impudence but simply from the
habit of success; and Isabel felt it out of her husband's power to
frustrate this faculty. A complex operation, as she sat there, went on
in her mind. On one side she listened to their visitor; said what was
proper to him; read, more or less, between the lines of what he said
himself; and wondered how he would have spoken if he had found her
alone. On the other she had a perfect consciousness of Osmond's emotion.
She felt almost sorry for him; he was condemned to the sharp pain of
loss without the relief of cursing. He had had a great hope, and now, as
he saw it vanish into smoke, he was obliged to sit and smile and twirl
his thumbs. Not that he troubled himself to smile very brightly; he
treated their friend on the whole to as vacant a countenance as so
clever a man could very well wear. It was indeed a part of Osmond's
cleverness that he could look consummately uncompromised. His present
appearance, however, was not a confession of disappointment; it was
simply a part of Osmond's habitual system, which was to be inexpressive
exactly in proportion as he was really intent. He had been intent on
this prize from the first; but he had never allowed his eagerness to
irradiate his refined face. He had treated his possible son-in-law as he
treated every one--with an air of being interested in him only for his
own advantage, not for any profit to a person already so generally, so
perfectly provided as Gilbert Osmond. He would give no sign now of an
inward rage which was the result of a vanished prospect of gain--not
the faintest nor subtlest. Isabel could be sure of that, if it was any
satisfaction to her. Strangely, very strangely, it was a satisfaction;
she wished Lord Warburton to triumph before her husband, and at the same
time she wished her husband to be very superior before Lord Warburton.
Osmond, in his way, was admirable; he had, like their visitor, the
advantage of an acquired habit. It was not that of succeeding, but it
was something almost as good--that of not attempting. As he leaned back
in his place, listening but vaguely to the other's friendly offers and
suppressed explanations--as if it were only proper to assume that they
were addressed essentially to his wife--he had at least (since so little
else was left him) the comfort of thinking how well he personally had
kept out of it, and how the air of indifference, which he was now able
to wear, had the added beauty of consistency. It was something to be
able to look as if the leave-taker's movements had no relation to his
own mind. The latter did well, certainly; but Osmond's performance was
in its very nature more finished. Lord Warburton's position was after
all an easy one; there was no reason in the world why he shouldn't leave
Rome. He had had beneficent inclinations, but they had stopped short
of fruition; he had never committed himself, and his honour was safe.
Osmond appeared to take but a moderate interest in the proposal that
they should go and stay with him and in his allusion to the success
Pansy might extract from their visit. He murmured a recognition, but
left Isabel to say that it was a matter requiring grave consideration.
Isabel, even while she made this remark, could see the great vista
which had suddenly opened out in her husband's mind, with Pansy's little
figure marching up the middle of it.

Lord Warburton had asked leave to bid good-bye to Pansy, but neither
Isabel nor Osmond had made any motion to send for her. He had the air of
giving out that his visit must be short; he sat on a small chair, as if
it were only for a moment, keeping his hat in his hand. But he stayed
and stayed; Isabel wondered what he was waiting for. She believed it
was not to see Pansy; she had an impression that on the whole he would
rather not see Pansy. It was of course to see herself alone--he had
something to say to her. Isabel had no great wish to hear it, for she
was afraid it would be an explanation, and she could perfectly dispense
with explanations. Osmond, however, presently got up, like a man of good
taste to whom it had occurred that so inveterate a visitor might wish
to say just the last word of all to the ladies. "I've a letter to write
before dinner," he said; "you must excuse me. I'll see if my daughter's
disengaged, and if she is she shall know you're here. Of course when
you come to Rome you'll always look us up. Mrs. Osmond will talk to you
about the English expedition: she decides all those things."

The nod with which, instead of a hand-shake, he wound up this little
speech was perhaps rather a meagre form of salutation; but on the whole
it was all the occasion demanded. Isabel reflected that after he
left the room Lord Warburton would have no pretext for saying, "Your
husband's very angry"; which would have been extremely disagreeable to
her. Nevertheless, if he had done so, she would have said: "Oh, don't be
anxious. He doesn't hate you: it's me that he hates!"

It was only when they had been left alone together that her friend
showed a certain vague awkwardness--sitting down in another chair,
handling two or three of the objects that were near him. "I hope he'll
make Miss Osmond come," he presently remarked. "I want very much to see
her."

"I'm glad it's the last time," said Isabel.

"So am I. She doesn't care for me."

"No, she doesn't care for you."

"I don't wonder at it," he returned. Then he added with inconsequence:
"You'll come to England, won't you?"

"I think we had better not."

"Ah, you owe me a visit. Don't you remember that you were to have come
to Lockleigh once, and you never did?"

"Everything's changed since then," said Isabel.

"Not changed for the worse, surely--as far as we're concerned. To see
you under my roof"--and he hung fire but an instant--"would be a great
satisfaction."

She had feared an explanation; but that was the only one that occurred.
They talked a little of Ralph, and in another moment Pansy came in,
already dressed for dinner and with a little red spot in either cheek.
She shook hands with Lord Warburton and stood looking up into his
face with a fixed smile--a smile that Isabel knew, though his lordship
probably never suspected it, to be near akin to a burst of tears.

"I'm going away," he said. "I want to bid you good-bye."

"Good-bye, Lord Warburton." Her voice perceptibly trembled.

"And I want to tell you how much I wish you may be very happy."

"Thank you, Lord Warburton," Pansy answered.

He lingered a moment and gave a glance at Isabel. "You ought to be very
happy--you've got a guardian angel."

"I'm sure I shall be happy," said Pansy in the tone of a person whose
certainties were always cheerful.

"Such a conviction as that will take you a great way. But if it should
ever fail you, remember--remember--" And her interlocutor stammered a
little. "Think of me sometimes, you know!" he said with a vague laugh.
Then he shook hands with Isabel in silence, and presently he was gone.

When he had left the room she expected an effusion of tears from her
stepdaughter; but Pansy in fact treated her to something very different.

"I think you ARE my guardian angel!" she exclaimed very sweetly.

Isabel shook her head. "I'm not an angel of any kind. I'm at the most
your good friend."

"You're a very good friend then--to have asked papa to be gentle with
me."

"I've asked your father nothing," said Isabel, wondering.

"He told me just now to come to the drawing-room, and then he gave me a
very kind kiss."

"Ah," said Isabel, "that was quite his own idea!"

She recognised the idea perfectly; it was very characteristic, and she
was to see a great deal more of it. Even with Pansy he couldn't put
himself the least in the wrong. They were dining out that day, and after
their dinner they went to another entertainment; so that it was not till
late in the evening that Isabel saw him alone. When Pansy kissed him
before going to bed he returned her embrace with even more than his
usual munificence, and Isabel wondered if he meant it as a hint that his
daughter had been injured by the machinations of her stepmother. It was
a partial expression, at any rate, of what he continued to expect of his
wife. She was about to follow Pansy, but he remarked that he wished she
would remain; he had something to say to her. Then he walked about the
drawing-room a little, while she stood waiting in her cloak.

"I don't understand what you wish to do," he said in a moment. "I should
like to know--so that I may know how to act."

"Just now I wish to go to bed. I'm very tired."

"Sit down and rest; I shall not keep you long. Not there--take a
comfortable place." And he arranged a multitude of cushions that were
scattered in picturesque disorder upon a vast divan. This was not,
however, where she seated herself; she dropped into the nearest chair.
The fire had gone out; the lights in the great room were few. She drew
her cloak about her; she felt mortally cold. "I think you're trying to
humiliate me," Osmond went on. "It's a most absurd undertaking."

"I haven't the least idea what you mean," she returned.

"You've played a very deep game; you've managed it beautifully."

"What is it that I've managed?"

"You've not quite settled it, however; we shall see him again." And he
stopped in front of her, with his hands in his pockets, looking down at
her thoughtfully, in his usual way, which seemed meant to let her know
that she was not an object, but only a rather disagreeable incident, of
thought.

"If you mean that Lord Warburton's under an obligation to come back
you're wrong," Isabel said. "He's under none whatever."

"That's just what I complain of. But when I say he'll come back I don't
mean he'll come from a sense of duty."

"There's nothing else to make him. I think he has quite exhausted Rome."

"Ah no, that's a shallow judgement. Rome's inexhaustible." And Osmond
began to walk about again. "However, about that perhaps there's no
hurry," he added. "It's rather a good idea of his that we should go
to England. If it were not for the fear of finding your cousin there I
think I should try to persuade you."

"It may be that you'll not find my cousin," said Isabel.

"I should like to be sure of it. However, I shall be as sure as
possible. At the same time I should like to see his house, that you told
me so much about at one time: what do you call it?--Gardencourt. It must
be a charming thing. And then, you know, I've a devotion to the memory
of your uncle: you made me take a great fancy to him. I should like to
see where he lived and died. That indeed is a detail. Your friend was
right. Pansy ought to see England."

"I've no doubt she would enjoy it," said Isabel.

"But that's a long time hence; next autumn's far off," Osmond continued;
"and meantime there are things that more nearly interest us. Do you
think me so very proud?" he suddenly asked.

"I think you very strange."

"You don't understand me."

"No, not even when you insult me."

"I don't insult you; I'm incapable of it. I merely speak of certain
facts, and if the allusion's an injury to you the fault's not mine.
It's surely a fact that you have kept all this matter quite in your own
hands."

"Are you going back to Lord Warburton?" Isabel asked. "I'm very tired of
his name."

"You shall hear it again before we've done with it."

She had spoken of his insulting her, but it suddenly seemed to her that
this ceased to be a pain. He was going down--down; the vision of such a
fall made her almost giddy: that was the only pain. He was too strange,
too different; he didn't touch her. Still, the working of his morbid
passion was extraordinary, and she felt a rising curiosity to know in
what light he saw himself justified. "I might say to you that I judge
you've nothing to say to me that's worth hearing," she returned in a
moment. "But I should perhaps be wrong. There's a thing that would be
worth my hearing--to know in the plainest words of what it is you accuse
me."

"Of having prevented Pansy's marriage to Warburton. Are those words
plain enough?"

"On the contrary, I took a great interest in it. I told you so; and when
you told me that you counted on me--that I think was what you said--I
accepted the obligation. I was a fool to do so, but I did it."

"You pretended to do it, and you even pretended reluctance to make me
more willing to trust you. Then you began to use your ingenuity to get
him out of the way."

"I think I see what you mean," said Isabel.

"Where's the letter you told me he had written me?" her husband
demanded.

"I haven't the least idea; I haven't asked him."

"You stopped it on the way," said Osmond.

Isabel slowly got up; standing there in her white cloak, which covered
her to her feet, she might have represented the angel of disdain, first
cousin to that of pity. "Oh, Gilbert, for a man who was so fine--!" she
exclaimed in a long murmur.

"I was never so fine as you. You've done everything you wanted. You've
got him out of the way without appearing to do so, and you've placed
me in the position in which you wished to see me--that of a man who has
tried to marry his daughter to a lord, but has grotesquely failed."

"Pansy doesn't care for him. She's very glad he's gone," Isabel said.

"That has nothing to do with the matter."

"And he doesn't care for Pansy."

"That won't do; you told me he did. I don't know why you wanted this
particular satisfaction," Osmond continued; "you might have taken some
other. It doesn't seem to me that I've been presumptuous--that I have
taken too much for granted. I've been very modest about it, very quiet.
The idea didn't originate with me. He began to show that he liked her
before I ever thought of it. I left it all to you."

"Yes, you were very glad to leave it to me. After this you must attend
to such things yourself."

He looked at her a moment; then he turned away. "I thought you were very
fond of my daughter."

"I've never been more so than to-day."

"Your affection is attended with immense limitations. However, that
perhaps is natural."

"Is this all you wished to say to me?" Isabel asked, taking a candle
that stood on one of the tables.

"Are you satisfied? Am I sufficiently disappointed?"

"I don't think that on the whole you're disappointed. You've had another
opportunity to try to stupefy me."

"It's not that. It's proved that Pansy can aim high."

"Poor little Pansy!" said Isabel as she turned away with her candle.


