
It had been arranged that the two young ladies should proceed to London
under Ralph's escort, though Mrs. Touchett looked with little favour on
the plan. It was just the sort of plan, she said, that Miss Stackpole
would be sure to suggest, and she enquired if the correspondent of
the Interviewer was to take the party to stay at her favourite
boarding-house.

"I don't care where she takes us to stay, so long as there's local
colour," said Isabel. "That's what we're going to London for."

"I suppose that after a girl has refused an English lord she may do
anything," her aunt rejoined. "After that one needn't stand on trifles."

"Should you have liked me to marry Lord Warburton?" Isabel enquired.

"Of course I should."

"I thought you disliked the English so much."

"So I do; but it's all the greater reason for making use of them."

"Is that your idea of marriage?" And Isabel ventured to add that her
aunt appeared to her to have made very little use of Mr. Touchett.

"Your uncle's not an English nobleman," said Mrs. Touchett, "though even
if he had been I should still probably have taken up my residence in
Florence."

"Do you think Lord Warburton could make me any better than I am?" the
girl asked with some animation. "I don't mean I'm too good to improve. I
mean that I don't love Lord Warburton enough to marry him."

"You did right to refuse him then," said Mrs. Touchett in her smallest,
sparest voice. "Only, the next great offer you get, I hope you'll manage
to come up to your standard."

"We had better wait till the offer comes before we talk about it. I
hope very much I may have no more offers for the present. They upset me
completely."

"You probably won't be troubled with them if you adopt permanently the
Bohemian manner of life. However, I've promised Ralph not to criticise."

"I'll do whatever Ralph says is right," Isabel returned. "I've unbounded
confidence in Ralph."

"His mother's much obliged to you!" this lady dryly laughed.

"It seems to me indeed she ought to feel it!" Isabel irrepressibly
answered.

Ralph had assured her that there would be no violation of decency in
their paying a visit--the little party of three--to the sights of the
metropolis; but Mrs. Touchett took a different view. Like many ladies of
her country who had lived a long time in Europe, she had completely
lost her native tact on such points, and in her reaction, not in itself
deplorable, against the liberty allowed to young persons beyond the
seas, had fallen into gratuitous and exaggerated scruples. Ralph
accompanied their visitors to town and established them at a quiet inn
in a street that ran at right angles to Piccadilly. His first idea had
been to take them to his father's house in Winchester Square, a large,
dull mansion which at this period of the year was shrouded in silence
and brown holland; but he bethought himself that, the cook being at
Gardencourt, there was no one in the house to get them their meals,
and Pratt's Hotel accordingly became their resting-place. Ralph, on his
side, found quarters in Winchester Square, having a "den" there of which
he was very fond and being familiar with deeper fears than that of a
cold kitchen. He availed himself largely indeed of the resources of
Pratt's Hotel, beginning his day with an early visit to his fellow
travellers, who had Mr. Pratt in person, in a large bulging white
waistcoat, to remove their dish-covers. Ralph turned up, as he said,
after breakfast, and the little party made out a scheme of entertainment
for the day. As London wears in the month of September a face blank but
for its smears of prior service, the young man, who occasionally took
an apologetic tone, was obliged to remind his companion, to Miss
Stackpole's high derision, that there wasn't a creature in town.

"I suppose you mean the aristocracy are absent," Henrietta answered;
"but I don't think you could have a better proof that if they were
absent altogether they wouldn't be missed. It seems to me the place is
about as full as it can be. There's no one here, of course, but three
or four millions of people. What is it you call them--the lower-middle
class? They're only the population of London, and that's of no
consequence."

Ralph declared that for him the aristocracy left no void that Miss
Stackpole herself didn't fill, and that a more contented man was nowhere
at that moment to be found. In this he spoke the truth, for the stale
September days, in the huge half-empty town, had a charm wrapped in them
as a coloured gem might be wrapped in a dusty cloth. When he went home
at night to the empty house in Winchester Square, after a chain of hours
with his comparatively ardent friends, he wandered into the big dusky
dining-room, where the candle he took from the hall-table, after letting
himself in, constituted the only illumination. The square was still, the
house was still; when he raised one of the windows of the dining-room to
let in the air he heard the slow creak of the boots of a lone constable.
His own step, in the empty place, seemed loud and sonorous; some of the
carpets had been raised, and whenever he moved he roused a melancholy
echo. He sat down in one of the armchairs; the big dark dining table
twinkled here and there in the small candle-light; the pictures on the
wall, all of them very brown, looked vague and incoherent. There was a
ghostly presence as of dinners long since digested, of table-talk
that had lost its actuality. This hint of the supernatural perhaps had
something to do with the fact that his imagination took a flight and
that he remained in his chair a long time beyond the hour at which he
should have been in bed; doing nothing, not even reading the evening
paper. I say he did nothing, and I maintain the phrase in the face of
the fact that he thought at these moments of Isabel. To think of Isabel
could only be for him an idle pursuit, leading to nothing and profiting
little to any one. His cousin had not yet seemed to him so charming
as during these days spent in sounding, tourist-fashion, the deeps
and shallows of the metropolitan element. Isabel was full of premises,
conclusions, emotions; if she had come in search of local colour she
found it everywhere. She asked more questions than he could answer, and
launched brave theories, as to historic cause and social effect, that he
was equally unable to accept or to refute. The party went more than once
to the British Museum and to that brighter palace of art which reclaims
for antique variety so large an area of a monotonous suburb; they spent
a morning in the Abbey and went on a penny-steamer to the Tower; they
looked at pictures both in public and private collections and sat
on various occasions beneath the great trees in Kensington Gardens.
Henrietta proved an indestructible sight-seer and a more lenient judge
than Ralph had ventured to hope. She had indeed many disappointments,
and London at large suffered from her vivid remembrance of the strong
points of the American civic idea; but she made the best of its dingy
dignities and only heaved an occasional sigh and uttered a desultory
"Well!" which led no further and lost itself in retrospect. The truth
was that, as she said herself, she was not in her element. "I've not a
sympathy with inanimate objects," she remarked to Isabel at the National
Gallery; and she continued to suffer from the meagreness of the glimpse
that had as yet been vouchsafed to her of the inner life. Landscapes
by Turner and Assyrian bulls were a poor substitute for the literary
dinner-parties at which she had hoped to meet the genius and renown of
Great Britain.

"Where are your public men, where are your men and women of intellect?"
she enquired of Ralph, standing in the middle of Trafalgar Square as
if she had supposed this to be a place where she would naturally meet a
few. "That's one of them on the top of the column, you say--Lord Nelson.
Was he a lord too? Wasn't he high enough, that they had to stick him a
hundred feet in the air? That's the past--I don't care about the past; I
want to see some of the leading minds of the present. I won't say of the
future, because I don't believe much in your future." Poor Ralph had few
leading minds among his acquaintance and rarely enjoyed the pleasure
of buttonholing a celebrity; a state of things which appeared to Miss
Stackpole to indicate a deplorable want of enterprise. "If I were on the
other side I should call," she said, "and tell the gentleman, whoever
he might be, that I had heard a great deal about him and had come to see
for myself. But I gather from what you say that this is not the custom
here. You seem to have plenty of meaningless customs, but none of those
that would help along. We are in advance, certainly. I suppose I shall
have to give up the social side altogether;" and Henrietta, though
she went about with her guidebook and pencil and wrote a letter to the
Interviewer about the Tower (in which she described the execution of
Lady Jane Grey), had a sad sense of falling below her mission.

The incident that had preceded Isabel's departure from Gardencourt left
a painful trace in our young woman's mind: when she felt again in her
face, as from a recurrent wave, the cold breath of her last suitor's
surprise, she could only muffle her head till the air cleared. She could
not have done less than what she did; this was certainly true. But her
necessity, all the same, had been as graceless as some physical act in
a strained attitude, and she felt no desire to take credit for her
conduct. Mixed with this imperfect pride, nevertheless, was a feeling of
freedom which in itself was sweet and which, as she wandered through the
great city with her ill-matched companions, occasionally throbbed into
odd demonstrations. When she walked in Kensington Gardens she stopped
the children (mainly of the poorer sort) whom she saw playing on the
grass; she asked them their names and gave them sixpence and, when
they were pretty, kissed them. Ralph noticed these quaint charities;
he noticed everything she did. One afternoon, that his companions might
pass the time, he invited them to tea in Winchester Square, and he had
the house set in order as much as possible for their visit. There
was another guest to meet them, an amiable bachelor, an old friend of
Ralph's who happened to be in town and for whom prompt commerce with
Miss Stackpole appeared to have neither difficulty nor dread. Mr.
Bantling, a stout, sleek, smiling man of forty, wonderfully dressed,
universally informed and incoherently amused, laughed immoderately at
everything Henrietta said, gave her several cups of tea, examined in her
society the bric-a-brac, of which Ralph had a considerable collection,
and afterwards, when the host proposed they should go out into the
square and pretend it was a fete-champetre, walked round the limited
enclosure several times with her and, at a dozen turns of their talk,
bounded responsive--as with a positive passion for argument--to her
remarks upon the inner life.

"Oh, I see; I dare say you found it very quiet at Gardencourt. Naturally
there's not much going on there when there's such a lot of illness
about. Touchett's very bad, you know; the doctors have forbidden his
being in England at all, and he has only come back to take care of his
father. The old man, I believe, has half a dozen things the matter
with him. They call it gout, but to my certain knowledge he has organic
disease so developed that you may depend upon it he'll go, some day
soon, quite quickly. Of course that sort of thing makes a dreadfully
dull house; I wonder they have people when they can do so little for
them. Then I believe Mr. Touchett's always squabbling with his wife; she
lives away from her husband, you know, in that extraordinary American
way of yours. If you want a house where there's always something going
on, I recommend you to go down and stay with my sister, Lady Pensil,
in Bedfordshire. I'll write to her to-morrow and I'm sure she'll be
delighted to ask you. I know just what you want--you want a house
where they go in for theatricals and picnics and that sort of thing. My
sister's just that sort of woman; she's always getting up something or
other and she's always glad to have the sort of people who help her. I'm
sure she'll ask you down by return of post: she's tremendously fond of
distinguished people and writers. She writes herself, you know; but
I haven't read everything she has written. It's usually poetry, and I
don't go in much for poetry--unless it's Byron. I suppose you think a
great deal of Byron in America," Mr. Bantling continued, expanding
in the stimulating air of Miss Stackpole's attention, bringing up his
sequences promptly and changing his topic with an easy turn of hand.
Yet he none the less gracefully kept in sight of the idea, dazzling to
Henrietta, of her going to stay with Lady Pensil in Bedfordshire. "I
understand what you want; you want to see some genuine English sport.
The Touchetts aren't English at all, you know; they have their own
habits, their own language, their own food--some odd religion even, I
believe, of their own. The old man thinks it's wicked to hunt, I'm told.
You must get down to my sister's in time for the theatricals, and I'm
sure she'll be glad to give you a part. I'm sure you act well; I know
you're very clever. My sister's forty years old and has seven children,
but she's going to play the principal part. Plain as she is she makes up
awfully well--I will say for her. Of course you needn't act if you don't
want to."

In this manner Mr. Bantling delivered himself while they strolled over
the grass in Winchester Square, which, although it had been peppered
by the London soot, invited the tread to linger. Henrietta thought her
blooming, easy-voiced bachelor, with his impressibility to feminine
merit and his splendid range of suggestion, a very agreeable man, and
she valued the opportunity he offered her. "I don't know but I would go,
if your sister should ask me. I think it would be my duty. What do you
call her name?"

"Pensil. It's an odd name, but it isn't a bad one."

"I think one name's as good as another. But what's her rank?".

"Oh, she's a baron's wife; a convenient sort of rank. You're fine enough
and you're not too fine."

"I don't know but what she'd be too fine for me. What do you call the
place she lives in--Bedfordshire?"

"She lives away in the northern corner of it. It's a tiresome country,
but I dare say you won't mind it. I'll try and run down while you're
there."

All this was very pleasant to Miss Stackpole, and she was sorry to be
obliged to separate from Lady Pensil's obliging brother. But it happened
that she had met the day before, in Piccadilly, some friends whom she
had not seen for a year: the Miss Climbers, two ladies from Wilmington,
Delaware, who had been travelling on the Continent and were now
preparing to re-embark. Henrietta had had a long interview with them on
the Piccadilly pavement, and though the three ladies all talked at once
they had not exhausted their store. It had been agreed therefore that
Henrietta should come and dine with them in their lodgings in Jermyn
Street at six o'clock on the morrow, and she now bethought herself of
this engagement. She prepared to start for Jermyn Street, taking leave
first of Ralph Touchett and Isabel, who, seated on garden chairs
in another part of the enclosure, were occupied--if the term may be
used--with an exchange of amenities less pointed than the practical
colloquy of Miss Stackpole and Mr. Bantling. When it had been settled
between Isabel and her friend that they should be reunited at some
reputable hour at Pratt's Hotel, Ralph remarked that the latter must
have a cab. She couldn't walk all the way to Jermyn Street.

"I suppose you mean it's improper for me to walk alone!" Henrietta
exclaimed. "Merciful powers, have I come to this?"

"There's not the slightest need of your walking alone," Mr. Bantling
gaily interposed. "I should be greatly pleased to go with you."

"I simply meant that you'd be late for dinner," Ralph returned. "Those
poor ladies may easily believe that we refuse, at the last, to spare
you."

"You had better have a hansom, Henrietta," said Isabel.

"I'll get you a hansom if you'll trust me," Mr. Bantling went on.

"We might walk a little till we meet one."

"I don't see why I shouldn't trust him, do you?" Henrietta enquired of
Isabel.

"I don't see what Mr. Bantling could do to you," Isabel obligingly
answered; "but, if you like, we'll walk with you till you find your
cab."

"Never mind; we'll go alone. Come on, Mr. Bantling, and take care you
get me a good one."

Mr. Bantling promised to do his best, and the two took their departure,
leaving the girl and her cousin together in the square, over which
a clear September twilight had now begun to gather. It was perfectly
still; the wide quadrangle of dusky houses showed lights in none of the
windows, where the shutters and blinds were closed; the pavements were
a vacant expanse, and, putting aside two small children from a
neighbouring slum, who, attracted by symptoms of abnormal animation
in the interior, poked their faces between the rusty rails of
the enclosure, the most vivid object within sight was the big red
pillar-post on the southeast corner.

"Henrietta will ask him to get into the cab and go with her to Jermyn
Street," Ralph observed. He always spoke of Miss Stackpole as Henrietta.

"Very possibly," said his companion.

"Or rather, no, she won't," he went on. "But Bantling will ask leave to
get in."

"Very likely again. I'm glad very they're such good friends."

"She has made a conquest. He thinks her a brilliant woman. It may go
far," said Ralph.

Isabel was briefly silent. "I call Henrietta a very brilliant woman, but
I don't think it will go far. They would never really know each other.
He has not the least idea what she really is, and she has no just
comprehension of Mr. Bantling."

"There's no more usual basis of union than a mutual misunderstanding.
But it ought not to be so difficult to understand Bob Bantling," Ralph
added. "He is a very simple organism."

"Yes, but Henrietta's a simpler one still. And, pray, what am I to do?"
Isabel asked, looking about her through the fading light, in which the
limited landscape-gardening of the square took on a large and effective
appearance. "I don't imagine that you'll propose that you and I, for our
amusement, shall drive about London in a hansom."

"There's no reason we shouldn't stay here--if you don't dislike it. It's
very warm; there will be half an hour yet before dark; and if you permit
it I'll light a cigarette."

"You may do what you please," said Isabel, "if you'll amuse me till
seven o'clock. I propose at that hour to go back and partake of a simple
and solitary repast--two poached eggs and a muffin--at Pratt's Hotel."

"Mayn't I dine with you?" Ralph asked.

"No, you'll dine at your club."

They had wandered back to their chairs in the centre of the square
again, and Ralph had lighted his cigarette. It would have given him
extreme pleasure to be present in person at the modest little feast she
had sketched; but in default of this he liked even being forbidden. For
the moment, however, he liked immensely being alone with her, in the
thickening dusk, in the centre of the multitudinous town; it made her
seem to depend upon him and to be in his power. This power he could
exert but vaguely; the best exercise of it was to accept her decisions
submissively which indeed there was already an emotion in doing. "Why
won't you let me dine with you?" he demanded after a pause.

"Because I don't care for it."

"I suppose you're tired of me."

"I shall be an hour hence. You see I have the gift of foreknowledge."

"Oh, I shall be delightful meanwhile," said Ralph.

But he said nothing more, and as she made no rejoinder they sat
some time in a stillness which seemed to contradict his promise of
entertainment. It seemed to him she was preoccupied, and he wondered
what she was thinking about; there were two or three very possible
subjects. At last he spoke again. "Is your objection to my society this
evening caused by your expectation of another visitor?"

She turned her head with a glance of her clear, fair eyes. "Another
visitor? What visitor should I have?"

He had none to suggest; which made his question seem to himself silly as
well as brutal. "You've a great many friends that I don't know. You've a
whole past from which I was perversely excluded."

"You were reserved for my future. You must remember that my past is over
there across the water. There's none of it here in London."

"Very good, then, since your future is seated beside you. Capital thing
to have your future so handy." And Ralph lighted another cigarette and
reflected that Isabel probably meant she had received news that Mr.
Caspar Goodwood had crossed to Paris. After he had lighted his cigarette
he puffed it a while, and then he resumed. "I promised just now to be
very amusing; but you see I don't come up to the mark, and the fact is
there's a good deal of temerity in one's undertaking to amuse a
person like you. What do you care for my feeble attempts? You've grand
ideas--you've a high standard in such matters. I ought at least to bring
in a band of music or a company of mountebanks."

"One mountebank's enough, and you do very well. Pray go on, and in
another ten minutes I shall begin to laugh."

"I assure you I'm very serious," said Ralph. "You do really ask a great
deal."

"I don't know what you mean. I ask nothing."

"You accept nothing," said Ralph. She coloured, and now suddenly it
seemed to her that she guessed his meaning. But why should he speak
to her of such things? He hesitated a little and then he continued:
"There's something I should like very much to say to you. It's a
question I wish to ask. It seems to me I've a right to ask it, because
I've a kind of interest in the answer."

"Ask what you will," Isabel replied gently, "and I'll try to satisfy
you."

"Well then, I hope you won't mind my saying that Warburton has told me
of something that has passed between you."

Isabel suppressed a start; she sat looking at her open fan. "Very good;
I suppose it was natural he should tell you."

"I have his leave to let you know he has done so. He has some hope
still," said Ralph.

"Still?"

"He had it a few days ago."

"I don't believe he has any now," said the girl.

"I'm very sorry for him then; he's such an honest man."

"Pray, did he ask you to talk to me?"

"No, not that. But he told me because he couldn't help it. We're old
friends, and he was greatly disappointed. He sent me a line asking me
to come and see him, and I drove over to Lockleigh the day before he and
his sister lunched with us. He was very heavy-hearted; he had just got a
letter from you."

"Did he show you the letter?" asked Isabel with momentary loftiness.

"By no means. But he told me it was a neat refusal. I was very sorry for
him," Ralph repeated.

For some moments Isabel said nothing; then at last, "Do you know how
often he had seen me?" she enquired. "Five or six times."

"That's to your glory."

"It's not for that I say it."

"What then do you say it for. Not to prove that poor Warburton's state
of mind's superficial, because I'm pretty sure you don't think that."

Isabel certainly was unable to say she thought it; but presently she
said something else. "If you've not been requested by Lord Warburton to
argue with me, then you're doing it disinterestedly--or for the love of
argument."

"I've no wish to argue with you at all. I only wish to leave you alone.
I'm simply greatly interested in your own sentiments."

"I'm greatly obliged to you!" cried Isabel with a slightly nervous
laugh.

"Of course you mean that I'm meddling in what doesn't concern me. But
why shouldn't I speak to you of this matter without annoying you or
embarrassing myself? What's the use of being your cousin if I can't have
a few privileges? What's the use of adoring you without hope of a reward
if I can't have a few compensations? What's the use of being ill and
disabled and restricted to mere spectatorship at the game of life if I
really can't see the show when I've paid so much for my ticket? Tell me
this," Ralph went on while she listened to him with quickened attention.
"What had you in mind when you refused Lord Warburton?"

"What had I in mind?"

"What was the logic--the view of your situation--that dictated so
remarkable an act?"

"I didn't wish to marry him--if that's logic."

"No, that's not logic--and I knew that before. It's really nothing, you
know. What was it you said to yourself? You certainly said more than
that."

Isabel reflected a moment, then answered with a question of her own.
"Why do you call it a remarkable act? That's what your mother thinks
too."

"Warburton's such a thorough good sort; as a man, I consider he has
hardly a fault. And then he's what they call here no end of a swell. He
has immense possessions, and his wife would be thought a superior being.
He unites the intrinsic and the extrinsic advantages."

Isabel watched her cousin as to see how far he would go. "I refused him
because he was too perfect then. I'm not perfect myself, and he's too
good for me. Besides, his perfection would irritate me."

"That's ingenious rather than candid," said Ralph. "As a fact you think
nothing in the world too perfect for you."

"Do you think I'm so good?"

"No, but you're exacting, all the same, without the excuse of thinking
yourself good. Nineteen women out of twenty, however, even of the most
exacting sort, would have managed to do with Warburton. Perhaps you
don't know how he has been stalked."

"I don't wish to know. But it seems to me," said Isabel, "that one day
when we talked of him you mentioned odd things in him." Ralph smokingly
considered. "I hope that what I said then had no weight with you;
for they were not faults, the things I spoke of: they were simply
peculiarities of his position. If I had known he wished to marry you I'd
never have alluded to them. I think I said that as regards that position
he was rather a sceptic. It would have been in your power to make him a
believer."

"I think not. I don't understand the matter, and I'm not conscious of
any mission of that sort. You're evidently disappointed," Isabel added,
looking at her cousin with rueful gentleness. "You'd have liked me to
make such a marriage."

"Not in the least. I'm absolutely without a wish on the subject. I don't
pretend to advise you, and I content myself with watching you--with the
deepest interest."

She gave rather a conscious sigh. "I wish I could be as interesting to
myself as I am to you!"

"There you're not candid again; you're extremely interesting to
yourself. Do you know, however," said Ralph, "that if you've really
given Warburton his final answer I'm rather glad it has been what it
was. I don't mean I'm glad for you, and still less of course for him.
I'm glad for myself."

"Are you thinking of proposing to me?"

"By no means. From the point of view I speak of that would be fatal;
I should kill the goose that supplies me with the material of my
inimitable omelettes. I use that animal as the symbol of my insane
illusions. What I mean is that I shall have the thrill of seeing what a
young lady does who won't marry Lord Warburton."

"That's what your mother counts upon too," said Isabel.

"Ah, there will be plenty of spectators! We shall hang on the rest of
your career. I shall not see all of it, but I shall probably see the
most interesting years. Of course if you were to marry our friend you'd
still have a career--a very decent, in fact a very brilliant one. But
relatively speaking it would be a little prosaic. It would be definitely
marked out in advance; it would be wanting in the unexpected. You know
I'm extremely fond of the unexpected, and now that you've kept the game
in your hands I depend on your giving us some grand example of it."

"I don't understand you very well," said Isabel, "but I do so well
enough to be able to say that if you look for grand examples of anything
from me I shall disappoint you."

"You'll do so only by disappointing yourself and that will go hard with
you!"

To this she made no direct reply; there was an amount of truth in it
that would bear consideration. At last she said abruptly: "I don't see
what harm there is in my wishing not to tie myself. I don't want to
begin life by marrying. There are other things a woman can do."

"There's nothing she can do so well. But you're of course so
many-sided."

"If one's two-sided it's enough," said Isabel.

"You're the most charming of polygons!" her companion broke out. At a
glance from his companion, however, he became grave, and to prove it
went on: "You want to see life--you'll be hanged if you don't, as the
young men say."

"I don't think I want to see it as the young men want to see it. But I
do want to look about me."

"You want to drain the cup of experience."

"No, I don't wish to touch the cup of experience. It's a poisoned drink!
I only want to see for myself."

"You want to see, but not to feel," Ralph remarked.

"I don't think that if one's a sentient being one can make the
distinction. I'm a good deal like Henrietta. The other day when I asked
her if she wished to marry she said: 'Not till I've seen Europe!' I too
don't wish to marry till I've seen Europe."

"You evidently expect a crowned head will be struck with you."

"No, that would be worse than marrying Lord Warburton. But it's getting
very dark," Isabel continued, "and I must go home." She rose from her
place, but Ralph only sat still and looked at her. As he remained there
she stopped, and they exchanged a gaze that was full on either side, but
especially on Ralph's, of utterances too vague for words.

"You've answered my question," he said at last. "You've told me what I
wanted. I'm greatly obliged to you."

"It seems to me I've told you very little."

"You've told me the great thing: that the world interests you and that
you want to throw yourself into it."

Her silvery eyes shone a moment in the dusk. "I never said that." "I
think you meant it. Don't repudiate it. It's so fine!"

"I don't know what you're trying to fasten upon me, for I'm not in the
least an adventurous spirit. Women are not like men."

Ralph slowly rose from his seat and they walked together to the gate of
the square. "No," he said; "women rarely boast of their courage. Men do
so with a certain frequency."

"Men have it to boast of!"

"Women have it too. You've a great deal."

"Enough to go home in a cab to Pratt's Hotel, but not more."

Ralph unlocked the gate, and after they had passed out he fastened it.
"We'll find your cab," he said; and as they turned toward a neighbouring
street in which this quest might avail he asked her again if he mightn't
see her safely to the inn.

"By no means," she answered; "you're very tired; you must go home and go
to bed."

The cab was found, and he helped her into it, standing a moment at the
door. "When people forget I'm a poor creature I'm often incommoded," he
said. "But it's worse when they remember it!"



She had had no hidden motive in wishing him not to take her home; it
simply struck her that for some days past she had consumed an inordinate
quantity of his time, and the independent spirit of the American girl
whom extravagance of aid places in an attitude that she ends by finding
"affected" had made her decide that for these few hours she must suffice
to herself. She had moreover a great fondness for intervals of solitude,
which since her arrival in England had been but meagrely met. It was a
luxury she could always command at home and she had wittingly missed
it. That evening, however, an incident occurred which--had there been a
critic to note it--would have taken all colour from the theory that the
wish to be quite by herself had caused her to dispense with her cousin's
attendance. Seated toward nine o'clock in the dim illumination of
Pratt's Hotel and trying with the aid of two tall candles to lose
herself in a volume she had brought from Gardencourt, she succeeded
only to the extent of reading other words than those printed on the
page--words that Ralph had spoken to her that afternoon. Suddenly
the well-muffed knuckle of the waiter was applied to the door, which
presently gave way to his exhibition, even as a glorious trophy, of the
card of a visitor. When this memento had offered to her fixed sight the
name of Mr. Caspar Goodwood she let the man stand before her without
signifying her wishes.

"Shall I show the gentleman up, ma'am?" he asked with a slightly
encouraging inflexion.

Isabel hesitated still and while she hesitated glanced at the mirror.
"He may come in," she said at last; and waited for him not so much
smoothing her hair as girding her spirit.

Caspar Goodwood was accordingly the next moment shaking hands with her,
but saying nothing till the servant had left the room. "Why didn't you
answer my letter?" he then asked in a quick, full, slightly peremptory
tone--the tone of a man whose questions were habitually pointed and who
was capable of much insistence.

She answered by a ready question, "How did you know I was here?"

"Miss Stackpole let me know," said Caspar Goodwood. "She told me you
would probably be at home alone this evening and would be willing to see
me."

"Where did she see you--to tell you that?"

"She didn't see me; she wrote to me."

Isabel was silent; neither had sat down; they stood there with an air
of defiance, or at least of contention. "Henrietta never told me she was
writing to you," she said at last. "This is not kind of her."

"Is it so disagreeable to you to see me?" asked the young man.

"I didn't expect it. I don't like such surprises."

"But you knew I was in town; it was natural we should meet."

"Do you call this meeting? I hoped I shouldn't see you. In so big a
place as London it seemed very possible."

"It was apparently repugnant to you even to write to me," her visitor
went on.

Isabel made no reply; the sense of Henrietta Stackpole's treachery,
as she momentarily qualified it, was strong within her. "Henrietta's
certainly not a model of all the delicacies!" she exclaimed with
bitterness. "It was a great liberty to take."

"I suppose I'm not a model either--of those virtues or of any others.
The fault's mine as much as hers."

As Isabel looked at him it seemed to her that his jaw had never been
more square. This might have displeased her, but she took a different
turn. "No, it's not your fault so much as hers. What you've done was
inevitable, I suppose, for you."

"It was indeed!" cried Caspar Goodwood with a voluntary laugh.

"And now that I've come, at any rate, mayn't I stay?"

"You may sit down, certainly."

She went back to her chair again, while her visitor took the first place
that offered, in the manner of a man accustomed to pay little thought to
that sort of furtherance. "I've been hoping every day for an answer to
my letter. You might have written me a few lines."

"It wasn't the trouble of writing that prevented me; I could as easily
have written you four pages as one. But my silence was an intention,"
Isabel said. "I thought it the best thing."

He sat with his eyes fixed on hers while she spoke; then he lowered them
and attached them to a spot in the carpet as if he were making a strong
effort to say nothing but what he ought. He was a strong man in the
wrong, and he was acute enough to see that an uncompromising exhibition
of his strength would only throw the falsity of his position into
relief. Isabel was not incapable of tasting any advantage of position
over a person of this quality, and though little desirous to flaunt it
in his face she could enjoy being able to say "You know you oughtn't to
have written to me yourself!" and to say it with an air of triumph.

Caspar Goodwood raised his eyes to her own again; they seemed to shine
through the vizard of a helmet. He had a strong sense of justice and was
ready any day in the year--over and above this--to argue the question
of his rights. "You said you hoped never to hear from me again; I know
that. But I never accepted any such rule as my own. I warned you that
you should hear very soon."

"I didn't say I hoped NEVER to hear from you," said Isabel.

"Not for five years then; for ten years; twenty years. It's the same
thing."

"Do you find it so? It seems to me there's a great difference. I can
imagine that at the end of ten years we might have a very pleasant
correspondence. I shall have matured my epistolary style."

She looked away while she spoke these words, knowing them of so much
less earnest a cast than the countenance of her listener. Her eyes,
however, at last came back to him, just as he said very irrelevantly;
"Are you enjoying your visit to your uncle?"

"Very much indeed." She dropped, but then she broke out. "What good do
you expect to get by insisting?"

"The good of not losing you."

"You've no right to talk of losing what's not yours. And even from your
own point of view," Isabel added, "you ought to know when to let one
alone."

"I disgust you very much," said Caspar Goodwood gloomily; not as if to
provoke her to compassion for a man conscious of this blighting fact,
but as if to set it well before himself, so that he might endeavour to
act with his eyes on it.

"Yes, you don't at all delight me, you don't fit in, not in any way,
just now, and the worst is that your putting it to the proof in this
manner is quite unnecessary." It wasn't certainly as if his nature had
been soft, so that pin-pricks would draw blood from it; and from the
first of her acquaintance with him, and of her having to defend herself
against a certain air that he had of knowing better what was good for
her than she knew herself, she had recognised the fact that perfect
frankness was her best weapon. To attempt to spare his sensibility or to
escape from him edgewise, as one might do from a man who had barred
the way less sturdily--this, in dealing with Caspar Goodwood, who would
grasp at everything of every sort that one might give him, was wasted
agility. It was not that he had not susceptibilities, but his passive
surface, as well as his active, was large and hard, and he might always
be trusted to dress his wounds, so far as they required it, himself. She
came back, even for her measure of possible pangs and aches in him,
to her old sense that he was naturally plated and steeled, armed
essentially for aggression.

"I can't reconcile myself to that," he simply said. There was a
dangerous liberality about it; for she felt how open it was to him to
make the point that he had not always disgusted her.

"I can't reconcile myself to it either, and it's not the state of things
that ought to exist between us. If you'd only try to banish me from your
mind for a few months we should be on good terms again."

"I see. If I should cease to think of you at all for a prescribed time,
I should find I could keep it up indefinitely."

"Indefinitely is more than I ask. It's more even than I should like."

"You know that what you ask is impossible," said the young man, taking
his adjective for granted in a manner she found irritating.

"Aren't you capable of making a calculated effort?" she demanded.
"You're strong for everything else; why shouldn't you be strong for
that?"

"An effort calculated for what?" And then as she hung fire, "I'm
capable of nothing with regard to you," he went on, "but just of being
infernally in love with you. If one's strong one loves only the more
strongly."

"There's a good deal in that;" and indeed our young lady felt the
force of it--felt it thrown off, into the vast of truth and poetry,
as practically a bait to her imagination. But she promptly came round.
"Think of me or not, as you find most possible; only leave me alone."

"Until when?"

"Well, for a year or two."

"Which do you mean? Between one year and two there's all the difference
in the world."

"Call it two then," said Isabel with a studied effect of eagerness.

"And what shall I gain by that?" her friend asked with no sign of
wincing.

"You'll have obliged me greatly."

"And what will be my reward?"

"Do you need a reward for an act of generosity?"

"Yes, when it involves a great sacrifice."

"There's no generosity without some sacrifice. Men don't understand such
things. If you make the sacrifice you'll have all my admiration."

"I don't care a cent for your admiration--not one straw, with nothing to
show for it. When will you marry me? That's the only question."

"Never--if you go on making me feel only as I feel at present."

"What do I gain then by not trying to make you feel otherwise?"

"You'll gain quite as much as by worrying me to death!" Caspar Goodwood
bent his eyes again and gazed a while into the crown of his hat. A
deep flush overspread his face; she could see her sharpness had at last
penetrated. This immediately had a value--classic, romantic, redeeming,
what did she know? for her; "the strong man in pain" was one of the
categories of the human appeal, little charm as he might exert in the
given case. "Why do you make me say such things to you?" she cried in a
trembling voice. "I only want to be gentle--to be thoroughly kind. It's
not delightful to me to feel people care for me and yet to have to try
and reason them out of it. I think others also ought to be considerate;
we have each to judge for ourselves. I know you're considerate, as much
as you can be; you've good reasons for what you do. But I really don't
want to marry, or to talk about it at all now. I shall probably never
do it--no, never. I've a perfect right to feel that way, and it's no
kindness to a woman to press her so hard, to urge her against her will.
If I give you pain I can only say I'm very sorry. It's not my fault; I
can't marry you simply to please you. I won't say that I shall always
remain your friend, because when women say that, in these situations, it
passes, I believe, for a sort of mockery. But try me some day."

Caspar Goodwood, during this speech, had kept his eyes fixed upon the
name of his hatter, and it was not until some time after she had ceased
speaking that he raised them. When he did so the sight of a rosy, lovely
eagerness in Isabel's face threw some confusion into his attempt to
analyse her words. "I'll go home--I'll go to-morrow--I'll leave you
alone," he brought out at last. "Only," he heavily said, "I hate to lose
sight of you!"

"Never fear. I shall do no harm."

"You'll marry some one else, as sure as I sit here," Caspar Goodwood
declared.

"Do you think that a generous charge?"

"Why not? Plenty of men will try to make you."

"I told you just now that I don't wish to marry and that I almost
certainly never shall."

"I know you did, and I like your 'almost certainly'! I put no faith in
what you say."

"Thank you very much. Do you accuse me of lying to shake you off? You
say very delicate things."

"Why should I not say that? You've given me no pledge of anything at
all."

"No, that's all that would be wanting!"

"You may perhaps even believe you're safe--from wishing to be. But
you're not," the young man went on as if preparing himself for the
worst.

"Very well then. We'll put it that I'm not safe. Have it as you please."

"I don't know, however," said Caspar Goodwood, "that my keeping you in
sight would prevent it."

"Don't you indeed? I'm after all very much afraid of you. Do you think
I'm so very easily pleased?" she asked suddenly, changing her tone.

"No--I don't; I shall try to console myself with that. But there are a
certain number of very dazzling men in the world, no doubt; and if there
were only one it would be enough. The most dazzling of all will make
straight for you. You'll be sure to take no one who isn't dazzling."

"If you mean by dazzling brilliantly clever," Isabel said--"and I can't
imagine what else you mean--I don't need the aid of a clever man to
teach me how to live. I can find it out for myself."

"Find out how to live alone? I wish that, when you have, you'd teach
me!"

She looked at him a moment; then with a quick smile, "Oh, you ought to
marry!" she said.

He might be pardoned if for an instant this exclamation seemed to him
to sound the infernal note, and it is not on record that her motive for
discharging such a shaft had been of the clearest. He oughtn't to stride
about lean and hungry, however--she certainly felt THAT for him. "God
forgive you!" he murmured between his teeth as he turned away.

Her accent had put her slightly in the wrong, and after a moment she
felt the need to right herself. The easiest way to do it was to place
him where she had been. "You do me great injustice--you say what you
don't know!" she broke out. "I shouldn't be an easy victim--I've proved
it."

"Oh, to me, perfectly."

"I've proved it to others as well." And she paused a moment. "I refused
a proposal of marriage last week; what they call--no doubt--a dazzling
one."

"I'm very glad to hear it," said the young man gravely.

"It was a proposal many girls would have accepted; it had everything to
recommend it." Isabel had not proposed to herself to tell this story,
but, now she had begun, the satisfaction of speaking it out and doing
herself justice took possession of her. "I was offered a great position
and a great fortune--by a person whom I like extremely."

Caspar watched her with intense interest. "Is he an Englishman?"

"He's an English nobleman," said Isabel.

Her visitor received this announcement at first in silence, but at last
said: "I'm glad he's disappointed."

"Well then, as you have companions in misfortune, make the best of it."

"I don't call him a companion," said Casper grimly.

"Why not--since I declined his offer absolutely?"

"That doesn't make him my companion. Besides, he's an Englishman."

"And pray isn't an Englishman a human being?" Isabel asked.

"Oh, those people? They're not of my humanity, and I don't care what
becomes of them."

"You're very angry," said the girl. "We've discussed this matter quite
enough."

"Oh yes, I'm very angry. I plead guilty to that!"

She turned away from him, walked to the open window and stood a moment
looking into the dusky void of the street, where a turbid gaslight
alone represented social animation. For some time neither of these young
persons spoke; Caspar lingered near the chimney-piece with eyes gloomily
attached. She had virtually requested him to go--he knew that; but at
the risk of making himself odious he kept his ground. She was far too
dear to him to be easily renounced, and he had crossed the sea all to
wring from her some scrap of a vow. Presently she left the window and
stood again before him. "You do me very little justice--after my telling
you what I told you just now. I'm sorry I told you--since it matters so
little to you."

"Ah," cried the young man, "if you were thinking of ME when you did it!"
And then he paused with the fear that she might contradict so happy a
thought.

"I was thinking of you a little," said Isabel.

"A little? I don't understand. If the knowledge of what I feel for you
had any weight with you at all, calling it a 'little' is a poor account
of it."

Isabel shook her head as if to carry off a blunder. "I've refused a most
kind, noble gentleman. Make the most of that."

"I thank you then," said Caspar Goodwood gravely. "I thank you
immensely."

"And now you had better go home."

"May I not see you again?" he asked.

"I think it's better not. You'll be sure to talk of this, and you see it
leads to nothing."

"I promise you not to say a word that will annoy you."

Isabel reflected and then answered: "I return in a day or two to my
uncle's, and I can't propose to you to come there. It would be too
inconsistent."

Caspar Goodwood, on his side, considered. "You must do me justice too.
I received an invitation to your uncle's more than a week ago, and I
declined it."

She betrayed surprise. "From whom was your invitation?"

"From Mr. Ralph Touchett, whom I suppose to be your cousin. I declined
it because I had not your authorisation to accept it. The suggestion
that Mr. Touchett should invite me appeared to have come from Miss
Stackpole."

"It certainly never did from me. Henrietta really goes very far," Isabel
added.

"Don't be too hard on her--that touches ME."

"No; if you declined you did quite right, and I thank you for it." And
she gave a little shudder of dismay at the thought that Lord Warburton
and Mr. Goodwood might have met at Gardencourt: it would have been so
awkward for Lord Warburton.

"When you leave your uncle where do you go?" her companion asked.

"I go abroad with my aunt--to Florence and other places."

The serenity of this announcement struck a chill to the young man's
heart; he seemed to see her whirled away into circles from which he was
inexorably excluded. Nevertheless he went on quickly with his questions.
"And when shall you come back to America?"

"Perhaps not for a long time. I'm very happy here."

"Do you mean to give up your country?"

"Don't be an infant!"

"Well, you'll be out of my sight indeed!" said Caspar Goodwood.

"I don't know," she answered rather grandly. "The world--with all these
places so arranged and so touching each other--comes to strike one as
rather small."

"It's a sight too big for ME!" Caspar exclaimed with a simplicity
our young lady might have found touching if her face had not been set
against concessions.

This attitude was part of a system, a theory, that she had lately
embraced, and to be thorough she said after a moment: "Don't think me
unkind if I say it's just THAT--being out of your sight--that I like.
If you were in the same place I should feel you were watching me, and I
don't like that--I like my liberty too much. If there's a thing in the
world I'm fond of," she went on with a slight recurrence of grandeur,
"it's my personal independence."

But whatever there might be of the too superior in this speech moved
Caspar Goodwood's admiration; there was nothing he winced at in the
large air of it. He had never supposed she hadn't wings and the need of
beautiful free movements--he wasn't, with his own long arms and strides,
afraid of any force in her. Isabel's words, if they had been meant to
shock him, failed of the mark and only made him smile with the sense
that here was common ground. "Who would wish less to curtail your
liberty than I? What can give me greater pleasure than to see you
perfectly independent--doing whatever you like? It's to make you
independent that I want to marry you."

"That's a beautiful sophism," said the girl with a smile more beautiful
still.

"An unmarried woman--a girl of your age--isn't independent. There are
all sorts of things she can't do. She's hampered at every step."

"That's as she looks at the question," Isabel answered with much spirit.
"I'm not in my first youth--I can do what I choose--I belong quite to
the independent class. I've neither father nor mother; I'm poor and of
a serious disposition; I'm not pretty. I therefore am not bound to be
timid and conventional; indeed I can't afford such luxuries. Besides,
I try to judge things for myself; to judge wrong, I think, is more
honourable than not to judge at all. I don't wish to be a mere sheep in
the flock; I wish to choose my fate and know something of human affairs
beyond what other people think it compatible with propriety to tell me."
She paused a moment, but not long enough for her companion to reply. He
was apparently on the point of doing so when she went on: "Let me say
this to you, Mr. Goodwood. You're so kind as to speak of being afraid of
my marrying. If you should hear a rumour that I'm on the point of doing
so--girls are liable to have such things said about them--remember what
I have told you about my love of liberty and venture to doubt it."

There was something passionately positive in the tone in which she gave
him this advice, and he saw a shining candour in her eyes that helped
him to believe her. On the whole he felt reassured, and you might have
perceived it by the manner in which he said, quite eagerly: "You want
simply to travel for two years? I'm quite willing to wait two years, and
you may do what you like in the interval. If that's all you want,
pray say so. I don't want you to be conventional; do I strike you as
conventional myself? Do you want to improve your mind? Your mind's quite
good enough for me; but if it interests you to wander about a while and
see different countries I shall be delighted to help you in any way in
my power."

"You're very generous; that's nothing new to me. The best way to help me
will be to put as many hundred miles of sea between us as possible."

"One would think you were going to commit some atrocity!" said Caspar
Goodwood.

"Perhaps I am. I wish to be free even to do that if the fancy takes me."

"Well then," he said slowly, "I'll go home." And he put out his hand,
trying to look contented and confident.

Isabel's confidence in him, however, was greater than any he could feel
in her. Not that he thought her capable of committing an atrocity; but,
turn it over as he would, there was something ominous in the way she
reserved her option. As she took his hand she felt a great respect for
him; she knew how much he cared for her and she thought him magnanimous.
They stood so for a moment, looking at each other, united by a
hand-clasp which was not merely passive on her side. "That's right,"
she said very kindly, almost tenderly. "You'll lose nothing by being a
reasonable man."

"But I'll come back, wherever you are, two years hence," he returned
with characteristic grimness.

We have seen that our young lady was inconsequent, and at this she
suddenly changed her note. "Ah, remember, I promise nothing--absolutely
nothing!" Then more softly, as if to help him to leave her: "And
remember too that I shall not be an easy victim!"

"You'll get very sick of your independence."

"Perhaps I shall; it's even very probable. When that day comes I shall
be very glad to see you."

She had laid her hand on the knob of the door that led into her room,
and she waited a moment to see whether her visitor would not take his
departure. But he appeared unable to move; there was still an immense
unwillingness in his attitude and a sore remonstrance in his eyes. "I
must leave you now," said Isabel; and she opened the door and passed
into the other room.

This apartment was dark, but the darkness was tempered by a vague
radiance sent up through the window from the court of the hotel, and
Isabel could make out the masses of the furniture, the dim shining of
the mirror and the looming of the big four-posted bed. She stood still a
moment, listening, and at last she heard Caspar Goodwood walk out of
the sitting-room and close the door behind him. She stood still a little
longer, and then, by an irresistible impulse, dropped on her knees
before her bed and hid her face in her arms.



She was not praying; she was trembling--trembling all over. Vibration
was easy to her, was in fact too constant with her, and she found
herself now humming like a smitten harp. She only asked, however, to put
on the cover, to case herself again in brown holland, but she wished to
resist her excitement, and the attitude of devotion, which she kept for
some time, seemed to help her to be still. She intensely rejoiced that
Caspar Goodwood was gone; there was something in having thus got rid of
him that was like the payment, for a stamped receipt, of some debt
too long on her mind. As she felt the glad relief she bowed her head a
little lower; the sense was there, throbbing in her heart; it was part
of her emotion, but it was a thing to be ashamed of--it was profane and
out of place. It was not for some ten minutes that she rose from her
knees, and even when she came back to the sitting-room her tremor had
not quite subsided. It had had, verily, two causes: part of it was to be
accounted for by her long discussion with Mr. Goodwood, but it might be
feared that the rest was simply the enjoyment she found in the exercise
of her power. She sat down in the same chair again and took up her book,
but without going through the form of opening the volume. She leaned
back, with that low, soft, aspiring murmur with which she often
uttered her response to accidents of which the brighter side was not
superficially obvious, and yielded to the satisfaction of having refused
two ardent suitors in a fortnight. That love of liberty of which she
had given Caspar Goodwood so bold a sketch was as yet almost exclusively
theoretic; she had not been able to indulge it on a large scale. But it
appeared to her she had done something; she had tasted of the delight,
if not of battle, at least of victory; she had done what was truest to
her plan. In the glow of this consciousness the image of Mr. Goodwood
taking his sad walk homeward through the dingy town presented itself
with a certain reproachful force; so that, as at the same moment the
door of the room was opened, she rose with an apprehension that he
had come back. But it was only Henrietta Stackpole returning from her
dinner.

Miss Stackpole immediately saw that our young lady had been "through"
something, and indeed the discovery demanded no great penetration. She
went straight up to her friend, who received her without a greeting.
Isabel's elation in having sent Caspar Goodwood back to America
presupposed her being in a manner glad he had come to see her; but at
the same time she perfectly remembered Henrietta had had no right to set
a trap for her. "Has he been here, dear?" the latter yearningly asked.

Isabel turned away and for some moments answered nothing. "You acted
very wrongly," she declared at last.

"I acted for the best. I only hope you acted as well."

"You're not the judge. I can't trust you," said Isabel.

This declaration was unflattering, but Henrietta was much too unselfish
to heed the charge it conveyed; she cared only for what it intimated
with regard to her friend. "Isabel Archer," she observed with equal
abruptness and solemnity, "if you marry one of these people I'll never
speak to you again!"

"Before making so terrible a threat you had better wait till I'm asked,"
Isabel replied. Never having said a word to Miss Stackpole about Lord
Warburton's overtures, she had now no impulse whatever to justify
herself to Henrietta by telling her that she had refused that nobleman.

"Oh, you'll be asked quick enough, once you get off on the Continent.
Annie Climber was asked three times in Italy--poor plain little Annie."

"Well, if Annie Climber wasn't captured why should I be?"

"I don't believe Annie was pressed; but you'll be."

"That's a flattering conviction," said Isabel without alarm.

"I don't flatter you, Isabel, I tell you the truth!" cried her friend.
"I hope you don't mean to tell me that you didn't give Mr. Goodwood some
hope."

"I don't see why I should tell you anything; as I said to you just now,
I can't trust you. But since you're so much interested in Mr. Goodwood I
won't conceal from you that he returns immediately to America."

"You don't mean to say you've sent him off?" Henrietta almost shrieked.

"I asked him to leave me alone; and I ask you the same, Henrietta." Miss
Stackpole glittered for an instant with dismay, and then passed to the
mirror over the chimney-piece and took off her bonnet. "I hope you've
enjoyed your dinner," Isabel went on.

But her companion was not to be diverted by frivolous propositions. "Do
you know where you're going, Isabel Archer?"

"Just now I'm going to bed," said Isabel with persistent frivolity.

"Do you know where you're drifting?" Henrietta pursued, holding out her
bonnet delicately.

"No, I haven't the least idea, and I find it very pleasant not to know.
A swift carriage, of a dark night, rattling with four horses over roads
that one can't see--that's my idea of happiness."

"Mr. Goodwood certainly didn't teach you to say such things as
that--like the heroine of an immoral novel," said Miss Stackpole.
"You're drifting to some great mistake."

Isabel was irritated by her friend's interference, yet she still tried
to think what truth this declaration could represent. She could think
of nothing that diverted her from saying: "You must be very fond of me,
Henrietta, to be willing to be so aggressive."

"I love you intensely, Isabel," said Miss Stackpole with feeling.

"Well, if you love me intensely let me as intensely alone. I asked that
of Mr. Goodwood, and I must also ask it of you."

"Take care you're not let alone too much."

"That's what Mr. Goodwood said to me. I told him I must take the risks."

"You're a creature of risks--you make me shudder!" cried Henrietta.
"When does Mr. Goodwood return to America?"

"I don't know--he didn't tell me."

"Perhaps you didn't enquire," said Henrietta with the note of righteous
irony.

"I gave him too little satisfaction to have the right to ask questions
of him."

This assertion seemed to Miss Stackpole for a moment to bid defiance to
comment; but at last she exclaimed: "Well, Isabel, if I didn't know you
I might think you were heartless!"

"Take care," said Isabel; "you're spoiling me."

"I'm afraid I've done that already. I hope, at least," Miss Stackpole
added, "that he may cross with Annie Climber!"

Isabel learned from her the next morning that she had determined not to
return to Gardencourt (where old Mr. Touchett had promised her a renewed
welcome), but to await in London the arrival of the invitation that Mr.
Bantling had promised her from his sister Lady Pensil. Miss Stackpole
related very freely her conversation with Ralph Touchett's sociable
friend and declared to Isabel that she really believed she had now got
hold of something that would lead to something. On the receipt of Lady
Pensil's letter--Mr. Bantling had virtually guaranteed the arrival of
this document--she would immediately depart for Bedfordshire, and if
Isabel cared to look out for her impressions in the Interviewer
she would certainly find them. Henrietta was evidently going to see
something of the inner life this time.

"Do you know where you're drifting, Henrietta Stackpole?" Isabel asked,
imitating the tone in which her friend had spoken the night before.

"I'm drifting to a big position--that of the Queen of American
Journalism. If my next letter isn't copied all over the West I'll
swallow my penwiper!"

She had arranged with her friend Miss Annie Climber, the young lady
of the continental offers, that they should go together to make
those purchases which were to constitute Miss Climber's farewell to a
hemisphere in which she at least had been appreciated; and she presently
repaired to Jermyn Street to pick up her companion. Shortly after her
departure Ralph Touchett was announced, and as soon as he came in Isabel
saw he had something on his mind. He very soon took his cousin into his
confidence. He had received from his mother a telegram to the effect
that his father had had a sharp attack of his old malady, that she
was much alarmed and that she begged he would instantly return to
Gardencourt. On this occasion at least Mrs. Touchett's devotion to the
electric wire was not open to criticism.

"I've judged it best to see the great doctor, Sir Matthew Hope,
first," Ralph said; "by great good luck he's in town. He's to see me
at half-past twelve, and I shall make sure of his coming down to
Gardencourt--which he will do the more readily as he has already seen
my father several times, both there and in London. There's an express
at two-forty-five, which I shall take; and you'll come back with me or
remain here a few days longer, exactly as you prefer."

"I shall certainly go with you," Isabel returned. "I don't suppose I can
be of any use to my uncle, but if he's ill I shall like to be near him."

"I think you're fond of him," said Ralph with a certain shy pleasure
in his face. "You appreciate him, which all the world hasn't done. The
quality's too fine."

"I quite adore him," Isabel after a moment said.

"That's very well. After his son he's your greatest admirer." She
welcomed this assurance, but she gave secretly a small sigh of relief
at the thought that Mr. Touchett was one of those admirers who couldn't
propose to marry her. This, however, was not what she spoke; she went on
to inform Ralph that there were other reasons for her not remaining in
London. She was tired of it and wished to leave it; and then Henrietta
was going away--going to stay in Bedfordshire.

"In Bedfordshire?"

"With Lady Pensil, the sister of Mr. Bantling, who has answered for an
invitation."

Ralph was feeling anxious, but at this he broke into a laugh. Suddenly,
none the less, his gravity returned. "Bantling's a man of courage. But
if the invitation should get lost on the way?"

"I thought the British post-office was impeccable."

"The good Homer sometimes nods," said Ralph. "However," he went on more
brightly, "the good Bantling never does, and, whatever happens, he'll
take care of Henrietta."

Ralph went to keep his appointment with Sir Matthew Hope, and Isabel
made her arrangements for quitting Pratt's Hotel. Her uncle's danger
touched her nearly, and while she stood before her open trunk, looking
about her vaguely for what she should put into it, the tears suddenly
rose to her eyes. It was perhaps for this reason that when Ralph came
back at two o'clock to take her to the station she was not yet ready. He
found Miss Stackpole, however, in the sitting-room, where she had just
risen from her luncheon, and this lady immediately expressed her regret
at his father's illness.

"He's a grand old man," she said; "he's faithful to the last. If it's
really to be the last--pardon my alluding to it, but you must often
have thought of the possibility--I'm sorry that I shall not be at
Gardencourt."

"You'll amuse yourself much more in Bedfordshire."

"I shall be sorry to amuse myself at such a time," said Henrietta
with much propriety. But she immediately added: "I should like so to
commemorate the closing scene."

"My father may live a long time," said Ralph simply. Then, adverting
to topics more cheerful, he interrogated Miss Stackpole as to her own
future.

Now that Ralph was in trouble she addressed him in a tone of larger
allowance and told him that she was much indebted to him for having made
her acquainted with Mr. Bantling. "He has told me just the things I
want to know," she said; "all the society items and all about the royal
family. I can't make out that what he tells me about the royal family is
much to their credit; but he says that's only my peculiar way of looking
at it. Well, all I want is that he should give me the facts; I can put
them together quick enough, once I've got them." And she added that Mr.
Bantling had been so good as to promise to come and take her out that
afternoon.

"To take you where?" Ralph ventured to enquire.

"To Buckingham Palace. He's going to show me over it, so that I may get
some idea how they live."

"Ah," said Ralph, "we leave you in good hands. The first thing we shall
hear is that you're invited to Windsor Castle."

"If they ask me, I shall certainly go. Once I get started I'm not
afraid. But for all that," Henrietta added in a moment, "I'm not
satisfied; I'm not at peace about Isabel."

"What is her last misdemeanour?"

"Well, I've told you before, and I suppose there's no harm in my going
on. I always finish a subject that I take up. Mr. Goodwood was here last
night."

Ralph opened his eyes; he even blushed a little--his blush being
the sign of an emotion somewhat acute. He remembered that Isabel, in
separating from him in Winchester Square, had repudiated his suggestion
that her motive in doing so was the expectation of a visitor at Pratt's
Hotel, and it was a new pang to him to have to suspect her of duplicity.
On the other hand, he quickly said to himself, what concern was it of
his that she should have made an appointment with a lover? Had it not
been thought graceful in every age that young ladies should make a
mystery of such appointments? Ralph gave Miss Stackpole a diplomatic
answer. "I should have thought that, with the views you expressed to me
the other day, this would satisfy you perfectly."

"That he should come to see her? That was very well, as far as it went.
It was a little plot of mine; I let him know that we were in London, and
when it had been arranged that I should spend the evening out I sent him
a word--the word we just utter to the 'wise.' I hoped he would find her
alone; I won't pretend I didn't hope that you'd be out of the way. He
came to see her, but he might as well have stayed away."

"Isabel was cruel?"--and Ralph's face lighted with the relief of his
cousin's not having shown duplicity.

"I don't exactly know what passed between them. But she gave him no
satisfaction--she sent him back to America."

"Poor Mr. Goodwood!" Ralph sighed.

"Her only idea seems to be to get rid of him," Henrietta went on.

"Poor Mr. Goodwood!" Ralph repeated. The exclamation, it must be
confessed, was automatic; it failed exactly to express his thoughts,
which were taking another line.

"You don't say that as if you felt it. I don't believe you care."

"Ah," said Ralph, "you must remember that I don't know this interesting
young man--that I've never seen him."

"Well, I shall see him, and I shall tell him not to give up. If I didn't
believe Isabel would come round," Miss Stackpole added--"well, I'd give
up myself. I mean I'd give HER up!"



It had occurred to Ralph that, in the conditions, Isabel's parting with
her friend might be of a slightly embarrassed nature, and he went down
to the door of the hotel in advance of his cousin, who, after a slight
delay, followed with the traces of an unaccepted remonstrance, as he
thought, in her eyes. The two made the journey to Gardencourt in almost
unbroken silence, and the servant who met them at the station had no
better news to give them of Mr. Touchett--a fact which caused Ralph to
congratulate himself afresh on Sir Matthew Hope's having promised to
come down in the five o'clock train and spend the night. Mrs. Touchett,
he learned, on reaching home, had been constantly with the old man and
was with him at that moment; and this fact made Ralph say to himself
that, after all, what his mother wanted was just easy occasion. The
finer natures were those that shone at the larger times. Isabel went to
her own room, noting throughout the house that perceptible hush which
precedes a crisis. At the end of an hour, however, she came downstairs
in search of her aunt, whom she wished to ask about Mr. Touchett. She
went into the library, but Mrs. Touchett was not there, and as the
weather, which had been damp and chill, was now altogether spoiled, it
was not probable she had gone for her usual walk in the grounds. Isabel
was on the point of ringing to send a question to her room, when this
purpose quickly yielded to an unexpected sound--the sound of low music
proceeding apparently from the saloon. She knew her aunt never touched
the piano, and the musician was therefore probably Ralph, who played for
his own amusement. That he should have resorted to this recreation at
the present time indicated apparently that his anxiety about his father
had been relieved; so that the girl took her way, almost with restored
cheer, toward the source of the harmony. The drawing-room at Gardencourt
was an apartment of great distances, and, as the piano was placed at
the end of it furthest removed from the door at which she entered, her
arrival was not noticed by the person seated before the instrument.
This person was neither Ralph nor his mother; it was a lady whom
Isabel immediately saw to be a stranger to herself, though her back was
presented to the door. This back--an ample and well-dressed one--Isabel
viewed for some moments with surprise. The lady was of course a visitor
who had arrived during her absence and who had not been mentioned by
either of the servants--one of them her aunt's maid--of whom she had had
speech since her return. Isabel had already learned, however, with
what treasures of reserve the function of receiving orders may be
accompanied, and she was particularly conscious of having been treated
with dryness by her aunt's maid, through whose hands she had slipped
perhaps a little too mistrustfully and with an effect of plumage but
the more lustrous. The advent of a guest was in itself far from
disconcerting; she had not yet divested herself of a young faith that
each new acquaintance would exert some momentous influence on her life.
By the time she had made these reflexions she became aware that the
lady at the piano played remarkably well. She was playing something
of Schubert's--Isabel knew not what, but recognised Schubert--and she
touched the piano with a discretion of her own. It showed skill, it
showed feeling; Isabel sat down noiselessly on the nearest chair and
waited till the end of the piece. When it was finished she felt a strong
desire to thank the player, and rose from her seat to do so, while at
the same time the stranger turned quickly round, as if but just aware of
her presence.

"That's very beautiful, and your playing makes it more beautiful still,"
said Isabel with all the young radiance with which she usually uttered a
truthful rapture.

"You don't think I disturbed Mr. Touchett then?" the musician answered
as sweetly as this compliment deserved. "The house is so large and his
room so far away that I thought I might venture, especially as I played
just--just du bout des doigts."

"She's a Frenchwoman," Isabel said to herself; "she says that as if she
were French." And this supposition made the visitor more interesting to
our speculative heroine. "I hope my uncle's doing well," Isabel added.
"I should think that to hear such lovely music as that would really make
him feel better."

The lady smiled and discriminated. "I'm afraid there are moments in life
when even Schubert has nothing to say to us. We must admit, however,
that they are our worst."

"I'm not in that state now then," said Isabel. "On the contrary I should
be so glad if you would play something more."

"If it will give you pleasure--delighted." And this obliging person took
her place again and struck a few chords, while Isabel sat down nearer
the instrument. Suddenly the new-comer stopped with her hands on the
keys, half-turning and looking over her shoulder. She was forty years
old and not pretty, though her expression charmed. "Pardon me," she
said; "but are you the niece--the young American?"

"I'm my aunt's niece," Isabel replied with simplicity.

The lady at the piano sat still a moment longer, casting her air of
interest over her shoulder. "That's very well; we're compatriots." And
then she began to play.

"Ah then she's not French," Isabel murmured; and as the opposite
supposition had made her romantic it might have seemed that this
revelation would have marked a drop. But such was not the fact; rarer
even than to be French seemed it to be American on such interesting
terms.

The lady played in the same manner as before, softly and solemnly, and
while she played the shadows deepened in the room. The autumn twilight
gathered in, and from her place Isabel could see the rain, which had now
begun in earnest, washing the cold-looking lawn and the wind shaking the
great trees. At last, when the music had ceased, her companion got up
and, coming nearer with a smile, before Isabel had time to thank her
again, said: "I'm very glad you've come back; I've heard a great deal
about you."

Isabel thought her a very attractive person, but nevertheless spoke with
a certain abruptness in reply to this speech. "From whom have you heard
about me?"

The stranger hesitated a single moment and then, "From your uncle," she
answered. "I've been here three days, and the first day he let me come
and pay him a visit in his room. Then he talked constantly of you."

"As you didn't know me that must rather have bored you."

"It made me want to know you. All the more that since then--your aunt
being so much with Mr. Touchett--I've been quite alone and have got
rather tired of my own society. I've not chosen a good moment for my
visit."

A servant had come in with lamps and was presently followed by another
bearing the tea-tray. On the appearance of this repast Mrs. Touchett had
apparently been notified, for she now arrived and addressed herself to
the tea-pot. Her greeting to her niece did not differ materially from
her manner of raising the lid of this receptacle in order to glance at
the contents: in neither act was it becoming to make a show of avidity.
Questioned about her husband she was unable to say he was better; but
the local doctor was with him, and much light was expected from this
gentleman's consultation with Sir Matthew Hope.

"I suppose you two ladies have made acquaintance," she pursued. "If you
haven't I recommend you to do so; for so long as we continue--Ralph and
I--to cluster about Mr. Touchett's bed you're not likely to have much
society but each other."

"I know nothing about you but that you're a great musician," Isabel said
to the visitor.

"There's a good deal more than that to know," Mrs. Touchett affirmed in
her little dry tone.

"A very little of it, I am sure, will content Miss Archer!" the lady
exclaimed with a light laugh. "I'm an old friend of your aunt's.
I've lived much in Florence. I'm Madame Merle." She made this last
announcement as if she were referring to a person of tolerably distinct
identity. For Isabel, however, it represented little; she could only
continue to feel that Madame Merle had as charming a manner as any she
had ever encountered.

"She's not a foreigner in spite of her name," said Mrs. Touchett.

"She was born--I always forget where you were born."

"It's hardly worth while then I should tell you."

"On the contrary," said Mrs. Touchett, who rarely missed a logical
point; "if I remembered your telling me would be quite superfluous."

Madame Merle glanced at Isabel with a sort of world-wide smile, a
thing that over-reached frontiers. "I was born under the shadow of the
national banner."

"She's too fond of mystery," said Mrs. Touchett; "that's her great
fault."

"Ah," exclaimed Madame Merle, "I've great faults, but I don't think
that's one of then; it certainly isn't the greatest. I came into the
world in the Brooklyn navy-yard. My father was a high officer in the
United States Navy, and had a post--a post of responsibility--in that
establishment at the time. I suppose I ought to love the sea, but I hate
it. That's why I don't return to America. I love the land; the great
thing is to love something."

Isabel, as a dispassionate witness, had not been struck with the
force of Mrs. Touchett's characterisation of her visitor, who had an
expressive, communicative, responsive face, by no means of the sort
which, to Isabel's mind, suggested a secretive disposition. It was a
face that told of an amplitude of nature and of quick and free motions
and, though it had no regular beauty, was in the highest degree engaging
and attaching. Madame Merle was a tall, fair, smooth woman; everything
in her person was round and replete, though without those accumulations
which suggest heaviness. Her features were thick but in perfect
proportion and harmony, and her complexion had a healthy clearness.
Her grey eyes were small but full of light and incapable of
stupidity--incapable, according to some people, even of tears; she had
a liberal, full-rimmed mouth which when she smiled drew itself upward to
the left side in a manner that most people thought very odd, some very
affected and a few very graceful. Isabel inclined to range herself in
the last category. Madame Merle had thick, fair hair, arranged somehow
"classically" and as if she were a Bust, Isabel judged--a Juno or a
Niobe; and large white hands, of a perfect shape, a shape so perfect
that their possessor, preferring to leave them unadorned, wore no
jewelled rings. Isabel had taken her at first, as we have seen, for
a Frenchwoman; but extended observation might have ranked her as a
German--a German of high degree, perhaps an Austrian, a baroness, a
countess, a princess. It would never have been supposed she had come
into the world in Brooklyn--though one could doubtless not have carried
through any argument that the air of distinction marking her in so
eminent a degree was inconsistent with such a birth. It was true that
the national banner had floated immediately over her cradle, and the
breezy freedom of the stars and stripes might have shed an influence
upon the attitude she there took towards life. And yet she had evidently
nothing of the fluttered, flapping quality of a morsel of bunting in the
wind; her manner expressed the repose and confidence which come from a
large experience. Experience, however, had not quenched her youth; it
had simply made her sympathetic and supple. She was in a word a woman of
strong impulses kept in admirable order. This commended itself to Isabel
as an ideal combination.

The girl made these reflexions while the three ladies sat at their tea,
but that ceremony was interrupted before long by the arrival of the
great doctor from London, who had been immediately ushered into the
drawing-room. Mrs. Touchett took him off to the library for a private
talk; and then Madame Merle and Isabel parted, to meet again at dinner.
The idea of seeing more of this interesting woman did much to mitigate
Isabel's sense of the sadness now settling on Gardencourt.

When she came into the drawing-room before dinner she found the place
empty; but in the course of a moment Ralph arrived. His anxiety about
his father had been lightened; Sir Matthew Hope's view of his condition
was less depressed than his own had been. The doctor recommended that
the nurse alone should remain with the old man for the next three or
four hours; so that Ralph, his mother and the great physician himself
were free to dine at table. Mrs. Touchett and Sir Matthew appeared;
Madame Merle was the last.

Before she came Isabel spoke of her to Ralph, who was standing before
the fireplace. "Pray who is this Madame Merle?"

"The cleverest woman I know, not excepting yourself," said Ralph.

"I thought she seemed very pleasant."

"I was sure you'd think her very pleasant."

"Is that why you invited her?"

"I didn't invite her, and when we came back from London I didn't know
she was here. No one invited her. She's a friend of my mother's, and
just after you and I went to town my mother got a note from her. She had
arrived in England (she usually lives abroad, though she has first and
last spent a good deal of time here), and asked leave to come down for
a few days. She's a woman who can make such proposals with perfect
confidence; she's so welcome wherever she goes. And with my mother there
could be no question of hesitating; she's the one person in the world
whom my mother very much admires. If she were not herself (which she
after all much prefers), she would like to be Madame Merle. It would
indeed be a great change."

"Well, she's very charming," said Isabel. "And she plays beautifully."

"She does everything beautifully. She's complete."

Isabel looked at her cousin a moment. "You don't like her."

"On the contrary, I was once in love with her."

"And she didn't care for you, and that's why you don't like her."

"How can we have discussed such things? Monsieur Merle was then living."

"Is he dead now?"

"So she says."

"Don't you believe her?"

"Yes, because the statement agrees with the probabilities. The husband
of Madame Merle would be likely to pass away."

Isabel gazed at her cousin again. "I don't know what you mean. You mean
something--that you don't mean. What was Monsieur Merle?"

"The husband of Madame."

"You're very odious. Has she any children?"

"Not the least little child--fortunately."

"Fortunately?"

"I mean fortunately for the child. She'd be sure to spoil it."

Isabel was apparently on the point of assuring her cousin for the third
time that he was odious; but the discussion was interrupted by the
arrival of the lady who was the topic of it. She came rustling in
quickly, apologising for being late, fastening a bracelet, dressed in
dark blue satin, which exposed a white bosom that was ineffectually
covered by a curious silver necklace. Ralph offered her his arm with the
exaggerated alertness of a man who was no longer a lover.

Even if this had still been his condition, however, Ralph had other
things to think about. The great doctor spent the night at Gardencourt
and, returning to London on the morrow, after another consultation with
Mr. Touchett's own medical adviser, concurred in Ralph's desire that he
should see the patient again on the day following. On the day following
Sir Matthew Hope reappeared at Gardencourt, and now took a less
encouraging view of the old man, who had grown worse in the twenty-four
hours. His feebleness was extreme, and to his son, who constantly sat
by his bedside, it often seemed that his end must be at hand. The local
doctor, a very sagacious man, in whom Ralph had secretly more confidence
than in his distinguished colleague, was constantly in attendance, and
Sir Matthew Hope came back several times. Mr. Touchett was much of the
time unconscious; he slept a great deal; he rarely spoke. Isabel had a
great desire to be useful to him and was allowed to watch with him at
hours when his other attendants (of whom Mrs. Touchett was not the least
regular) went to take rest. He never seemed to know her, and she always
said to herself "Suppose he should die while I'm sitting here;" an idea
which excited her and kept her awake. Once he opened his eyes for a
while and fixed them upon her intelligently, but when she went to him,
hoping he would recognise her, he closed them and relapsed into stupor.
The day after this, however, he revived for a longer time; but on this
occasion Ralph only was with him. The old man began to talk, much to his
son's satisfaction, who assured him that they should presently have him
sitting up.

"No, my boy," said Mr. Touchett, "not unless you bury me in a sitting
posture, as some of the ancients--was it the ancients?--used to do."

"Ah, daddy, don't talk about that," Ralph murmured. "You mustn't deny
that you're getting better."

"There will be no need of my denying it if you don't say it," the old
man answered. "Why should we prevaricate just at the last? We never
prevaricated before. I've got to die some time, and it's better to die
when one's sick than when one's well. I'm very sick--as sick as I shall
ever be. I hope you don't want to prove that I shall ever be worse than
this? That would be too bad. You don't? Well then."

Having made this excellent point he became quiet; but the next time that
Ralph was with him he again addressed himself to conversation. The
nurse had gone to her supper and Ralph was alone in charge, having just
relieved Mrs. Touchett, who had been on guard since dinner. The room was
lighted only by the flickering fire, which of late had become necessary,
and Ralph's tall shadow was projected over wall and ceiling with an
outline constantly varying but always grotesque.

"Who's that with me--is it my son?" the old man asked.

"Yes, it's your son, daddy."

"And is there no one else?"

"No one else."

Mr. Touchett said nothing for a while; and then, "I want to talk a
little," he went on.

"Won't it tire you?" Ralph demurred.

"It won't matter if it does. I shall have a long rest. I want to talk
about YOU."

Ralph had drawn nearer to the bed; he sat leaning forward with his hand
on his father's. "You had better select a brighter topic."

"You were always bright; I used to be proud of your brightness. I should
like so much to think you'd do something."

"If you leave us," said Ralph, "I shall do nothing but miss you."

"That's just what I don't want; it's what I want to talk about. You must
get a new interest."

"I don't want a new interest, daddy. I have more old ones than I know
what to do with."

The old man lay there looking at his son; his face was the face of the
dying, but his eyes were the eyes of Daniel Touchett. He seemed to be
reckoning over Ralph's interests. "Of course you have your mother," he
said at last. "You'll take care of her."

"My mother will always take care of herself," Ralph returned.

"Well," said his father, "perhaps as she grows older she'll need a
little help."

"I shall not see that. She'll outlive me."

"Very likely she will; but that's no reason--!" Mr. Touchett let his
phrase die away in a helpless but not quite querulous sigh and remained
silent again.

"Don't trouble yourself about us," said his son, "My mother and I get on
very well together, you know."

"You get on by always being apart; that's not natural."

"If you leave us we shall probably see more of each other."

"Well," the old man observed with wandering irrelevance, "it can't be
said that my death will make much difference in your mother's life."

"It will probably make more than you think."

"Well, she'll have more money," said Mr. Touchett. "I've left her a good
wife's portion, just as if she had been a good wife."

"She has been one, daddy, according to her own theory. She has never
troubled you."

"Ah, some troubles are pleasant," Mr. Touchett murmured. "Those you've
given me for instance. But your mother has been less--less--what shall
I call it? less out of the way since I've been ill. I presume she knows
I've noticed it."

"I shall certainly tell her so; I'm so glad you mention it."

"It won't make any difference to her; she doesn't do it to please me.
She does it to please--to please--" And he lay a while trying to think
why she did it. "She does it because it suits her. But that's not what
I want to talk about," he added. "It's about you. You'll be very well
off."

"Yes," said Ralph, "I know that. But I hope you've not forgotten the
talk we had a year ago--when I told you exactly what money I should need
and begged you to make some good use of the rest."

"Yes, yes, I remember. I made a new will--in a few days. I suppose it
was the first time such a thing had happened--a young man trying to get
a will made against him."

"It is not against me," said Ralph. "It would be against me to have a
large property to take care of. It's impossible for a man in my state of
health to spend much money, and enough is as good as a feast."

"Well, you'll have enough--and something over. There will be more than
enough for one--there will be enough for two."

"That's too much," said Ralph.

"Ah, don't say that. The best thing you can do; when I'm gone, will be
to marry."

Ralph had foreseen what his father was coming to, and this suggestion
was by no means fresh. It had long been Mr. Touchett's most ingenious
way of taking the cheerful view of his son's possible duration. Ralph
had usually treated it facetiously; but present circumstances proscribed
the facetious. He simply fell back in his chair and returned his
father's appealing gaze.

"If I, with a wife who hasn't been very fond of me, have had a very
happy life," said the old man, carrying his ingenuity further still,
"what a life mightn't you have if you should marry a person different
from Mrs. Touchett. There are more different from her than there are
like her." Ralph still said nothing; and after a pause his father
resumed softly: "What do you think of your cousin?"

At this Ralph started, meeting the question with a strained smile. "Do I
understand you to propose that I should marry Isabel?"

"Well, that's what it comes to in the end. Don't you like Isabel?"

"Yes, very much." And Ralph got up from his chair and wandered over to
the fire. He stood before it an instant and then he stooped and stirred
it mechanically. "I like Isabel very much," he repeated.

"Well," said his father, "I know she likes you. She has told me how much
she likes you."

"Did she remark that she would like to marry me?"

"No, but she can't have anything against you. And she's the most
charming young lady I've ever seen. And she would be good to you. I have
thought a great deal about it."

"So have I," said Ralph, coming back to the bedside again. "I don't mind
telling you that."

"You ARE in love with her then? I should think you would be. It's as if
she came over on purpose."

"No, I'm not in love with her; but I should be if--if certain things
were different."

"Ah, things are always different from what they might be," said the old
man. "If you wait for them to change you'll never do anything. I don't
know whether you know," he went on; "but I suppose there's no harm in
my alluding to it at such an hour as this: there was some one wanted to
marry Isabel the other day, and she wouldn't have him."

"I know she refused Warburton: he told me himself."

"Well, that proves there's a chance for somebody else."

"Somebody else took his chance the other day in London--and got nothing
by it."

"Was it you?" Mr. Touchett eagerly asked.

"No, it was an older friend; a poor gentleman who came over from America
to see about it."

"Well, I'm sorry for him, whoever he was. But it only proves what I
say--that the way's open to you."

"If it is, dear father, it's all the greater pity that I'm unable to
tread it. I haven't many convictions; but I have three or four that I
hold strongly. One is that people, on the whole, had better not marry
their cousins. Another is that people in an advanced stage of pulmonary
disorder had better not marry at all."

The old man raised his weak hand and moved it to and fro before his
face. "What do you mean by that? You look at things in a way that would
make everything wrong. What sort of a cousin is a cousin that you
had never seen for more than twenty years of her life? We're all each
other's cousins, and if we stopped at that the human race would die out.
It's just the same with your bad lung. You're a great deal better than
you used to be. All you want is to lead a natural life. It is a great
deal more natural to marry a pretty young lady that you're in love with
than it is to remain single on false principles."

"I'm not in love with Isabel," said Ralph.

"You said just now that you would be if you didn't think it wrong. I
want to prove to you that it isn't wrong."

"It will only tire you, dear daddy," said Ralph, who marvelled at his
father's tenacity and at his finding strength to insist. "Then where
shall we all be?"

"Where shall you be if I don't provide for you? You won't have anything
to do with the bank, and you won't have me to take care of. You say
you've so many interests; but I can't make them out."

Ralph leaned back in his chair with folded arms; his eyes were fixed for
some time in meditation. At last, with the air of a man fairly mustering
courage, "I take a great interest in my cousin," he said, "but not the
sort of interest you desire. I shall not live many years; but I hope I
shall live long enough to see what she does with herself. She's entirely
independent of me; I can exercise very little influence upon her life.
But I should like to do something for her."

"What should you like to do?"

"I should like to put a little wind in her sails."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I should like to put it into her power to do some of the things she
wants. She wants to see the world for instance. I should like to put
money in her purse."

"Ah, I'm glad you've thought of that," said the old man. "But I've
thought of it too. I've left her a legacy--five thousand pounds."

"That's capital; it's very kind of you. But I should like to do a little
more."

Something of that veiled acuteness with which it had been on Daniel
Touchett's part the habit of a lifetime to listen to a financial
proposition still lingered in the face in which the invalid had not
obliterated the man of business. "I shall be happy to consider it," he
said softly.

"Isabel's poor then. My mother tells me that she has but a few hundred
dollars a year. I should like to make her rich."

"What do you mean by rich?"

"I call people rich when they're able to meet the requirements of their
imagination. Isabel has a great deal of imagination."

"So have you, my son," said Mr. Touchett, listening very attentively but
a little confusedly.

"You tell me I shall have money enough for two. What I want is that you
should kindly relieve me of my superfluity and make it over to Isabel.
Divide my inheritance into two equal halves and give her the second."

"To do what she likes with?"

"Absolutely what she likes."

"And without an equivalent?"

"What equivalent could there be?"

"The one I've already mentioned."

"Her marrying--some one or other? It's just to do away with anything of
that sort that I make my suggestion. If she has an easy income she'll
never have to marry for a support. That's what I want cannily to
prevent. She wishes to be free, and your bequest will make her free."

"Well, you seem to have thought it out," said Mr. Touchett. "But I don't
see why you appeal to me. The money will be yours, and you can easily
give it to her yourself."

Ralph openly stared. "Ah, dear father, I can't offer Isabel money!"

The old man gave a groan. "Don't tell me you're not in love with her! Do
you want me to have the credit of it?"

"Entirely. I should like it simply to be a clause in your will, without
the slightest reference to me."

"Do you want me to make a new will then?"

"A few words will do it; you can attend to it the next time you feel a
little lively."

"You must telegraph to Mr. Hilary then. I'll do nothing without my
solicitor."

"You shall see Mr. Hilary to-morrow."

"He'll think we've quarrelled, you and I," said the old man.

"Very probably; I shall like him to think it," said Ralph, smiling;
"and, to carry out the idea, I give you notice that I shall be very
sharp, quite horrid and strange, with you."

The humour of this appeared to touch his father, who lay a little while
taking it in. "I'll do anything you like," Mr. Touchett said at last;
"but I'm not sure it's right. You say you want to put wind in her sails;
but aren't you afraid of putting too much?"

"I should like to see her going before the breeze!" Ralph answered.

"You speak as if it were for your mere amusement."

"So it is, a good deal."

"Well, I don't think I understand," said Mr. Touchett with a sigh.
"Young men are very different from what I was. When I cared for a
girl--when I was young--I wanted to do more than look at her."

"You've scruples that I shouldn't have had, and you've ideas that I
shouldn't have had either. You say Isabel wants to be free, and that
her being rich will keep her from marrying for money. Do you think that
she's a girl to do that?"

"By no means. But she has less money than she has ever had before. Her
father then gave her everything, because he used to spend his capital.
She has nothing but the crumbs of that feast to live on, and she doesn't
really know how meagre they are--she has yet to learn it. My mother has
told me all about it. Isabel will learn it when she's really thrown upon
the world, and it would be very painful to me to think of her coming to
the consciousness of a lot of wants she should be unable to satisfy."

"I've left her five thousand pounds. She can satisfy a good many wants
with that."

"She can indeed. But she would probably spend it in two or three years."

"You think she'd be extravagant then?"

"Most certainly," said Ralph, smiling serenely.

Poor Mr. Touchett's acuteness was rapidly giving place to pure
confusion. "It would merely be a question of time then, her spending the
larger sum?"

"No--though at first I think she'd plunge into that pretty freely: she'd
probably make over a part of it to each of her sisters. But after that
she'd come to her senses, remember she has still a lifetime before her,
and live within her means."

"Well, you HAVE worked it out," said the old man helplessly. "You do
take an interest in her, certainly."

"You can't consistently say I go too far. You wished me to go further."

"Well, I don't know," Mr. Touchett answered. "I don't think I enter into
your spirit. It seems to me immoral."

"Immoral, dear daddy?"

"Well, I don't know that it's right to make everything so easy for a
person."

"It surely depends upon the person. When the person's good, your making
things easy is all to the credit of virtue. To facilitate the execution
of good impulses, what can be a nobler act?"

This was a little difficult to follow, and Mr. Touchett considered it
for a while. At last he said: "Isabel's a sweet young thing; but do you
think she's so good as that?"

"She's as good as her best opportunities," Ralph returned.

"Well," Mr. Touchett declared, "she ought to get a great many
opportunities for sixty thousand pounds."

"I've no doubt she will."

"Of course I'll do what you want," said the old man. "I only want to
understand it a little."

"Well, dear daddy, don't you understand it now?" his son caressingly
asked. "If you don't we won't take any more trouble about it. We'll
leave it alone."

Mr. Touchett lay a long time still. Ralph supposed he had given up the
attempt to follow. But at last, quite lucidly, he began again. "Tell
me this first. Doesn't it occur to you that a young lady with sixty
thousand pounds may fall a victim to the fortune-hunters?"

"She'll hardly fall a victim to more than one."

"Well, one's too many."

"Decidedly. That's a risk, and it has entered into my calculation. I
think it's appreciable, but I think it's small, and I'm prepared to take
it."

Poor Mr. Touchett's acuteness had passed into perplexity, and his
perplexity now passed into admiration. "Well, you have gone into it!" he
repeated. "But I don't see what good you're to get of it."

Ralph leaned over his father's pillows and gently smoothed them; he was
aware their talk had been unduly prolonged. "I shall get just the good
I said a few moments ago I wished to put into Isabel's reach--that of
having met the requirements of my imagination. But it's scandalous, the
way I've taken advantage of you!"


