{"name": "Chapters 18\u201320", "summary": "Chapter 18 After his fateful meeting with the monster on the glacier, Victor puts off the creation of a new, female creature. He begins to have doubts about the wisdom of agreeing to the monster\u2019s request. He realizes that the project will require him to travel to England to gather information. His father notices that his spirits are troubled much of the time\u2014Victor, still racked by guilt over the deaths of William and Justine, is now newly horrified by the task in which he is about to engage\u2014and asks him if his impending marriage to Elizabeth is the source of his melancholy. Victor assures him that the prospect of marriage to Elizabeth is the only happiness in his life. Eager to raise Victor\u2019s spirits, Alphonse suggests that they celebrate the marriage immediately. Victor refuses, unwilling to marry Elizabeth until he has completed his obligation to the monster. He asks Alphonse if he can first travel to England, and Alphonse consents. Victor and Alphonse arrange a two-year tour, on which Henry Clerval, eager to begin his studies after several years of unpleasant work for his father in Geneva, will accompany Victor. After traveling for a while, they reach London.  Chapter 19 Victor and Henry journey through England and Scotland, but Victor grows impatient to begin his work and free himself of his bond to the monster. Victor has an acquaintance in a Scottish town, with whom he urges Henry to stay while he goes alone on a tour of Scotland. Henry consents reluctantly, and Victor departs for a remote, desolate island in the Orkneys to complete his project. Quickly setting up a laboratory in a small shack, Victor devotes many hours to working on his new creature. He often has trouble continuing his work, however, knowing how unsatisfying, even grotesque, the product of his labor will be.  Chapter 20 While working one night, Victor begins to think about what might happen after he finishes his creation. He imagines that his new creature might not want to seclude herself, as the monster had promised, or that the two creatures might have children, creating \u201ca race of devils . . . on the earth.\u201d In the midst of these reflections and growing concern, Victor looks up to see the monster grinning at him through the window. Overcome by the monster\u2019s hideousness and the possibility of a second creature like him, he destroys his work in progress. The monster becomes enraged at Victor for breaking his promise, and at the prospect of his own continued solitude. He curses and vows revenge, then departs, swearing that he will be with Victor on his wedding night. The following night, Victor receives a letter from Henry, who, tired of Scotland, suggests that they continue their travels. Before he leaves his shack, Victor cleans and packs his chemical instruments and collects the remains of his second creature. Late that evening, he rows out onto the ocean and throws the remains into the water, allowing himself to rest in the boat for a while. When he wakes, he finds that the winds will not permit him to return to shore. Panicking, in fear for his life, he contemplates the possibility of dying at sea, blown far out into the Atlantic. Soon the winds change, however, and he reaches shore near a town. When he lands, a group of townspeople greet him rudely, telling him that he is under suspicion for a murder discovered the previous night.<PARAGRAPH>", "analysis": "Chapters 18\u201320 The contrast, first established at Ingolstadt, between the inwardly focused Victor and the outwardly focused Henry sharpens as the natural world produces differing effects in the two men. Earlier, Henry\u2019s interaction with the Frankenstein family and general sociability counter Victor\u2019s secrecy and self-isolation. Similarly, his optimism and cheer in the presence of sublime nature now counter the anxiety that Victor feels in knowing that the monster pervades his natural surroundings. For Henry, \u201calive to every new scene; joyful when he saw the beauties of the setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise,\u201d nature is a source of infinite bliss, while for Victor it has become an unending reminder of his imprudent meddling, and of his responsibility for the tragedies that have plagued him. An appreciation of nature is not the only aspect of Victor\u2019s character that Henry seems to have adopted: Henry is now enthusiastic about natural philosophy and eager to explore the world\u2014much like Victor had been two years before. Victor himself notes that \u201cin Clerval I saw the image of my former self.\u201d One can argue that Henry represents the impending ruin of another young, brilliant man by science; one can also argue that he represents the healthy, safe route to scientific knowledge that Victor never took. In either case, Victor\u2019s emotional outbursts strongly foreshadow Henry\u2019s death: \u201cAnd where does he now exist?\u201d he asks. \u201cIs this gentle and lovely being lost forever?\u201d The pervading theme of the passive, innocent woman\u2014manifested in the mother who sacrifices herself for her daughter, the fianc\u00e9e who waits endlessly for her future husband, and the orphan girl who is rescued from poverty\u2014culminates in this section with the female monster whose creation Victor suddenly aborts after being struck by doubts about the correctness of his actions. Though never alive, the female monster is a powerful presence: to Victor, she represents another crime against humanity and nature; to the monster, she represents his one remaining hope for a life not spent alone. Even Victor, as he tears his creation apart, recognizes her near-humanity: \u201cI almost felt,\u201d he says, \u201cas if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being.\u201d Victor\u2019s decision to destroy the female creature can be seen as an explicitly anti-feminist action. He fears her ability to reproduce (and thereby create a \u201crace of devils\u201d); he fears that, as a woman, she will refuse to satisfy the male monster for whom she has been created; and he fears that he will unleash another power into the world that he cannot control. Unlike the God of Genesis, who creates a woman to keep Adam company, Victor does not have ultimate power over his creations. His anxiety leads him to project a stereotypically male activeness onto the female creature; his decision to destroy her ensures her absolute passivity. Victor sprinkles his speech with metanarrative comments that remind the reader of the relationship between storyteller and audience, shape the upcoming narrative, and demonstrate the narrator\u2019s deep emotional investment in his story. \u201cI must pause here; for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my recollection,\u201d Victor says, illustrating that he is overwhelmed by emotion and offering a glimpse of the horrific story that he is about to tell. Victor\u2019s apostrophes to his absent friends serve the same purposes, adding to the emotional impact of his speech, emphasizing the poignancy of his nostalgic memories, and calling attention to the layered narrative. When Victor cries out \u201cClerval! Beloved Friend! Even now it delights me to record your words,\u201d the reader senses the power of Victor\u2019s emotion and its ultimate uselessness against the force of fate. Additionally, the mention of \u201crecord[ing]\u201d Henry\u2019s words underscores the fact that it is only through Walton that the reader has access to the other characters and their narratives.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210120122716/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/frankenstein/section9/"}