{"name": "Chapters 1\u20132", "summary": "Chapter 1 The stranger, who the reader soon learns is Victor Frankenstein, begins his narration. He starts with his family background, birth, and early childhood, telling Walton about his father, Alphonse, and his mother, Caroline. Alphonse became Caroline\u2019s protector when her father, Alphonse\u2019s longtime friend Beaufort, died in poverty. They married two years later, and Victor was born soon after. Frankenstein then describes how his childhood companion, Elizabeth Lavenza, entered his family. At this point in the narrative, the original (1818) and revised (1831) versions of Frankenstein diverge. In the original version, Elizabeth is Victor\u2019s cousin, the daughter of Alphonse\u2019s sister; when Victor is four years old, Elizabeth\u2019s mother dies and Elizabeth is adopted into the Frankenstein family. In the revised version, Elizabeth is discovered by Caroline, on a trip to Italy, when Victor is about five years old. While visiting a poor Italian family, Caroline notices a beautiful blonde girl among the dark-haired Italian children; upon discovering that Elizabeth is the orphaned daughter of a Milanese nobleman and a German woman and that the Italian family can barely afford to feed her, Caroline adopts Elizabeth and brings her back to Geneva. Victor\u2019s mother decides at the moment of the adoption that Elizabeth and Victor should someday marry.  Chapter 2 Elizabeth and Victor grow up together as best friends. Victor\u2019s friendship with Henry Clerval, a schoolmate and only child, flourishes as well, and he spends his childhood happily surrounded by this close domestic circle. As a teenager, Victor becomes increasingly fascinated by the mysteries of the natural world. He chances upon a book by Cornelius Agrippa, a sixteenth-century scholar of the occult sciences, and becomes interested in natural philosophy. He studies the outdated findings of the alchemists Agrippa, Paracelsus, and Albertus Magnus with enthusiasm. He witnesses the destructive power of nature when, during a raging storm, lightning destroys a tree near his house. A modern natural philosopher accompanying the Frankenstein family explains to Victor the workings of electricity, making the ideas of the alchemists seem outdated and worthless. (In the 1818 version, a demonstration of electricity by his father convinces Victor of the alchemists\u2019 mistakenness.)", "analysis": "Chapters 1\u20132 The picture that Victor draws of his childhood is an idyllic one. Though loss abounds\u2014the poverty of Beaufort and the orphaning of Elizabeth, for instance\u2014it is always quickly alleviated by the presence of a close, loving family. Nonetheless, the reader senses, even in these early passages, that the stability and comfort of family are about to be exploded. Shining through Victor\u2019s narration of a joyful childhood and an eccentric adolescence is a glimmer of the great tragedy that will soon overtake\u00a0him. Women in Frankenstein fit into few roles: the loving, sacrificial mother; the innocent, sensitive child; and the concerned, confused, abandoned lover. Throughout the novel, they are universally passive, rising only at the most extreme moments to demand action from the men around them. The language Victor uses to describe the relationship between his mother and father supports this image of women\u2019s passivity: in reference to his mother, he says that his father \u201ccame as a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself to his care.\u201d Elizabeth, Justine Moritz, and Caroline Beaufort all fit into this mold of the passive woman.Various metanarrative comments (i.e., remarks that pertain not to the content of the narrative but rather to the telling of the narrative) remind the reader of the fact that Victor\u2019s narrative is contained within Walton\u2019s. Victor interrupts his story to relate how Elizabeth became a part of his family, prefacing the digression with the comment, \u201cBut before I continue my narrative, I must record an incident.\u201d Such guiding statements structure Victor\u2019s narrative and remind the reader that Victor is telling his story to a specific audience\u2014Walton. Foreshadowing is ubiquitous in these chapters and, in fact, throughout the novel. Even Walton\u2019s letters prepare the way for the tragic events that Victor will recount. Victor constantly alludes to his imminent doom; for example, he calls his interest in natural philosophy \u201cthe genius that has regulated my fate\u201d and \u201cthe fatal impulse that led to my ruin.\u201d Victor\u2019s narrative is rife with nostalgia for a happier time; he dwells on the fuzzy memories of his blissful childhood with Elizabeth, his father and mother, and Henry Clerval. But even in the midst of these tranquil childhood recollections, he cannot ignore the signs of the tragedy that lies in his imminent future; he sees that each event, such as the death of his mother, is nothing but \u201can omen, as it were, of [his]\u00a0future misery.\u201d<PARAGRAPH>This heavy use of foreshadowing has a dual effect. On the one hand, it adds to the suspense of the novel, leaving the reader wondering about the nature of the awful tragedy that has caused Victor so much grief. On the other hand, it drains away some of the suspense\u2014the reader knows far ahead of time that Victor has no hope, that all is doomed. Words like \u201cfate,\u201d \u201cfatal,\u201d and \u201comen\u201d reinforce the inevitability of Victor\u2019s tragedy, suggesting not only a sense of resignation but also, perhaps, an attempt by Victor to deny responsibility for his own misfortune. Describing his decision to study chemistry, he says, \u201cThus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.\u201d", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210120122716/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/frankenstein/section2/"}