{"name": "part 2, Chapter 14", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210422211837/https://www.gradesaver.com/a-room-with-a-view/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-16", "summary": "Lucy prepares for the external situation of Sunday, but she avoids self-examination. She met George at the rectory soon after the incident at the lake; the sound of his voice had a strong affect on her, and she longed to be near him. But Lucy has convinced herself that these feelings all come from stress and confusion. Charlotte Bartlett has arrived, and she is already proving a nuisance with her fussiness. Mr. Floyd , Cecil, Freddy, Lucy, and Charlotte are all outside the house on a beautiful autumn day. Charlotte tries to pay for her cab ride, but since she has no small coins and no one is able to make change, an elaborate conversation starts up, with competing schemes for dispersing the money fairly. Finally fed up, Lucy intercedes and takes Charlotte's money, to go make change with one of the servants. Charlotte follows her into the house and, once they are alone, asks if anyone knows about \"him\" yet. Lucy responds crossly that no one knows. They argue back and forth: Charlotte now thinks that Lucy must fess up, lest Cecil should hear about the kiss from someone else. Lucy thinks it impossible that Cecil might hear of it, but Charlotte seems fixated on the possibility. Lucy finally argues that Cecil will laugh at it if he hears it, but deep down she knows that he won't. He demands that she be completely pure for him. They talk about George, and Lucy insists that he does not mean to be a cad. She makes a speech trying to explain the kiss ; it is an important moment in the novel, worth a look. She talks about how George was swept up in the moment: he saw Lucy surrounded by violets and lost his head. She defends his character. He is happier than before, and he works as a clerk. She insists, amiably, that Charlotte forget about the whole thing. But she makes a critical error: when talking about George losing his head and being swept away by the moment, she unknowingly uses the masculine pronoun instead of the feminine: \"It makes such a difference when you see a person with beautiful things behind him unexpectedly\". Forster does not tell us if Charlotte detects the slip.", "analysis": "Charlotte's inordinate fear of Cecil finding out about George is a bit of foreshadowing; the worry is not that Lucy might have told someone untrustworthy, but that Charlotte has. Charlotte wants Lucy to confess because she has already endangered the integrity of the secret and does not want to be held accountable for it. Things between the cousins have been very difficult, and a good part of it has to do with Charlotte's interference in Florence. Although Lucy is not self-aware enough to realize the origin of her anger, Forster hints throughout that Lucy feels a great deal of resentment towards Charlotte. Charlotte represents a woman who never realized her potential. From here until the end of the novel, Forster begins to set up parallels between Charlotte and Lucy. Charlotte represents failed potential in different ways. Because this is a social comedy and, by the formula of the genre, the novel will end in marriage, spinsters are usually seen as somewhat pathetic figures. In A Room with a View, a life of companionship is seen as better than a life alone. Forster, newly involved with his first great love at the time this novel was written, depicts a world where life partnership can and should be part of growth. A woman need not be a spinster to be independent; in Charlotte's case, eternal maidenhood has not helped her to achieve any real independence of thought or action. She is unimaginative and passive aggressive, and her years alone have only exacerbated these qualities. Lucy's slip is one of the nicest moments of the novel. Although she does not realize what she said, her words reveal explicitly to the reader that she lost her head amongst the violets just as much as George did"}