{"name": "Chapter 19", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 19 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>When it grew dark, the two climbed through the heather, coming out in view of a lit house. Many people scurried about but froze as Alan gave three sharp whistles to identify himself. When Alan and David reached the house, they were greeted by James Stewart of the Glens. Alan asked him to speak in English so David could understand. James immediately mentioned how bad of a day it had been. The murder would certainly be pinned on the people of Appin. Alan asked him to consider that the Red Fox was dead as well. But James exclaimed that he had a family and it would be better for him if Campbell were still alive. PARAGRAPH>During this conversation, the confused scurrying behind them continued. James explained that they were burying the weapons and burning dangerous documents. When Alan learned that they planned to hide his French clothing, he ran off to retrieve it, handing David over to James. David and James entered the house and sat at a table, but James was too deep in thought to pay much attention to David. James' wife stood weeping and his son sat at the fire, burning select papers. Finally, James could no longer sit and began to pace. At one point, James ran to his son and struck him for trying to burn a paper which could help him. The situation was very awkward for David, who was glad to see Alan reappear in his tattered French garb. While David changed into better clothing, the matter was settled between Alan and James that he would run with Alan. They were given provisions, including arms, food, and money. Alan noted that the money would soon run out but James told him he should not wait for more but should send word once they had traveled awhile. He exclaimed that soldiers would soon ransack the entire area and the news that Alan had been present would surface. James would have to create a wanted poster with Alan's name and another with David's. He figured that the Red Fox's relatives would do the same and it was James's only hope of avoiding some of their retribution. PARAGRAPH>Alan cried that he had brought David to this and now acted like a traitor. Alan asked David what he thought, who told them that they make posters of the man who had committed the crime, not of two innocent men. The Highlanders gasped, crying that they would not betray the Camerons. To David, this confirmed that the murderer was from the Cameron family. David gave up trying to use logic and agreed to help in any way he could. Mrs. Stewart ran over to Alan and David, thanking them both. She was especially grateful toward David because he was risking his life for strangers. She wept that she would always bless him. As day was approaching, Alan and David reentered the dark heather of the Highlands. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>David comes into the urgency of the situation when they arrive at James of the Glens. He had not realized the severity of the situation nor the likelihood that the murder would be blamed on a scapegoat if the Campbells could not find the murderer. David still suggests making a wanted poster for the real murderer instead of for himself and Alan. However, the loyalty which the Stewarts feel toward the others in their clan overwhelms any sense of rational justice that David holds. The reader can understand the reaction that James and Alan have to the situation, though she may not condone it. PARAGRAPH>However, one also observes that Alan refuses to have his French clothing disposed of and puts the clothing back on his body even though it is incriminating, tattered, and dirty. This is a far from a rational response but Alan's romantic ideals and ego will not allow him to dress in clothing any less glorious. The clothing is a synecdoche for Alan, representing his loyalty to the French King and his need to arrogantly uphold his cosmopolitan reputation. As David observed on the ship, Alan was so consumed by his appearance and the material with which he adorned himself that he fussed over his clothing like a woman. By modern standards, this simile may seem sexist, but his point is well taken and we understand his meaning as we watch Alan return to his tattered French wear. PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Stewart is one of the few female characters in the novel. One will notice, however, that the female characters which are portrayed are given positive illustrations. Mrs. Stewart, though only a wife figure, and thus a secondary character, shows more sincere human emotion than do many of the other characters. One of Kiely's comments details that for all of the traumatic experiences which David and Alan undergo on their journey, truthfully their adventures are little more than boy's play. He alleges, 3For all the fatigue and discomforts caused by the rough terrain and the fickle Scotch climate during their flight in the heather, David and Alan have a rather whimsical time of it, whistling and joking and treating the dangers of man and nature with an air of casual disregard. 2 If this is true, which we will discuss later, the women at least seem to have a much more sincere investment in life and humanity", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20"}