{"name": "Chapter 15", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 15 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>David walked in the direction he thought he had seen the rooftops. He came upon a small residence where an old man sat out front. With the man's limited English, David learned that his ship's crew had landed safely and had passed through that very house the previous night. He asked if a man wearing fancier clothes was among the group and the man confirmed this. The man inquired if David was the boy with the silver button. David answered and the man delivered a message from Alan. David was requested to find Alan in his own country, Torosay. The generous man invited David in for the night, making him punch and feeding him extremely well. David slept well and was much revived. PARAGRAPH>He started off late the next morning toward Torosay, noting the dress of the impoverished Highlanders reflected the edict of the 1746 defeat whereby their traditional dress was prohibited. He asked some of the natives directions to Torosay but received a flood of Gaelic in response. When night fell, David reached a small house but was refused entrance until he offered money for his stay. The house owner took five shillings, began speaking Scottish, and agreed to lead him to Torosay in the morning. David slept anxiously but found the man willing to lead him the next day. Five miles later they stopped at wealthier man's house to change the shillings. The man invited them to a meal with his family and served a strong punch for drink. David's guide was incapacitated after the punch and refused to continue. David appealed to the host but he refused to allow his guests to leave after punch. The next morning, David's guide was slow to start as he began drinking again. Finally they traveled a few miles but then the man stopped, saying his English had left him, and demanded more money. David compromised and gave him two shillings but the man soon stopped again and demanded more. When David refused, the man took out a knife but David was able to knock the man down and strip him of his knife and shoes. PARAGRAPH>He thus continued alone until meeting a blind man who professed that he knew the country so well that he could lead David. Unbeknownst to the blind man, David noticed a pistol hanging from the man's clothes. David doubted that the man was a catechist like he claimed. As they walked, David noticed that the man trying to knock him over. When David would not succumb to his tricks, the old man wandered off cursing. Happy to be alone, David continued until he reached an inn. The innkeeper told him how the blind man he had met was suspected as a highway robber. David ate and drank well again and went to sleep pleased with his progress. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Ironically, although David is quite relieved to find civilization on the Isle of Mull, the men he meets are largely villainous and dangerous. David has returned to walking along a path toward a destination as we found him at the beginning of the story when he sets out for his uncle's home. As this mode was his start, we can assume that he is now back on track along his rite of passage toward adulthood, moving from the Garden of Eden to the land of knowledge, symbolically speaking. He meets several obstacles along the way during the passage in this chapter and must learn how to deal with each without getting swindled. The chapter has a cyclical pattern, beginning with David walking alone, pleased to be back on track, and ending in the same manner. In the interim, David comes into contact with five different, challenging Highlanders whom he must judge. Cyclically, the man David meets at the beginning of the chapter and the man David is aided by at the end are both kind and helpful. The three men sandwiched in between cause the problems. PARAGRAPH>Luckily, the first house which David comes to on the Isle of Mull has been visited by the Covenant's crew and Alan. Furthermore, Alan has left a message for David and has given the man at the house a means by which he can trust to whom he is communicating. He identifies that David is \"the lad with the silver button. We have already discussed how the button is a synecdoche for Alan - it is a piece of him and stands for his body and character. In a very Biblical sense, one could possibly say that the button represents the Eucharist, where a churchgoer may receive the blood and body of Christ. David has received from Alan's body and is now in search of him, following his path and the messages he has left behind. Furthermore, David has been reduced from a man with a name and past to a man identified by the button he is carrying. The button serves as a vessel for receiving the messages Alan has left behind and allows David a destination to seek. Otherwise, he would not know where to go or for whom to look. David only has purpose and direction through the button and the ticket it gives him. He does not make decisions on his own. PARAGRAPH>The three men David meets up with in the middle of the chapter try to swindle and trick him but he catches on rather quickly. The blind man is the most interesting. He claims to be a catechist, but yet has a pistol hanging out of his pocket and constantly tries to knock David over so that he can rob him. David however sees the pistol and notices the man's tricks and so is not manipulated by him. The pistol is symbolic of the manner in which David is able to see past the tricks and obstacles he is affronted with. His instincts toward the blind man are correct, just as the path he follows is straight and will lead him to Alan", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-11-15"}