{"name": "Chapter 13", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 13 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Late one night, Hoseason pleaded with Alan to steer the ship. Alan and David could tell that the Captain was earnestly worried about navigating his ship through the upcoming waters. Alan took the reins but found the sea to be ordinary. Suddenly, a fountain of water spurted high and the Captain demanded to know what had caused it. Alan recognized that the fountain was caused by water breaking on a reef. He was glad the fountain had alerted them. Hoseason agreed but pointed to the fountains spurting up all around the ship. Sure enough, many reefs became visible. Safe navigation seemed nearly impossible. Alan remembered that the Torran Rocks stretched for a mile along these parts. David noticed that Alan was white with fear but Hoseason and Riach remained calm. David respected them greatly at this time. PARAGRAPH>Alan remembered that there may be clearer waters near the land. Mr. Riach watched the sea from aloft and alerted Alan where to move the ship to avoid danger. He yelled down that the waters did seem calmer near land. The Captain declared that Alan had been correct after all and that he would remember this when they were settling their dues. Hoseason cared more about the ship, David observed, than he had about Ransome. Riach screamed to the men on deck to move the ship just as the tide hit the ship sharply. The boat spun like a top, throwing Riach onto the deck. David was stunned and confused. When he came to, he joined the seamen trying to repair the skiff. Injured crewmen came on deck to lend a hand as well. The Captain stood motionless, in shock. Alan told David that the land they neared was home to his hated Campbells. PARAGRAPH>One of the wounded man took over watch of the sea and suddenly shouted to the men to hang on. A great swell came and David was pushed into the sea. He sank below the water and rose to the surface many times. After being tossed about for a long while, David came to in calmer water, holding onto a spar. He was far from the ship and finally decided he was closer to the land. With his little swimming experience, he did not reach the shore for over an hour. The desolation of the isle struck him almost as much as his fatigue. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>In this chapter, the reader observes the men under extraordinary circumstances and watches as they try to work together. Although the men have battled against each other and although Alan is a Jacobite and the others are Protestant followers of King George, the circumstances require a team effort. Again, Stevenson is highlighting that a Scotsman, as a human being, contains qualities of both the Highlander and the Lowlander. In times when one must function successfully, one must draw from each side of his humanity. Similarly, David and Alan are most successful along their journey when they are able to take advantage of each man's best qualities. Still, we will note in \"The Quarrel\" chapter, how far and difficult the gap is to bridge", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-11-15"}