{"name": "Chapter 6", "summary": "Chapter 6 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Ransome led them to the Hawes Inn at Queensferry. Up the stairs in a hot room sat Captain Hoseason in very thick, warm clothing. He was large and dignified in appearance. Due to the heat of the room and David's desire to see the ocean, David agreed, against his better will, to leave the room where his uncle sat and go wander by the water. He enjoyed seeing the waves and seaweed. He spoke with one of the ship's men whose language drove him back toward the hotel where he saw Ransome exiting. The boy asked for punch which David refused but he did buy ale for them both. They sat in the inn's lobby eating and drinking. PARAGRAPH>David thought it would be good to make friends with the landlord and so asked him if he knew Ebenezer's lawyer, Mr. Rankeillor. The landlord replied that he was a good man and asked if David was a relation to old Ebenezer. David denied that he was and mentioned Ebenezer's bad reputation. From talking with the landlord, David learned what he had hoped and guessed, that his father has been the eldest son and that the property at the Shaws was now legally his. David started imagining the life he could lead. He noticed Hoseason down by the pier and then heard his uncle calling for him so met the pair in the street. The Captain addressed the young man, telling him how well his uncle had spoke of him. He invited David to board the ship for a drink. Hesitant, David told the Captain that he and his uncle had an appointment with a lawyer. The Captain remarked that Rankeillor's place was close to the ship and then whispered in David's ear that the old man was working mischief. He suggested the boy come aboard so they could talk. Feeling he had found an ally, David agreed and the Captain took him by the arm. They took a small boat out to the ship and in the excitement and noise of the moment, David could not hear what Hoseason was saying. As they approached the ship, Hoseason thrust himself and David on board and started pointing out the sights on the ship. Suddenly, David noticed that his uncle was not on board. Hoseason told him that was the point. Breaking away, David ran to the edge to see his uncle in the boat paddling back to the shore. David yelled, help. Murder. Hands drew him back to the ship and he was knocked unconscious. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>One of the greatest points that many critics bring into their analysis of Kidnapped and which they feel is highly significant in Stevenson's writing life, is the theme of the duality of the self. Stevenson loved to explore the duality of the Scottish character, generally consisting of rationalism as embodied by the conservative, Whig Lowlander versus and/or in sync with the romanticism as embodied by the radical, Jacobite Highlander. By viewing Scotland as a body enlivened by these dueling philosophies and characterizations, Stevenson observed that the country had, at once, two distinct personalities as well as two halves to a very important whole, the Scotsman. History did not necessarily agree with his theories since the two cultures often looked at each other with disdain. The Jacobite rebellion of 1745 was far from dead. However, Stevenson recognized a human duality which played with a conservatism and a romanticism, often battling to find a balance between the two. Thus Scotland was not only a country divided and united by a battling duality but so was the Scotsman, as identified by Stevenson. PARAGRAPH>Largely, David symbolizes the typical Lowlander persona -- logical and mercantile. He can reason his way through a situation and can employ rationale to problem solving. However, in this chapter, we observe David fantasizing the wealth of property he has gained with the Shaws and the kind of life he will be able to lead. He then cuts back to reality, noting that he does not remember exactly how it happened, but his eye alighted on Hoseason. Tossing about in his daydreams, he does not realize the type of future he is heading toward when he leaves his dreams and heads toward Ebenezer and Hoseason. This split thought process symbolizes the duality of self. David is drawn to fantastical imaginings but later understands that the fantasy led in no way to an immediate reality. PARAGRAPH>Moreover, though David shows good reasoning powers, he makes three major mistakes of judgment during the chapter. He allows his uncle to convince him to go into town before he has heard his uncle's story. He is overcome by heat and a desire to see the ocean so he does not oversee the conversation between Hoseason and Ebenezer. And, he is persuaded by Hoseason to board the ship. These mistakes highlight the fallibility of youth, reason, and fantasy which is why Stevenson would likely say it is integral for humanity to possess and use all three characteristics", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10"}