{"name": "Chapter 17", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 17 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>The next morning, Henderland arranged for a man who was crossing the Linnhe Loch to Appin to bring David across, thus saving him from two ferry rides. As they reached the shore, David observed some red and metallic colors clashing and asked his host about it. The skipper noted that red coats must be moving into Appin against its residents. Saddened, David soon asked to be let off the boat. On land, David sat in the woods. He wondered why he was risking his life for a rebel like Alan when he could simply turn toward his home. Suddenly, he heard men coming down the trail and decided that he would continue to his destination. The leading man appeared regal, had red hair, and was accompanied by a lawyer, servant, and man of the Sheriff. When they neared, David stepped onto the path and asked for directions to Aucharn. The red haired man, who turned out to be Red Fox/Colin Campbell, asked him why he wished to know and David intelligently explained that he was neither for or against the Highlanders but was loyal to King George. Campbell was not willing to help on this day. While he was speaking, a single shot rang out and hit Red Fox. He dropped to the ground and died. Coming to his senses, David sprang up the hill, yelling after the murderer. He continued to chase him until the murderer disappeared. PARAGRAPH>Behind David stood the Sheriff's men, who demanded David come to them. He overheard one order the men to grab the boy because he was an accomplice to the murder. David was confounded. Men hiding in the bush reached out for him and helped him hide within. There, he saw Alan Stewart. Alan told David to follow him and they ran quickly through the countryside. Every so often, Alan would stand upright and a roar from the soldiers would follow. Then, Alan signaled for them to turn and they ran back to the spot where David had found him. They ducked down. David was exhausted and fell to Alan's side. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The reader will observe a clear example of David's decision-making, or the lack of active decision-making which takes place on his part. As the critic Kiely finds, 3For all the intrigue, kidnapping, border-crossing, spying, and sword play, David Balfouris an impotent hero, and is one of the inactive and inept heroes in the noncomic literature of adventure. 2 For the first time in the novel, David begins to wonder why he is running in search of Alan Breck, a condemned man who rebelled against David's King. Not only is it a dangerous venture, but David had been raised a faithful and religious Whig who was warned by his minister when leaving Essendean to not shame his homeland and faith. Yet, David has aided a wild Highlander Jacobite overthrow a ship of pirates and is now following the messages he leaves in hopes of catching up with him. What will David do when he gets there. PARAGRAPH>The thematic struggle he faces is best described by critic Edwin Eigner, who writes, 3 depend for suspense and significance on thethematic question: Can the boy transcend his conscience and bring himself to accept his despised companion. 2 Yet David never consciously decides whether he will support or tolerate Alan. We see him worrying about the issue, but his decision is made in the same haphazard and groundless manner the reader noted when David decided to continue to his Uncle's door after hearing what a dreadful man he was. The text states, 3I had no sooner seen these people coming than I made up my mind  to go through with my adventure2 Not only has Stevenson devised a character whose mind is fickle, but he stresses the lack of self-knowledge that David beholds by placing the fact that he has no idea why he has made a choice in parentheses so that the statement is highlighted for the reader. The syntactic structure of the sentence arranges the stress by placing the parentheses directly following the word 3mind2 so that an immediate connection can be made by reader between David's mind and his fickleness. PARAGRAPH>Is his lack of active decision-making a fault. Or is his mental sharpness and maturity meant to be understressed. The critic, Kiely, likes to believe that Stevenson may have wanted to exhibit more profound human and psychological issues in Kidnapped but actually was not able to move away from the simplistic, open-air adventure which he had created in the more childish Treasure Island. Kiely states, 3But if there is a tendency  to expand the field  of adventure and to complicate the action with historical and geographical association, there isa stronger tendency to remain in the relatively simple and limited world of child's dream. 2 Kiely believes that that Stevenson's attempt to deepen the issues involved in Kidnapped was mainly a superficial function. However, other critics such as Eigner, believe the use of doubling and dopplegangers in addition to the similarities in Kidnapped to The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, may add more weight than Kiely would have supported. We will further explore these issues as we move along", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20"}