{"name": "Chapter 30", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 30 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Though the future was looking bright for David, he still wondered what he should do with Alan and what he might do for James of the Glens. He spoke to Rankeillor about these issues the next morning. Rankeillor felt that David was bound to help Mr. Thomson, but doubted that he should endanger himself in the case of James. His testimony to a Highland court would not be given much credence, he reasoned. David had thought of this argument but still believed he should try to help. Rankeillor was impressed by his nobility and urged him to follow his principles. They hurried inside so Rankeillor could write David two letters. One letter was signed to the British Linen Company, a bank, to give David credit. The second letter was for the lawyer, Mr. Balfour of Pilrig, who could represent David to the advocate in the murder case. He figured a respected man of David's namesake would be most effective. PARAGRAPH>Rankeillor and Torrance left for the ferry while David and Alan started for Edinburgh. As they departed, David noticed Ebenezer watching sullenly from a top window. Walking along, David and Alan had difficulty speaking to each other as they knew they would have to part soon. They tried discussing their plans for the upcoming days. Alan would hide about the country, coming once daily to a singular spot where David or a messenger could find him. David would seek out a lawyer who was an Appin Stewart and who could thus find a ship for Alan's departure. They soon reached a spot looking over the city called Rest-and-be-Thankful. PARAGRAPH>Both feeling very saddened, they repeated the plan to each other. David then gave Alan the little money he had and they shook hands good-bye. David ran down the hill to Edinburgh, refusing to look back until Alan was out of sight. He was overwhelmed by sadness and loneliness. When David reached the city, the crowd carried him to the door of the lawyer he sought. The narrator then ends the story, alerting the reader that both David and Alan handled what was in store for them well enough. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Characteristically, David feels the need to not only help Alan but also James of the Glens since he knows that neither man was the murderer of Colin Campbell. Without the murder, David would have wanted to help Alan return safely to the Highlands. The duty he feels toward James is honorable because, as Rankeillor explains, any help David could try to give would likely put him in grave danger. David grows in Rankeillor's esteem when he decides to go through with this act. Rankeillor has, in effect, taken over the position of father figure in David's life. David is satisfied that he has made Rankeillor proud by nobly wishing to help James. Rankeillor writes two letters for David, paralleling the last time David would leave a father figure in search of a new adventure. The minister gave David a few gifts, including written instructions. David then took off in search of a new life adventure, or as we have symbolically entitled it, his rite of passage. Here again he leaves the father figure and starts a new adventure -- the journey to help Alan find safety and to help prove James innocent of murder -- with the gifts in hand. PARAGRAPH>As he leaves the Shaws with Alan, David notices that Ebenezer watches them from an upstairs window. Ebenezer is a metonym for the conquered villain, who was, as we analyzed, more of an illusion of evil than a monster with much substance. He has easily been relegated to the position of \"almost cooperative\", as detailed by Kiely. Thus, David can start toward Edinburgh with a mind set on his new goals, no longer needing to worry about the old ones. David has symbolically reached the end of his rite of passage. As an adult, he holds the wealth and property of the Shaws. He is the lord and master of an estate. Empowered, he begins this second major journey looking to change the lives of other people, instead of looking to change his own life. In accordance, David leaves his home and goes out toward a new city, as he did at the beginning of the book, except that he is accompanied by a good friend whom he wishes to help. PARAGRAPH>However, David's position as an adult cannot be fulfilled until he and Alan part, forcing David to be fully independent and responsible. If one applies Stevenson's theme of the duality of the self, David and Alan are the doubling of the soul, dopplegangers. Once Alan leaves, the book abruptly ends. This could be symbolic except that critics say that a friend suggested to Stevenson that he should end the book at this point. Otherwise, he would have been happy to continue writing. Still, it is not too far of a stretch of the imagination to note that Stevenson may have been telling us that the dual halves of Scotland and of the soul can never be completely united. David and Alan have enjoyed each other's company and they will likely see one another again as we are told that their plan was to meet every day or couple of days until David could secure Alan's safe passage. However, metaphorically, the two must go off in different directions at the end of the book in order to show that David has reached adulthood and that the two opposing sides of Scotland and of the soul remain disunited. As the next journey begins, David has matured to some extent but he still seeks the agency and romanticism that Alan has to offer. His separation from this causes David great sadness and loneliness. He is not whole, symbolically, without Alan", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-26-30"}