{"name": "Chapter 28", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 28 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>David felt relieved to see his past likeness return, though he was ashamed to wear borrowed clothes. Mr. Rankeillor brought David back to his cabinet to give him some information on David's father and uncle. He was embarrassed to say that their problems had hinged on a love affair. Remembering his uncle, David thought this odd. However, Rankeillor explained that Ebenezer had been handsome and charming when young. In 1715, Ebenezer had run off with rebels until he was apprehended by David's father, who found him in a ditch. Back home, the two brothers fell in love with the same woman. Ebenezer was confident of winning the girl because of his looks but was mistaken. He sulked and whined to every neighbor he met. David's father was a weak man and finally decided to let Ebenezer have the woman. She, however, did not agree to their decision. Both brothers proposed to her. They bargained and Alexander made one concession after another to the selfish Ebenezer. Finally they agreed that Alexander could have the woman but Ebenezer would take the estate. As a result, David's parents were poor for the rest of their lives. PARAGRAPH>However, regardless of the brothers' bargaining, the estate did now legally belong to David. Rankeillor knew that Ebenezer would contest this fact and did not think it wise to bring him to court since information about David's connection to Alan could leak out. The kidnapping would aid David's cause but asking the ship's crew to vouch for him could also lead to information about Alan. Rankeillor suggested allowing Ebenezer to stay on the property if David received a large provision. David agreed to be easy on his uncle but also began to think of a plan to trap the old man. They had to show Ebenezer proof of the kidnapping out of court. David related to Rankeillor his plan. Rankeillor was dismayed that he would have to meet Mr. Thomson but liked the plan. They stopped speaking of it for awhile and had dinner but soon returned to the topic. Rankeillor asked David many questions about the plan and then had his clerk, Torrance, record his notes officially. When the clerk left, Rankeillor told and retold David a story about a time when he forgot his glasses and could not recognize Torrance. The clerk soon returned with the documents and the three set off to find Alan. PARAGRAPH>Rankeillor was frequently greeted by neighbors along the way, illustrating his respected position. When they neared Alan, Rankeillor realized that, ironically, he had forgotten his glasses. David now understood that his earlier story was told to set up the event in which Rankeillor would not be able to incriminate Alan because Rankeillor could not be said to have recognized him. It seemed to David that Rankeillor had seen well enough while being greeted during their walk. David went to Alan alone and whistled. Alan appeared, glad to see David in new clothes and hear of his plan. He easily agreed to help. David called to Rankeillor who apologized to Thomson for not seeing very well and having to hold onto Thomson's arm while they walked. When they arrived at the Shaws, it was late enough that Ebenezer was likely asleep. Alan went to the door to knock as the other three hid nearby and waited. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>In this chapter, story telling appears again though not in the form of David's adventures. The story which Rankeillor tells David functions to fill in the details concerning David's uncle and father, which the reader and David were previously ignorant, and provides the basis for David's rights surrounding the Shaws. Though Rankeillor makes a good case for why Ebenezer is miserly, the story does little to explain the extent of his cruelty. It seems that he had always been a haughty, self-involved man whose age and isolation must have evolved into an evil sensibility. Yet, the reader can also view Ebenezer as the most recent product in Stevenson's patterning of the obstacles along David's rite of passage. Ebenezer was most definitely an obstacle to David for many reasons. He stood in the way of David's property, safety, and livelihood. As we discussed earlier, he presents the first possibility of a substitute father figure after David leaves Minister Campbell. Yet, in the face of this expectation, Ebenezer acts cruelly toward the boy. He becomes the first villain along the route and he passes David over to the second villain of the novel, Captain Hoseason. The villains in Kidnapped fit easily into the style of obstacles Stevenson has established. In this novel, very few of the obstacles cannot be overcome. PARAGRAPH>As analyzed, often when David nears an obstacle, the danger it had presented dissolves. He is involved in the rite of passage toward adulthood in which one gains knowledge of the ways of the world and learns how to deal with the challenges that had previously been insurmountable. With Rankeillor's story, one learns that Ebenezer grew into a miser because of a love affair. He had once been a gallant and approachable young man. Once his exterior is stripped away in this manner, Ebenezer is not less evil, yet he is more understandable. As the critic, Kiely, highlights, \" creates an illusion of danger until the hero is finally able to see all around it, and then  becomes innocuous, almost cooperative with the will of the protagonist. David is not scared of the man and hopes to trick him with a plan that he has created himself. The villain is not villain but rather a pitiable and malleable creature", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-26-30"}