{"name": "Chapter 16", "summary": "Chapter 16 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>David took a ferry from Torosay to Kinlochaline. The boat's skipper had the last name of Macrob which he recognized as one of Alan's clan. David hoped to get a word with him but the crowds on the boat did not allow it. The trip was tedious but the good natured passengers sang in Gaelic to pass the time. As they neared the shore, David noted a ship filled with people in black crying out in mourning. It was an emigrant ship headed for America and the passengers on board David's ship either empathized or recognized the emigrants and wailed with them. Finally they disembarked and David spoke with Neil Roy Macrob. He asked for information on Alan Breck, offering money. Macrob was deeply offended. David then showed him Alan's silver button which Macrob recognized. He chastised David for not showing this first and grudgingly gave him Alan's instructions. David was given a route which led from the inn at Kinlochaline to Morven to Ardgour across lochs and finally to the house of James Stewart of Appin. Macrob warned him to speak with no one. PARAGRAPH>The night spent at the local inn was miserable as the place was in much disrepair. David departed the next morning and headed along the route he was given. Along the way, David met another catechist, Henderland, who was a member of the Edinburgh Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge. Being from the south, the catechist and David got along well and David was pleased to hear his own language. Henderland seemed to be welcomed by the people they passed. David told him much of his story, though changing his destination and leaving out any mention of Alan. Henderland continually asked him if he had snuff. He also spoke to David about the affairs of the Highlands and of the unfairness of many of the laws which Parliament had passed. The catechist noted how stealthy Alan was and how unlikely it was that Red Fox would escape trouble even if he was able to fully disarm and disband the clan of Ardshiel. PARAGRAPH>Henderland was kind enough to bring David back to his dwelling to sleep and eat. David was surprised by the hypocrisy of the catechist, rushing back to his home for his snuff but preaching to David about humility before God. Still, David found himself deeply moved and tried to think less highly of himself. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>The ship of mourners which David and the other ferrygoers approach is a reminder of the fate which David could have easily faced. The ship is full of emigrants being exiled to America. It is a merchandise ship, which leads one to believe that the passengers would not have a much better future to look forward to than David would have had. The air was filled with the sense of melancholy and death, affecting even David who was now removed from this fear. David however moves in the opposite direction from the mourning ship, symbolizing his step move past this obstacle and the new route he has effectively undertaken. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Henderland was likely created by Stevenson in order to please his father, who was a highly religious Protestant. He was never pleased that David had moved away from religion. Often David attempted to smooth the issue over anyway that he could. He would frequently send his father letters updating his progress and critics have guessed that the character of Henderland the catechist was a direct product of a suggestion that Mr. Stevenson made to his son in a letter that has been uncovered. McFarlan's note includes the following quotation from the letter Robert Louis sent to Thomas Stevenson on January 25, 1886: 3I quite agree with you, and had already planned a scene of religion in ; the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge furnishes me with a catechist whom I shall try to make the man. 2 His father had suggested a character like Henderland because there were so few characters who were well-respected, religious Lowlanders in Kidnapped and Stevenson liked to keep his father involved in his work. PARAGRAPH>Regardless of the reason for Henderland's creation, the reader will immediately be aware of the hypocrisy inherent in his character, as noted by David. The man is so consumed by getting to his snuff that he constantly interrupts David and then runs rudely into his house so that he can have some. David himself mentions that he finds it ironic that the man who is so obviously addicted to snuff has been sent to the Highlands to cultivate the more savage breed of Scots. Ironically, this same man also preaches to David about humility in religion. In contrast, the character of Neil Macrob, a clansman of Alan, is offended by the thought of a bribe and righteously delivers Alan's message out of loyalty to Alan and their relationship. Again, Stevenson highlights his theme of the complexity and duality of man as well as the complexity of Scotland", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20"}