{"name": "Chapter 25", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 25 Summary:<PARAGRAPH>Alan knocked on the door of the first house they came to in Balquidder, which was risky for him since some members of the town belonged to an opposing clan. Luckily the house belonged to a Maclaren, who had followed the Stewarts in 1746. David was given a bed and a doctor was quickly ordered. Though David pressed Alan to leave because he was in danger, Alan refused to go. He would hide in a hole outdoors during the day and then visit at night. The hosts, Duncan Dhu and Mrs. Maclaren, were gracious. While Alan visited, pipes were brought out so that the atmosphere was festive. PARAGRAPH>Even though David rested at the Maclaren house for nearly a month and the entire area knew of his stay, no soldiers or magistrates bothered him. The only remarkable event which occurred involved a visit from the infamous Robin Oig, son of Rob Roy. Though he was wanted for several crimes, he walked in this area untouched and entered the house of the Maclarens, an enemy, with ease. Duncan and David were anxious because Robin arrived at the time when Alan normally visited. Robin wished to see David because he had known a surgeon whose last name was Balfour. David was ashamed to admit that he knew nothing about his relatives so he could not tell Robin whether he was related to the surgeon. Robin looked disgusted and rose to leave without excuse, when Alan walked in. The two stood face to face, glaring at each other. PARAGRAPH>Their conversation soon progressed into talk of dueling. David almost got out of bed to stop them, but Duncan stepped in between and slyly challenged them to prove who was the best piper. The two men fell for this and began arguing over who was the best. Duncan brought out his pipe and Robin began. His tune was nice but uninteresting. Alan's tune improved upon Robin's and flowed into ravishing variations. Robin took his pipe and played Alan's tune note for note before illustrating his skill by reworking each variation to an incredible new height. Alan was forced to admit that Robin was more talented than he. After this point, the two ate, drank, and played through the night. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>After the peaceful resolution of the quarrel between David and Alan, at least to the point where they are friendly to each other again, the reader is witness to quite another type of quarrel in this chapter. Supporting the themes of duality, during the instances in which we have observed Alan committing the greatest folly, David has not been present to effect his decision making. Granted, David is quite inept at decision making himself but his presence appears to allow Alan to take a greater number of concerns into consideration. For instance, while David is brought into the Stewart's home with James, Alan runs outside and dresses himself in his tattered and incriminating French clothing. While David is ill and feverish due to illness at Cluny's Cage, Alan wheedles David for money and then loses it. In this chapter, while David again is ill, Alan nearly duels with a man in his gracious host's home. Though the event would not have been ridiculous for the time period, the decision to fight would not have been beneficial for either side and there was no reason to fight beyond that the two men saw each other. PARAGRAPH>This brings us back to Alan's romantic, irrational sensibility as a Highlander. He reacts to life circumstances through passion, emotion, strongly held ideals. These ideals often revolve around the ancient prejudices roused in the last chapter, where the Lowlander views the Highlander as a barbarian and the Highlander views the Lowlander as a conservative moralist. Furthermore, rivalries between clans within the Highlands often caused nearly as much tension and violence, as we saw when Red Fox was killed and now when Alan and Robin want to fight because of who they are. Peace is restored thanks to the pipe because it offers a peaceful manner of competition. The pipe thus functions as a metaphor for the restoration of peace and the smoothing over of differences. Through David's eyes and the theme of duality within the self, Stevenson portrays the foolishness of prejudice. PARAGRAPH>The pipe, thus, can also be a metaphor for the bond between our two heroes. The critic, Eigner, likens their relationship to the bond which forms between Huck and Jim in Mark Twain's The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. The parallels between the plot structures and secondary characters are many. As he explains, \" begins a long journey in the company of an older man of a different, supposedly more primitive race, a man who is a fugitive from justice and a suspected murderer. The major difference in the two novels is in scope. Huckleberry Finn is obviously filled with greater political struggle, judgment, and social overtones. However, critics such as Leslie Fiedler, assert that Kidnapped is rich in psychological elements which can be evidenced from the bond between the two heroes who are at once dopplegangers and two conflicting halves of one self. As Fiedler concludes, \"hey war within Stevenson's single country and in his single soul. Thus whether one views the novel as psychological romance or adventure story, it is important to recognize the symbolic complexity contained in the relationship between the two main characters", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-25"}