

Shortly after ten o'clock the singing-boys arrived at the tranter's
house, which was invariably the place of meeting, and preparations were
made for the start.  The older men and musicians wore thick coats, with
stiff perpendicular collars, and coloured handkerchiefs wound round and
round the neck till the end came to hand, over all which they just showed
their ears and noses, like people looking over a wall.  The remainder,
stalwart ruddy men and boys, were dressed mainly in snow-white
smock-frocks, embroidered upon the shoulders and breasts, in ornamental
forms of hearts, diamonds, and zigzags.  The cider-mug was emptied for
the ninth time, the music-books were arranged, and the pieces finally
decided upon.  The boys in the meantime put the old horn-lanterns in
order, cut candles into short lengths to fit the lanterns; and, a thin
fleece of snow having fallen since the early part of the evening, those
who had no leggings went to the stable and wound wisps of hay round their
ankles to keep the insidious flakes from the interior of their boots.

Mellstock was a parish of considerable acreage, the hamlets composing it
lying at a much greater distance from each other than is ordinarily the
case.  Hence several hours were consumed in playing and singing within
hearing of every family, even if but a single air were bestowed on each.
There was Lower Mellstock, the main village; half a mile from this were
the church and vicarage, and a few other houses, the spot being rather
lonely now, though in past centuries it had been the most
thickly-populated quarter of the parish.  A mile north-east lay the
hamlet of Upper Mellstock, where the tranter lived; and at other points
knots of cottages, besides solitary farmsteads and dairies.

Old William Dewy, with the violoncello, played the bass; his grandson
Dick the treble violin; and Reuben and Michael Mail the tenor and second
violins respectively.  The singers consisted of four men and seven boys,
upon whom devolved the task of carrying and attending to the lanterns,
and holding the books open for the players.  Directly music was the
theme, old William ever and instinctively came to the front.

"Now mind, neighbours," he said, as they all went out one by one at the
door, he himself holding it ajar and regarding them with a critical face
as they passed, like a shepherd counting out his sheep.  "You two counter-
boys, keep your ears open to Michael's fingering, and don't ye go
straying into the treble part along o' Dick and his set, as ye did last
year; and mind this especially when we be in 'Arise, and hail.'  Billy
Chimlen, don't you sing quite so raving mad as you fain would; and, all
o' ye, whatever ye do, keep from making a great scuffle on the ground
when we go in at people's gates; but go quietly, so as to strike up all
of a sudden, like spirits."

"Farmer Ledlow's first?"

"Farmer Ledlow's first; the rest as usual."

"And, Voss," said the tranter terminatively, "you keep house here till
about half-past two; then heat the metheglin and cider in the warmer
you'll find turned up upon the copper; and bring it wi' the victuals to
church-hatch, as th'st know."

* * * * *

Just before the clock struck twelve they lighted the lanterns and
started.  The moon, in her third quarter, had risen since the snowstorm;
but the dense accumulation of snow-cloud weakened her power to a faint
twilight, which was rather pervasive of the landscape than traceable to
the sky.  The breeze had gone down, and the rustle of their feet and
tones of their speech echoed with an alert rebound from every post,
boundary-stone, and ancient wall they passed, even where the distance of
the echo's origin was less than a few yards.  Beyond their own slight
noises nothing was to be heard, save the occasional bark of foxes in the
direction of Yalbury Wood, or the brush of a rabbit among the grass now
and then, as it scampered out of their way.

Most of the outlying homesteads and hamlets had been visited by about two
o'clock; they then passed across the outskirts of a wooded park toward
the main village, nobody being at home at the Manor.  Pursuing no
recognized track, great care was necessary in walking lest their faces
should come in contact with the low-hanging boughs of the old lime-trees,
which in many spots formed dense over-growths of interlaced branches.

"Times have changed from the times they used to be," said Mail, regarding
nobody can tell what interesting old panoramas with an inward eye, and
letting his outward glance rest on the ground, because it was as
convenient a position as any.  "People don't care much about us now!  I've
been thinking we must be almost the last left in the county of the old
string players?  Barrel-organs, and the things next door to 'em that you
blow wi' your foot, have come in terribly of late years."

"Ay!" said Bowman, shaking his head; and old William, on seeing him, did
the same thing.

"More's the pity," replied another.  "Time was--long and merry ago
now!--when not one of the varmits was to be heard of; but it served some
of the quires right.  They should have stuck to strings as we did, and
kept out clarinets, and done away with serpents.  If you'd thrive in
musical religion, stick to strings, says I."

"Strings be safe soul-lifters, as far as that do go," said Mr. Spinks.

"Yet there's worse things than serpents," said Mr. Penny.  "Old things
pass away, 'tis true; but a serpent was a good old note: a deep rich note
was the serpent."

"Clar'nets, however, be bad at all times," said Michael Mail.  "One
Christmas--years agone now, years--I went the rounds wi' the Weatherbury
quire.  'Twas a hard frosty night, and the keys of all the clar'nets
froze--ah, they did freeze!--so that 'twas like drawing a cork every time
a key was opened; and the players o' 'em had to go into a
hedger-and-ditcher's chimley-corner, and thaw their clar'nets every now
and then.  An icicle o' spet hung down from the end of every man's
clar'net a span long; and as to fingers--well, there, if ye'll believe
me, we had no fingers at all, to our knowing."

"I can well bring back to my mind," said Mr. Penny, "what I said to poor
Joseph Ryme (who took the treble part in Chalk-Newton Church for two-and-
forty year) when they thought of having clar'nets there.  'Joseph,' I
said, says I, 'depend upon't, if so be you have them tooting clar'nets
you'll spoil the whole set-out.  Clar'nets were not made for the service
of the Lard; you can see it by looking at 'em,' I said.  And what came
o't?  Why, souls, the parson set up a barrel-organ on his own account
within two years o' the time I spoke, and the old quire went to nothing."

"As far as look is concerned," said the tranter, "I don't for my part see
that a fiddle is much nearer heaven than a clar'net.  'Tis further off.
There's always a rakish, scampish twist about a fiddle's looks that seems
to say the Wicked One had a hand in making o'en; while angels be supposed
to play clar'nets in heaven, or som'at like 'em, if ye may believe
picters."

"Robert Penny, you was in the right," broke in the eldest Dewy.  "They
should ha' stuck to strings.  Your brass-man is a rafting dog--well and
good; your reed-man is a dab at stirring ye--well and good; your drum-man
is a rare bowel-shaker--good again.  But I don't care who hears me say
it, nothing will spak to your heart wi' the sweetness o' the man of
strings!"

"Strings for ever!" said little Jimmy.

"Strings alone would have held their ground against all the new comers in
creation."  ("True, true!" said Bowman.)  "But clarinets was death."
("Death they was!" said Mr. Penny.)  "And harmonions," William continued
in a louder voice, and getting excited by these signs of approval,
"harmonions and barrel-organs"  ("Ah!" and groans from Spinks) "be
miserable--what shall I call 'em?--miserable--"

"Sinners," suggested Jimmy, who made large strides like the men, and did
not lag behind like the other little boys.

"Miserable dumbledores!"

"Right, William, and so they be--miserable dumbledores!" said the choir
with unanimity.

By this time they were crossing to a gate in the direction of the school,
which, standing on a slight eminence at the junction of three ways, now
rose in unvarying and dark flatness against the sky.  The instruments
were retuned, and all the band entered the school enclosure, enjoined by
old William to keep upon the grass.

"Number seventy-eight," he softly gave out as they formed round in a
semicircle, the boys opening the lanterns to get a clearer light, and
directing their rays on the books.

Then passed forth into the quiet night an ancient and time-worn hymn,
embodying a quaint Christianity in words orally transmitted from father
to son through several generations down to the present characters, who
sang them out right earnestly:

   "Remember Adam's fall,
      O thou Man:
   Remember Adam's fall
      From Heaven to Hell.
   Remember Adam's fall;
   How he hath condemn'd all
   In Hell perpetual
      There for to dwell.

   Remember God's goodnesse,
      O thou Man:
   Remember God's goodnesse,
      His promise made.
   Remember God's goodnesse;
   He sent His Son sinlesse
   Our ails for to redress;
      Be not afraid!

   In Bethlehem He was born,
      O thou Man:
   In Bethlehem He was born,
      For mankind's sake.
   In Bethlehem He was born,
   Christmas-day i' the morn:
   Our Saviour thought no scorn
      Our faults to take.

   Give thanks to God alway,
      O thou Man:
   Give thanks to God alway
      With heart-most joy.
   Give thanks to God alway
   On this our joyful day:
   Let all men sing and say,
      Holy, Holy!"

Having concluded the last note, they listened for a minute or two, but
found that no sound issued from the schoolhouse.

"Four breaths, and then, 'O, what unbounded goodness!' number
fifty-nine," said William.

This was duly gone through, and no notice whatever seemed to be taken of
the performance.

"Good guide us, surely 'tisn't a' empty house, as befell us in the year
thirty-nine and forty-three!" said old Dewy.

"Perhaps she's jist come from some musical city, and sneers at our
doings?" the tranter whispered.

"'Od rabbit her!" said Mr. Penny, with an annihilating look at a corner
of the school chimney, "I don't quite stomach her, if this is it.  Your
plain music well done is as worthy as your other sort done bad, a'
b'lieve, souls; so say I."

"Four breaths, and then the last," said the leader authoritatively.
"'Rejoice, ye Tenants of the Earth,' number sixty-four."

At the close, waiting yet another minute, he said in a clear loud voice,
as he had said in the village at that hour and season for the previous
forty years--"A merry Christmas to ye!"


