

The choir at last reached their beds, and slept like the rest of the
parish.  Dick's slumbers, through the three or four hours remaining for
rest, were disturbed and slight; an exhaustive variation upon the
incidents that had passed that night in connection with the school-window
going on in his brain every moment of the time.

In the morning, do what he would--go upstairs, downstairs, out of doors,
speak of the wind and weather, or what not--he could not refrain from an
unceasing renewal, in imagination, of that interesting enactment.  Tilted
on the edge of one foot he stood beside the fireplace, watching his
mother grilling rashers; but there was nothing in grilling, he thought,
unless the Vision grilled.  The limp rasher hung down between the bars of
the gridiron like a cat in a child's arms; but there was nothing in
similes, unless She uttered them.  He looked at the daylight shadows of a
yellow hue, dancing with the firelight shadows in blue on the whitewashed
chimney corner, but there was nothing in shadows.  "Perhaps the new young
wom--sch--Miss Fancy Day will sing in church with us this morning," he
said.

The tranter looked a long time before he replied, "I fancy she will; and
yet I fancy she won't."

Dick implied that such a remark was rather to be tolerated than admired;
though deliberateness in speech was known to have, as a rule, more to do
with the machinery of the tranter's throat than with the matter
enunciated.

They made preparations for going to church as usual; Dick with extreme
alacrity, though he would not definitely consider why he was so
religious.  His wonderful nicety in brushing and cleaning his best light
boots had features which elevated it to the rank of an art.  Every
particle and speck of last week's mud was scraped and brushed from toe
and heel; new blacking from the packet was carefully mixed and made use
of, regardless of expense.  A coat was laid on and polished; then another
coat for increased blackness; and lastly a third, to give the perfect and
mirror-like jet which the hoped-for rencounter demanded.

It being Christmas-day, the tranter prepared himself with Sunday
particularity.  Loud sousing and snorting noises were heard to proceed
from a tub in the back quarters of the dwelling, proclaiming that he was
there performing his great Sunday wash, lasting half-an-hour, to which
his washings on working-day mornings were mere flashes in the pan.
Vanishing into the outhouse with a large brown towel, and the above-named
bubblings and snortings being carried on for about twenty minutes, the
tranter would appear round the edge of the door, smelling like a summer
fog, and looking as if he had just narrowly escaped a watery grave with
the loss of much of his clothes, having since been weeping bitterly till
his eyes were red; a crystal drop of water hanging ornamentally at the
bottom of each ear, one at the tip of his nose, and others in the form of
spangles about his hair.

After a great deal of crunching upon the sanded stone floor by the feet
of father, son, and grandson as they moved to and fro in these
preparations, the bass-viol and fiddles were taken from their nook, and
the strings examined and screwed a little above concert-pitch, that they
might keep their tone when the service began, to obviate the awkward
contingency of having to retune them at the back of the gallery during a
cough, sneeze, or amen--an inconvenience which had been known to arise in
damp wintry weather.

The three left the door and paced down Mellstock-lane and across the ewe-
lease, bearing under their arms the instruments in faded green-baize
bags, and old brown music-books in their hands; Dick continually finding
himself in advance of the other two, and the tranter moving on with toes
turned outwards to an enormous angle.

At the foot of an incline the church became visible through the north
gate, or 'church hatch,' as it was called here.  Seven agile figures in a
clump were observable beyond, which proved to be the choristers waiting;
sitting on an altar-tomb to pass the time, and letting their heels dangle
against it.  The musicians being now in sight, the youthful party
scampered off and rattled up the old wooden stairs of the gallery like a
regiment of cavalry; the other boys of the parish waiting outside and
observing birds, cats, and other creatures till the vicar entered, when
they suddenly subsided into sober church-goers, and passed down the aisle
with echoing heels.

The gallery of Mellstock Church had a status and sentiment of its own.  A
stranger there was regarded with a feeling altogether differing from that
of the congregation below towards him.  Banished from the nave as an
intruder whom no originality could make interesting, he was received
above as a curiosity that no unfitness could render dull.  The gallery,
too, looked down upon and knew the habits of the nave to its remotest
peculiarity, and had an extensive stock of exclusive information about
it; whilst the nave knew nothing of the gallery folk, as gallery folk,
beyond their loud-sounding minims and chest notes.  Such topics as that
the clerk was always chewing tobacco except at the moment of crying amen;
that he had a dust-hole in his pew; that during the sermon certain young
daughters of the village had left off caring to read anything so mild as
the marriage service for some years, and now regularly studied the one
which chronologically follows it; that a pair of lovers touched fingers
through a knot-hole between their pews in the manner ordained by their
great exemplars, Pyramus and Thisbe; that Mrs. Ledlow, the farmer's wife,
counted her money and reckoned her week's marketing expenses during the
first lesson--all news to those below--were stale subjects here.

Old William sat in the centre of the front row, his violoncello between
his knees and two singers on each hand.  Behind him, on the left, came
the treble singers and Dick; and on the right the tranter and the tenors.
Farther back was old Mail with the altos and supernumeraries.

But before they had taken their places, and whilst they were standing in
a circle at the back of the gallery practising a psalm or two, Dick cast
his eyes over his grandfather's shoulder, and saw the vision of the past
night enter the porch-door as methodically as if she had never been a
vision at all.  A new atmosphere seemed suddenly to be puffed into the
ancient edifice by her movement, which made Dick's body and soul tingle
with novel sensations.  Directed by Shiner, the churchwarden, she
proceeded to the small aisle on the north side of the chancel, a spot now
allotted to a throng of Sunday-school girls, and distinctly visible from
the gallery-front by looking under the curve of the furthermost arch on
that side.

Before this moment the church had seemed comparatively empty--now it was
thronged; and as Miss Fancy rose from her knees and looked around her for
a permanent place in which to deposit herself--finally choosing the
remotest corner--Dick began to breathe more freely the warm new air she
had brought with her; to feel rushings of blood, and to have impressions
that there was a tie between her and himself visible to all the
congregation.

Ever afterwards the young man could recollect individually each part of
the service of that bright Christmas morning, and the trifling
occurrences which took place as its minutes slowly drew along; the duties
of that day dividing themselves by a complete line from the services of
other times.  The tunes they that morning essayed remained with him for
years, apart from all others; also the text; also the appearance of the
layer of dust upon the capitals of the piers; that the holly-bough in the
chancel archway was hung a little out of the centre--all the ideas, in
short, that creep into the mind when reason is only exercising its lowest
activity through the eye.

By chance or by fate, another young man who attended Mellstock Church on
that Christmas morning had towards the end of the service the same
instinctive perception of an interesting presence, in the shape of the
same bright maiden, though his emotion reached a far less developed
stage.  And there was this difference, too, that the person in question
was surprised at his condition, and sedulously endeavoured to reduce
himself to his normal state of mind.  He was the young vicar, Mr.
Maybold.

The music on Christmas mornings was frequently below the standard of
church-performances at other times.  The boys were sleepy from the heavy
exertions of the night; the men were slightly wearied; and now, in
addition to these constant reasons, there was a dampness in the
atmosphere that still further aggravated the evil.  Their strings, from
the recent long exposure to the night air, rose whole semitones, and
snapped with a loud twang at the most silent moment; which necessitated
more retiring than ever to the back of the gallery, and made the gallery
throats quite husky with the quantity of coughing and hemming required
for tuning in.  The vicar looked cross.

When the singing was in progress there was suddenly discovered to be a
strong and shrill reinforcement from some point, ultimately found to be
the school-girls' aisle.  At every attempt it grew bolder and more
distinct.  At the third time of singing, these intrusive feminine voices
were as mighty as those of the regular singers; in fact, the flood of
sound from this quarter assumed such an individuality, that it had a
time, a key, almost a tune of its own, surging upwards when the gallery
plunged downwards, and the reverse.

Now this had never happened before within the memory of man.  The girls,
like the rest of the congregation, had always been humble and respectful
followers of the gallery; singing at sixes and sevens if without gallery
leaders; never interfering with the ordinances of these practised
artists--having no will, union, power, or proclivity except it was given
them from the established choir enthroned above them.

A good deal of desperation became noticeable in the gallery throats and
strings, which continued throughout the musical portion of the service.
Directly the fiddles were laid down, Mr. Penny's spectacles put in their
sheath, and the text had been given out, an indignant whispering began.

"Did ye hear that, souls?" Mr. Penny said, in a groaning breath.

"Brazen-faced hussies!" said Bowman.

"True; why, they were every note as loud as we, fiddles and all, if not
louder!"

"Fiddles and all!" echoed Bowman bitterly.

"Shall anything saucier be found than united 'ooman?" Mr. Spinks
murmured.

"What I want to know is," said the tranter (as if he knew already, but
that civilization required the form of words), "what business people have
to tell maidens to sing like that when they don't sit in a gallery, and
never have entered one in their lives?  That's the question, my sonnies."

"'Tis the gallery have got to sing, all the world knows," said Mr. Penny.
"Why, souls, what's the use o' the ancients spending scores of pounds to
build galleries if people down in the lowest depths of the church sing
like that at a moment's notice?"

"Really, I think we useless ones had better march out of church, fiddles
and all!" said Mr. Spinks, with a laugh which, to a stranger, would have
sounded mild and real.  Only the initiated body of men he addressed could
understand the horrible bitterness of irony that lurked under the quiet
words 'useless ones,' and the ghastliness of the laughter apparently so
natural.

"Never mind!  Let 'em sing too--'twill make it all the louder--hee, hee!"
said Leaf.

"Thomas Leaf, Thomas Leaf!  Where have you lived all your life?" said
grandfather William sternly.

The quailing Leaf tried to look as if he had lived nowhere at all.

"When all's said and done, my sonnies," Reuben said, "there'd have been
no real harm in their singing if they had let nobody hear 'em, and only
jined in now and then."

"None at all," said Mr. Penny.  "But though I don't wish to accuse people
wrongfully, I'd say before my lord judge that I could hear every note o'
that last psalm come from 'em as much as from us--every note as if 'twas
their own."

"Know it! ah, I should think I did know it!" Mr. Spinks was heard to
observe at this moment, without reference to his fellow players--shaking
his head at some idea he seemed to see floating before him, and smiling
as if he were attending a funeral at the time.  "Ah, do I or don't I know
it!"

No one said "Know what?" because all were aware from experience that what
he knew would declare itself in process of time.

"I could fancy last night that we should have some trouble wi' that young
man," said the tranter, pending the continuance of Spinks's speech, and
looking towards the unconscious Mr. Maybold in the pulpit.

"I fancy," said old William, rather severely, "I fancy there's too much
whispering going on to be of any spiritual use to gentle or simple."  Then
folding his lips and concentrating his glance on the vicar, he implied
that none but the ignorant would speak again; and accordingly there was
silence in the gallery, Mr. Spinks's telling speech remaining for ever
unspoken.

Dick had said nothing, and the tranter little, on this episode of the
morning; for Mrs. Dewy at breakfast expressed it as her intention to
invite the youthful leader of the culprits to the small party it was
customary with them to have on Christmas night--a piece of knowledge
which had given a particular brightness to Dick's reflections since he
had received it.  And in the tranter's slightly-cynical nature, party
feeling was weaker than in the other members of the choir, though
friendliness and faithful partnership still sustained in him a hearty
earnestness on their account.


