

At six o'clock the next day, the whole body of men in the choir emerged
from the tranter's door, and advanced with a firm step down the lane.
This dignity of march gradually became obliterated as they went on, and
by the time they reached the hill behind the vicarage a faint resemblance
to a flock of sheep might have been discerned in the venerable party.  A
word from the tranter, however, set them right again; and as they
descended the hill, the regular tramp, tramp, tramp of the united feet
was clearly audible from the vicarage garden.  At the opening of the gate
there was another short interval of irregular shuffling, caused by a
rather peculiar habit the gate had, when swung open quickly, of striking
against the bank and slamming back into the opener's face.

"Now keep step again, will ye?" said the tranter.  "It looks better, and
more becomes the high class of arrant which has brought us here."  Thus
they advanced to the door.

At Reuben's ring the more modest of the group turned aside, adjusted
their hats, and looked critically at any shrub that happened to lie in
the line of vision; endeavouring thus to give a person who chanced to
look out of the windows the impression that their request, whatever it
was going to be, was rather a casual thought occurring whilst they were
inspecting the vicar's shrubbery and grass-plot than a predetermined
thing.  The tranter, who, coming frequently to the vicarage with luggage,
coals, firewood, etc., had none of the awe for its precincts that filled
the breasts of most of the others, fixed his eyes firmly on the knocker
during this interval of waiting.  The knocker having no characteristic
worthy of notice, he relinquished it for a knot in one of the
door-panels, and studied the winding lines of the grain.

"O, sir, please, here's Tranter Dewy, and old William Dewy, and young
Richard Dewy, O, and all the quire too, sir, except the boys, a-come to
see you!" said Mr. Maybold's maid-servant to Mr. Maybold, the pupils of
her eyes dilating like circles in a pond.

"All the choir?" said the astonished vicar (who may be shortly described
as a good-looking young man with courageous eyes, timid mouth, and
neutral nose), abandoning his writing and looking at his parlour-maid
after speaking, like a man who fancied he had seen her face before but
couldn't recollect where.

"And they looks very firm, and Tranter Dewy do turn neither to the right
hand nor to the left, but stares quite straight and solemn with his mind
made up!"

"O, all the choir," repeated the vicar to himself, trying by that simple
device to trot out his thoughts on what the choir could come for.

"Yes; every man-jack of 'em, as I be alive!"  (The parlour-maid was
rather local in manner, having in fact been raised in the same village.)
"Really, sir, 'tis thoughted by many in town and country that--"

"Town and country!--Heavens, I had no idea that I was public property in
this way!" said the vicar, his face acquiring a hue somewhere between
that of the rose and the peony.  "Well, 'It is thought in town and
country that--'"

"It is thought that you be going to get it hot and strong!--excusen my
incivility, sir."

The vicar suddenly recalled to his recollection that he had long ago
settled it to be decidedly a mistake to encourage his servant Jane in
giving personal opinions.  The servant Jane saw by the vicar's face that
he recalled this fact to his mind; and removing her forehead from the
edge of the door, and rubbing away the indent that edge had made,
vanished into the passage as Mr. Maybold remarked, "Show them in, Jane."

A few minutes later a shuffling and jostling (reduced to as refined a
form as was compatible with the nature of shuffles and jostles) was heard
in the passage; then an earnest and prolonged wiping of shoes, conveying
the notion that volumes of mud had to be removed; but the roads being so
clean that not a particle of dirt appeared on the choir's boots (those of
all the elder members being newly oiled, and Dick's brightly polished),
this wiping might have been set down simply as a desire to show that
respectable men had no wish to take a mean advantage of clean roads for
curtailing proper ceremonies.  Next there came a powerful whisper from
the same quarter:-

"Now stand stock-still there, my sonnies, one and all!  And don't make no
noise; and keep your backs close to the wall, that company may pass in
and out easy if they want to without squeezing through ye: and we two are
enough to go in." . . . The voice was the tranter's.

"I wish I could go in too and see the sight!" said a reedy voice--that of
Leaf.

"'Tis a pity Leaf is so terrible silly, or else he might," said another.

"I never in my life seed a quire go into a study to have it out about the
playing and singing," pleaded Leaf; "and I should like to see it just
once!"

"Very well; we'll let en come in," said the tranter.  "You'll be like
chips in porridge, {1} Leaf--neither good nor hurt.  All right, my sonny,
come along;" and immediately himself, old William, and Leaf appeared in
the room.

"We took the liberty to come and see 'ee, sir," said Reuben, letting his
hat hang in his left hand, and touching with his right the brim of an
imaginary one on his head.  "We've come to see 'ee, sir, man and man, and
no offence, I hope?"

"None at all," said Mr. Maybold.

"This old aged man standing by my side is father; William Dewy by name,
sir."

"Yes; I see it is," said the vicar, nodding aside to old William, who
smiled.

"I thought you mightn't know en without his bass-viol," the tranter
apologized.  "You see, he always wears his best clothes and his bass-viol
a-Sundays, and it do make such a difference in a' old man's look."

"And who's that young man?" the vicar said.

"Tell the pa'son yer name," said the tranter, turning to Leaf, who stood
with his elbows nailed back to a bookcase.

"Please, Thomas Leaf, your holiness!" said Leaf, trembling.

"I hope you'll excuse his looks being so very thin," continued the
tranter deprecatingly, turning to the vicar again.  "But 'tisn't his
fault, poor feller.  He's rather silly by nature, and could never get
fat; though he's a' excellent treble, and so we keep him on."

"I never had no head, sir," said Leaf, eagerly grasping at this
opportunity for being forgiven his existence.

"Ah, poor young man!" said Mr. Maybold.

"Bless you, he don't mind it a bit, if you don't, sir," said the tranter
assuringly.  "Do ye, Leaf?"

"Not I--not a morsel--hee, hee!  I was afeard it mightn't please your
holiness, sir, that's all."

The tranter, finding Leaf get on so very well through his negative
qualities, was tempted in a fit of generosity to advance him still
higher, by giving him credit for positive ones.  "He's very clever for a
silly chap, good-now, sir.  You never knowed a young feller keep his
smock-frocks so clane; very honest too.  His ghastly looks is all there
is against en, poor feller; but we can't help our looks, you know, sir."

"True: we cannot.  You live with your mother, I think, Leaf?"

The tranter looked at Leaf to express that the most friendly assistant to
his tongue could do no more for him now, and that he must be left to his
own resources.

"Yes, sir: a widder, sir.  Ah, if brother Jim had lived she'd have had a
clever son to keep her without work!"

"Indeed! poor woman.  Give her this half-crown.  I'll call and see your
mother."

"Say, 'Thank you, sir,'" the tranter whispered imperatively towards Leaf.

"Thank you, sir!" said Leaf.

"That's it, then; sit down, Leaf," said Mr. Maybold.

"Y-yes, sir!"

The tranter cleared his throat after this accidental parenthesis about
Leaf, rectified his bodily position, and began his speech.

"Mr. Mayble," he said, "I hope you'll excuse my common way, but I always
like to look things in the face."

Reuben made a point of fixing this sentence in the vicar's mind by gazing
hard at him at the conclusion of it, and then out of the window.

Mr. Maybold and old William looked in the same direction, apparently
under the impression that the things' faces alluded to were there
visible.

"What I have been thinking"--the tranter implied by this use of the past
tense that he was hardly so discourteous as to be positively thinking it
then--"is that the quire ought to be gie'd a little time, and not done
away wi' till Christmas, as a fair thing between man and man.  And, Mr.
Mayble, I hope you'll excuse my common way?"

"I will, I will.  Till Christmas," the vicar murmured, stretching the two
words to a great length, as if the distance to Christmas might be
measured in that way.  "Well, I want you all to understand that I have no
personal fault to find, and that I don't wish to change the church music
by forcible means, or in a way which should hurt the feelings of any
parishioners.  Why I have at last spoken definitely on the subject is
that a player has been brought under--I may say pressed upon--my notice
several times by one of the churchwardens.  And as the organ I brought
with me is here waiting" (pointing to a cabinet-organ standing in the
study), "there is no reason for longer delay."

"We made a mistake I suppose then, sir?  But we understood the young
woman didn't want to play particularly?"  The tranter arranged his
countenance to signify that he did not want to be inquisitive in the
least.

"No, nor did she.  Nor did I definitely wish her to just yet; for your
playing is very good.  But, as I said, one of the churchwardens has been
so anxious for a change, that, as matters stand, I couldn't consistently
refuse my consent."

Now for some reason or other, the vicar at this point seemed to have an
idea that he had prevaricated; and as an honest vicar, it was a thing he
determined not to do.  He corrected himself, blushing as he did so,
though why he should blush was not known to Reuben.

"Understand me rightly," he said: "the church-warden proposed it to me,
but I had thought myself of getting--Miss Day to play."

"Which churchwarden might that be who proposed her, sir?--excusing my
common way."  The tranter intimated by his tone that, so far from being
inquisitive, he did not even wish to ask a single question.

"Mr. Shiner, I believe."

"Clk, my sonny!--beg your pardon, sir, that's only a form of words of
mine, and slipped out accidental--he nourishes enmity against us for some
reason or another; perhaps because we played rather hard upon en
Christmas night.  Anyhow 'tis certain sure that Mr. Shiner's real love
for music of a particular kind isn't his reason.  He've no more ear than
that chair.  But let that be."

"I don't think you should conclude that, because Mr. Shiner wants a
different music, he has any ill-feeling for you.  I myself, I must own,
prefer organ-music to any other.  I consider it most proper, and feel
justified in endeavouring to introduce it; but then, although other music
is better, I don't say yours is not good."

"Well then, Mr. Mayble, since death's to be, we'll die like men any day
you name (excusing my common way)."

Mr. Maybold bowed his head.

"All we thought was, that for us old ancient singers to be choked off
quiet at no time in particular, as now, in the Sundays after Easter,
would seem rather mean in the eyes of other parishes, sir.  But if we
fell glorious with a bit of a flourish at Christmas, we should have a
respectable end, and not dwindle away at some nameless paltry
second-Sunday-after or Sunday-next-before something, that's got no name
of his own."

"Yes, yes, that's reasonable; I own it's reasonable."

"You see, Mr. Mayble, we've got--do I keep you inconvenient long, sir?"

"No, no."

"We've got our feelings--father there especially."

The tranter, in his earnestness, had advanced his person to within six
inches of the vicar's.

"Certainly, certainly!" said Mr. Maybold, retreating a little for
convenience of seeing.  "You are all enthusiastic on the subject, and I
am all the more gratified to find you so.  A Laodicean lukewarmness is
worse than wrongheadedness itself."

"Exactly, sir.  In fact now, Mr. Mayble," Reuben continued, more
impressively, and advancing a little closer still to the vicar, "father
there is a perfect figure o' wonder, in the way of being fond of music!"

The vicar drew back a little further, the tranter suddenly also standing
back a foot or two, to throw open the view of his father, and pointing to
him at the same time.

Old William moved uneasily in the large chair, and with a minute smile on
the mere edge of his lips, for good-manners, said he was indeed very fond
of tunes.

"Now, you see exactly how it is," Reuben continued, appealing to Mr.
Maybold's sense of justice by looking sideways into his eyes.  The vicar
seemed to see how it was so well that the gratified tranter walked up to
him again with even vehement eagerness, so that his waistcoat-buttons
almost rubbed against the vicar's as he continued: "As to father, if you
or I, or any man or woman of the present generation, at the time music is
a-playing, was to shake your fist in father's face, as may be this way,
and say, 'Don't you be delighted with that music!'"--the tranter went
back to where Leaf was sitting, and held his fist so close to Leaf's face
that the latter pressed his head back against the wall: "All right, Leaf,
my sonny, I won't hurt you; 'tis just to show my meaning to Mr.
Mayble.--As I was saying, if you or I, or any man, was to shake your fist
in father's face this way, and say, 'William, your life or your music!'
he'd say, 'My life!'  Now that's father's nature all over; and you see,
sir, it must hurt the feelings of a man of that kind for him and his bass-
viol to be done away wi' neck and crop."

The tranter went back to the vicar's front and again looked earnestly at
his face.

"True, true, Dewy," Mr. Maybold answered, trying to withdraw his head and
shoulders without moving his feet; but finding this impracticable, edging
back another inch.  These frequent retreats had at last jammed Mr.
Maybold between his easy-chair and the edge of the table.

And at the moment of the announcement of the choir, Mr. Maybold had just
re-dipped the pen he was using; at their entry, instead of wiping it, he
had laid it on the table with the nib overhanging.  At the last retreat
his coat-tails came in contact with the pen, and down it rolled, first
against the back of the chair, thence turning a summersault into the
seat, thence falling to the floor with a rattle.

The vicar stooped for his pen, and the tranter, wishing to show that,
however great their ecclesiastical differences, his mind was not so small
as to let this affect his social feelings, stooped also.

"And have you anything else you want to explain to me, Dewy?" said Mr.
Maybold from under the table.

"Nothing, sir.  And, Mr. Mayble, you be not offended?  I hope you see our
desire is reason?" said the tranter from under the chair.

"Quite, quite; and I shouldn't think of refusing to listen to such a
reasonable request," the vicar replied.  Seeing that Reuben had secured
the pen, he resumed his vertical position, and added, "You know, Dewy, it
is often said how difficult a matter it is to act up to our convictions
and please all parties.  It may be said with equal truth, that it is
difficult for a man of any appreciativeness to have convictions at all.
Now in my case, I see right in you, and right in Shiner.  I see that
violins are good, and that an organ is good; and when we introduce the
organ, it will not be that fiddles were bad, but that an organ was
better.  That you'll clearly understand, Dewy?"

"I will; and thank you very much for such feelings, sir.  Piph-h-h-h!  How
the blood do get into my head, to be sure, whenever I quat down like
that!" said Reuben, who having also risen to his feet stuck the pen
vertically in the inkstand and almost through the bottom, that it might
not roll down again under any circumstances whatever.

Now the ancient body of minstrels in the passage felt their curiosity
surging higher and higher as the minutes passed.  Dick, not having much
affection for this errand, soon grew tired, and went away in the
direction of the school.  Yet their sense of propriety would probably
have restrained them from any attempt to discover what was going on in
the study had not the vicar's pen fallen to the floor.  The conviction
that the movement of chairs, etc., necessitated by the search, could only
have been caused by the catastrophe of a bloody fight beginning,
overpowered all other considerations; and they advanced to the door,
which had only just fallen to.  Thus, when Mr. Maybold raised his eyes
after the stooping he beheld glaring through the door Mr. Penny in full-
length portraiture, Mail's face and shoulders above Mr. Penny's head,
Spinks's forehead and eyes over Mail's crown, and a fractional part of
Bowman's countenance under Spinks's arm--crescent-shaped portions of
other heads and faces being visible behind these--the whole dozen and odd
eyes bristling with eager inquiry.

Mr. Penny, as is the case with excitable boot-makers and men, seeing the
vicar look at him and hearing no word spoken, thought it incumbent upon
himself to say something of any kind.  Nothing suggested itself till he
had looked for about half a minute at the vicar.

"You'll excuse my naming of it, sir," he said, regarding with much
commiseration the mere surface of the vicar's face; "but perhaps you
don't know that your chin have bust out a-bleeding where you cut yourself
a-shaving this morning, sir."

"Now, that was the stooping, depend upon't," the tranter suggested, also
looking with much interest at the vicar's chin.  "Blood always will bust
out again if you hang down the member that's been bleeding."

Old William raised his eyes and watched the vicar's bleeding chin
likewise; and Leaf advanced two or three paces from the bookcase,
absorbed in the contemplation of the same phenomenon, with parted lips
and delighted eyes.

"Dear me, dear me!" said Mr. Maybold hastily, looking very red, and
brushing his chin with his hand, then taking out his handkerchief and
wiping the place.

"That's it, sir; all right again now, 'a b'lieve--a mere nothing," said
Mr. Penny.  "A little bit of fur off your hat will stop it in a minute if
it should bust out again."

"I'll let 'ee have a bit off mine," said Reuben, to show his good
feeling; "my hat isn't so new as yours, sir, and 'twon't hurt mine a
bit."

"No, no; thank you, thank you," Mr. Maybold again nervously replied.

"'Twas rather a deep cut seemingly?" said Reuben, feeling these to be the
kindest and best remarks he could make.

"O, no; not particularly."

"Well, sir, your hand will shake sometimes a-shaving, and just when it
comes into your head that you may cut yourself, there's the blood."

"I have been revolving in my mind that question of the time at which we
make the change," said Mr. Maybold, "and I know you'll meet me half-way.
I think Christmas-day as much too late for me as the present time is too
early for you.  I suggest Michaelmas or thereabout as a convenient time
for both parties; for I think your objection to a Sunday which has no
name is not one of any real weight."

"Very good, sir.  I suppose mortal men mustn't expect their own way
entirely; and I express in all our names that we'll make shift and be
satisfied with what you say."  The tranter touched the brim of his
imaginary hat again, and all the choir did the same.  "About Michaelmas,
then, as far as you are concerned, sir, and then we make room for the
next generation."

"About Michaelmas," said the vicar.


