

For several minutes Dick drove along homeward, with the inner eye of
reflection so anxiously set on his passages at arms with Fancy, that the
road and scenery were as a thin mist over the real pictures of his mind.
Was she a coquette?  The balance between the evidence that she did love
him and that she did not was so nicely struck, that his opinion had no
stability.  She had let him put his hand upon hers; she had allowed her
gaze to drop plumb into the depths of his--his into hers--three or four
times; her manner had been very free with regard to the basin and towel;
she had appeared vexed at the mention of Shiner.  On the other hand, she
had driven him about the house like a quiet dog or cat, said Shiner cared
for her, and seemed anxious that Mr. Maybold should do the same.

Thinking thus as he neared the handpost at Mellstock Cross, sitting on
the front board of the spring cart--his legs on the outside, and his
whole frame jigging up and down like a candle-flame to the time of
Smart's trotting--who should he see coming down the hill but his father
in the light wagon, quivering up and down on a smaller scale of shakes,
those merely caused by the stones in the road.  They were soon crossing
each other's front.

"Weh-hey!" said the tranter to Smiler.

"Weh-hey!" said Dick to Smart, in an echo of the same voice.

"Th'st hauled her back, I suppose?" Reuben inquired peaceably.

"Yes," said Dick, with such a clinching period at the end that it seemed
he was never going to add another word.  Smiler, thinking this the close
of the conversation, prepared to move on.

"Weh-hey!" said the tranter.  "I tell thee what it is, Dick.  That there
maid is taking up thy thoughts more than's good for thee, my sonny.
Thou'rt never happy now unless th'rt making thyself miserable about her
in one way or another."

"I don't know about that, father," said Dick rather stupidly.

"But I do--Wey, Smiler!--'Od rot the women, 'tis nothing else wi' 'em
nowadays but getting young men and leading 'em astray."

"Pooh, father! you just repeat what all the common world says; that's all
you do."

"The world's a very sensible feller on things in jineral, Dick; very
sensible indeed."

Dick looked into the distance at a vast expanse of mortgaged estate.  "I
wish I was as rich as a squire when he's as poor as a crow," he murmured;
"I'd soon ask Fancy something."

"I wish so too, wi' all my heart, sonny; that I do.  Well, mind what
beest about, that's all."

Smart moved on a step or two.  "Supposing now, father,--We-hey, Smart!--I
did think a little about her, and I had a chance, which I ha'n't; don't
you think she's a very good sort of--of--one?"

"Ay, good; she's good enough.  When you've made up your mind to marry,
take the first respectable body that comes to hand--she's as good as any
other; they be all alike in the groundwork; 'tis only in the flourishes
there's a difference.  She's good enough; but I can't see what the nation
a young feller like you--wi' a comfortable house and home, and father and
mother to take care o' thee, and who sent 'ee to a school so good that
'twas hardly fair to the other children--should want to go hollering
after a young woman for, when she's quietly making a husband in her
pocket, and not troubled by chick nor chiel, to make a poverty-stric'
wife and family of her, and neither hat, cap, wig, nor waistcoat to set
'em up with: be drowned if I can see it, and that's the long and the
short o't, my sonny."

Dick looked at Smart's ears, then up the hill; but no reason was
suggested by any object that met his gaze.

"For about the same reason that you did, father, I suppose."

"Dang it, my sonny, thou'st got me there!"  And the tranter gave vent to
a grim admiration, with the mien of a man who was too magnanimous not to
appreciate artistically a slight rap on the knuckles, even if they were
his own.

"Whether or no," said Dick, "I asked her a thing going along the road."

"Come to that, is it?  Turk! won't thy mother be in a taking!  Well,
she's ready, I don't doubt?"

"I didn't ask her anything about having me; and if you'll let me speak,
I'll tell 'ee what I want to know.  I just said, Did she care about me?"

"Piph-ph-ph!"

"And then she said nothing for a quarter of a mile, and then she said she
didn't know.  Now, what I want to know is, what was the meaning of that
speech?"  The latter words were spoken resolutely, as if he didn't care
for the ridicule of all the fathers in creation.

"The meaning of that speech is," the tranter replied deliberately, "that
the meaning is meant to be rather hid at present.  Well, Dick, as an
honest father to thee, I don't pretend to deny what you d'know well
enough; that is, that her father being rather better in the pocket than
we, I should welcome her ready enough if it must be somebody."

"But what d'ye think she really did mean?" said the unsatisfied Dick.

"I'm afeard I am not o' much account in guessing, especially as I was not
there when she said it, and seeing that your mother was the only 'ooman I
ever cam' into such close quarters as that with."

"And what did mother say to you when you asked her?" said Dick musingly.

"I don't see that that will help 'ee."

"The principle is the same."

"Well--ay: what did she say?  Let's see.  I was oiling my working-day
boots without taking 'em off, and wi' my head hanging down, when she just
brushed on by the garden hatch like a flittering leaf.  'Ann,' I said,
says I, and then,--but, Dick I'm afeard 'twill be no help to thee; for we
were such a rum couple, your mother and I, leastways one half was, that
is myself--and your mother's charms was more in the manner than the
material."

"Never mind!  'Ann,' said you."

"'Ann,' said I, as I was saying . . . 'Ann,' I said to her when I was
oiling my working-day boots wi' my head hanging down, 'Woot hae me?' . .
. What came next I can't quite call up at this distance o' time.  Perhaps
your mother would know,--she's got a better memory for her little
triumphs than I.  However, the long and the short o' the story is that we
were married somehow, as I found afterwards.  'Twas on White
Tuesday,--Mellstock Club walked the same day, every man two and two, and
a fine day 'twas,--hot as fire,--how the sun did strike down upon my back
going to church!  I well can mind what a bath o' sweating I was in, body
and soul!  But Fance will ha' thee, Dick--she won't walk with another
chap--no such good luck."

"I don't know about that," said Dick, whipping at Smart's flank in a
fanciful way, which, as Smart knew, meant nothing in connection with
going on.  "There's Pa'son Maybold, too--that's all against me."

"What about he?  She's never been stuffing into thy innocent heart that
he's in hove with her?  Lord, the vanity o' maidens!"

"No, no.  But he called, and she looked at him in such a way, and at me
in such a way--quite different the ways were,--and as I was coming off,
there was he hanging up her birdcage."

"Well, why shouldn't the man hang up her bird-cage?  Turk seize it all,
what's that got to do wi' it?  Dick, that thou beest a white-lyvered chap
I don't say, but if thou beestn't as mad as a cappel-faced bull, let me
smile no more."

"O, ay."

"And what's think now, Dick?"

"I don't know."

"Here's another pretty kettle o' fish for thee.  Who d'ye think's the
bitter weed in our being turned out?  Did our party tell 'ee?"

"No.  Why, Pa'son Maybold, I suppose."

"Shiner,--because he's in love with thy young woman, and d'want to see
her young figure sitting up at that queer instrument, and her young
fingers rum-strumming upon the keys."

A sharp ado of sweet and bitter was going on in Dick during this
communication from his father.  "Shiner's a fool!--no, that's not it; I
don't believe any such thing, father.  Why, Shiner would never take a
bold step like that, unless she'd been a little made up to, and had taken
it kindly.  Pooh!"

"Who's to say she didn't?"

"I do."

"The more fool you."

"Why, father of me?"

"Has she ever done more to thee?"

"No."

"Then she has done as much to he--rot 'em!  Now, Dick, this is how a maid
is.  She'll swear she's dying for thee, and she is dying for thee, and
she will die for thee; but she'll fling a look over t'other shoulder at
another young feller, though never leaving off dying for thee just the
same."

"She's not dying for me, and so she didn't fling a look at him."

"But she may be dying for him, for she looked at thee."

"I don't know what to make of it at all," said Dick gloomily.

"All I can make of it is," the tranter said, raising his whip, arranging
his different joints and muscles, and motioning to the horse to move on,
"that if you can't read a maid's mind by her motions, nature d'seem to
say thou'st ought to be a bachelor.  Clk, clk!  Smiler!"  And the tranter
moved on.

Dick held Smart's rein firmly, and the whole concern of horse, cart, and
man remained rooted in the lane.  How long this condition would have
lasted is unknown, had not Dick's thoughts, after adding up numerous
items of misery, gradually wandered round to the fact that as something
must be done, it could not be done by staying there all night.

Reaching home he went up to his bedroom, shut the door as if he were
going to be seen no more in this life, and taking a sheet of paper and
uncorking the ink-bottle, he began a letter.  The dignity of the writer's
mind was so powerfully apparent in every line of this effusion that it
obscured the logical sequence of facts and intentions to an appreciable
degree; and it was not at all clear to a reader whether he there and then
left off loving Miss Fancy Day; whether he had never loved her seriously,
and never meant to; whether he had been dying up to the present moment,
and now intended to get well again; or whether he had hitherto been in
good health, and intended to die for her forthwith.

He put this letter in an envelope, sealed it up, directed it in a stern
handwriting of straight dashes--easy flourishes being rigorously
excluded.  He walked with it in his pocket down the lane in strides not
an inch less than three feet long.  Reaching her gate he put on a
resolute expression--then put it off again, turned back homeward, tore up
his letter, and sat down.

That letter was altogether in a wrong tone--that he must own.  A
heartless man-of-the-world tone was what the juncture required.  That he
rather wanted her, and rather did not want her--the latter for choice;
but that as a member of society he didn't mind making a query in jaunty
terms, which could only be answered in the same way: did she mean
anything by her bearing towards him, or did she not?

This letter was considered so satisfactory in every way that, being put
into the hands of a little boy, and the order given that he was to run
with it to the school, he was told in addition not to look behind him if
Dick called after him to bring it back, but to run along with it just the
same.  Having taken this precaution against vacillation, Dick watched his
messenger down the road, and turned into the house whistling an air in
such ghastly jerks and starts, that whistling seemed to be the act the
very furthest removed from that which was instinctive in such a youth.

The letter was left as ordered: the next morning came and passed--and no
answer.  The next.  The next.  Friday night came.  Dick resolved that if
no answer or sign were given by her the next day, on Sunday he would meet
her face to face, and have it all out by word of mouth.

"Dick," said his father, coming in from the garden at that moment--in
each hand a hive of bees tied in a cloth to prevent their egress--"I
think you'd better take these two swarms of bees to Mrs. Maybold's to-
morrow, instead o' me, and I'll go wi' Smiler and the wagon."

It was a relief; for Mrs. Maybold, the vicar's mother, who had just taken
into her head a fancy for keeping bees (pleasantly disguised under the
pretence of its being an economical wish to produce her own honey), lived
near the watering-place of Budmouth-Regis, ten miles off, and the
business of transporting the hives thither would occupy the whole day,
and to some extent annihilate the vacant time between this evening and
the coming Sunday.  The best spring-cart was washed throughout, the axles
oiled, and the bees placed therein for the journey.




PART THE THIRD--SUMMER

