

Dick, dressed in his 'second-best' suit, burst into Fancy's sitting-room
with a glow of pleasure on his face.

It was two o'clock on Friday, the day before her contemplated visit to
her father, and for some reason connected with cleaning the school the
children had been given this Friday afternoon for pastime, in addition to
the usual Saturday.

"Fancy! it happens just right that it is a leisure half day with you.
Smart is lame in his near-foot-afore, and so, as I can't do anything,
I've made a holiday afternoon of it, and am come for you to go nutting
with me!"

She was sitting by the parlour window, with a blue frock lying across her
lap and scissors in her hand.

"Go nutting!  Yes.  But I'm afraid I can't go for an hour or so."

"Why not?  'Tis the only spare afternoon we may both have together for
weeks."

"This dress of mine, that I am going to wear on Sunday at Yalbury;--I
find it fits so badly that I must alter it a little, after all.  I told
the dressmaker to make it by a pattern I gave her at the time; instead of
that, she did it her own way, and made me look a perfect fright."

"How long will you be?" he inquired, looking rather disappointed.

"Not long.  Do wait and talk to me; come, do, dear."

Dick sat down.  The talking progressed very favourably, amid the snipping
and sewing, till about half-past two, at which time his conversation
began to be varied by a slight tapping upon his toe with a walking-stick
he had cut from the hedge as he came along.  Fancy talked and answered
him, but sometimes the answers were so negligently given, that it was
evident her thoughts lay for the greater part in her lap with the blue
dress.

The clock struck three.  Dick arose from his seat, walked round the room
with his hands behind him, examined all the furniture, then sounded a few
notes on the harmonium, then looked inside all the books he could find,
then smoothed Fancy's head with his hand.  Still the snipping and sewing
went on.

The clock struck four.  Dick fidgeted about, yawned privately; counted
the knots in the table, yawned publicly; counted the flies on the
ceiling, yawned horribly; went into the kitchen and scullery, and so
thoroughly studied the principle upon which the pump was constructed that
he could have delivered a lecture on the subject.  Stepping back to
Fancy, and finding still that she had not done, he went into her garden
and looked at her cabbages and potatoes, and reminded himself that they
seemed to him to wear a decidedly feminine aspect; then pulled up several
weeds, and came in again.  The clock struck five, and still the snipping
and sewing went on.

Dick attempted to kill a fly, peeled all the rind off his walking-stick,
then threw the stick into the scullery because it was spoilt, produced
hideous discords from the harmonium, and accidentally overturned a vase
of flowers, the water from which ran in a rill across the table and
dribbled to the floor, where it formed a lake, the shape of which, after
the lapse of a few minutes, he began to modify considerably with his
foot, till it was like a map of England and Wales.

"Well, Dick, you needn't have made quite such a mess."

"Well, I needn't, I suppose."  He walked up to the blue dress, and looked
at it with a rigid gaze.  Then an idea seemed to cross his brain.

"Fancy."

"Yes."

"I thought you said you were going to wear your gray gown all day
to-morrow on your trip to Yalbury, and in the evening too, when I shall
be with you, and ask your father for you?"

"So I am."

"And the blue one only on Sunday?"

"And the blue one Sunday."

"Well, dear, I sha'n't be at Yalbury Sunday to see it."

"No, but I shall walk to Longpuddle church in the afternoon with father,
and such lots of people will be looking at me there, you know; and it did
set so badly round the neck."

"I never noticed it, and 'tis like nobody else would."

"They might."

"Then why not wear the gray one on Sunday as well?  'Tis as pretty as the
blue one."

"I might make the gray one do, certainly.  But it isn't so good; it
didn't cost half so much as this one, and besides, it would be the same I
wore Saturday."

"Then wear the striped one, dear."

"I might."

"Or the dark one."

"Yes, I might; but I want to wear a fresh one they haven't seen."

"I see, I see," said Dick, in a voice in which the tones of love were
decidedly inconvenienced by a considerable emphasis, his thoughts
meanwhile running as follows: "I, the man she loves best in the world, as
she says, am to understand that my poor half-holiday is to be lost,
because she wants to wear on Sunday a gown there is not the slightest
necessity for wearing, simply, in fact, to appear more striking than
usual in the eyes of Longpuddle young men; and I not there, either."

"Then there are three dresses good enough for my eyes, but neither is
good enough for the youths of Longpuddle," he said.

"No, not that exactly, Dick.  Still, you see, I do want--to look pretty
to them--there, that's honest!  But I sha'n't be much longer."

"How much?"

"A quarter of an hour."

"Very well; I'll come in in a quarter of an hour."

"Why go away?"

"I mid as well."

He went out, walked down the road, and sat upon a gate.  Here he
meditated and meditated, and the more he meditated the more decidedly did
he begin to fume, and the more positive was he that his time had been
scandalously trifled with by Miss Fancy Day--that, so far from being the
simple girl who had never had a sweetheart before, as she had solemnly
assured him time after time, she was, if not a flirt, a woman who had had
no end of admirers; a girl most certainly too anxious about her frocks; a
girl, whose feelings, though warm, were not deep; a girl who cared a
great deal too much how she appeared in the eyes of other men.  "What she
loves best in the world," he thought, with an incipient spice of his
father's grimness, "is her hair and complexion.  What she loves next
best, her gowns and hats; what she loves next best, myself, perhaps!"

Suffering great anguish at this disloyalty in himself and harshness to
his darling, yet disposed to persevere in it, a horribly cruel thought
crossed his mind.  He would not call for her, as he had promised, at the
end of a quarter of an hour!  Yes, it would be a punishment she well
deserved.  Although the best part of the afternoon had been wasted he
would go nutting as he had intended, and go by himself.

He leaped over the gate, and pushed up the lane for nearly two miles,
till a winding path called Snail-Creep sloped up a hill and entered a
hazel copse by a hole like a rabbit's burrow.  In he plunged, vanished
among the bushes, and in a short time there was no sign of his existence
upon earth, save an occasional rustling of boughs and snapping of twigs
in divers points of Grey's Wood.

Never man nutted as Dick nutted that afternoon.  He worked like a galley
slave.  Half-hour after half-hour passed away, and still he gathered
without ceasing.  At last, when the sun had set, and bunches of nuts
could not be distinguished from the leaves which nourished them, he
shouldered his bag, containing quite two pecks of the finest produce of
the wood, about as much use to him as two pecks of stones from the road,
strolled down the woodland track, crossed the highway and entered the
homeward lane, whistling as he went.

Probably, Miss Fancy Day never before or after stood so low in Mr. Dewy's
opinion as on that afternoon.  In fact, it is just possible that a few
more blue dresses on the Longpuddle young men's account would have
clarified Dick's brain entirely, and made him once more a free man.

But Venus had planned other developments, at any rate for the present.
Cuckoo-Lane, the way he pursued, passed over a ridge which rose keenly
against the sky about fifty yards in his van.  Here, upon the bright
after-glow about the horizon, was now visible an irregular shape, which
at first he conceived to be a bough standing a little beyond the line of
its neighbours.  Then it seemed to move, and, as he advanced still
further, there was no doubt that it was a living being sitting in the
bank, head bowed on hand.  The grassy margin entirely prevented his
footsteps from being heard, and it was not till he was close that the
figure recognized him.  Up it sprang, and he was face to face with Fancy.

"Dick, Dick!  O, is it you, Dick!"

"Yes, Fancy," said Dick, in a rather repentant tone, and lowering his
nuts.

She ran up to him, flung her parasol on the grass, put her little head
against his breast, and then there began a narrative, disjointed by such
a hysterical weeping as was never surpassed for intensity in the whole
history of love.

"O Dick," she sobbed out, "where have you been away from me?  O, I have
suffered agony, and thought you would never come any more!  'Tis cruel,
Dick; no 'tisn't, it is justice!  I've been walking miles and miles up
and down Grey's Wood, trying to find you, till I was wearied and worn
out, and I could walk no further, and had come back this far!  O Dick,
directly you were gone, I thought I had offended you and I put down the
dress; 'tisn't finished now, and I never will finish, it, and I'll wear
an old one Sunday!  Yes, Dick, I will, because I don't care what I wear
when you are not by my side--ha, you think I do, but I don't!--and I ran
after you, and I saw you go up Snail-Creep and not look back once, and
then you plunged in, and I after you; but I was too far behind.  O, I did
wish the horrid bushes had been cut down, so that I could see your dear
shape again!  And then I called out to you, and nobody answered, and I
was afraid to call very loud, lest anybody else should hear me.  Then I
kept wandering and wandering about, and it was dreadful misery, Dick.  And
then I shut my eyes and fell to picturing you looking at some other
woman, very pretty and nice, but with no affection or truth in her at
all, and then imagined you saying to yourself, 'Ah, she's as good as
Fancy, for Fancy told me a story, and was a flirt, and cared for herself
more than me, so now I'll have this one for my sweetheart.'  O, you
won't, will you, Dick, for I do love you so!"

It is scarcely necessary to add that Dick renounced his freedom there and
then, and kissed her ten times over, and promised that no pretty woman of
the kind alluded to should ever engross his thoughts; in short, that
though he had been vexed with her, all such vexation was past, and that
henceforth and for ever it was simply Fancy or death for him.  And then
they set about proceeding homewards, very slowly on account of Fancy's
weariness, she leaning upon his shoulder, and in addition receiving
support from his arm round her waist; though she had sufficiently
recovered from her desperate condition to sing to him, 'Why are you
wandering here, I pray?' during the latter part of their walk.  Nor is it
necessary to describe in detail how the bag of nuts was quite forgotten
until three days later, when it was found among the brambles and restored
empty to Mrs. Dewy, her initials being marked thereon in red cotton; and
how she puzzled herself till her head ached upon the question of how on
earth her meal-bag could have got into Cuckoo-Lane.


