

The next morning the vicar rose early.  The first thing he did was to
write a long and careful letter to his friend in Yorkshire.  Then, eating
a little breakfast, he crossed the meadows in the direction of
Casterbridge, bearing his letter in his pocket, that he might post it at
the town office, and obviate the loss of one day in its transmission that
would have resulted had he left it for the foot-post through the village.

It was a foggy morning, and the trees shed in noisy water-drops the
moisture they had collected from the thick air, an acorn occasionally
falling from its cup to the ground, in company with the drippings.  In
the meads, sheets of spiders'-web, almost opaque with wet, hung in folds
over the fences, and the falling leaves appeared in every variety of
brown, green, and yellow hue.

A low and merry whistling was heard on the highway he was approaching,
then the light footsteps of a man going in the same direction as himself.
On reaching the junction of his path with the road, the vicar beheld Dick
Dewy's open and cheerful face.  Dick lifted his hat, and the vicar came
out into the highway that Dick was pursuing.

"Good-morning, Dewy.  How well you are looking!" said Mr. Maybold.

"Yes, sir, I am well--quite well!  I am going to Casterbridge now, to get
Smart's collar; we left it there Saturday to be repaired."

"I am going to Casterbridge, so we'll walk together," the vicar said.
Dick gave a hop with one foot to put himself in step with Mr. Maybold,
who proceeded: "I fancy I didn't see you at church yesterday, Dewy.  Or
were you behind the pier?"

"No; I went to Charmley.  Poor John Dunford chose me to be one of his
bearers a long time before he died, and yesterday was the funeral.  Of
course I couldn't refuse, though I should have liked particularly to have
been at home as 'twas the day of the new music."

"Yes, you should have been.  The musical portion of the service was
successful--very successful indeed; and what is more to the purpose, no
ill-feeling whatever was evinced by any of the members of the old choir.
They joined in the singing with the greatest good-will."

"'Twas natural enough that I should want to be there, I suppose," said
Dick, smiling a private smile; "considering who the organ-player was."

At this the vicar reddened a little, and said, "Yes, yes," though not at
all comprehending Dick's true meaning, who, as he received no further
reply, continued hesitatingly, and with another smile denoting his pride
as a lover--

"I suppose you know what I mean, sir?  You've heard about me and--Miss
Day?"

The red in Maybold's countenance went away: he turned and looked Dick in
the face.

"No," he said constrainedly, "I've heard nothing whatever about you and
Miss Day."

"Why, she's my sweetheart, and we are going to be married next Midsummer.
We are keeping it rather close just at present, because 'tis a good many
months to wait; but it is her father's wish that we don't marry before,
and of course we must submit.  But the time 'ill soon slip along."

"Yes, the time will soon slip along--Time glides away every day--yes."

Maybold said these words, but he had no idea of what they were.  He was
conscious of a cold and sickly thrill throughout him; and all he reasoned
was this that the young creature whose graces had intoxicated him into
making the most imprudent resolution of his life, was less an angel than
a woman.

"You see, sir," continued the ingenuous Dick, "'twill be better in one
sense.  I shall by that time be the regular manager of a branch o'
father's business, which has very much increased lately, and business,
which we think of starting elsewhere.  It has very much increased lately,
and we expect next year to keep a' extra couple of horses.  We've already
our eye on one--brown as a berry, neck like a rainbow, fifteen hands, and
not a gray hair in her--offered us at twenty-five want a crown.  And to
kip pace with the times I have had some cards prented and I beg leave to
hand you one, sir."

"Certainly," said the vicar, mechanically taking the card that Dick
offered him.

"I turn in here by Grey's Bridge," said Dick.  "I suppose you go straight
on and up town?"

"Yes."

"Good-morning, sir."

"Good-morning, Dewy."

Maybold stood still upon the bridge, holding the card as it had been put
into his hand, and Dick's footsteps died away towards Durnover Mill.  The
vicar's first voluntary action was to read the card:--

   DEWY AND SON,
   TRANTERS AND HAULIERS,
   MELLSTOCK.
   NB.--Furniture, Coals, Potatoes, Live and Dead Stock, removed to any
   distance on the shortest notice.

Mr. Maybold leant over the parapet of the bridge and looked into the
river.  He saw--without heeding--how the water came rapidly from beneath
the arches, glided down a little steep, then spread itself over a pool in
which dace, trout, and minnows sported at ease among the long green locks
of weed that lay heaving and sinking with their roots towards the
current.  At the end of ten minutes spent leaning thus, he drew from his
pocket the letter to his friend, tore it deliberately into such minute
fragments that scarcely two syllables remained in juxtaposition, and sent
the whole handful of shreds fluttering into the water.  Here he watched
them eddy, dart, and turn, as they were carried downwards towards the
ocean and gradually disappeared from his view.  Finally he moved off, and
pursued his way at a rapid pace back again to Mellstock Vicarage.

Nerving himself by a long and intense effort, he sat down in his study
and wrote as follows:

   "DEAR MISS DAY,--The meaning of your words, 'the temptation is too
   strong,' of your sadness and your tears, has been brought home to me
   by an accident.  I know to-day what I did not know yesterday--that you
   are not a free woman.

   "Why did you not tell me--why didn't you?  Did you suppose I knew?  No.
   Had I known, my conduct in coming to you as I did would have been
   reprehensible.

   "But I don't chide you!  Perhaps no blame attaches to you--I can't
   tell.  Fancy, though my opinion of you is assailed and disturbed in a
   way which cannot be expressed, I love you still, and my word to you
   holds good yet.  But will you, in justice to an honest man who relies
   upon your word to him, consider whether, under the circumstances, you
   can honourably forsake him?--Yours ever sincerely,

   "ARTHUR MAYBOLD."

He rang the bell.  "Tell Charles to take these copybooks and this note to
the school at once."

The maid took the parcel and the letter, and in a few minutes a boy was
seen to leave the vicarage gate, with the one under his arm, and the
other in his hand.  The vicar sat with his hand to his brow, watching the
lad as he descended Church Lane and entered the waterside path which
intervened between that spot and the school.

Here he was met by another boy, and after a free salutation and
pugilistic frisk had passed between the two, the second boy came on his
way to the vicarage, and the other vanished out of sight.

The boy came to the door, and a note for Mr. Maybold was brought in.

He knew the writing.  Opening the envelope with an unsteady hand, he read
the subjoined words:

   "DEAR MR. MAYBOLD,--I have been thinking seriously and sadly through
   the whole of the night of the question you put to me last evening and
   of my answer.  That answer, as an honest woman, I had no right to
   give.

   "It is my nature--perhaps all women's--to love refinement of mind and
   manners; but even more than this, to be ever fascinated with the idea
   of surroundings more elegant and pleasing than those which have been
   customary.  And you praised me, and praise is life to me.  It was
   alone my sensations at these things which prompted my reply.  Ambition
   and vanity they would be called; perhaps they are so.

   "After this explanation I hope you will generously allow me to
   withdraw the answer I too hastily gave.

   "And one more request.  To keep the meeting of last night, and all
   that passed between us there, for ever a secret.  Were it to become
   known, it would utterly blight the happiness of a trusting and
   generous man, whom I love still, and shall love always.--Yours
   sincerely,

   "FANCY DAY.

The last written communication that ever passed from the vicar to Fancy,
was a note containing these words only:

   "Tell him everything; it is best.  He will forgive you."




PART THE FIFTH: CONCLUSION

