

The point in Yalbury Wood which abutted on the end of Geoffrey Day's
premises was closed with an ancient tree, horizontally of enormous
extent, though having no great pretensions to height.  Many hundreds of
birds had been born amidst the boughs of this single tree; tribes of
rabbits and hares had nibbled at its bark from year to year; quaint tufts
of fungi had sprung from the cavities of its forks; and countless
families of moles and earthworms had crept about its roots.  Beneath and
beyond its shade spread a carefully-tended grass-plot, its purpose being
to supply a healthy exercise-ground for young chickens and pheasants; the
hens, their mothers, being enclosed in coops placed upon the same green
flooring.

All these encumbrances were now removed, and as the afternoon advanced,
the guests gathered on the spot, where music, dancing, and the singing of
songs went forward with great spirit throughout the evening.  The
propriety of every one was intense by reason of the influence of Fancy,
who, as an additional precaution in this direction, had strictly charged
her father and the tranter to carefully avoid saying 'thee' and 'thou' in
their conversation, on the plea that those ancient words sounded so very
humiliating to persons of newer taste; also that they were never to be
seen drawing the back of the hand across the mouth after drinking--a
local English custom of extraordinary antiquity, but stated by Fancy to
be decidedly dying out among the better classes of society.

In addition to the local musicians present, a man who had a thorough
knowledge of the tambourine was invited from the village of Tantrum
Clangley,--a place long celebrated for the skill of its inhabitants as
performers on instruments of percussion.  These important members of the
assembly were relegated to a height of two or three feet from the ground,
upon a temporary erection of planks supported by barrels.  Whilst the
dancing progressed the older persons sat in a group under the trunk of
the tree,--the space being allotted to them somewhat grudgingly by the
young ones, who were greedy of pirouetting room,--and fortified by a
table against the heels of the dancers.  Here the gaffers and gammers,
whose dancing days were over, told stories of great impressiveness, and
at intervals surveyed the advancing and retiring couples from the same
retreat, as people on shore might be supposed to survey a naval
engagement in the bay beyond; returning again to their tales when the
pause was over.  Those of the whirling throng, who, during the rests
between each figure, turned their eyes in the direction of these seated
ones, were only able to discover, on account of the music and bustle,
that a very striking circumstance was in course of narration--denoted by
an emphatic sweep of the hand, snapping of the fingers, close of the
lips, and fixed look into the centre of the listener's eye for the space
of a quarter of a minute, which raised in that listener such a
reciprocating working of face as to sometimes make the distant dancers
half wish to know what such an interesting tale could refer to.

Fancy caused her looks to wear as much matronly expression as was
obtainable out of six hours' experience as a wife, in order that the
contrast between her own state of life and that of the unmarried young
women present might be duly impressed upon the company: occasionally
stealing glances of admiration at her left hand, but this quite
privately; for her ostensible bearing concerning the matter was intended
to show that, though she undoubtedly occupied the most wondrous position
in the eyes of the world that had ever been attained, she was almost
unconscious of the circumstance, and that the somewhat prominent position
in which that wonderfully-emblazoned left hand was continually found to
be placed, when handing cups and saucers, knives, forks, and glasses, was
quite the result of accident.  As to wishing to excite envy in the bosoms
of her maiden companions, by the exhibition of the shining ring, every
one was to know it was quite foreign to the dignity of such an
experienced married woman.  Dick's imagination in the meantime was far
less capable of drawing so much wontedness from his new condition.  He
had been for two or three hours trying to feel himself merely a newly-
married man, but had been able to get no further in the attempt than to
realize that he was Dick Dewy, the tranter's son, at a party given by
Lord Wessex's head man-in-charge, on the outlying Yalbury estate, dancing
and chatting with Fancy Day.

Five country dances, including 'Haste to the Wedding,' two reels, and
three fragments of horn-pipes, brought them to the time for supper,
which, on account of the dampness of the grass from the immaturity of the
summer season, was spread indoors.  At the conclusion of the meal Dick
went out to put the horse in; and Fancy, with the elder half of the four
bridesmaids, retired upstairs to dress for the journey to Dick's new
cottage near Mellstock.

"How long will you be putting on your bonnet, Fancy?" Dick inquired at
the foot of the staircase.  Being now a man of business and married, he
was strong on the importance of time, and doubled the emphasis of his
words in conversing, and added vigour to his nods.

"Only a minute."

"How long is that?"

"Well, dear, five."

"Ah, sonnies!" said the tranter, as Dick retired, "'tis a talent of the
female race that low numbers should stand for high, more especially in
matters of waiting, matters of age, and matters of money."

"True, true, upon my body," said Geoffrey.

"Ye spak with feeling, Geoffrey, seemingly."

"Anybody that d'know my experience might guess that."

"What's she doing now, Geoffrey?"

"Claning out all the upstairs drawers and cupboards, and dusting the
second-best chainey--a thing that's only done once a year.  'If there's
work to be done I must do it,' says she, 'wedding or no.'"

"'Tis my belief she's a very good woman at bottom."

"She's terrible deep, then."

Mrs. Penny turned round.  "Well, 'tis humps and hollers with the best of
us; but still and for all that, Dick and Fancy stand as fair a chance of
having a bit of sunsheen as any married pair in the land."

"Ay, there's no gainsaying it."

Mrs. Dewy came up, talking to one person and looking at another.  "Happy,
yes," she said.  "'Tis always so when a couple is so exactly in tune with
one another as Dick and she."

"When they be'n't too poor to have time to sing," said grandfather James.

"I tell ye, neighbours, when the pinch comes," said the tranter: "when
the oldest daughter's boots be only a size less than her mother's, and
the rest o' the flock close behind her.  A sharp time for a man that, my
sonnies; a very sharp time!  Chanticleer's comb is a-cut then, 'a
believe."

"That's about the form o't," said Mr. Penny.  "That'll put the stuns upon
a man, when you must measure mother and daughter's lasts to tell 'em
apart."

"You've no cause to complain, Reuben, of such a close-coming flock," said
Mrs. Dewy; "for ours was a straggling lot enough, God knows!"

"I d'know it, I d'know it," said the tranter.  "You be a well-enough
woman, Ann."

Mrs. Dewy put her mouth in the form of a smile, and put it back again
without smiling.

"And if they come together, they go together," said Mrs. Penny, whose
family had been the reverse of the tranter's; "and a little money will
make either fate tolerable.  And money can be made by our young couple, I
know."

"Yes, that it can!" said the impulsive voice of Leaf, who had hitherto
humbly admired the proceedings from a corner.  "It can be done--all
that's wanted is a few pounds to begin with.  That's all!  I know a story
about it!"

"Let's hear thy story, Leaf," said the tranter.  "I never knew you were
clever enough to tell a story.  Silence, all of ye!  Mr. Leaf will tell a
story."

"Tell your story, Thomas Leaf," said grandfather William in the tone of a
schoolmaster.

"Once," said the delighted Leaf, in an uncertain voice, "there was a man
who lived in a house!  Well, this man went thinking and thinking night
and day.  At last, he said to himself, as I might, 'If I had only ten
pound, I'd make a fortune.'  At last by hook or by crook, behold he got
the ten pounds!"

"Only think of that!" said Nat Callcome satirically.

"Silence!" said the tranter.

"Well, now comes the interesting part of the story!  In a little time he
made that ten pounds twenty.  Then a little time after that he doubled
it, and made it forty.  Well, he went on, and a good while after that he
made it eighty, and on to a hundred.  Well, by-and-by he made it two
hundred!  Well, you'd never believe it, but--he went on and made it four
hundred!  He went on, and what did he do?  Why, he made it eight hundred!
Yes, he did," continued Leaf, in the highest pitch of excitement,
bringing down his fist upon his knee with such force that he quivered
with the pain; "yes, and he went on and made it A THOUSAND!"

"Hear, hear!" said the tranter.  "Better than the history of England, my
sonnies!"

"Thank you for your story, Thomas Leaf," said grandfather William; and
then Leaf gradually sank into nothingness again.

Amid a medley of laughter, old shoes, and elder-wine, Dick and his bride
took their departure, side by side in the excellent new spring-cart which
the young tranter now possessed.  The moon was just over the full,
rendering any light from lamps or their own beauties quite unnecessary to
the pair.  They drove slowly along Yalbury Bottom, where the road passed
between two copses.  Dick was talking to his companion.

"Fancy," he said, "why we are so happy is because there is such full
confidence between us.  Ever since that time you confessed to that little
flirtation with Shiner by the river (which was really no flirtation at
all), I have thought how artless and good you must be to tell me o' such
a trifling thing, and to be so frightened about it as you were.  It has
won me to tell you my every deed and word since then.  We'll have no
secrets from each other, darling, will we ever?--no secret at all."

"None from to-day," said Fancy.  "Hark! what's that?"

From a neighbouring thicket was suddenly heard to issue in a loud,
musical, and liquid voice--

"Tippiwit! swe-e-et! ki-ki-ki!  Come hither, come hither, come hither!"

"O, 'tis the nightingale," murmured she, and thought of a secret she
would never tell.




Footnotes:


{1} This, a local expression, must be a corruption of something less
questionable.




