

The next scene is a tempestuous afternoon in the following month, and
Fancy Day is discovered walking from her father's home towards Mellstock.

A single vast gray cloud covered the country, from which the small rain
and mist had just begun to blow down in wavy sheets, alternately thick
and thin.  The trees of the fields and plantations writhed like miserable
men as the air wound its way swiftly among them: the lowest portions of
their trunks, that had hardly ever been known to move, were visibly
rocked by the fiercer gusts, distressing the mind by its painful
unwontedness, as when a strong man is seen to shed tears.  Low-hanging
boughs went up and down; high and erect boughs went to and fro; the
blasts being so irregular, and divided into so many cross-currents, that
neighbouring branches of the same tree swept the skies in independent
motions, crossed each other, or became entangled.  Across the open spaces
flew flocks of green and yellowish leaves, which, after travelling a long
distance from their parent trees, reached the ground, and lay there with
their under-sides upward.

As the rain and wind increased, and Fancy's bonnet-ribbons leapt more and
more snappishly against her chin, she paused on entering Mellstock Lane
to consider her latitude, and the distance to a place of shelter.  The
nearest house was Elizabeth Endorfield's, in Higher Mellstock, whose
cottage and garden stood not far from the junction of that hamlet with
the road she followed.  Fancy hastened onward, and in five minutes
entered a gate, which shed upon her toes a flood of water-drops as she
opened it.

"Come in, chiel!" a voice exclaimed, before Fancy had knocked: a
promptness that would have surprised her had she not known that Mrs.
Endorfield was an exceedingly and exceptionally sharp woman in the use of
her eyes and ears.

Fancy went in and sat down.  Elizabeth was paring potatoes for her
husband's supper.

Scrape, scrape, scrape; then a toss, and splash went a potato into a
bucket of water.

Now, as Fancy listlessly noted these proceedings of the dame, she began
to reconsider an old subject that lay uppermost in her heart.  Since the
interview between her father and Dick, the days had been melancholy days
for her.  Geoffrey's firm opposition to the notion of Dick as a son-in-
law was more than she had expected.  She had frequently seen her lover
since that time, it is true, and had loved him more for the opposition
than she would have otherwise dreamt of doing--which was a happiness of a
certain kind.  Yet, though love is thus an end in itself, it must be
believed to be the means to another end if it is to assume the rosy hues
of an unalloyed pleasure.  And such a belief Fancy and Dick were
emphatically denied just now.

Elizabeth Endorfield had a repute among women which was in its nature
something between distinction and notoriety.  It was founded on the
following items of character.  She was shrewd and penetrating; her house
stood in a lonely place; she never went to church; she wore a red cloak;
she always retained her bonnet indoors and she had a pointed chin.  Thus
far her attributes were distinctly Satanic; and those who looked no
further called her, in plain terms, a witch.  But she was not gaunt, nor
ugly in the upper part of her face, nor particularly strange in manner;
so that, when her more intimate acquaintances spoke of her the term was
softened, and she became simply a Deep Body, who was as long-headed as
she was high.  It may be stated that Elizabeth belonged to a class of
suspects who were gradually losing their mysterious characteristics under
the administration of the young vicar; though, during the long reign of
Mr. Grinham, the parish of Mellstock had proved extremely favourable to
the growth of witches.

While Fancy was revolving all this in her mind, and putting it to herself
whether it was worth while to tell her troubles to Elizabeth, and ask her
advice in getting out of them, the witch spoke.

"You be down--proper down," she said suddenly, dropping another potato
into the bucket.

Fancy took no notice.

"About your young man."

Fancy reddened.  Elizabeth seemed to be watching her thoughts.  Really,
one would almost think she must have the powers people ascribed to her.

"Father not in the humour for't, hey?"  Another potato was finished and
flung in.  "Ah, I know about it.  Little birds tell me things that people
don't dream of my knowing."

Fancy was desperate about Dick, and here was a chance--O, such a wicked
chance--of getting help; and what was goodness beside love!

"I wish you'd tell me how to put him in the humour for it?" she said.

"That I could soon do," said the witch quietly.

"Really?  O, do; anyhow--I don't care--so that it is done!  How could I
do it, Mrs. Endorfield?"

"Nothing so mighty wonderful in it."

"Well, but how?"

"By witchery, of course!" said Elizabeth.

"No!" said Fancy.

"'Tis, I assure ye.  Didn't you ever hear I was a witch?"

"Well," hesitated Fancy, "I have heard you called so."

"And you believed it?"

"I can't say that I did exactly believe it, for 'tis very horrible and
wicked; but, O, how I do wish it was possible for you to be one!"

"So I am.  And I'll tell you how to bewitch your father to let you marry
Dick Dewy."

"Will it hurt him, poor thing?"

"Hurt who?"

"Father."

"No; the charm is worked by common sense, and the spell can only be broke
by your acting stupidly."

Fancy looked rather perplexed, and Elizabeth went on:

   "This fear of Lizz--whatever 'tis--
   By great and small;
   She makes pretence to common sense,
   And that's all.

"You must do it like this."  The witch laid down her knife and potato,
and then poured into Fancy's ear a long and detailed list of directions,
glancing up from the corner of her eye into Fancy's face with an
expression of sinister humour.  Fancy's face brightened, clouded, rose
and sank, as the narrative proceeded.  "There," said Elizabeth at length,
stooping for the knife and another potato, "do that, and you'll have him
by-long and by-late, my dear."

"And do it I will!" said Fancy.

She then turned her attention to the external world once more.  The rain
continued as usual, but the wind had abated considerably during the
discourse.  Judging that it was now possible to keep an umbrella erect,
she pulled her hood again over her bonnet, bade the witch good-bye, and
went her way.




Mrs. Endorfield's advice was duly followed.

"I be proper sorry that your daughter isn't so well as she might be,"
said a Mellstock man to Geoffrey one morning.

"But is there anything in it?" said Geoffrey uneasily, as he shifted his
hat to the right.  "I can't understand the report.  She didn't complain
to me a bit when I saw her."

"No appetite at all, they say."

Geoffrey crossed to Mellstock and called at the school that afternoon.
Fancy welcomed him as usual, and asked him to stay and take tea with her.

"I be'n't much for tea, this time o' day," he said, but stayed.

During the meal he watched her narrowly.  And to his great consternation
discovered the following unprecedented change in the healthy girl--that
she cut herself only a diaphanous slice of bread-and-butter, and, laying
it on her plate, passed the meal-time in breaking it into pieces, but
eating no more than about one-tenth of the slice.  Geoffrey hoped she
would say something about Dick, and finish up by weeping, as she had done
after the decision against him a few days subsequent to the interview in
the garden.  But nothing was said, and in due time Geoffrey departed
again for Yalbury Wood.

"'Tis to be hoped poor Miss Fancy will be able to keep on her school,"
said Geoffrey's man Enoch to Geoffrey the following week, as they were
shovelling up ant-hills in the wood.

Geoffrey stuck in the shovel, swept seven or eight ants from his sleeve,
and killed another that was prowling round his ear, then looked
perpendicularly into the earth as usual, waiting for Enoch to say more.
"Well, why shouldn't she?" said the keeper at last.

"The baker told me yesterday," continued Enoch, shaking out another emmet
that had run merrily up his thigh, "that the bread he've left at that
there school-house this last month would starve any mouse in the three
creations; that 'twould so!  And afterwards I had a pint o' small down at
Morrs's, and there I heard more."

"What might that ha' been?"

"That she used to have a pound o' the best rolled butter a week, regular
as clockwork, from Dairyman Viney's for herself, as well as just so much
salted for the helping girl, and the 'ooman she calls in; but now the
same quantity d'last her three weeks, and then 'tis thoughted she throws
it away sour."

"Finish doing the emmets, and carry the bag home-along."  The keeper
resumed his gun, tucked it under his arm, and went on without whistling
to the dogs, who however followed, with a bearing meant to imply that
they did not expect any such attentions when their master was reflecting.

On Saturday morning a note came from Fancy.  He was not to trouble about
sending her the couple of rabbits, as was intended, because she feared
she should not want them.  Later in the day Geoffrey went to Casterbridge
and called upon the butcher who served Fancy with fresh meat, which was
put down to her father's account.

"I've called to pay up our little bill, Neighbour Haylock, and you can
gie me the chiel's account at the same time."

Mr. Haylock turned round three quarters of a circle in the midst of a
heap of joints, altered the expression of his face from meat to money,
went into a little office consisting only of a door and a window, looked
very vigorously into a book which possessed length but no breadth; and
then, seizing a piece of paper and scribbling thereupon, handed the bill.

Probably it was the first time in the history of commercial transactions
that the quality of shortness in a butcher's bill was a cause of
tribulation to the debtor.  "Why, this isn't all she've had in a whole
month!" said Geoffrey.

"Every mossel," said the butcher--"(now, Dan, take that leg and shoulder
to Mrs. White's, and this eleven pound here to Mr. Martin's)--you've been
treating her to smaller joints lately, to my thinking, Mr. Day?"

"Only two or three little scram rabbits this last week, as I am alive--I
wish I had!"

"Well, my wife said to me--(Dan! not too much, not too much on that tray
at a time; better go twice)--my wife said to me as she posted up the
books: she says, 'Miss Day must have been affronted this summer during
that hot muggy weather that spolit so much for us; for depend upon't,'
she says, 'she've been trying John Grimmett unknown to us: see her
account else.'  'Tis little, of course, at the best of times, being only
for one, but now 'tis next kin to nothing."

"I'll inquire," said Geoffrey despondingly.

He returned by way of Mellstock, and called upon Fancy, in fulfilment of
a promise.  It being Saturday, the children were enjoying a holiday, and
on entering the residence Fancy was nowhere to be seen.  Nan, the
charwoman, was sweeping the kitchen.

"Where's my da'ter?" said the keeper.

"Well, you see she was tired with the week's teaching, and this morning
she said, 'Nan, I sha'n't get up till the evening.'  You see, Mr. Day, if
people don't eat, they can't work; and as she've gie'd up eating, she
must gie up working."

"Have ye carried up any dinner to her?"

"No; she don't want any.  There, we all know that such things don't come
without good reason--not that I wish to say anything about a broken
heart, or anything of the kind."

Geoffrey's own heart felt inconveniently large just then.  He went to the
staircase and ascended to his daughter's door.

"Fancy!"

"Come in, father."

To see a person in bed from any cause whatever, on a fine afternoon, is
depressing enough; and here was his only child Fancy, not only in bed,
but looking very pale.  Geoffrey was visibly disturbed.

"Fancy, I didn't expect to see thee here, chiel," he said.  "What's the
matter?"

"I'm not well, father."

"How's that?"

"Because I think of things."

"What things can you have to think o' so mortal much?"

"You know, father."

"You think I've been cruel to thee in saying that that penniless Dick o'
thine sha'n't marry thee, I suppose?"

No answer.

"Well, you know, Fancy, I do it for the best, and he isn't good enough
for thee.  You know that well enough."  Here he again looked at her as
she lay.  "Well, Fancy, I can't let my only chiel die; and if you can't
live without en, you must ha' en, I suppose."

"O, I don't want him like that; all against your will, and everything so
disobedient!" sighed the invalid.

"No, no, 'tisn't against my will.  My wish is, now I d'see how 'tis
hurten thee to live without en, that he shall marry thee as soon as we've
considered a little.  That's my wish flat and plain, Fancy.  There, never
cry, my little maid!  You ought to ha' cried afore; no need o' crying now
'tis all over.  Well, howsoever, try to step over and see me and mother-
law to-morrow, and ha' a bit of dinner wi' us."

"And--Dick too?"

"Ay, Dick too, 'far's I know."

"And when do you think you'll have considered, father, and he may marry
me?" she coaxed.

"Well, there, say next Midsummer; that's not a day too long to wait."

On leaving the school Geoffrey went to the tranter's.  Old William opened
the door.

"Is your grandson Dick in 'ithin, William?"

"No, not just now, Mr. Day.  Though he've been at home a good deal
lately."

"O, how's that?"

"What wi' one thing, and what wi' t'other, he's all in a mope, as might
be said.  Don't seem the feller he used to.  Ay, 'a will sit studding and
thinking as if 'a were going to turn chapel-member, and then do nothing
but traypse and wamble about.  Used to be such a chatty boy, too, Dick
did; and now 'a don't speak at all.  But won't ye step inside?  Reuben
will be home soon, 'a b'lieve."

"No, thank you, I can't stay now.  Will ye just ask Dick if he'll do me
the kindness to step over to Yalbury to-morrow with my da'ter Fancy, if
she's well enough?  I don't like her to come by herself, now she's not so
terrible topping in health."

"So I've heard.  Ay, sure, I'll tell him without fail."




The visit to Geoffrey passed off as delightfully as a visit might have
been expected to pass off when it was the first day of smooth experience
in a hitherto obstructed love-course.  And then came a series of several
happy days, of the same undisturbed serenity.  Dick could court her when
he chose; stay away when he chose,--which was never; walk with her by
winding streams and waterfalls and autumn scenery till dews and twilight
sent them home.  And thus they drew near the day of the Harvest
Thanksgiving, which was also the time chosen for opening the organ in
Mellstock Church.

It chanced that Dick on that very day was called away from Mellstock.  A
young acquaintance had died of consumption at Charmley, a neighbouring
village, on the previous Monday, and Dick, in fulfilment of a
long-standing promise, was to assist in carrying him to the grave.  When
on Tuesday, Dick went towards the school to acquaint Fancy with the fact,
it is difficult to say whether his own disappointment at being denied the
sight of her triumphant debut as organist, was greater than his vexation
that his pet should on this great occasion be deprived of the pleasure of
his presence.  However, the intelligence was communicated.  She bore it
as she best could, not without many expressions of regret, and
convictions that her performance would be nothing to her now.

Just before eleven o'clock on Sunday he set out upon his sad errand.  The
funeral was to be immediately after the morning service, and as there
were four good miles to walk, driving being inconvenient, it became
necessary to start comparatively early.  Half an hour later would
certainly have answered his purpose quite as well, yet at the last moment
nothing would content his ardent mind but that he must go a mile out of
his way in the direction of the school, in the hope of getting a glimpse
of his Love as she started for church.

Striking, therefore, into the lane towards the school, instead of across
the ewelease direct to Charmley, he arrived opposite her door as his
goddess emerged.

If ever a woman looked a divinity, Fancy Day appeared one that morning as
she floated down those school steps, in the form of a nebulous collection
of colours inclining to blue.  With an audacity unparalleled in the whole
history of village-school-mistresses at this date--partly owing, no
doubt, to papa's respectable accumulation of cash, which rendered her
profession not altogether one of necessity--she had actually donned a hat
and feather, and lowered her hitherto plainly looped-up hair, which now
fell about her shoulders in a profusion of curls.  Poor Dick was
astonished: he had never seen her look so distractingly beautiful before,
save on Christmas-eve, when her hair was in the same luxuriant condition
of freedom.  But his first burst of delighted surprise was followed by
less comfortable feelings, as soon as his brain recovered its power to
think.

Fancy had blushed;--was it with confusion?  She had also involuntarily
pressed back her curls.  She had not expected him.

"Fancy, you didn't know me for a moment in my funeral clothes, did you?"

"Good-morning, Dick--no, really, I didn't know you for an instant in such
a sad suit."

He looked again at the gay tresses and hat.  "You've never dressed so
charming before, dearest."

"I like to hear you praise me in that way, Dick," she said, smiling
archly.  "It is meat and drink to a woman.  Do I look nice really?"

"Fie! you know it.  Did you remember,--I mean didn't you remember about
my going away to-day?"

"Well, yes, I did, Dick; but, you know, I wanted to look well;--forgive
me."

"Yes, darling; yes, of course,--there's nothing to forgive.  No, I was
only thinking that when we talked on Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday
and Friday about my absence to-day, and I was so sorry for it, you said,
Fancy, so were you sorry, and almost cried, and said it would be no
pleasure to you to be the attraction of the church to-day, since I could
not be there."

"My dear one, neither will it be so much pleasure to me . . . But I do
take a little delight in my life, I suppose," she pouted.

"Apart from mine?"

She looked at him with perplexed eyes.  "I know you are vexed with me,
Dick, and it is because the first Sunday I have curls and a hat and
feather since I have been here happens to be the very day you are away
and won't be with me.  Yes, say it is, for that is it!  And you think
that all this week I ought to have remembered you wouldn't be here to-
day, and not have cared to be better dressed than usual.  Yes, you do,
Dick, and it is rather unkind!"

"No, no," said Dick earnestly and simply, "I didn't think so badly of you
as that.  I only thought that--if you had been going away, I shouldn't
have tried new attractions for the eyes of other people.  But then of
course you and I are different, naturally."

"Well, perhaps we are."

"Whatever will the vicar say, Fancy?"

"I don't fear what he says in the least!" she answered proudly.  "But he
won't say anything of the sort you think.  No, no."

"He can hardly have conscience to, indeed."

"Now come, you say, Dick, that you quite forgive me, for I must go," she
said with sudden gaiety, and skipped backwards into the porch.  "Come
here, sir;--say you forgive me, and then you shall kiss me;--you never
have yet when I have worn curls, you know.  Yes, just where you want to
so much,--yes, you may!"

Dick followed her into the inner corner, where he was probably not slow
in availing himself of the privilege offered.

"Now that's a treat for you, isn't it?" she continued.  "Good-bye, or I
shall be late.  Come and see me to-morrow: you'll be tired to-night."

Thus they parted, and Fancy proceeded to the church.  The organ stood on
one side of the chancel, close to and under the immediate eye of the
vicar when he was in the pulpit, and also in full view of the
congregation.  Here she sat down, for the first time in such a
conspicuous position, her seat having previously been in a remote spot in
the aisle.

"Good heavens--disgraceful!  Curls and a hat and feather!" said the
daughters of the small gentry, who had either only curly hair without a
hat and feather, or a hat and feather without curly hair.  "A bonnet for
church always," said sober matrons.

That Mr. Maybold was conscious of her presence close beside him during
the sermon; that he was not at all angry at her development of costume;
that he admired her, she perceived.  But she did not see that he loved
her during that sermon-time as he had never loved a woman before; that
her proximity was a strange delight to him; and that he gloried in her
musical success that morning in a spirit quite beyond a mere cleric's
glory at the inauguration of a new order of things.

The old choir, with humbled hearts, no longer took their seats in the
gallery as heretofore (which was now given up to the school-children who
were not singers, and a pupil-teacher), but were scattered about with
their wives in different parts of the church.  Having nothing to do with
conducting the service for almost the first time in their lives, they all
felt awkward, out of place, abashed, and inconvenienced by their hands.
The tranter had proposed that they should stay away to-day and go
nutting, but grandfather William would not hear of such a thing for a
moment.  "No," he replied reproachfully, and quoted a verse: "Though this
has come upon us, let not our hearts be turned back, or our steps go out
of the way."

So they stood and watched the curls of hair trailing down the back of the
successful rival, and the waving of her feather, as she swayed her head.
After a few timid notes and uncertain touches her playing became markedly
correct, and towards the end full and free.  But, whether from prejudice
or unbiassed judgment, the venerable body of musicians could not help
thinking that the simpler notes they had been wont to bring forth were
more in keeping with the simplicity of their old church than the crowded
chords and interludes it was her pleasure to produce.




The day was done, and Fancy was again in the school-house.  About five
o'clock it began to rain, and in rather a dull frame of mind she wandered
into the schoolroom, for want of something better to do.  She was
thinking--of her lover Dick Dewy?  Not precisely.  Of how weary she was
of living alone: how unbearable it would be to return to Yalbury under
the rule of her strange-tempered step-mother; that it was far better to
be married to anybody than do that; that eight or nine long months had
yet to be lived through ere the wedding could take place.

At the side of the room were high windows of Ham-hill stone, upon either
sill of which she could sit by first mounting a desk and using it as a
footstool.  As the evening advanced here she perched herself, as was her
custom on such wet and gloomy occasions, put on a light shawl and bonnet,
opened the window, and looked out at the rain.

The window overlooked a field called the Grove, and it was the position
from which she used to survey the crown of Dick's passing hat in the
early days of their acquaintance and meetings.  Not a living soul was now
visible anywhere; the rain kept all people indoors who were not forced
abroad by necessity, and necessity was less importunate on Sundays than
during the week.

Sitting here and thinking again--of her lover, or of the sensation she
had created at church that day?--well, it is unknown--thinking and
thinking she saw a dark masculine figure arising into distinctness at the
further end of the Grove--a man without an umbrella.  Nearer and nearer
he came, and she perceived that he was in deep mourning, and then that it
was Dick.  Yes, in the fondness and foolishness of his young heart, after
walking four miles, in a drizzling rain without overcoat or umbrella, and
in face of a remark from his love that he was not to come because he
would be tired, he had made it his business to wander this mile out of
his way again, from sheer wish of spending ten minutes in her presence.

"O Dick, how wet you are!" she said, as he drew up under the window.
"Why, your coat shines as if it had been varnished, and your hat--my
goodness, there's a streaming hat!"

"O, I don't mind, darling!" said Dick cheerfully.  "Wet never hurts me,
though I am rather sorry for my best clothes.  However, it couldn't be
helped; we lent all the umbrellas to the women.  I don't know when I
shall get mine back!"

"And look, there's a nasty patch of something just on your shoulder."

"Ah, that's japanning; it rubbed off the clamps of poor Jack's coffin
when we lowered him from our shoulders upon the bier!  I don't care about
that, for 'twas the last deed I could do for him; and 'tis hard if you
can't afford a coat for an old friend."

Fancy put her hand to her mouth for half a minute.  Underneath the palm
of that little hand there existed for that half-minute a little yawn.

"Dick, I don't like you to stand there in the wet.  And you mustn't sit
down.  Go home and change your things.  Don't stay another minute."

"One kiss after coming so far," he pleaded.

"If I can reach, then."

He looked rather disappointed at not being invited round to the door.  She
twisted from her seated position and bent herself downwards, but not even
by standing on the plinth was it possible for Dick to get his lips into
contact with hers as she held them.  By great exertion she might have
reached a little lower; but then she would have exposed her head to the
rain.

"Never mind, Dick; kiss my hand," she said, flinging it down to him.
"Now, good-bye."

"Good-bye."

He walked slowly away, turning and turning again to look at her till he
was out of sight.  During the retreat she said to herself, almost
involuntarily, and still conscious of that morning's triumph--"I like
Dick, and I love him; but how plain and sorry a man looks in the rain,
with no umbrella, and wet through!"

As he vanished, she made as if to descend from her seat; but glancing in
the other direction she saw another form coming along the same track.  It
was also that of a man.  He, too, was in black from top to toe; but he
carried an umbrella.

He drew nearer, and the direction of the rain caused him so to slant his
umbrella that from her height above the ground his head was invisible, as
she was also to him.  He passed in due time directly beneath her, and in
looking down upon the exterior of his umbrella her feminine eyes
perceived it to be of superior silk--less common at that date than
since--and of elegant make.  He reached the entrance to the building, and
Fancy suddenly lost sight of him.  Instead of pursuing the roadway as
Dick had done he had turned sharply round into her own porch.

She jumped to the floor, hastily flung off her shawl and bonnet, smoothed
and patted her hair till the curls hung in passable condition, and
listened.  No knock.  Nearly a minute passed, and still there was no
knock.  Then there arose a soft series of raps, no louder than the
tapping of a distant woodpecker, and barely distinct enough to reach her
ears.  She composed herself and flung open the door.

In the porch stood Mr. Maybold.

There was a warm flush upon his face, and a bright flash in his eyes,
which made him look handsomer than she had ever seen him before.

"Good-evening, Miss Day."

"Good-evening, Mr. Maybold," she said, in a strange state of mind.  She
had noticed, beyond the ardent hue of his face, that his voice had a
singular tremor in it, and that his hand shook like an aspen leaf when he
laid his umbrella in the corner of the porch.  Without another word being
spoken by either, he came into the schoolroom, shut the door, and moved
close to her.  Once inside, the expression of his face was no more
discernible, by reason of the increasing dusk of evening.

"I want to speak to you," he then said; "seriously--on a perhaps
unexpected subject, but one which is all the world to me--I don't know
what it may be to you, Miss Day."

No reply.

"Fancy, I have come to ask you if you will be my wife?"

As a person who has been idly amusing himself with rolling a snowball
might start at finding he had set in motion an avalanche, so did Fancy
start at these words from the vicar.  And in the dead silence which
followed them, the breathings of the man and of the woman could be
distinctly and separately heard; and there was this difference between
them--his respirations gradually grew quieter and less rapid after the
enunciation, hers, from having been low and regular, increased in
quickness and force, till she almost panted.

"I cannot, I cannot, Mr. Maybold--I cannot!  Don't ask me!" she said.

"Don't answer in a hurry!" he entreated.  "And do listen to me.  This is
no sudden feeling on my part.  I have loved you for more than six months!
Perhaps my late interest in teaching the children here has not been so
single-minded as it seemed.  You will understand my motive--like me
better, perhaps, for honestly telling you that I have struggled against
my emotion continually, because I have thought that it was not well for
me to love you!  But I resolved to struggle no longer; I have examined
the feeling; and the love I bear you is as genuine as that I could bear
any woman!  I see your great charm; I respect your natural talents, and
the refinement they have brought into your nature--they are quite enough,
and more than enough for me!  They are equal to anything ever required of
the mistress of a quiet parsonage-house--the place in which I shall pass
my days, wherever it may be situated.  O Fancy, I have watched you,
criticized you even severely, brought my feelings to the light of
judgment, and still have found them rational, and such as any man might
have expected to be inspired with by a woman like you!  So there is
nothing hurried, secret, or untoward in my desire to do this.  Fancy,
will you marry me?"

No answer was returned.

"Don't refuse; don't," he implored.  "It would be foolish of you--I mean
cruel!  Of course we would not live here, Fancy.  I have had for a long
time the offer of an exchange of livings with a friend in Yorkshire, but
I have hitherto refused on account of my mother.  There we would go.  Your
musical powers shall be still further developed; you shall have whatever
pianoforte you like; you shall have anything, Fancy, anything to make you
happy--pony-carriage, flowers, birds, pleasant society; yes, you have
enough in you for any society, after a few months of travel with me!  Will
you, Fancy, marry me?"

Another pause ensued, varied only by the surging of the rain against the
window-panes, and then Fancy spoke, in a faint and broken voice.

"Yes, I will," she said.

"God bless you, my own!"  He advanced quickly, and put his arm out to
embrace her.  She drew back hastily.  "No no, not now!" she said in an
agitated whisper.  "There are things;--but the temptation is, O, too
strong, and I can't resist it; I can't tell you now, but I must tell you!
Don't, please, don't come near me now!  I want to think, I can scarcely
get myself used to the idea of what I have promised yet."  The next
minute she turned to a desk, buried her face in her hands, and burst into
a hysterical fit of weeping.  "O, leave me to myself!" she sobbed; "leave
me!  O, leave me!"

"Don't be distressed; don't, dearest!"  It was with visible difficulty
that he restrained himself from approaching her.  "You shall tell me at
your leisure what it is that grieves you so; I am happy--beyond all
measure happy!--at having your simple promise."

"And do go and leave me now!"

"But I must not, in justice to you, leave for a minute, until you are
yourself again."

"There then," she said, controlling her emotion, and standing up; "I am
not disturbed now."

He reluctantly moved towards the door.  "Good-bye!" he murmured tenderly.
"I'll come to-morrow about this time."




The next morning the vicar rose early.  The first thing he did was to
write a long and careful letter to his friend in Yorkshire.  Then, eating
a little breakfast, he crossed the meadows in the direction of
Casterbridge, bearing his letter in his pocket, that he might post it at
the town office, and obviate the loss of one day in its transmission that
would have resulted had he left it for the foot-post through the village.

It was a foggy morning, and the trees shed in noisy water-drops the
moisture they had collected from the thick air, an acorn occasionally
falling from its cup to the ground, in company with the drippings.  In
the meads, sheets of spiders'-web, almost opaque with wet, hung in folds
over the fences, and the falling leaves appeared in every variety of
brown, green, and yellow hue.

A low and merry whistling was heard on the highway he was approaching,
then the light footsteps of a man going in the same direction as himself.
On reaching the junction of his path with the road, the vicar beheld Dick
Dewy's open and cheerful face.  Dick lifted his hat, and the vicar came
out into the highway that Dick was pursuing.

"Good-morning, Dewy.  How well you are looking!" said Mr. Maybold.

"Yes, sir, I am well--quite well!  I am going to Casterbridge now, to get
Smart's collar; we left it there Saturday to be repaired."

"I am going to Casterbridge, so we'll walk together," the vicar said.
Dick gave a hop with one foot to put himself in step with Mr. Maybold,
who proceeded: "I fancy I didn't see you at church yesterday, Dewy.  Or
were you behind the pier?"

"No; I went to Charmley.  Poor John Dunford chose me to be one of his
bearers a long time before he died, and yesterday was the funeral.  Of
course I couldn't refuse, though I should have liked particularly to have
been at home as 'twas the day of the new music."

"Yes, you should have been.  The musical portion of the service was
successful--very successful indeed; and what is more to the purpose, no
ill-feeling whatever was evinced by any of the members of the old choir.
They joined in the singing with the greatest good-will."

"'Twas natural enough that I should want to be there, I suppose," said
Dick, smiling a private smile; "considering who the organ-player was."

At this the vicar reddened a little, and said, "Yes, yes," though not at
all comprehending Dick's true meaning, who, as he received no further
reply, continued hesitatingly, and with another smile denoting his pride
as a lover--

"I suppose you know what I mean, sir?  You've heard about me and--Miss
Day?"

The red in Maybold's countenance went away: he turned and looked Dick in
the face.

"No," he said constrainedly, "I've heard nothing whatever about you and
Miss Day."

"Why, she's my sweetheart, and we are going to be married next Midsummer.
We are keeping it rather close just at present, because 'tis a good many
months to wait; but it is her father's wish that we don't marry before,
and of course we must submit.  But the time 'ill soon slip along."

"Yes, the time will soon slip along--Time glides away every day--yes."

Maybold said these words, but he had no idea of what they were.  He was
conscious of a cold and sickly thrill throughout him; and all he reasoned
was this that the young creature whose graces had intoxicated him into
making the most imprudent resolution of his life, was less an angel than
a woman.

"You see, sir," continued the ingenuous Dick, "'twill be better in one
sense.  I shall by that time be the regular manager of a branch o'
father's business, which has very much increased lately, and business,
which we think of starting elsewhere.  It has very much increased lately,
and we expect next year to keep a' extra couple of horses.  We've already
our eye on one--brown as a berry, neck like a rainbow, fifteen hands, and
not a gray hair in her--offered us at twenty-five want a crown.  And to
kip pace with the times I have had some cards prented and I beg leave to
hand you one, sir."

"Certainly," said the vicar, mechanically taking the card that Dick
offered him.

"I turn in here by Grey's Bridge," said Dick.  "I suppose you go straight
on and up town?"

"Yes."

"Good-morning, sir."

"Good-morning, Dewy."

Maybold stood still upon the bridge, holding the card as it had been put
into his hand, and Dick's footsteps died away towards Durnover Mill.  The
vicar's first voluntary action was to read the card:--

   DEWY AND SON,
   TRANTERS AND HAULIERS,
   MELLSTOCK.
   NB.--Furniture, Coals, Potatoes, Live and Dead Stock, removed to any
   distance on the shortest notice.

Mr. Maybold leant over the parapet of the bridge and looked into the
river.  He saw--without heeding--how the water came rapidly from beneath
the arches, glided down a little steep, then spread itself over a pool in
which dace, trout, and minnows sported at ease among the long green locks
of weed that lay heaving and sinking with their roots towards the
current.  At the end of ten minutes spent leaning thus, he drew from his
pocket the letter to his friend, tore it deliberately into such minute
fragments that scarcely two syllables remained in juxtaposition, and sent
the whole handful of shreds fluttering into the water.  Here he watched
them eddy, dart, and turn, as they were carried downwards towards the
ocean and gradually disappeared from his view.  Finally he moved off, and
pursued his way at a rapid pace back again to Mellstock Vicarage.

Nerving himself by a long and intense effort, he sat down in his study
and wrote as follows:

   "DEAR MISS DAY,--The meaning of your words, 'the temptation is too
   strong,' of your sadness and your tears, has been brought home to me
   by an accident.  I know to-day what I did not know yesterday--that you
   are not a free woman.

   "Why did you not tell me--why didn't you?  Did you suppose I knew?  No.
   Had I known, my conduct in coming to you as I did would have been
   reprehensible.

   "But I don't chide you!  Perhaps no blame attaches to you--I can't
   tell.  Fancy, though my opinion of you is assailed and disturbed in a
   way which cannot be expressed, I love you still, and my word to you
   holds good yet.  But will you, in justice to an honest man who relies
   upon your word to him, consider whether, under the circumstances, you
   can honourably forsake him?--Yours ever sincerely,

   "ARTHUR MAYBOLD."

He rang the bell.  "Tell Charles to take these copybooks and this note to
the school at once."

The maid took the parcel and the letter, and in a few minutes a boy was
seen to leave the vicarage gate, with the one under his arm, and the
other in his hand.  The vicar sat with his hand to his brow, watching the
lad as he descended Church Lane and entered the waterside path which
intervened between that spot and the school.

Here he was met by another boy, and after a free salutation and
pugilistic frisk had passed between the two, the second boy came on his
way to the vicarage, and the other vanished out of sight.

The boy came to the door, and a note for Mr. Maybold was brought in.

He knew the writing.  Opening the envelope with an unsteady hand, he read
the subjoined words:

   "DEAR MR. MAYBOLD,--I have been thinking seriously and sadly through
   the whole of the night of the question you put to me last evening and
   of my answer.  That answer, as an honest woman, I had no right to
   give.

   "It is my nature--perhaps all women's--to love refinement of mind and
   manners; but even more than this, to be ever fascinated with the idea
   of surroundings more elegant and pleasing than those which have been
   customary.  And you praised me, and praise is life to me.  It was
   alone my sensations at these things which prompted my reply.  Ambition
   and vanity they would be called; perhaps they are so.

   "After this explanation I hope you will generously allow me to
   withdraw the answer I too hastily gave.

   "And one more request.  To keep the meeting of last night, and all
   that passed between us there, for ever a secret.  Were it to become
   known, it would utterly blight the happiness of a trusting and
   generous man, whom I love still, and shall love always.--Yours
   sincerely,

   "FANCY DAY.

The last written communication that ever passed from the vicar to Fancy,
was a note containing these words only:

   "Tell him everything; it is best.  He will forgive you."




PART THE FIFTH: CONCLUSION

