

Dick, dressed in his 'second-best' suit, burst into Fancy's sitting-room
with a glow of pleasure on his face.

It was two o'clock on Friday, the day before her contemplated visit to
her father, and for some reason connected with cleaning the school the
children had been given this Friday afternoon for pastime, in addition to
the usual Saturday.

"Fancy! it happens just right that it is a leisure half day with you.
Smart is lame in his near-foot-afore, and so, as I can't do anything,
I've made a holiday afternoon of it, and am come for you to go nutting
with me!"

She was sitting by the parlour window, with a blue frock lying across her
lap and scissors in her hand.

"Go nutting!  Yes.  But I'm afraid I can't go for an hour or so."

"Why not?  'Tis the only spare afternoon we may both have together for
weeks."

"This dress of mine, that I am going to wear on Sunday at Yalbury;--I
find it fits so badly that I must alter it a little, after all.  I told
the dressmaker to make it by a pattern I gave her at the time; instead of
that, she did it her own way, and made me look a perfect fright."

"How long will you be?" he inquired, looking rather disappointed.

"Not long.  Do wait and talk to me; come, do, dear."

Dick sat down.  The talking progressed very favourably, amid the snipping
and sewing, till about half-past two, at which time his conversation
began to be varied by a slight tapping upon his toe with a walking-stick
he had cut from the hedge as he came along.  Fancy talked and answered
him, but sometimes the answers were so negligently given, that it was
evident her thoughts lay for the greater part in her lap with the blue
dress.

The clock struck three.  Dick arose from his seat, walked round the room
with his hands behind him, examined all the furniture, then sounded a few
notes on the harmonium, then looked inside all the books he could find,
then smoothed Fancy's head with his hand.  Still the snipping and sewing
went on.

The clock struck four.  Dick fidgeted about, yawned privately; counted
the knots in the table, yawned publicly; counted the flies on the
ceiling, yawned horribly; went into the kitchen and scullery, and so
thoroughly studied the principle upon which the pump was constructed that
he could have delivered a lecture on the subject.  Stepping back to
Fancy, and finding still that she had not done, he went into her garden
and looked at her cabbages and potatoes, and reminded himself that they
seemed to him to wear a decidedly feminine aspect; then pulled up several
weeds, and came in again.  The clock struck five, and still the snipping
and sewing went on.

Dick attempted to kill a fly, peeled all the rind off his walking-stick,
then threw the stick into the scullery because it was spoilt, produced
hideous discords from the harmonium, and accidentally overturned a vase
of flowers, the water from which ran in a rill across the table and
dribbled to the floor, where it formed a lake, the shape of which, after
the lapse of a few minutes, he began to modify considerably with his
foot, till it was like a map of England and Wales.

"Well, Dick, you needn't have made quite such a mess."

"Well, I needn't, I suppose."  He walked up to the blue dress, and looked
at it with a rigid gaze.  Then an idea seemed to cross his brain.

"Fancy."

"Yes."

"I thought you said you were going to wear your gray gown all day
to-morrow on your trip to Yalbury, and in the evening too, when I shall
be with you, and ask your father for you?"

"So I am."

"And the blue one only on Sunday?"

"And the blue one Sunday."

"Well, dear, I sha'n't be at Yalbury Sunday to see it."

"No, but I shall walk to Longpuddle church in the afternoon with father,
and such lots of people will be looking at me there, you know; and it did
set so badly round the neck."

"I never noticed it, and 'tis like nobody else would."

"They might."

"Then why not wear the gray one on Sunday as well?  'Tis as pretty as the
blue one."

"I might make the gray one do, certainly.  But it isn't so good; it
didn't cost half so much as this one, and besides, it would be the same I
wore Saturday."

"Then wear the striped one, dear."

"I might."

"Or the dark one."

"Yes, I might; but I want to wear a fresh one they haven't seen."

"I see, I see," said Dick, in a voice in which the tones of love were
decidedly inconvenienced by a considerable emphasis, his thoughts
meanwhile running as follows: "I, the man she loves best in the world, as
she says, am to understand that my poor half-holiday is to be lost,
because she wants to wear on Sunday a gown there is not the slightest
necessity for wearing, simply, in fact, to appear more striking than
usual in the eyes of Longpuddle young men; and I not there, either."

"Then there are three dresses good enough for my eyes, but neither is
good enough for the youths of Longpuddle," he said.

"No, not that exactly, Dick.  Still, you see, I do want--to look pretty
to them--there, that's honest!  But I sha'n't be much longer."

"How much?"

"A quarter of an hour."

"Very well; I'll come in in a quarter of an hour."

"Why go away?"

"I mid as well."

He went out, walked down the road, and sat upon a gate.  Here he
meditated and meditated, and the more he meditated the more decidedly did
he begin to fume, and the more positive was he that his time had been
scandalously trifled with by Miss Fancy Day--that, so far from being the
simple girl who had never had a sweetheart before, as she had solemnly
assured him time after time, she was, if not a flirt, a woman who had had
no end of admirers; a girl most certainly too anxious about her frocks; a
girl, whose feelings, though warm, were not deep; a girl who cared a
great deal too much how she appeared in the eyes of other men.  "What she
loves best in the world," he thought, with an incipient spice of his
father's grimness, "is her hair and complexion.  What she loves next
best, her gowns and hats; what she loves next best, myself, perhaps!"

Suffering great anguish at this disloyalty in himself and harshness to
his darling, yet disposed to persevere in it, a horribly cruel thought
crossed his mind.  He would not call for her, as he had promised, at the
end of a quarter of an hour!  Yes, it would be a punishment she well
deserved.  Although the best part of the afternoon had been wasted he
would go nutting as he had intended, and go by himself.

He leaped over the gate, and pushed up the lane for nearly two miles,
till a winding path called Snail-Creep sloped up a hill and entered a
hazel copse by a hole like a rabbit's burrow.  In he plunged, vanished
among the bushes, and in a short time there was no sign of his existence
upon earth, save an occasional rustling of boughs and snapping of twigs
in divers points of Grey's Wood.

Never man nutted as Dick nutted that afternoon.  He worked like a galley
slave.  Half-hour after half-hour passed away, and still he gathered
without ceasing.  At last, when the sun had set, and bunches of nuts
could not be distinguished from the leaves which nourished them, he
shouldered his bag, containing quite two pecks of the finest produce of
the wood, about as much use to him as two pecks of stones from the road,
strolled down the woodland track, crossed the highway and entered the
homeward lane, whistling as he went.

Probably, Miss Fancy Day never before or after stood so low in Mr. Dewy's
opinion as on that afternoon.  In fact, it is just possible that a few
more blue dresses on the Longpuddle young men's account would have
clarified Dick's brain entirely, and made him once more a free man.

But Venus had planned other developments, at any rate for the present.
Cuckoo-Lane, the way he pursued, passed over a ridge which rose keenly
against the sky about fifty yards in his van.  Here, upon the bright
after-glow about the horizon, was now visible an irregular shape, which
at first he conceived to be a bough standing a little beyond the line of
its neighbours.  Then it seemed to move, and, as he advanced still
further, there was no doubt that it was a living being sitting in the
bank, head bowed on hand.  The grassy margin entirely prevented his
footsteps from being heard, and it was not till he was close that the
figure recognized him.  Up it sprang, and he was face to face with Fancy.

"Dick, Dick!  O, is it you, Dick!"

"Yes, Fancy," said Dick, in a rather repentant tone, and lowering his
nuts.

She ran up to him, flung her parasol on the grass, put her little head
against his breast, and then there began a narrative, disjointed by such
a hysterical weeping as was never surpassed for intensity in the whole
history of love.

"O Dick," she sobbed out, "where have you been away from me?  O, I have
suffered agony, and thought you would never come any more!  'Tis cruel,
Dick; no 'tisn't, it is justice!  I've been walking miles and miles up
and down Grey's Wood, trying to find you, till I was wearied and worn
out, and I could walk no further, and had come back this far!  O Dick,
directly you were gone, I thought I had offended you and I put down the
dress; 'tisn't finished now, and I never will finish, it, and I'll wear
an old one Sunday!  Yes, Dick, I will, because I don't care what I wear
when you are not by my side--ha, you think I do, but I don't!--and I ran
after you, and I saw you go up Snail-Creep and not look back once, and
then you plunged in, and I after you; but I was too far behind.  O, I did
wish the horrid bushes had been cut down, so that I could see your dear
shape again!  And then I called out to you, and nobody answered, and I
was afraid to call very loud, lest anybody else should hear me.  Then I
kept wandering and wandering about, and it was dreadful misery, Dick.  And
then I shut my eyes and fell to picturing you looking at some other
woman, very pretty and nice, but with no affection or truth in her at
all, and then imagined you saying to yourself, 'Ah, she's as good as
Fancy, for Fancy told me a story, and was a flirt, and cared for herself
more than me, so now I'll have this one for my sweetheart.'  O, you
won't, will you, Dick, for I do love you so!"

It is scarcely necessary to add that Dick renounced his freedom there and
then, and kissed her ten times over, and promised that no pretty woman of
the kind alluded to should ever engross his thoughts; in short, that
though he had been vexed with her, all such vexation was past, and that
henceforth and for ever it was simply Fancy or death for him.  And then
they set about proceeding homewards, very slowly on account of Fancy's
weariness, she leaning upon his shoulder, and in addition receiving
support from his arm round her waist; though she had sufficiently
recovered from her desperate condition to sing to him, 'Why are you
wandering here, I pray?' during the latter part of their walk.  Nor is it
necessary to describe in detail how the bag of nuts was quite forgotten
until three days later, when it was found among the brambles and restored
empty to Mrs. Dewy, her initials being marked thereon in red cotton; and
how she puzzled herself till her head ached upon the question of how on
earth her meal-bag could have got into Cuckoo-Lane.




Saturday evening saw Dick Dewy journeying on foot to Yalbury Wood,
according to the arrangement with Fancy.

The landscape being concave, at the going down of the sun everything
suddenly assumed a uniform robe of shade.  The evening advanced from
sunset to dusk long before Dick's arrival, and his progress during the
latter portion of his walk through the trees was indicated by the flutter
of terrified birds that had been roosting over the path.  And in crossing
the glades, masses of hot dry air, that had been formed on the hills
during the day, greeted his cheeks alternately with clouds of damp night
air from the valleys.  He reached the keeper-steward's house, where the
grass-plot and the garden in front appeared light and pale against the
unbroken darkness of the grove from which he had emerged, and paused at
the garden gate.

He had scarcely been there a minute when he beheld a sort of procession
advancing from the door in his front.  It consisted first of Enoch the
trapper, carrying a spade on his shoulder and a lantern dangling in his
hand; then came Mrs. Day, the light of the lantern revealing that she
bore in her arms curious objects about a foot long, in the form of Latin
crosses (made of lath and brown paper dipped in brimstone--called matches
by bee-masters); next came Miss Day, with a shawl thrown over her head;
and behind all, in the gloom, Mr. Frederic Shiner.

Dick, in his consternation at finding Shiner present, was at a loss how
to proceed, and retired under a tree to collect his thoughts.

"Here I be, Enoch," said a voice; and the procession advancing farther,
the lantern's rays illuminated the figure of Geoffrey, awaiting their
arrival beside a row of bee-hives, in front of the path.  Taking the
spade from Enoch, he proceeded to dig two holes in the earth beside the
hives, the others standing round in a circle, except Mrs. Day, who
deposited her matches in the fork of an apple-tree and returned to the
house.  The party remaining were now lit up in front by the lantern in
their midst, their shadows radiating each way upon the garden-plot like
the spokes of a wheel.  An apparent embarrassment of Fancy at the
presence of Shiner caused a silence in the assembly, during which the
preliminaries of execution were arranged, the matches fixed, the stake
kindled, the two hives placed over the two holes, and the earth stopped
round the edges.  Geoffrey then stood erect, and rather more, to
straighten his backbone after the digging.

"They were a peculiar family," said Mr. Shiner, regarding the hives
reflectively.

Geoffrey nodded.

"Those holes will be the grave of thousands!" said Fancy.  "I think 'tis
rather a cruel thing to do."

Her father shook his head.  "No," he said, tapping the hives to shake the
dead bees from their cells, "if you suffocate 'em this way, they only die
once: if you fumigate 'em in the new way, they come to life again, and
die o' starvation; so the pangs o' death be twice upon 'em."

"I incline to Fancy's notion," said Mr. Shiner, laughing lightly.

"The proper way to take honey, so that the bees be neither starved nor
murdered, is a puzzling matter," said the keeper steadily.

"I should like never to take it from them," said Fancy.

"But 'tis the money," said Enoch musingly.  "For without money man is a
shadder!"

The lantern-light had disturbed many bees that had escaped from hives
destroyed some days earlier, and, demoralized by affliction, were now
getting a living as marauders about the doors of other hives.  Several
flew round the head and neck of Geoffrey; then darted upon him with an
irritated bizz.

Enoch threw down the lantern, and ran off and pushed his head into a
currant bush; Fancy scudded up the path; and Mr. Shiner floundered away
helter-skelter among the cabbages.  Geoffrey stood his ground, unmoved
and firm as a rock.  Fancy was the first to return, followed by Enoch
picking up the lantern.  Mr. Shiner still remained invisible.

"Have the craters stung ye?" said Enoch to Geoffrey.

"No, not much--on'y a little here and there," he said with leisurely
solemnity, shaking one bee out of his shirt sleeve, pulling another from
among his hair, and two or three more from his neck.  The rest looked on
during this proceeding with a complacent sense of being out of it,--much
as a European nation in a state of internal commotion is watched by its
neighbours.

"Are those all of them, father?" said Fancy, when Geoffrey had pulled
away five.

"Almost all,--though I feel one or two more sticking into my shoulder and
side.  Ah! there's another just begun again upon my backbone.  You lively
young mortals, how did you get inside there?  However, they can't sting
me many times more, poor things, for they must be getting weak.  They mid
as well stay in me till bedtime now, I suppose."

As he himself was the only person affected by this arrangement, it seemed
satisfactory enough; and after a noise of feet kicking against cabbages
in a blundering progress among them, the voice of Mr. Shiner was heard
from the darkness in that direction.

"Is all quite safe again?"

No answer being returned to this query, he apparently assumed that he
might venture forth, and gradually drew near the lantern again.  The
hives were now removed from their position over the holes, one being
handed to Enoch to carry indoors, and one being taken by Geoffrey
himself.

"Bring hither the lantern, Fancy: the spade can bide."

Geoffrey and Enoch then went towards the house, leaving Shiner and Fancy
standing side by side on the garden-plot.

"Allow me," said Shiner, stooping for the lantern and seizing it at the
same time with Fancy.

"I can carry it," said Fancy, religiously repressing all inclination to
trifle.  She had thoroughly considered that subject after the tearful
explanation of the bird-catching adventure to Dick, and had decided that
it would be dishonest in her, as an engaged young woman, to trifle with
men's eyes and hands any more.  Finding that Shiner still retained his
hold of the lantern, she relinquished it, and he, having found her
retaining it, also let go.  The lantern fell, and was extinguished.  Fancy
moved on.

"Where is the path?" said Mr. Shiner.

"Here," said Fancy.  "Your eyes will get used to the dark in a minute or
two."

"Till that time will ye lend me your hand?"  Fancy gave him the extreme
tips of her fingers, and they stepped from the plot into the path.

"You don't accept attentions very freely."

"It depends upon who offers them."

"A fellow like me, for instance."  A dead silence.

"Well, what do you say, Missie?"

"It then depends upon how they are offered."

"Not wildly, and yet not careless-like; not purposely, and yet not by
chance; not too quick nor yet too slow."

"How then?" said Fancy.

"Coolly and practically," he said.  "How would that kind of love be
taken?"

"Not anxiously, and yet not indifferently; neither blushing nor pale; nor
religiously nor yet quite wickedly."

"Well, how?"

"Not at all."

* * * * *

Geoffrey Day's storehouse at the back of his dwelling was hung with
bunches of dried horehound, mint, and sage; brown-paper bags of thyme and
lavender; and long ropes of clean onions.  On shelves were spread large
red and yellow apples, and choice selections of early potatoes for seed
next year;--vulgar crowds of commoner kind lying beneath in heaps.  A few
empty beehives were clustered around a nail in one corner, under which
stood two or three barrels of new cider of the first crop, each bubbling
and squirting forth from the yet open bunghole.

Fancy was now kneeling beside the two inverted hives, one of which rested
against her lap, for convenience in operating upon the contents.  She
thrust her sleeves above her elbows, and inserted her small pink hand
edgewise between each white lobe of honeycomb, performing the act so
adroitly and gently as not to unseal a single cell.  Then cracking the
piece off at the crown of the hive by a slight backward and forward
movement, she lifted each portion as it was loosened into a large blue
platter, placed on a bench at her side.

"Bother these little mortals!" said Geoffrey, who was holding the light
to her, and giving his back an uneasy twist.  "I really think I may as
well go indoors and take 'em out, poor things! for they won't let me
alone.  There's two a stinging wi' all their might now.  I'm sure I
wonder their strength can last so long."

"All right, friend; I'll hold the candle whilst you are gone," said Mr.
Shiner, leisurely taking the light, and allowing Geoffrey to depart,
which he did with his usual long paces.

He could hardly have gone round to the house-door when other footsteps
were heard approaching the outbuilding; the tip of a finger appeared in
the hole through which the wood latch was lifted, and Dick Dewy came in,
having been all this time walking up and down the wood, vainly waiting
for Shiner's departure.

Fancy looked up and welcomed him rather confusedly.  Shiner grasped the
candlestick more firmly, and, lest doing this in silence should not imply
to Dick with sufficient force that he was quite at home and cool, he sang
invincibly--

   "'King Arthur he had three sons.'"

"Father here?" said Dick.

"Indoors, I think," said Fancy, looking pleasantly at him.

Dick surveyed the scene, and did not seem inclined to hurry off just at
that moment.  Shiner went on singing--

   "'The miller was drown'd in his pond,
      The weaver was hung in his yarn,
   And the d--- ran away with the little tail-or,
      With the broadcloth under his arm.'"

"That's a terrible crippled rhyme, if that's your rhyme!" said Dick, with
a grain of superciliousness in his tone.

"It's no use your complaining to me about the rhyme!" said Mr. Shiner.
"You must go to the man that made it."

Fancy by this time had acquired confidence.

"Taste a bit, Mr. Dewy," she said, holding up to him a small circular
piece of honeycomb that had been the last in the row of layers, remaining
still on her knees and flinging back her head to look in his face; "and
then I'll taste a bit too."

"And I, if you please," said Mr. Shiner.  Nevertheless the farmer looked
superior, as if he could even now hardly join the trifling from very
importance of station; and after receiving the honeycomb from Fancy, he
turned it over in his hand till the cells began to be crushed, and the
liquid honey ran down from his fingers in a thin string.

Suddenly a faint cry from Fancy caused them to gaze at her.

"What's the matter, dear?" said Dick.

"It is nothing, but O-o! a bee has stung the inside of my lip!  He was in
one of the cells I was eating!"

"We must keep down the swelling, or it may be serious!" said Shiner,
stepping up and kneeling beside her.  "Let me see it."

"No, no!"

"Just let me see it," said Dick, kneeling on the other side: and after
some hesitation she pressed down her lip with one finger to show the
place.  "O, I hope 'twill soon be better!  I don't mind a sting in
ordinary places, but it is so bad upon your lip," she added with tears in
her eyes, and writhing a little from the pain.

Shiner held the light above his head and pushed his face close to
Fancy's, as if the lip had been shown exclusively to himself, upon which
Dick pushed closer, as if Shiner were not there at all.

"It is swelling," said Dick to her right aspect.

"It isn't swelling," said Shiner to her left aspect.

"Is it dangerous on the lip?" cried Fancy.  "I know it is dangerous on
the tongue."

"O no, not dangerous!" answered Dick.

"Rather dangerous," had answered Shiner simultaneously.

"I must try to bear it!" said Fancy, turning again to the hives.

"Hartshorn-and-oil is a good thing to put to it, Miss Day," said Shiner
with great concern.

"Sweet-oil-and-hartshorn I've found to be a good thing to cure stings,
Miss Day," said Dick with greater concern.

"We have some mixed indoors; would you kindly run and get it for me?" she
said.

Now, whether by inadvertence, or whether by mischievous intention, the
individuality of the you was so carelessly denoted that both Dick and
Shiner sprang to their feet like twin acrobats, and marched abreast to
the door; both seized the latch and lifted it, and continued marching on,
shoulder to shoulder, in the same manner to the dwelling-house.  Not only
so, but entering the room, they marched as before straight up to Mrs.
Day's chair, letting the door in the oak partition slam so forcibly, that
the rows of pewter on the dresser rang like a bell.

"Mrs. Day, Fancy has stung her lip, and wants you to give me the
hartshorn, please," said Mr. Shiner, very close to Mrs. Day's face.

"O, Mrs. Day, Fancy has asked me to bring out the hartshorn, please,
because she has stung her lip!" said Dick, a little closer to Mrs. Day's
face.

"Well, men alive! that's no reason why you should eat me, I suppose!"
said Mrs. Day, drawing back.

She searched in the corner-cupboard, produced the bottle, and began to
dust the cork, the rim, and every other part very carefully, Dick's hand
and Shiner's hand waiting side by side.

"Which is head man?" said Mrs. Day.  "Now, don't come mumbudgeting so
close again.  Which is head man?"

Neither spoke; and the bottle was inclined towards Shiner.  Shiner, as a
high-class man, would not look in the least triumphant, and turned to go
off with it as Geoffrey came downstairs after the search in his linen for
concealed bees.

"O--that you, Master Dewy?"

Dick assured the keeper that it was; and the young man then determined
upon a bold stroke for the attainment of his end, forgetting that the
worst of bold strokes is the disastrous consequences they involve if they
fail.

"I've come on purpose to speak to you very particular, Mr. Day," he said,
with a crushing emphasis intended for the ears of Mr. Shiner, who was
vanishing round the door-post at that moment.

"Well, I've been forced to go upstairs and unrind myself, and shake some
bees out o' me" said Geoffrey, walking slowly towards the open door, and
standing on the threshold.  "The young rascals got into my shirt and
wouldn't be quiet nohow."

Dick followed him to the door.

"I've come to speak a word to you," he repeated, looking out at the pale
mist creeping up from the gloom of the valley.  "You may perhaps guess
what it is about."

The keeper lowered his hands into the depths of his pockets, twirled his
eyes, balanced himself on his toes, looked as perpendicularly downward as
if his glance were a plumb-line, then horizontally, collecting together
the cracks that lay about his face till they were all in the
neighbourhood of his eyes.

"Maybe I don't know," he replied.

Dick said nothing; and the stillness was disturbed only by some small
bird that was being killed by an owl in the adjoining wood, whose cry
passed into the silence without mingling with it.

"I've left my hat up in chammer," said Geoffrey; "wait while I step up
and get en."

"I'll be in the garden," said Dick.

He went round by a side wicket into the garden, and Geoffrey went
upstairs.  It was the custom in Mellstock and its vicinity to discuss
matters of pleasure and ordinary business inside the house, and to
reserve the garden for very important affairs: a custom which, as is
supposed, originated in the desirability of getting away at such times
from the other members of the family when there was only one room for
living in, though it was now quite as frequently practised by those who
suffered from no such limitation to the size of their domiciles.

The head-keeper's form appeared in the dusky garden, and Dick walked
towards him.  The elder paused and leant over the rail of a piggery that
stood on the left of the path, upon which Dick did the same; and they
both contemplated a whitish shadowy shape that was moving about and
grunting among the straw of the interior.

"I've come to ask for Fancy," said Dick.

"I'd as lief you hadn't."

"Why should that be, Mr. Day?"

"Because it makes me say that you've come to ask what ye be'n't likely to
have.  Have ye come for anything else?"

"Nothing."

"Then I'll just tell 'ee you've come on a very foolish errand.  D'ye know
what her mother was?"

"No."

"A teacher in a landed family's nursery, who was foolish enough to marry
the keeper of the same establishment; for I was only a keeper then,
though now I've a dozen other irons in the fire as steward here for my
lord, what with the timber sales and the yearly fellings, and the gravel
and sand sales and one thing and 'tother.  However, d'ye think Fancy
picked up her good manners, the smooth turn of her tongue, her musical
notes, and her knowledge of books, in a homely hole like this?"

"No."

"D'ye know where?"

"No."

"Well, when I went a-wandering after her mother's death, she lived with
her aunt, who kept a boarding-school, till her aunt married Lawyer
Green--a man as sharp as a needle--and the school was broke up.  Did ye
know that then she went to the training-school, and that her name stood
first among the Queen's scholars of her year?"

"I've heard so."

"And that when she sat for her certificate as Government teacher, she had
the highest of the first class?"

"Yes."

"Well, and do ye know what I live in such a miserly way for when I've got
enough to do without it, and why I make her work as a schoolmistress
instead of living here?"

"No."

"That if any gentleman, who sees her to be his equal in polish, should
want to marry her, and she want to marry him, he sha'n't be superior to
her in pocket.  Now do ye think after this that you be good enough for
her?"

"No."

"Then good-night t'ee, Master Dewy."

"Good-night, Mr. Day."

Modest Dick's reply had faltered upon his tongue, and he turned away
wondering at his presumption in asking for a woman whom he had seen from
the beginning to be so superior to him.


