

It followed that, as the spring advanced, Dick walked abroad much more
frequently than had hitherto been usual with him, and was continually
finding that his nearest way to or from home lay by the road which
skirted the garden of the school.  The first-fruits of his perseverance
were that, on turning the angle on the nineteenth journey by that track,
he saw Miss Fancy's figure, clothed in a dark-gray dress, looking from a
high open window upon the crown of his hat.  The friendly greeting
resulting from this rencounter was considered so valuable an elixir that
Dick passed still oftener; and by the time he had almost trodden a little
path under the fence where never a path was before, he was rewarded with
an actual meeting face to face on the open road before her gate.  This
brought another meeting, and another, Fancy faintly showing by her
bearing that it was a pleasure to her of some kind to see him there; but
the sort of pleasure she derived, whether exultation at the hope her
exceeding fairness inspired, or the true feeling which was alone Dick's
concern, he could not anyhow decide, although he meditated on her every
little movement for hours after it was made.




It was the evening of a fine spring day.  The descending sun appeared as
a nebulous blaze of amber light, its outline being lost in cloudy masses
hanging round it, like wild locks of hair.

The chief members of Mellstock parish choir were standing in a group in
front of Mr. Penny's workshop in the lower village.  They were all
brightly illuminated, and each was backed up by a shadow as long as a
steeple; the lowness of the source of light rendering the brims of their
hats of no use at all as a protection to the eyes.

Mr. Penny's was the last house in that part of the parish, and stood in a
hollow by the roadside so that cart-wheels and horses' legs were about
level with the sill of his shop-window.  This was low and wide, and was
open from morning till evening, Mr. Penny himself being invariably seen
working inside, like a framed portrait of a shoemaker by some modern
Moroni.  He sat facing the road, with a boot on his knees and the awl in
his hand, only looking up for a moment as he stretched out his arms and
bent forward at the pull, when his spectacles flashed in the passer's
face with a shine of flat whiteness, and then returned again to the boot
as usual.  Rows of lasts, small and large, stout and slender, covered the
wall which formed the background, in the extreme shadow of which a kind
of dummy was seen sitting, in the shape of an apprentice with a string
tied round his hair (probably to keep it out of his eyes).  He smiled at
remarks that floated in from without, but was never known to answer them
in Mr. Penny's presence.  Outside the window the upper-leather of a
Wellington-boot was usually hung, pegged to a board as if to dry.  No
sign was over his door; in fact--as with old banks and mercantile
houses--advertising in any shape was scorned, and it would have been felt
as beneath his dignity to paint up, for the benefit of strangers, the
name of an establishment whose trade came solely by connection based on
personal respect.

His visitors now came and stood on the outside of his window, sometimes
leaning against the sill, sometimes moving a pace or two backwards and
forwards in front of it.  They talked with deliberate gesticulations to
Mr. Penny, enthroned in the shadow of the interior.

"I do like a man to stick to men who be in the same line o' life--o'
Sundays, anyway--that I do so."

"'Tis like all the doings of folk who don't know what a day's work is,
that's what I say."

"My belief is the man's not to blame; 'tis she--she's the bitter weed!"

"No, not altogether.  He's a poor gawk-hammer.  Look at his sermon
yesterday."

"His sermon was well enough, a very good guessable sermon, only he
couldn't put it into words and speak it.  That's all was the matter wi'
the sermon.  He hadn't been able to get it past his pen."

"Well--ay, the sermon might have been good; for, 'tis true, the sermon of
Old Eccl'iastes himself lay in Eccl'iastes's ink-bottle afore he got it
out."

Mr. Penny, being in the act of drawing the last stitch tight, could
afford time to look up and throw in a word at this point.

"He's no spouter--that must be said, 'a b'lieve."

"'Tis a terrible muddle sometimes with the man, as far as spout do go,"
said Spinks.

"Well, we'll say nothing about that," the tranter answered; "for I don't
believe 'twill make a penneth o' difference to we poor martels here or
hereafter whether his sermons be good or bad, my sonnies."

Mr. Penny made another hole with his awl, pushed in the thread, and
looked up and spoke again at the extension of arms.

"'Tis his goings-on, souls, that's what it is."  He clenched his features
for an Herculean addition to the ordinary pull, and continued, "The first
thing he done when he came here was to be hot and strong about church
business."

"True," said Spinks; "that was the very first thing he done."

Mr. Penny, having now been offered the ear of the assembly, accepted it,
ceased stitching, swallowed an unimportant quantity of air as if it were
a pill, and continued:

"The next thing he do do is to think about altering the church, until he
found 'twould be a matter o' cost and what not, and then not to think no
more about it."

"True: that was the next thing he done."

"And the next thing was to tell the young chaps that they were not on no
account to put their hats in the christening font during service."

"True."

"And then 'twas this, and then 'twas that, and now 'tis--"

Words were not forcible enough to conclude the sentence, and Mr. Penny
gave a huge pull to signify the concluding word.

"Now 'tis to turn us out of the quire neck and crop," said the tranter
after an interval of half a minute, not by way of explaining the pause
and pull, which had been quite understood, but as a means of keeping the
subject well before the meeting.

Mrs. Penny came to the door at this point in the discussion.  Like all
good wives, however much she was inclined to play the Tory to her
husband's Whiggism, and vice versa, in times of peace, she coalesced with
him heartily enough in time of war.

"It must be owned he's not all there," she replied in a general way to
the fragments of talk she had heard from indoors.  "Far below poor Mr.
Grinham" (the late vicar).

"Ay, there was this to be said for he, that you were quite sure he'd
never come mumbudgeting to see ye, just as you were in the middle of your
work, and put you out with his fuss and trouble about ye."

"Never.  But as for this new Mr. Maybold, though he mid be a very well-
intending party in that respect, he's unbearable; for as to sifting your
cinders, scrubbing your floors, or emptying your slops, why, you can't do
it.  I assure you I've not been able to empt them for several days,
unless I throw 'em up the chimley or out of winder; for as sure as the
sun you meet him at the door, coming to ask how you are, and 'tis such a
confusing thing to meet a gentleman at the door when ye are in the mess
o' washing."

"'Tis only for want of knowing better, poor gentleman," said the tranter.
"His meaning's good enough.  Ay, your pa'son comes by fate: 'tis heads or
tails, like pitch-halfpenny, and no choosing; so we must take en as he
is, my sonnies, and thank God he's no worse, I suppose."

"I fancy I've seen him look across at Miss Day in a warmer way than
Christianity asked for," said Mrs. Penny musingly; "but I don't quite
like to say it."

"O no; there's nothing in that," said grandfather William.

"If there's nothing, we shall see nothing," Mrs. Penny replied, in the
tone of a woman who might possibly have private opinions still.

"Ah, Mr. Grinham was the man!" said Bowman.  "Why, he never troubled us
wi' a visit from year's end to year's end.  You might go anywhere, do
anything: you'd be sure never to see him."

"Yes, he was a right sensible pa'son," said Michael.  "He never entered
our door but once in his life, and that was to tell my poor wife--ay,
poor soul, dead and gone now, as we all shall!--that as she was such a'
old aged person, and lived so far from the church, he didn't at all
expect her to come any more to the service."

"And 'a was a very jinerous gentleman about choosing the psalms and hymns
o' Sundays.  'Confound ye,' says he, 'blare and scrape what ye will, but
don't bother me!'"

"And he was a very honourable man in not wanting any of us to come and
hear him if we were all on-end for a jaunt or spree, or to bring the
babies to be christened if they were inclined to squalling.  There's good
in a man's not putting a parish to unnecessary trouble."

"And there's this here man never letting us have a bit o' peace; but
keeping on about being good and upright till 'tis carried to such a pitch
as I never see the like afore nor since!"

"No sooner had he got here than he found the font wouldn't hold water, as
it hadn't for years off and on; and when I told him that Mr. Grinham
never minded it, but used to spet upon his vinger and christen 'em just
as well, 'a said, 'Good Heavens!  Send for a workman immediate.  What
place have I come to!'  Which was no compliment to us, come to that."

"Still, for my part," said old William, "though he's arrayed against us,
I like the hearty borussnorus ways of the new pa'son."

"You, ready to die for the quire," said Bowman reproachfully, "to stick
up for the quire's enemy, William!"

"Nobody will feel the loss of our church-work so much as I," said the old
man firmly; "that you d'all know.  I've a-been in the quire man and boy
ever since I was a chiel of eleven.  But for all that 'tisn't in me to
call the man a bad man, because I truly and sincerely believe en to be a
good young feller."

Some of the youthful sparkle that used to reside there animated William's
eye as he uttered the words, and a certain nobility of aspect was also
imparted to him by the setting sun, which gave him a Titanic shadow at
least thirty feet in length, stretching away to the east in outlines of
imposing magnitude, his head finally terminating upon the trunk of a
grand old oak-tree.

"Mayble's a hearty feller enough," the tranter replied, "and will spak to
you be you dirty or be you clane.  The first time I met en was in a
drong, and though 'a didn't know me no more than the dead, 'a passed the
time of day.  'D'ye do?' he said, says he, nodding his head.  'A fine
day.'  Then the second time I met en was full-buff in town street, when
my breeches were tore into a long strent by getting through a copse of
thorns and brimbles for a short cut home-along; and not wanting to
disgrace the man by spaking in that state, I fixed my eye on the
weathercock to let en pass me as a stranger.  But no: 'How d'ye do,
Reuben?' says he, right hearty, and shook my hand.  If I'd been dressed
in silver spangles from top to toe, the man couldn't have been civiller."

At this moment Dick was seen coming up the village-street, and they
turned and watched him.




"I'm afraid Dick's a lost man," said the tranter.

"What?--no!" said Mail, implying by his manner that it was a far commoner
thing for his ears to report what was not said than that his judgment
should be at fault.

"Ay," said the tranter, still gazing at Dick's unconscious advance.  "I
don't at all like what I see!  There's too many o' them looks out of the
winder without noticing anything; too much shining of boots; too much
peeping round corners; too much looking at the clock; telling about
clever things she did till you be sick of it; and then upon a hint to
that effect a horrible silence about her.  I've walked the path once in
my life and know the country, neighbours; and Dick's a lost man!"  The
tranter turned a quarter round and smiled a smile of miserable satire at
the setting new moon, which happened to catch his eye.

The others became far too serious at this announcement to allow them to
speak; and they still regarded Dick in the distance.

"'Twas his mother's fault," the tranter continued, "in asking the young
woman to our party last Christmas.  When I eyed the blue frock and light
heels o' the maid, I had my thoughts directly.  'God bless thee, Dicky my
sonny,' I said to myself; 'there's a delusion for thee!'"

"They seemed to be rather distant in manner last Sunday, I thought?" Mail
tentatively observed, as became one who was not a member of the family.

"Ay, that's a part of the zickness.  Distance belongs to it, slyness
belongs to it, queerest things on earth belongs to it!  There, 'tmay as
well come early as late s'far as I know.  The sooner begun, the sooner
over; for come it will."

"The question I ask is," said Mr. Spinks, connecting into one thread the
two subjects of discourse, as became a man learned in rhetoric, and
beating with his hand in a way which signified that the manner rather
than the matter of his speech was to be observed, "how did Mr. Maybold
know she could play the organ?  You know we had it from her own lips, as
far as lips go, that she has never, first or last, breathed such a thing
to him; much less that she ever would play."

In the midst of this puzzle Dick joined the party, and the news which had
caused such a convulsion among the ancient musicians was unfolded to him.
"Well," he said, blushing at the allusion to Miss Day, "I know by some
words of hers that she has a particular wish not to play, because she is
a friend of ours; and how the alteration comes, I don't know."

"Now, this is my plan," said the tranter, reviving the spirit of the
discussion by the infusion of new ideas, as was his custom--"this is my
plan; if you don't like it, no harm's done.  We all know one another very
well, don't we, neighbours?"

That they knew one another very well was received as a statement which,
though familiar, should not be omitted in introductory speeches.

"Then I say this"--and the tranter in his emphasis slapped down his hand
on Mr. Spinks's shoulder with a momentum of several pounds, upon which
Mr. Spinks tried to look not in the least startled--"I say that we all
move down-along straight as a line to Pa'son Mayble's when the clock has
gone six to-morrow night.  There we one and all stand in the passage,
then one or two of us go in and spak to en, man and man; and say, 'Pa'son
Mayble, every tradesman d'like to have his own way in his workshop, and
Mellstock Church is yours.  Instead of turning us out neck and crop, let
us stay on till Christmas, and we'll gie way to the young woman, Mr.
Mayble, and make no more ado about it.  And we shall always be quite
willing to touch our hats when we meet ye, Mr. Mayble, just as before.'
That sounds very well?  Hey?"

"Proper well, in faith, Reuben Dewy."

"And we won't sit down in his house; 'twould be looking too familiar when
only just reconciled?"

"No need at all to sit down.  Just do our duty man and man, turn round,
and march out--he'll think all the more of us for it."

"I hardly think Leaf had better go wi' us?" said Michael, turning to Leaf
and taking his measure from top to bottom by the eye.  "He's so terrible
silly that he might ruin the concern."

"He don't want to go much; do ye, Thomas Leaf?" said William.

"Hee-hee! no; I don't want to.  Only a teeny bit!"

"I be mortal afeard, Leaf, that you'll never be able to tell how many
cuts d'take to sharpen a spar," said Mail.

"I never had no head, never! that's how it happened to happen, hee-hee!"

They all assented to this, not with any sense of humiliating Leaf by
disparaging him after an open confession, but because it was an accepted
thing that Leaf didn't in the least mind having no head, that deficiency
of his being an unimpassioned matter of parish history.

"But I can sing my treble!" continued Thomas Leaf, quite delighted at
being called a fool in such a friendly way; "I can sing my treble as well
as any maid, or married woman either, and better!  And if Jim had lived,
I should have had a clever brother!  To-morrow is poor Jim's birthday.
He'd ha' been twenty-six if he'd lived till to-morrow."

"You always seem very sorry for Jim," said old William musingly.

"Ah!  I do.  Such a stay to mother as he'd always ha' been!  She'd never
have had to work in her old age if he had continued strong, poor Jim!"

"What was his age when 'a died?"

"Four hours and twenty minutes, poor Jim.  'A was born as might be at
night; and 'a didn't last as might be till the morning.  No, 'a didn't
last.  Mother called en Jim on the day that would ha' been his
christening day if he had lived; and she's always thinking about en.  You
see he died so very young."

"Well, 'twas rather youthful," said Michael.

"Now to my mind that woman is very romantical on the matter o' children?"
said the tranter, his eye sweeping his audience.

"Ah, well she mid be," said Leaf.  "She had twelve regular one after
another, and they all, except myself, died very young; either before they
was born or just afterwards."

"Pore feller, too.  I suppose th'st want to come wi' us?" the tranter
murmured.

"Well, Leaf, you shall come wi' us as yours is such a melancholy family,"
said old William rather sadly.

"I never see such a melancholy family as that afore in my life," said
Reuben.  "There's Leaf's mother, poor woman!  Every morning I see her
eyes mooning out through the panes of glass like a pot-sick
winder-flower; and as Leaf sings a very high treble, and we don't know
what we should do without en for upper G, we'll let en come as a trate,
poor feller."

"Ay, we'll let en come, 'a b'lieve," said Mr. Penny, looking up, as the
pull happened to be at that moment.

"Now," continued the tranter, dispersing by a new tone of voice these
digressions about Leaf; "as to going to see the pa'son, one of us might
call and ask en his meaning, and 'twould be just as well done; but it
will add a bit of flourish to the cause if the quire waits on him as a
body.  Then the great thing to mind is, not for any of our fellers to be
nervous; so before starting we'll one and all come to my house and have a
rasher of bacon; then every man-jack het a pint of cider into his inside;
then we'll warm up an extra drop wi' some mead and a bit of ginger; every
one take a thimbleful--just a glimmer of a drop, mind ye, no more, to
finish off his inner man--and march off to Pa'son Mayble.  Why, sonnies,
a man's not himself till he is fortified wi' a bit and a drop?  We shall
be able to look any gentleman in the face then without shrink or shame."

Mail recovered from a deep meditation and downward glance into the earth
in time to give a cordial approval to this line of action, and the
meeting adjourned.




At six o'clock the next day, the whole body of men in the choir emerged
from the tranter's door, and advanced with a firm step down the lane.
This dignity of march gradually became obliterated as they went on, and
by the time they reached the hill behind the vicarage a faint resemblance
to a flock of sheep might have been discerned in the venerable party.  A
word from the tranter, however, set them right again; and as they
descended the hill, the regular tramp, tramp, tramp of the united feet
was clearly audible from the vicarage garden.  At the opening of the gate
there was another short interval of irregular shuffling, caused by a
rather peculiar habit the gate had, when swung open quickly, of striking
against the bank and slamming back into the opener's face.

"Now keep step again, will ye?" said the tranter.  "It looks better, and
more becomes the high class of arrant which has brought us here."  Thus
they advanced to the door.

At Reuben's ring the more modest of the group turned aside, adjusted
their hats, and looked critically at any shrub that happened to lie in
the line of vision; endeavouring thus to give a person who chanced to
look out of the windows the impression that their request, whatever it
was going to be, was rather a casual thought occurring whilst they were
inspecting the vicar's shrubbery and grass-plot than a predetermined
thing.  The tranter, who, coming frequently to the vicarage with luggage,
coals, firewood, etc., had none of the awe for its precincts that filled
the breasts of most of the others, fixed his eyes firmly on the knocker
during this interval of waiting.  The knocker having no characteristic
worthy of notice, he relinquished it for a knot in one of the
door-panels, and studied the winding lines of the grain.

"O, sir, please, here's Tranter Dewy, and old William Dewy, and young
Richard Dewy, O, and all the quire too, sir, except the boys, a-come to
see you!" said Mr. Maybold's maid-servant to Mr. Maybold, the pupils of
her eyes dilating like circles in a pond.

"All the choir?" said the astonished vicar (who may be shortly described
as a good-looking young man with courageous eyes, timid mouth, and
neutral nose), abandoning his writing and looking at his parlour-maid
after speaking, like a man who fancied he had seen her face before but
couldn't recollect where.

"And they looks very firm, and Tranter Dewy do turn neither to the right
hand nor to the left, but stares quite straight and solemn with his mind
made up!"

"O, all the choir," repeated the vicar to himself, trying by that simple
device to trot out his thoughts on what the choir could come for.

"Yes; every man-jack of 'em, as I be alive!"  (The parlour-maid was
rather local in manner, having in fact been raised in the same village.)
"Really, sir, 'tis thoughted by many in town and country that--"

"Town and country!--Heavens, I had no idea that I was public property in
this way!" said the vicar, his face acquiring a hue somewhere between
that of the rose and the peony.  "Well, 'It is thought in town and
country that--'"

"It is thought that you be going to get it hot and strong!--excusen my
incivility, sir."

The vicar suddenly recalled to his recollection that he had long ago
settled it to be decidedly a mistake to encourage his servant Jane in
giving personal opinions.  The servant Jane saw by the vicar's face that
he recalled this fact to his mind; and removing her forehead from the
edge of the door, and rubbing away the indent that edge had made,
vanished into the passage as Mr. Maybold remarked, "Show them in, Jane."

A few minutes later a shuffling and jostling (reduced to as refined a
form as was compatible with the nature of shuffles and jostles) was heard
in the passage; then an earnest and prolonged wiping of shoes, conveying
the notion that volumes of mud had to be removed; but the roads being so
clean that not a particle of dirt appeared on the choir's boots (those of
all the elder members being newly oiled, and Dick's brightly polished),
this wiping might have been set down simply as a desire to show that
respectable men had no wish to take a mean advantage of clean roads for
curtailing proper ceremonies.  Next there came a powerful whisper from
the same quarter:-

"Now stand stock-still there, my sonnies, one and all!  And don't make no
noise; and keep your backs close to the wall, that company may pass in
and out easy if they want to without squeezing through ye: and we two are
enough to go in." . . . The voice was the tranter's.

"I wish I could go in too and see the sight!" said a reedy voice--that of
Leaf.

"'Tis a pity Leaf is so terrible silly, or else he might," said another.

"I never in my life seed a quire go into a study to have it out about the
playing and singing," pleaded Leaf; "and I should like to see it just
once!"

"Very well; we'll let en come in," said the tranter.  "You'll be like
chips in porridge, {1} Leaf--neither good nor hurt.  All right, my sonny,
come along;" and immediately himself, old William, and Leaf appeared in
the room.

"We took the liberty to come and see 'ee, sir," said Reuben, letting his
hat hang in his left hand, and touching with his right the brim of an
imaginary one on his head.  "We've come to see 'ee, sir, man and man, and
no offence, I hope?"

"None at all," said Mr. Maybold.

"This old aged man standing by my side is father; William Dewy by name,
sir."

"Yes; I see it is," said the vicar, nodding aside to old William, who
smiled.

"I thought you mightn't know en without his bass-viol," the tranter
apologized.  "You see, he always wears his best clothes and his bass-viol
a-Sundays, and it do make such a difference in a' old man's look."

"And who's that young man?" the vicar said.

"Tell the pa'son yer name," said the tranter, turning to Leaf, who stood
with his elbows nailed back to a bookcase.

"Please, Thomas Leaf, your holiness!" said Leaf, trembling.

"I hope you'll excuse his looks being so very thin," continued the
tranter deprecatingly, turning to the vicar again.  "But 'tisn't his
fault, poor feller.  He's rather silly by nature, and could never get
fat; though he's a' excellent treble, and so we keep him on."

"I never had no head, sir," said Leaf, eagerly grasping at this
opportunity for being forgiven his existence.

"Ah, poor young man!" said Mr. Maybold.

"Bless you, he don't mind it a bit, if you don't, sir," said the tranter
assuringly.  "Do ye, Leaf?"

"Not I--not a morsel--hee, hee!  I was afeard it mightn't please your
holiness, sir, that's all."

The tranter, finding Leaf get on so very well through his negative
qualities, was tempted in a fit of generosity to advance him still
higher, by giving him credit for positive ones.  "He's very clever for a
silly chap, good-now, sir.  You never knowed a young feller keep his
smock-frocks so clane; very honest too.  His ghastly looks is all there
is against en, poor feller; but we can't help our looks, you know, sir."

"True: we cannot.  You live with your mother, I think, Leaf?"

The tranter looked at Leaf to express that the most friendly assistant to
his tongue could do no more for him now, and that he must be left to his
own resources.

"Yes, sir: a widder, sir.  Ah, if brother Jim had lived she'd have had a
clever son to keep her without work!"

"Indeed! poor woman.  Give her this half-crown.  I'll call and see your
mother."

"Say, 'Thank you, sir,'" the tranter whispered imperatively towards Leaf.

"Thank you, sir!" said Leaf.

"That's it, then; sit down, Leaf," said Mr. Maybold.

"Y-yes, sir!"

The tranter cleared his throat after this accidental parenthesis about
Leaf, rectified his bodily position, and began his speech.

"Mr. Mayble," he said, "I hope you'll excuse my common way, but I always
like to look things in the face."

Reuben made a point of fixing this sentence in the vicar's mind by gazing
hard at him at the conclusion of it, and then out of the window.

Mr. Maybold and old William looked in the same direction, apparently
under the impression that the things' faces alluded to were there
visible.

"What I have been thinking"--the tranter implied by this use of the past
tense that he was hardly so discourteous as to be positively thinking it
then--"is that the quire ought to be gie'd a little time, and not done
away wi' till Christmas, as a fair thing between man and man.  And, Mr.
Mayble, I hope you'll excuse my common way?"

"I will, I will.  Till Christmas," the vicar murmured, stretching the two
words to a great length, as if the distance to Christmas might be
measured in that way.  "Well, I want you all to understand that I have no
personal fault to find, and that I don't wish to change the church music
by forcible means, or in a way which should hurt the feelings of any
parishioners.  Why I have at last spoken definitely on the subject is
that a player has been brought under--I may say pressed upon--my notice
several times by one of the churchwardens.  And as the organ I brought
with me is here waiting" (pointing to a cabinet-organ standing in the
study), "there is no reason for longer delay."

"We made a mistake I suppose then, sir?  But we understood the young
woman didn't want to play particularly?"  The tranter arranged his
countenance to signify that he did not want to be inquisitive in the
least.

"No, nor did she.  Nor did I definitely wish her to just yet; for your
playing is very good.  But, as I said, one of the churchwardens has been
so anxious for a change, that, as matters stand, I couldn't consistently
refuse my consent."

Now for some reason or other, the vicar at this point seemed to have an
idea that he had prevaricated; and as an honest vicar, it was a thing he
determined not to do.  He corrected himself, blushing as he did so,
though why he should blush was not known to Reuben.

"Understand me rightly," he said: "the church-warden proposed it to me,
but I had thought myself of getting--Miss Day to play."

"Which churchwarden might that be who proposed her, sir?--excusing my
common way."  The tranter intimated by his tone that, so far from being
inquisitive, he did not even wish to ask a single question.

"Mr. Shiner, I believe."

"Clk, my sonny!--beg your pardon, sir, that's only a form of words of
mine, and slipped out accidental--he nourishes enmity against us for some
reason or another; perhaps because we played rather hard upon en
Christmas night.  Anyhow 'tis certain sure that Mr. Shiner's real love
for music of a particular kind isn't his reason.  He've no more ear than
that chair.  But let that be."

"I don't think you should conclude that, because Mr. Shiner wants a
different music, he has any ill-feeling for you.  I myself, I must own,
prefer organ-music to any other.  I consider it most proper, and feel
justified in endeavouring to introduce it; but then, although other music
is better, I don't say yours is not good."

"Well then, Mr. Mayble, since death's to be, we'll die like men any day
you name (excusing my common way)."

Mr. Maybold bowed his head.

"All we thought was, that for us old ancient singers to be choked off
quiet at no time in particular, as now, in the Sundays after Easter,
would seem rather mean in the eyes of other parishes, sir.  But if we
fell glorious with a bit of a flourish at Christmas, we should have a
respectable end, and not dwindle away at some nameless paltry
second-Sunday-after or Sunday-next-before something, that's got no name
of his own."

"Yes, yes, that's reasonable; I own it's reasonable."

"You see, Mr. Mayble, we've got--do I keep you inconvenient long, sir?"

"No, no."

"We've got our feelings--father there especially."

The tranter, in his earnestness, had advanced his person to within six
inches of the vicar's.

"Certainly, certainly!" said Mr. Maybold, retreating a little for
convenience of seeing.  "You are all enthusiastic on the subject, and I
am all the more gratified to find you so.  A Laodicean lukewarmness is
worse than wrongheadedness itself."

"Exactly, sir.  In fact now, Mr. Mayble," Reuben continued, more
impressively, and advancing a little closer still to the vicar, "father
there is a perfect figure o' wonder, in the way of being fond of music!"

The vicar drew back a little further, the tranter suddenly also standing
back a foot or two, to throw open the view of his father, and pointing to
him at the same time.

Old William moved uneasily in the large chair, and with a minute smile on
the mere edge of his lips, for good-manners, said he was indeed very fond
of tunes.

"Now, you see exactly how it is," Reuben continued, appealing to Mr.
Maybold's sense of justice by looking sideways into his eyes.  The vicar
seemed to see how it was so well that the gratified tranter walked up to
him again with even vehement eagerness, so that his waistcoat-buttons
almost rubbed against the vicar's as he continued: "As to father, if you
or I, or any man or woman of the present generation, at the time music is
a-playing, was to shake your fist in father's face, as may be this way,
and say, 'Don't you be delighted with that music!'"--the tranter went
back to where Leaf was sitting, and held his fist so close to Leaf's face
that the latter pressed his head back against the wall: "All right, Leaf,
my sonny, I won't hurt you; 'tis just to show my meaning to Mr.
Mayble.--As I was saying, if you or I, or any man, was to shake your fist
in father's face this way, and say, 'William, your life or your music!'
he'd say, 'My life!'  Now that's father's nature all over; and you see,
sir, it must hurt the feelings of a man of that kind for him and his bass-
viol to be done away wi' neck and crop."

The tranter went back to the vicar's front and again looked earnestly at
his face.

"True, true, Dewy," Mr. Maybold answered, trying to withdraw his head and
shoulders without moving his feet; but finding this impracticable, edging
back another inch.  These frequent retreats had at last jammed Mr.
Maybold between his easy-chair and the edge of the table.

And at the moment of the announcement of the choir, Mr. Maybold had just
re-dipped the pen he was using; at their entry, instead of wiping it, he
had laid it on the table with the nib overhanging.  At the last retreat
his coat-tails came in contact with the pen, and down it rolled, first
against the back of the chair, thence turning a summersault into the
seat, thence falling to the floor with a rattle.

The vicar stooped for his pen, and the tranter, wishing to show that,
however great their ecclesiastical differences, his mind was not so small
as to let this affect his social feelings, stooped also.

"And have you anything else you want to explain to me, Dewy?" said Mr.
Maybold from under the table.

"Nothing, sir.  And, Mr. Mayble, you be not offended?  I hope you see our
desire is reason?" said the tranter from under the chair.

"Quite, quite; and I shouldn't think of refusing to listen to such a
reasonable request," the vicar replied.  Seeing that Reuben had secured
the pen, he resumed his vertical position, and added, "You know, Dewy, it
is often said how difficult a matter it is to act up to our convictions
and please all parties.  It may be said with equal truth, that it is
difficult for a man of any appreciativeness to have convictions at all.
Now in my case, I see right in you, and right in Shiner.  I see that
violins are good, and that an organ is good; and when we introduce the
organ, it will not be that fiddles were bad, but that an organ was
better.  That you'll clearly understand, Dewy?"

"I will; and thank you very much for such feelings, sir.  Piph-h-h-h!  How
the blood do get into my head, to be sure, whenever I quat down like
that!" said Reuben, who having also risen to his feet stuck the pen
vertically in the inkstand and almost through the bottom, that it might
not roll down again under any circumstances whatever.

Now the ancient body of minstrels in the passage felt their curiosity
surging higher and higher as the minutes passed.  Dick, not having much
affection for this errand, soon grew tired, and went away in the
direction of the school.  Yet their sense of propriety would probably
have restrained them from any attempt to discover what was going on in
the study had not the vicar's pen fallen to the floor.  The conviction
that the movement of chairs, etc., necessitated by the search, could only
have been caused by the catastrophe of a bloody fight beginning,
overpowered all other considerations; and they advanced to the door,
which had only just fallen to.  Thus, when Mr. Maybold raised his eyes
after the stooping he beheld glaring through the door Mr. Penny in full-
length portraiture, Mail's face and shoulders above Mr. Penny's head,
Spinks's forehead and eyes over Mail's crown, and a fractional part of
Bowman's countenance under Spinks's arm--crescent-shaped portions of
other heads and faces being visible behind these--the whole dozen and odd
eyes bristling with eager inquiry.

Mr. Penny, as is the case with excitable boot-makers and men, seeing the
vicar look at him and hearing no word spoken, thought it incumbent upon
himself to say something of any kind.  Nothing suggested itself till he
had looked for about half a minute at the vicar.

"You'll excuse my naming of it, sir," he said, regarding with much
commiseration the mere surface of the vicar's face; "but perhaps you
don't know that your chin have bust out a-bleeding where you cut yourself
a-shaving this morning, sir."

"Now, that was the stooping, depend upon't," the tranter suggested, also
looking with much interest at the vicar's chin.  "Blood always will bust
out again if you hang down the member that's been bleeding."

Old William raised his eyes and watched the vicar's bleeding chin
likewise; and Leaf advanced two or three paces from the bookcase,
absorbed in the contemplation of the same phenomenon, with parted lips
and delighted eyes.

"Dear me, dear me!" said Mr. Maybold hastily, looking very red, and
brushing his chin with his hand, then taking out his handkerchief and
wiping the place.

"That's it, sir; all right again now, 'a b'lieve--a mere nothing," said
Mr. Penny.  "A little bit of fur off your hat will stop it in a minute if
it should bust out again."

"I'll let 'ee have a bit off mine," said Reuben, to show his good
feeling; "my hat isn't so new as yours, sir, and 'twon't hurt mine a
bit."

"No, no; thank you, thank you," Mr. Maybold again nervously replied.

"'Twas rather a deep cut seemingly?" said Reuben, feeling these to be the
kindest and best remarks he could make.

"O, no; not particularly."

"Well, sir, your hand will shake sometimes a-shaving, and just when it
comes into your head that you may cut yourself, there's the blood."

"I have been revolving in my mind that question of the time at which we
make the change," said Mr. Maybold, "and I know you'll meet me half-way.
I think Christmas-day as much too late for me as the present time is too
early for you.  I suggest Michaelmas or thereabout as a convenient time
for both parties; for I think your objection to a Sunday which has no
name is not one of any real weight."

"Very good, sir.  I suppose mortal men mustn't expect their own way
entirely; and I express in all our names that we'll make shift and be
satisfied with what you say."  The tranter touched the brim of his
imaginary hat again, and all the choir did the same.  "About Michaelmas,
then, as far as you are concerned, sir, and then we make room for the
next generation."

"About Michaelmas," said the vicar.




"'A took it very well, then?" said Mail, as they all walked up the hill.

"He behaved like a man, 'a did so," said the tranter.  "And I'm glad
we've let en know our minds.  And though, beyond that, we ha'n't got much
by going, 'twas worth while.  He won't forget it.  Yes, he took it very
well.  Supposing this tree here was Pa'son Mayble, and I standing here,
and thik gr't stone is father sitting in the easy-chair.  'Dewy,' says
he, 'I don't wish to change the church music in a forcible way.'"

"That was very nice o' the man, even though words be wind."

"Proper nice--out and out nice.  The fact is," said Reuben
confidentially, "'tis how you take a man.  Everybody must be managed.
Queens must be managed: kings must be managed; for men want managing
almost as much as women, and that's saying a good deal."

"'Tis truly!" murmured the husbands.

"Pa'son Mayble and I were as good friends all through it as if we'd been
sworn brothers.  Ay, the man's well enough; 'tis what's put in his head
that spoils him, and that's why we've got to go."

"There's really no believing half you hear about people nowadays."

"Bless ye, my sonnies! 'tisn't the pa'son's move at all.  That gentleman
over there" (the tranter nodded in the direction of Shiner's farm) "is at
the root of the mischty."

"What!  Shiner?"

"Ay; and I see what the pa'son don't see.  Why, Shiner is for putting
forward that young woman that only last night I was saying was our Dick's
sweet-heart, but I suppose can't be, and making much of her in the sight
of the congregation, and thinking he'll win her by showing her off.  Well,
perhaps 'a woll."

"Then the music is second to the woman, the other churchwarden is second
to Shiner, the pa'son is second to the churchwardens, and God A'mighty is
nowhere at all."

"That's true; and you see," continued Reuben, "at the very beginning it
put me in a stud as to how to quarrel wi' en.  In short, to save my soul,
I couldn't quarrel wi' such a civil man without belying my conscience.
Says he to father there, in a voice as quiet as a lamb's, 'William, you
are a' old aged man, as all shall be, so sit down in my easy-chair, and
rest yourself.'  And down father zot.  I could fain ha' laughed at thee,
father; for thou'st take it so unconcerned at first, and then looked so
frightened when the chair-bottom sunk in."

"You see," said old William, hastening to explain, "I was scared to find
the bottom gie way--what should I know o' spring bottoms?--and thought I
had broke it down: and of course as to breaking down a man's chair, I
didn't wish any such thing."

"And, neighbours, when a feller, ever so much up for a miff, d'see his
own father sitting in his enemy's easy-chair, and a poor chap like Leaf
made the best of, as if he almost had brains--why, it knocks all the wind
out of his sail at once: it did out of mine."

"If that young figure of fun--Fance Day, I mean," said Bowman, "hadn't
been so mighty forward wi' showing herself off to Shiner and Dick and the
rest, 'tis my belief we should never ha' left the gallery."

"'Tis my belief that though Shiner fired the bullets, the parson made
'em," said Mr. Penny.  "My wife sticks to it that he's in love wi' her."

"That's a thing we shall never know.  I can't onriddle her, nohow."

"Thou'st ought to be able to onriddle such a little chiel as she," the
tranter observed.

"The littler the maid, the bigger the riddle, to my mind.  And coming of
such a stock, too, she may well be a twister."

"Yes; Geoffrey Day is a clever man if ever there was one.  Never says
anything: not he."

"Never."

"You might live wi' that man, my sonnies, a hundred years, and never know
there was anything in him."

"Ay; one o' these up-country London ink-bottle chaps would call Geoffrey
a fool."

"Ye never find out what's in that man: never," said Spinks.  "Close? ah,
he is close!  He can hold his tongue well.  That man's dumbness is
wonderful to listen to."

"There's so much sense in it.  Every moment of it is brimmen over wi'
sound understanding."

"'A can hold his tongue very clever--very clever truly," echoed Leaf.  "'A
do look at me as if 'a could see my thoughts running round like the works
of a clock."

"Well, all will agree that the man can halt well in his talk, be it a
long time or be it a short time.  And though we can't expect his daughter
to inherit his closeness, she may have a few dribblets from his sense."

"And his pocket, perhaps."

"Yes; the nine hundred pound that everybody says he's worth; but I call
it four hundred and fifty; for I never believe more than half I hear."

"Well, he've made a pound or two, and I suppose the maid will have it,
since there's nobody else.  But 'tis rather sharp upon her, if she's been
born to fortune, to bring her up as if not born for it, and letting her
work so hard."

"'Tis all upon his principle.  A long-headed feller!"

"Ah," murmured Spinks, "'twould be sharper upon her if she were born for
fortune, and not to it!  I suffer from that affliction."


