{"name": "Chapter 22", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210515081630/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/treasure-island-book/summary/chapter-22", "summary": "The pirates don't attack again that day, so there's time for Doctor Livesey to tend to his patients: one of the pirates who got shot at the wall of the fort, Hunter, and Captain Smollett. Of those three, only Captain Smollett recovers - he's been badly injured, but he'll live. Even so, the captain is now out of the action. He's not allowed to move or talk more than he has to. Squire Trelawney, Doctor Livesey, and Captain Smollett discuss what to do next. Abraham Gray is totally astonished to see Doctor Livesey walking in the forest outside the fort. Jim guesses correctly that Doctor Livesey is going to see Ben Gunn. Jim feels more and more restless and cooped up. He decides to fill his pockets with biscuits, grab a couple pistols, and head out on his own. He wants to return to that odd white boulder to see if Ben Gunn's boat is tied up there. Jim knows he wouldn't be allowed to do this if he asked, so he decides to sneak out when no one is looking. Jim doesn't even think about the fact that he's leaving only two able-bodied men to guard the fort, Abraham Gray and Squire Trelawney. He makes up his mind and goes. Jim is enjoying his stroll down to the beach when, in the distance, he sees Long John Silver talking and laughing with a couple of crew members and holding his parrot, Captain Flint. The two crew members get into a rowboat and set off for the Hispaniola. The day is growing foggy and the sun is setting, so Jim creeps across to the white rock. Sure enough, he sees a little tent hidden near the rock with a tiny homemade goatskin boat next to it. Jim suddenly gets another bright idea: under the cover of night and fog, he decides to row quietly out to the Hispaniola, cut the rope attached to the anchor, and let it float off. He waits until the dead of night, picks up the tiny boat, and sets it on the ocean to row out to the Hispaniola.", "analysis": ""}