{"name": "Chapter 16", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210515081630/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/treasure-island-book/summary/chapter-16", "summary": "At 1:30, two boatloads of sailors row ashore from the Hispaniola. One of them is humming an Irish marching song, \"Lillibullero\" . Tom Redruth comes to tell Doctor Livesey that Jim Hawkins has also slipped ashore. Doctor Livesey is worried for Jim's safety. Livesey feels restless and decides to use a tiny rowboat to go ashore with Hunter in secret to look for information. Doctor Livesey finds an abandoned fort at the top of a hill. The best part of the fort is that it has a spring of fresh water. While the ship is well-provisioned and would be easy to defend, there isn't enough water on board for a long battle against the pirates. Doctor Livesey hears a scream . Doctor Livesey thinks it's Jim who's been killed. Livesey and Hunter rush back to the ship. Squire Trelawney is sitting aboard the Hispaniola thinking that it's Doctor Livesey and Hunter who were killed. Captain Smollett points out that one of the six sailors left aboard the ship turned pale when he heard the scream. Captain Smollett thinks that man will join the loyal party. Doctor Livesey explains his plan to use the abandoned stockade to defend themselves. They secretly load up the tiny rowboat with ammunition and provisions. Meanwhile, the Captain and Squire Trelawney stay on deck. Finally, the charade is over: Squire Trelawney takes out his pistol and tells Israel Hands to freeze. The six sailors are totally confused, but since they are surrounded - with Squire Trelawney and Captain Smollett on one end of the ship and Redruth on the other - they obediently go below decks. During all this activity, Doctor Livesey, Hunter, and Joyce manage to set off for shore in their rowboat filled with provisions. They unload the rowboat into the fort, then Doctor Livesey and Hunter row back to the Hispaniola. Joyce stays behind to guard the fort, armed with six guns. Back on the Hispaniola, they load up the rowboat a second time. They dump all of the guns and ammunition they don't have room for over the side of the ship so the pirates can't use them. The tide is starting to go out, and they hear the sounds of the two boatloads of men coming back from their day on the island. Doctor Livesey, Squire Trelawney, and Redruth get into the rowboat. , but he said that Joyce is alone just four paragraphs earlier. Here we see the value of close proofreading!) They paddle around to the front of the boat where the six sailors are trapped below the deck. They hear Captain Smollett's voice from the deck of the ship. Captain Smollett is ordering the sailor they thought might be loyal out of the six - Abraham Gray - to join their party. They hear the sounds of a fight below the decks, and Abraham Gray bursts out and runs over to Captain Smollett. Captain Smollett and Abraham Gray drop aboard the tiny rowboat, and they all set off for shore.", "analysis": ""}