{"name": "Book 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201025193428/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/meditations/summary/book-7", "summary": "Marcus comments on the evil that he sees--and has seen --in the world around him. More on the sameness and cyclical nature of human behavior and the shortness of time. Back to principles: only the death of the mind can extinguish them. Marcus observes that everything external to the mind has no power over it, since the mind makes its own judgments. Marcus believes that he can refresh and renew himself by changing the way he thinks about things, returning to the way he was before he felt bummed. Marcus lists the things of the world that irritate him and make it difficult to live out his principles. Marcus reminds himself to remain tolerant and judge people only by their own criteria . Marcus tells himself to pay close attention to any conversation he's involved in and make sure he understands what is being discussed. Marcus sounds out his capabilities. If he isn't up to a task, he finds someone who would be better suited to it. If he is up to the task, he takes it as something given from the Whole for his development. The important thing is to do the job well and for the benefit of the community. Marcus reflects on men of reputation who are now long forgotten--and also on those who celebrated their fame. Marcus reminds himself that it's his duty to seek help when he needs it. Marcus tells himself not to worry about the future, since he will have the same faculties of reason to deal with it if or when he gets there. Marcus reiterates his belief in the unity and harmony of all things. There is one universe, one head honcho god, one common reason in all humans. Marcus says that every material thing will reach dissolution at some point. All things will be subsumed into the universe, and all memory of these things will be dissolved, too. Reason allows men to act in accordance with nature. Marcus reiterates that he's meant to do the right thing under his own direction--not be held to it by outside forces. Marcus compares rational beings to the \"limbs of an organic entity,\" meaning that they were meant to work together for a common purpose. Marcus creates a new mantra for himself . Don't ask us. Marcus also does some etymological gymnastics to say this: if you translate \"limb\" to mean \"part,\" you don't understand what it means to belong to the Whole. Marcus tells the universe to bring it on: let whatever will happen to his body happen. He will stay tranquil in his mind, refusing to call what comes to pass either good or ill. Marcus says his goodness should not be affected by outside action or opinion. Like an emerald that does not change color, he will be steadfast. Marcus tells himself that his directing mind will not cause trouble for itself. If something external tries to disturb it, perhaps pain will come. As for the rest of him--the body should avoid pain, the senses should alert it to problems, but reason can't be touched unless it gets involved with all the drama of the external world. If the directing mind/reason will just withhold judgment on the drama--like whether what is happening to the body is good or bad--it can keep itself untouched. Reason has no needs--unless it forms bad habits. Marcus seems to be plagued by a mind that \"imagines\" bad things that can ruin his happiness. But he's emperor, so he just tells his imagination to get gone. He assures his imagination that he's not angry. He just desires its absence. Marcus reminds himself not to be afraid of change, since it is part of the nature of the Whole. All things come to being through change. It is even necessary for Marcus himself to be changed, if he wishes to be part of the changing nature of the Whole. We get more on the movement of the human body through the grand recycling scheme of the universe. Marcus marvels at how many philosophers have been devoured by time and dispersed. He also notes that the same is true for regular people. Marcus is concerned that he will one day do something against his human nature. Marcus tells himself that all will be forgotten--including him. Marcus observes that even people who make mistakes are loveable because there is a unity between all rational creatures in the universe. Also, according to Marcus, most people are merely ignorant; they're not malicious. And let's face it: everybody will be dead soon, anyway. Might as well love the ones you're with. Finally, another person can't harm Marcus's directing mind. He's always going to be tranquil there. \"Universal nature\" molds the things of the world out of the substance of the universe as you might mold things out of wax. The Universe also \"melts down\" one thing to have more substance to make something else--it's a cosmic recycling program. Nothing lasts very long before it is broken down again and the process starts all over again. Marcus declares that a frown kills the face's ability to express other emotions. Too much frowning and--like your mother always said--your face will get stuck that way. Marcus feels that he needs to pay attention to this behavior in himself because he's becoming insensitive to the wrongs he's committing. Everything will be changed by the Whole and recycled into something else in order to rejuvenate the world. Marcus urges himself to consider what the directing mind of a person who wrongs him is doing: how is it judging good and evil? By considering this, he will be able to see that he and the person who wrongs him both probably believe good to mean the same thing. In which case, they have something in common, and he should forgive the wrongdoer. And then, perhaps, he might not be a good judge of good and evil, anyway--in which case, whatever has happened to him won't matter. Marcus reminds himself to focus on the good that he has--not the things he doesn't have. But while he's being thankful for these things, he has to make sure that he doesn't become so used to them that he's dependent on them for his serenity. Marcus advises himself to find contentment within, withdrawing from the activity of the world. His right actions should be enough to keep him happy. There are some important things on the emperor's \"To-Do\" list: 1) Get rid of imagination; 2) Ignore the promptings of impulse; 3) Focus on the present; 4) Dissect and analyze the stuff that happens to you; 5) Think about your death; 6) Let go of past wrongs. Marcus tells himself to focus on the conversation at hand and really enter empathetically into it. More instructions on how to live a good life: value simplicity and integrity; show love to people and god. Marcus must also remember that law governs everything. Keep it simple. Death dilemma: dispersal into atoms versus recycling into the Whole? Or... wait for it... total extinction? Which one would you choose? Marcus thinks that pain can go one of two ways: it can kill us, or it can linger and make life hard. In the second case, a person should just retreat into his or her mind and let the pain have its way with the body. Let the body revolt against it, if it can. Marcus reflects on those who seek fame, and he points out the futility of such an exercise. The dialogue we get next may be something that Marcus had read and recorded for his personal use here. The upshot: if a man could have a total view of time and existence, he would not put much value on human existence. He would not worry about death. Marcus assesses his situation as emperor: damned if he does, damned if he doesn't. Marcus feels that if the face is capable of expressing itself at the whim of emotion, the mind should be even more easily controlled by itself, since it is a superior organ. More collected wisdom, this time from Euripides: basically, facts shouldn't anger you. More recorded lit, this time from an unknown source. This one is a type of blessing, praying for the subject to bring joy to gods and the community. More Euripides: human lives are compared to ears of corn falling to the reaper. And guess what? Even more Euripides: if a person should find that the gods no longer care for him and his heir, there must be a darn good reason. Euripides: the speaker is upheld by right. Marcus includes a quote here that echoes a previous sentiment: don't get involved in displays of extreme emotion. Next up: Plato. A man worth his salt does not think about his mortality; instead, he thinks about the rightness of his actions. More Plato: if a man has judged a \"position\" to be suitable--or if he has been commanded to take it--he should defend it without a worry for death. And yet more Plato: a definition of nobility and virtue. They are something more than saving yourself; it's not about worrying about death and living just for the sake of continuing on. Your focus should be on the quality of your life and actions. Marcus advises himself to do some stargazing to lift him from the muck of the world. Marcus restates the need to view humanity as if he were a heavenly body way up on high, looking down. From there, he can see the entire array of humans--and their smallness. Marcus tells himself that if he looks back on the past, he can predict the future, since everything that happens recurs in cycles. It's an eternal sameness of shenanigans. This exercise helps Marcus see that a short life is as good as a long one. Back to Euripides: earth returns to earth; whatever comes from heaven also returns there. Or, if not, then we'll be broken up into atoms and scattered throughout the universe. And Euripides again: humans seek shelter from death through rituals and magic. Marcus includes another quote, this time from an unknown source: humans just have to suck up whatever the gods throw their way. Marcus refers to sport here--specifically, wrestling--and says that prowess in the field doesn't necessarily mean the athlete is a person of virtue. If Marcus will do a thing according to reason , then there's no worry that harm will be done to anyone. Marcus reminds himself that it's his duty to revere god, to treat men fairly, and to pay attention to what is going on around him so that he doesn't miss anything important. Marcus calls himself to attention, training his focus on his own business . He reminds himself not to worry about the directing minds of others. He must tend to his own duties. Everyone else also has to tend to whatever their natures tell them to do. According to Marcus, rational creatures are marked by three traits. 1) As beings with reason, humans are meant to serve each other--just as lower beings are meant to serve humans. As such, human action should be social. 2) Humans are also called to shun the world of the senses and impulses. A rational person would never allow him- or herself to be controlled by these. 3) Humans should never make rash judgments or to let false representations deceive them in their decision-making. It is man's duty to stick to these principles at all times--or he might lose his humanity. Marcus creates an exercise to make himself grateful for whatever life he has left. He is to imagine that he is dead already and that the rest of life is a bonus. Marcus counsels himself to be contented with his lot in life. Marcus wants to keep frustrated people in his mind's eye. Why? Because their vexation never makes them feel better, nor does it ever fix anything. Instead, Marcus should spend his time thinking about how to turn a bad situation to his advantage and remain calm. Marcus advocates looking out for number one in this one--rather than for the common good. Marcus advocates retreat inside his mind again, for refreshment and in order to find goodness. Marcus thinks that he should be graceful in his bodily movements--or at least outwardly composed. However, he needs to do this without showing too much effort. Marcus thinks that wrestling is a better analogy for life than dancing because the wrestler is always at the ready--and a good one is never thrown by something he didn't see coming. Marcus warns himself to be careful of those whose approval he is courting--and to consider how their own minds are working. To understand their minds is to understand better their errors and erase the need of their approval. More Plato: the soul doesn't want to be deprived of truth--or, as Marcus adds, any of the other virtues. Keeping this in mind will make Marcus kinder to others. Marcus reminds himself that pain can't degrade his rational mind. He cites Epicurus, who says that pain has its limits--and that we shouldn't exaggerate its effects. There are other things that fall in the pain category--exhaustion, heat, etc.--and these experiences should be governed by this good advice. Don't treat the man who hates mankind as he, well, treats mankind. Marcus questions how we know that Socrates was a great man. Sure, he was a great philosopher and speaker, but Marcus believes we have to look into his soul to know for sure. But how to do that? Marcus sets up some criteria: was Socrates content with his lot? Was he too harsh a critic, or was he a marshmallow? Did he shun the life of the senses? Marcus acknowledges that even though his substance is drawn from the stuff of the universe, he should still be able to cordon himself off and take control of himself. He also reminds himself that he needs almost nothing to be happy. Though Marcus strikes a melancholy note , he cheers himself up by thinking that he doesn't need to be a full-time scholar to feel divinity within. Marcus reiterates the necessity of living a tranquil life, no matter what chaos is happening around him. Even if lions are tearing off his arms and legs, he'll be okay. Marcus offers a dialogue between Judgment and Circumstance , in which J tells C who he is in reality. Then, Ready Use and Event have a chat. Ready Use is totally happy to see Event, since he's giving him good material to work with. He wants to exercise reason and show that man can handle anything. Trippy. Marcus reminds himself to keep his death in his mind if he wants to be perfect. Marcus points out that the immortal gods don't complain that they have to live so long with stupid humans driving them nuts. Why should we, who live infinitely shorter lives, complain about working hard? Marcus tells himself that it's stupid not to get rid of his own vices. It's infinitely easier than avoiding the vices of others. If your reason can't find something intelligent or of benefit to the community, whatever it's examining is not worth the time. Marcus chides himself for looking for a reward for helping others or for other good behavior. The social behavior in itself is its own reward. Marcus acknowledges that everyone likes it when good things happen. Doing things that are part of one's nature is just such a benefit. Marcus reminds himself that the Whole intended to create the entire universe and everything in it. And everything down to his time is continuously created by the Whole. Marcus feels that this knowledge should help him live a life of serenity.", "analysis": ""}