{"name": "Book 1", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201025193428/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/meditations/summary/book-1", "summary": "Marcus tells us about the virtues and qualities he's observed in the important people in his life. Absolute goodness came from Mom. Great-Grandpa wisely had Marcus avoid a public school education. Marcus's tutor taught him to work hard and have few needs. Marcus observes that it's important to avoid superstitions and people who ply them. It's also important to write essays and to accustom yourself to hard-living . Rusticus demonstrates the good of being diplomatic and avoiding fancy talk and fancy writing . Rusticus introduces Marcus to the work of Epictetus. Apollonius values indifference to changing fortunes, stability of personal character, and patience. From Sextus , Marcus learns the value of a traditional life, of living in accord with nature, of tolerance for all people, and of humility. Marcus learns also from Alexander to correct lack of knowledge in others gently and with patience. Marcus credits his tutor, Fronto, for showing him to avoid tyranny. Fronto says that the upper class may, in fact, be lacking a heart. Alexander the Platonist taught Marcus not to blow off friends, family, or colleagues, because there's not enough time in the day. Cinna Catulus, a philosopher, believed that friendship should be maintained, even after criticism. He also believed that teachers should be appreciated and children should be loved. Severus, a consul, demonstrated the value of family, truth, and justice. Severus also emphasized the importance of freedom of speech, of equality, and of the citizen. Severus was truthful, generous and optimistic. Marcus notes that Claudius Maximus showed self-control, humor, frankness, forgiveness, and generosity. Marcus rounds out the bromance-fest by addressing the qualities of his adoptive father, Antoninus Pius, and of the gods. Antoninus is quite a guy, and Marcus spends a lot of time tallying up his virtues. He's gentle, he's a good listener, and he's concerned with the common good. As a man of power, Antoninus never required his inferiors to dote on him. Rather, he gave them time off to be with their families or to pursue their own interests. Antoninus was also a good \"steward\" of the Empire, not squandering its resources. Antoninus was very much in control of himself and kept himself indifferent to the advantages of his position--something very important to Marcus--so that he was unaffected by their loss. We learn that Antoninus was prone to migraines, but that he sprang back from illness immediately. This is due, in part, to his ability to remain unchanged, no matter what life throws at him. Marcus admires the fact that Antoninus rides the middle line, neither indulging nor refraining from enjoyment, never getting too worked up about anything, never getting ambitious. As Marcus moves into his discussion of the gods, the tone becomes one of gratitude rather than admiration. Marcus mentions how lucky he is to have been given a good family and not to have screwed up too badly in his life. Marcus is also grateful for his delayed sexual experience, which he thinks has kept him out of mischief. Marcus is especially glad to have had a father who kept him simple and who taught him to spurn the pomp of the court, which might have overtaken him. Along these lines, Marcus is also super happy not to have been obsessed with rhetoric. As a result, his speech and thinking are neither fancy nor overbearing. Marcus feels that his ability to live the life of reason has kept him in communication with the gods and brings him inspiration. If he ever fails to live the good life, it is his fault, not the gods'. Just to make sure we understand, Marcus tells us that he's grateful for his sexual timidity. He's especially glad that he never indulged with either his male or female slaves. Marcus is grateful to the gods that he has money, so that he can always help someone out of financial distress if he wants to. Money has also allowed him to hire the best tutors for his children. Finally, Marcus is thankful for his lovely, submissive wife, Faustina. He is also thankful for all the help the gods have sent to him through dreams.", "analysis": ""}