{"name": "Book 11", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201025193428/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/meditations/summary/book-11", "summary": "Marcus describes the rational soul as a completely self-determining thing: it observes, defines and works for itself. The rational soul also contemplates the entire universe and sees the motion of the Whole--how it changes and regenerates itself. It observes the cyclical nature of life. The rational soul also has lots of good qualities, like truthfulness and love of neighbor. Marcus reminds himself how good it is to take everything down to its component parts so that he will know how to properly value it--which is to say, not at all. Marcus thinks that a soul willing to leave the body is the best thing ever. But the soul has to be gracious about it--not like the stubborn Christians, who die in defiance of the Romans. Marcus tells himself that doing good for the good of the community is its own reward. Marcus's only real job is to be a good man, and that can only be achieved by adhering to philosophical principles. Tragedies were made for the stage so that we can see just how bad things can get and still be the lot of humanity. Marcus also finds that there are some \"useful sayings\" to be found in such plays and includes some here. Comedies, however, are of questionable usefulness. Marcus analyzes each period of comedic drama and finds that only Old Comedy offers anything educational. Middle and New Comedy are too newfangled, too realistic for Marcus. Marcus exults that he is in the perfect line of work to practice philosophy. Marcus uses the analogy of a branch cut from a tree to illustrate what happens when a man cuts himself off from society by unsocial behavior. But, unlike a tree, humans have the ability to \"re-graft\" themselves back onto their communities--and that's gift given to him from the gods. However, a re-grafted person is not the same as he or she was before the rift. And too many instances of separation make it more difficult for a person to be successfully reconciled. Marcus says that he has to keep his eye out for two things: 1) people who will knock him off his destined path, and 2) becoming angry with these people for doing this. It's Marcus's duty to maintain equilibrium on both fronts, since anger against his countrymen would lead him to social isolation. Marcus reasons that the nature of the Whole is more beautiful than any artistic endeavor. Universal nature sets a scale of nature in place, making the lower subservient to higher beings. This also sets up a just society, since it encourages higher beings not to worry about lower ones. Marcus claims that external things can't invade the inner sanctum of the mind--unless a person allows them to. Marcus recommends to himself to turn off his judgment of the external so that it no longer bothers him. The soul retains its purity and tranquility if it occupies its own space and doesn't let external things influence it, but keeps its focus on truth. Marcus addresses the issue of reputation and judgment by his colleagues. He tells himself he shouldn't care what other people think of him as long as he remains a good man. And no matter what, he'll mind his manners and be gentle with those who speak ill of him. In this way, he can't be harmed, since he is doing everything that a man should do. More disdain for those around Marcus, who act hypocritically for personal gain. Marcus compares the honest man with the man that has intense body odor: you can \"detect the aura\" when you pass him. Eek. He means to say that virtue is easy to spot. Those who fake honesty are the most treacherous of companions. Marcus reminds himself that he's just got to do the best he can in his life. Marcus reiterates the importance of not forming judgments about things that happen; this way, he will prevent himself from magnifying any misfortune he may have. Things will also be easier if Marcus remembers that he will die soon, and none of these annoyances will follow him to his grave. For now, Marcus has to focus on what belongs to his rational nature and act on that. Again, Marcus emphasizes the importance of breaking stuff down. It's important to figure out what it is, how it is going to change, how long it will last, etc. Marcus is going to give a step-by-step on how to deal with anger and return to his rational self: 1) Marcus should remember that we were all born for the good of each other, that there is a social hierarchy in place, and that he was born to be the leader. 2) Marcus should consider the source. Most of the time, the people angering him just aren't worth the time. 3) If his critics are right, Marcus shouldn't whine. If they're wrong, then he can't be mad at them, because they are ignorant. And clearly, no one likes to be ignorant. Bless their hearts. 4) Marcus tells himself to remember that he isn't perfect, either. That should make him feel better about the idiocy of others. 5) Are the people annoying him really doing the wrong thing? Or is Marcus just being judgmental in unhelpful ways? What if it's part of the universal plan? 6) Human life is measly and everyone involved will soon be dead. That should make Marcus feel better. 7) Marcus confesses that he's only angry because of his own perception of the situation. He should stop being so judgy; no harm has really been done to him. 8) Marcus says that he's only upset because of his emotional response. The original cause is barely responsible for it. 9) Marcus can curb his anger by reeducating the morons who upset him in the first place. That would be much better than throwing them to the lions. Marcus tells himself to keep these nine helpful hints in mind the next time he's tempted to get angry. He reminds himself how desirable it is to remain calm. If Marcus can control his emotional response, he will be in a position of power. And a cool man is a more manly man, considering that this is closer to what nature intended. Anger is also a sign of weakness, just like the acknowledgment of pain. And one more tip : it's utterly stupid to expect bad men to behave well. Why be surprised when they act up and annoy you? Still, it's Marcus's job to put a stop to bad behavior, since it may in fact harm others. Marcus identifies four things that can dement the directing mind and must at all costs be avoided. He recommends four antidotes: 1) Check unnecessary mental images at the door; 2) Ask whether it is for the common good; 3) Don't say what you don't mean; 4) Never give in to the body. Marcus explains that people have contradictory elements at work in them. Some rise, some sink according to their natures. In this, they do the work of the Whole. Only the intellect can work against nature--but to do so is a rebellion against the Whole. This happens when it fusses at the Things That Happen. The rational mind has two goals: to act justly toward people and to respect the gods. Man must have a constant aim in life, and for Marcus, it's always the good of the community. If he focuses all his energies on that, he will be a steady fellow. Marcus alludes to Aesop's fable about the town mouse and the country mouse. He wags his finger at those who behave irrationally out of fear and self-importance. Marcus refers to Socrates's \"bogies\" or superstitious beliefs to frighten kiddos. Marcus remembers the hospitality of the Spartans. More memories of fine etiquette: Socrates once declined an invitation to visit Archelaus of Macedon because he would never be able to return the favor. From Epicurus: remember the lives of the virtuous, as examples for living. From the Pythagoreans: check out the sky at dawn. Contemplate the order and beauty of the stars. Marcus recalls the humiliation of Socrates at the hand of his wife, Xanthippe, who left him in his underclothes with no coat. Marcus reminds himself that you have to be a student before you can be a teacher. Marcus quotes a fragment of poetry that says he is a slave with no voice. Marcus includes a quote from Homer's Odyssey, from the moment when Odysseus celebrates victory over the Cyclops Polyphemus. Marcus quotes from Hesiod's Works and Days, in which the poet does much handwringing about the loss of respect for elders. Marcus talks about the irrationality of looking for something out of season. In this case, it's for a child when the possibility is gone. More Horrible Advice for Parents, courtesy of Epictetus: when you kiss your child goodnight, remind yourself that he or she might me dead in the morning. Marcus follows Epictetus in believing this isn't morbid; it's just reality. More truths from Epictetus, this time involving grapes and raisins to illustrate change that doesn't obliterate. Epictetus on will: no one can take yours away from you. Epictetus on impulse: make sure that it's for the common good and that the ends justify the means. One last bit from Epictetus: the stakes for the game of philosophy are high, since it is about how a person should live his or her life. Marcus includes a short dialogue from Socrates in which Socrates questions his students about what type of soul they would like to have: rational or irrational. Guess which they choose?", "analysis": ""}