{"name": "Chapter V", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411031822/https://www.gradesaver.com/turn-of-the-screw/study-guide/summary-chapters-5-8", "summary": "Mrs. Grose rushes outside the house, where she meets the governess, who is now pale with shock, and demands to know what is wrong with her. No longer desiring to protect Mrs. Grose from her knowledge, the governess tells her that through that same window, she saw something much worse and more frightening - a man looking in. Prompted by Mrs. Grose's questions, she says she does not know who he is nor where he has gone but that she has seen him before in the tower. The housekeeper demands to know if the man was a stranger and if so why she had not been told. The governess affirms her suspicions and suggests that now that Mrs. Grose has guessed - which Mrs. Grose interjects she has not - she'll tell her. She tells her she has seen the man in the tower and in the spot in which they stand. Responding to Mrs. Grose's questions, she says that no, he was not a gentleman, nor was he from the town - rather, \"he's a horror. At that Mrs. Grose suggests leaving for church, but the governess says that she cannot leave the children at this time because she is afraid of the man she saw. Mrs. Grose, upon learning that she saw the man in the tower at the same time of day, suggests that it was nearly dark, but the governess insists she saw him clearly. She tries to send the housekeeper off to church, but instead, Mrs. Grose asks if she fears for the children. Though she says she was afraid, she ran out after him because she has her \"duty\" to protect the children. The governess then describes the man to Mrs. Grose. He's like nobody\" with curly red hair, a pale long face, red whiskers, arched eyebrows, small sharp eyes, a large mouth with thin lips - like an actor and not a gentleman. He is handsome but dressed in someone else's clothes, without a hat. At this, Mrs. Grose exclaims in recognition: It is Peter Quint, the master's valet, who was at Bly with the master the previous year. He never wore a hat, and while he was there the master's waistcoats were missing. He remained on, in charge, after the master left. And, Mrs. Grose concludes, Quint is dead.", "analysis": "This chapter is the most problematic for those who wish to argue that the governess is mad. Mrs. Grose's immediate recognition of Peter Quint from the governess's description seems to offer affirmative evidence that the governess has seen a ghost. The detailed description seems to preclude the possibility of misrecognition and explains the man's ability to appear suddenly, without barriers to entrance or exit. This is the first time the governess considers the possibility of a ghost, and it is clear that she has not consciously considered it previously. Mrs. Grose's revelation that Quint is dead comes as a great shock to both narrator and reader. Critics who favor reading the governess as mad and the ghost as figments of her imagination offer various suggestions for circumnavigating this textual obstacle. On suggestion is that the governess had heard a description of or story about Quint while in town sometime and offered it up knowing that Mrs. Grose would confirm it. Others argue that Mrs. Grose, resenting the governess's intrusion into Bly and deliberately attempting to drive her mad, would have identified any man she described as the dead valet. The specifics of the man's appearance, however, also have another possible origin - in the study of human physiognomy in the nineteenth century. In other words, the man the governess describes fits the stereotype of the sexually frightening man popularized by pseudo-science and literature of her day. In her sexual hysteria, she imagines precisely the image that would represent her greatest fears - an image that in its specificity seems to accord with Quint's appearance. According to the pseudo-science of physiognomy, the man's \"straight good features\" and handsome appearance suggest he is a cad. More importantly, red hair, especially curly red hair, has existed as a sign of evil all the way back to the Bible, to depictions of a red-haired Satan in human form, and to the belief that Judas was a redhead. Red hair was also associated in the nineteenth century with lechery. The sharp, small eyes illustrate the man's sexuality and wickedness, and his arched eyebrows show him to be proud. The shape of his mouth shows him to be cruel. James himself was aware of theories of physiognomy, and while the governess herself had most likely not read scientific treatises on the subject, she has already proved herself to be familiar with the literature of her day. One such character is Fagin, in Dicken's Oliver Twist, which had appeared serialized in the months before the governess accepted her position at Bly. Likewise, this sort of physiognomic cliche of a villain proliferates in the Gothic fiction with which she was familiar. Thus, James simultaneously draws upon a rich tradition of villains defined by their appearance - a tradition which includes The Canterbury Tales Wife of Bath and Gulliver's Travels' Yahoos - but uses the existence of that tradition within the story. The governess, unable to acknowledge her sexual desire for her employer, projects the image of a stereotypical sexual threatening male - a man who just happens to wear clothing similar to employer. The governess's initial description, \"He's like nobody,\" demonstrates his air of unreality and suggests that he is possibly a hallucination - or a ghost. The governess has already mentioned her well-founded fear at seeing a strange man on the property. That he \"only peeps,\" as Mrs. Grose observes, should come as a relief to her. However, his peeping represents a threat to her control and authority. The governess has assumed a subjective position as head of the household at Bly. By constructing her with his gaze, both from the tower and through the window, Quint threatens to undermine the governess's subjectivity. James's familiarity with spirit phenomena also play a part. Mrs. Grose and the governess's exchange about how the man got in - or out - of the tower echoes the statement given to the Society for Psychical Research about a woman, alone in a house with two children, who reports seeing two ghosts, a man and a woman, and who, when discussing the incident with another woman, wonders how the man got in - or more importantly, how he got out"}