{"name": "Chapter VI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210411031822/https://www.gradesaver.com/turn-of-the-screw/study-guide/summary-chapters-5-8", "summary": "The governess is so shocked that she must lie down for an hour. After that, she and Mrs. Grose don't go to church but rather have their own \"service\" of tears, prayers and promises to each other in the schoolroom. Though Mrs. Grose has not seen anything, she does not question the governess's sanity but defers to her judgment. They decide to \"bear things together,\" and the governess is certain she can protect Miles and Flora. As they go over the sighting, the governess expresses her sudden certainty that Quint was looking for Miles and that Quint wants to appear to the children. She recalls being sure she would see the ghost again but is willing even to sacrifice herself to protect the children. She tells Mrs. Grose she finds it strange that the children have never at all mentioned Quint. Mrs. Grose says that Flora does not know that he is dead, but Miles, whom the governess promises not ask, was \"great friends\" with Quint. Quint liked to play with Miles and was, in the words of Mrs. Grose \"much to free\" with him and with \"every one. The governess considers the household servants but cannot think of any stories she has heard. There are no frightening legends attached to Bly. Just at midnight, as Mrs. Grose is about to leave, the governess demands to know if Quint was \"definitely and admittedly bad. Mrs. Grose reveals that the master did not know that he was, and because he did not like complaints, she never told him. Quint, who was supposedly staying at the country house for his health, was given complete control over its inhabitants - including the children, which leads Mrs. Grose to break into tears. In the following days, the governess worries that there is something Mrs. Grose has not told her and thinks about Quint's death. He had been found dead on the road to the village, and is believed, after an inquest, to have died by accident after slipping down an icy hill while drunk. There is also much gossip about his secrets and vices. The governess is able to find happiness thinking about her heroism in protecting the children. Determined to keep them from seeing anything she has, she engages in a watchfulness over them \"that might well, had it continued too long, have turned into something like madness. She is saved from that, she says, by encountering proof. One afternoon, she leaves Miles reading in the house, and goes with Flora to the lake on the property. As she sews and Flora plays, she becomes aware, without looking, that there is another person present across the lake. She prepares her reaction - hoping the person is the postman or a messenger - while staring at her sewing and then looks over at Flora, worried that she will see. Suddenly turning her back to the water, Flora attempts to stick a piece of wood into a hole in another flat piece to make a boat with a mast. The governess stares at her intent efforts for several minutes before looking up across the lake.", "analysis": "With her need to lie down after Mrs. Grose's news, the governess illustrates the state of her mental deterioration. The hour she takes to do so also functions as a power play in the power struggle between her and Mrs. Grose. The housekeeper must wait until the governess feels better to discuss the revelation of the ghost with her. The class dynamics at play in the relationship between these two women provide insight into Mrs. Grose's behavior. The governess speaks of Mrs. Grose's \"deference,\" despite talk which might lead others to question her sanity. As a servant speaking to the person who has been put in charge of the household, Mrs. Grose is not able to politely confront or contradict the governess. Indeed, she could not even bring herself to act against Quint, who is lower in class than the governess, despite what she seems to feel was despicable behavior. Quint's class, too, plays a part in the governess's aborrence of him. Quint was a valet - a servant. His usurpation of the master's power, though done with permission, offends her class-conscious Victorian sensibilities. That valet Quint spent time with Miles seems to upset her even more than the realization that Quint is now a ghost. In part, this reaction may proceed from a subconscious recognition of her commonality with Quint. In her imaginings about her master, she too has hoped to transcend the class into which she was born. Likewise, her exultation in her rich physical surroundings at Bly and her power in the household are eerily similar to that for which she condemns in Quint. Much has been made of Mrs. Grose's statement that Quint was \"much too free. We will see that, in part, she refers to Miss Jessel, the former governess, with whom he had an affair. But Mrs. Grose also speaks specifically of Quint being too free with Miles. She may simply mean that Miles association with this uncouth servant was detrimental to his development as a little gentleman. Or, some might argue, she means free in the same - sexual - sense. The contrast between the inclinations of Mrs. Grose and the governess becomes readily apparent in this chapter. Mrs. Grose protests that she could not act against Quint's influence because the children had been placed in his charge, rather than hers, and that she preferred not to complain to the master because he was \"terribly short with anything of that kind. In other words, she is ineffective because of the inconvenience action would have caused her. The governess, in contrast, seeks a more active role than is traditionally available to her as a woman. Her desire to protect the children on her own is born of a self-congratulatory impulse and the belief that by keeping worries from her employer, she will gain his love. The sexual preoccupations of the governess become noticeable in a psychoanalytic reading of the scene on the beach. She has no true evidence that anyone else is present and before she looks to see if her \"knowledge\" that third person is present is correct, she looks at Flora. The little girl is attempting to jam a long thin \"mast\" into a hole in another piece of wood to make a boat. Some critics read this as evidence of Flora's sexual confusion as she approaches puberty. She attempts to take an active masculine role with the phallic mast but her attempts are unsuccessful as a result of Victorian gender roles and her imperfect role model in the governess - a woman who seeks power but in doing so must deny her sexuality. Even if one does not accept that Freudian reading, it is significant that the governess observes the child engage in this play - which may be innocent and unknowing but which the governess may, consciously or subconsciously, interpret as sexual and threatening to the innocence of her charge - before looking up to see just who watches from across the lake"}