{"name": "act 2, Scene 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419164219/https://www.gradesaver.com/richard-ii/study-guide/summary-act-2", "summary": "The Queen is upset that Richard has been forced to go to Ireland, and misses his presence. Bushy tries to comfort her, but is interrupted by Green with the news that Bolingbroke has landed in the north. To make things even worse, he further tells her that Northumberland, Northumberland's son Harry Percy, and several other noblemen have joined the rebels. York, left behind to manage the kingdom in Richard's absence, arrives dressed in battle garments. He is so old that he is not sure he can defend the throne from Bolingbroke's army. Here am I, left to underprop his land, / Who, weak with age, cannot support myself\". York orders his servingman to go to his sister, the Duchess of Gloucester, and ask her for a thousand pounds. The servingman informs him that his sister died only an hour ago, and therefore cannot help him. York, completely distraught by so many problems at once, tries to muster an army with the few forces he has at his disposal. He orders some armor to be brought from his own estate, and begs the few remaining nobles to lend him their men. Green and Bushy decide to run away to Bristol Castle and seek refuge there, for they know that they will be killed if captured by Bolingbroke. Bagot is the only noble who chooses to instead go to Richard's army, which is still en route to Ireland", "analysis": "Much like in Richard III the older generation relies on curses to influence the plot. In this play, it is Gaunt who predicts, much like Queen Margaret in Richard III, that \"Methinks I am a prophet new-inspired, / And thus, expiring, do foretell of him. / His rash, fierce blaze of riot cannot last, / for violent fires soon burn out themselves\" . The impotence of the older characters is thus overcome by their ability to foresee the events in the play. Richard's inability to listen to Gaunt will in fact lead to his downfall. Gaunt informs Richard that he will dethrone himself. \"Which art possessed now to depose thyself\" . The issue of hereditary rights coupled with political reality is portrayed very strongly throughout this act. In Richard's absence, York alludes to the fact that he represents the king, which is intended to be enough to demand immediate loyalty from Bolingbroke. This relates to the theme of \"the king is dead, long live the king,\" an expression which signifies the political aspect of the king rather than the physical. However, Shakespeare cleverly uses this phrase not with Richard, but with Bolingbroke, thus foreshadowing his future assumption of the throne. After Gaunt's death, Northumberland says, \"Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.\" Ross replies, \"And living too, for now his son is Duke\" . The use of this phrase in connection with Bolingbroke alludes to the fact that Bolingbroke will become king. Many critics have remarked on the use of anamorphism in Richard II. An anamorphism is a painting which shows different images when looked at from different perspectives. Bushy tells the Queen that, \"Like perspectives, which, rightly gazed upon,/ Show nothing but confusion; eyed awry,/ Distinguish form\" . The anamorphism was often considered a Renaissance invention which encouraged speculation about the \"correct\" way of viewing something. It is interesting to note that is is the Queen's perspective which is correct in the end, possibly alluding to the fact that the male view of the world leaves out an entire realm of perception. Language again emerges as a fundamental part of this play, most specifically when Northumberland tells Bolingbroke, \"And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, / making the hard way sweet and delectable\" . Bolingbroke gradually becomes more eloquent as the play progresses, a necessary attribute if he is to become king. This will emerge even more strongly once Bolingbroke becomes Henry IV, at which point language and ceremony, both initially rejected by him, will become essential to his ability to rule. Yet a final instance of foreshadowing in the this act is given in 2.4. The Welsh captain leaves with his men, convinced that Richard has been killed already. The omens of the heavens, or the astrology, has convinced the Welsh that a king must die. Salisbury tries to convince the captain to remain, but finally gives up and remarks that for Richard, \"Thy sun sets weeping in the lonely west\" . The sun represents the emblem of the King of England, and thus this is a direct allusion to the fact that Richard will presently lose the throne."}