{"name": "act 2, Scene 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419164219/https://www.gradesaver.com/richard-ii/study-guide/summary-act-2", "summary": "The Earl of Salisbury pleads with a Welsh captain to remain with his army rather than return to Wales. The men are waiting for the arrival of Richard's army so that they can attack Ireland together. The captain tells Salisbury that there have been omens indicating that the king will soon fall or die, and that he is therefore not needed anymore. Salisbury laments the fact that Richard's glory is rapidly disintegrating", "analysis": "Much like in Richard III the older generation relies on curses to influence the plot. In this play, it is Gaunt who predicts, much like Queen Margaret in Richard III, that \"Methinks I am a prophet new-inspired, / And thus, expiring, do foretell of him. / His rash, fierce blaze of riot cannot last, / for violent fires soon burn out themselves\" . The impotence of the older characters is thus overcome by their ability to foresee the events in the play. Richard's inability to listen to Gaunt will in fact lead to his downfall. Gaunt informs Richard that he will dethrone himself. \"Which art possessed now to depose thyself\" . The issue of hereditary rights coupled with political reality is portrayed very strongly throughout this act. In Richard's absence, York alludes to the fact that he represents the king, which is intended to be enough to demand immediate loyalty from Bolingbroke. This relates to the theme of \"the king is dead, long live the king,\" an expression which signifies the political aspect of the king rather than the physical. However, Shakespeare cleverly uses this phrase not with Richard, but with Bolingbroke, thus foreshadowing his future assumption of the throne. After Gaunt's death, Northumberland says, \"Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.\" Ross replies, \"And living too, for now his son is Duke\" . The use of this phrase in connection with Bolingbroke alludes to the fact that Bolingbroke will become king. Many critics have remarked on the use of anamorphism in Richard II. An anamorphism is a painting which shows different images when looked at from different perspectives. Bushy tells the Queen that, \"Like perspectives, which, rightly gazed upon,/ Show nothing but confusion; eyed awry,/ Distinguish form\" . The anamorphism was often considered a Renaissance invention which encouraged speculation about the \"correct\" way of viewing something. It is interesting to note that is is the Queen's perspective which is correct in the end, possibly alluding to the fact that the male view of the world leaves out an entire realm of perception. Language again emerges as a fundamental part of this play, most specifically when Northumberland tells Bolingbroke, \"And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, / making the hard way sweet and delectable\" . Bolingbroke gradually becomes more eloquent as the play progresses, a necessary attribute if he is to become king. This will emerge even more strongly once Bolingbroke becomes Henry IV, at which point language and ceremony, both initially rejected by him, will become essential to his ability to rule. Yet a final instance of foreshadowing in the this act is given in 2.4. The Welsh captain leaves with his men, convinced that Richard has been killed already. The omens of the heavens, or the astrology, has convinced the Welsh that a king must die. Salisbury tries to convince the captain to remain, but finally gives up and remarks that for Richard, \"Thy sun sets weeping in the lonely west\" . The sun represents the emblem of the King of England, and thus this is a direct allusion to the fact that Richard will presently lose the throne."}