{"name": "Chapter 17", "summary": "Chapter 17: The Flight of Two Owls  Clifford and Hepzibah flee the house of the seven gables, worried that they will be implicated in the death of Judge Pyncheon. They walk along the village streets, fading into the gloomy background of the overcast day, noticed by no one. Hepzibah feels as if she is living in a nightmare, but Clifford has never seemed more youthful or alive; the death of the Judge has left him feeling liberated and elated. They board a train, and an old gentleman sitting on the other side of their passenger car strikes up a conversation with Clifford. He remarks that it is a poor day to travel and would be better spent inside near a fireplace. Clifford, however, disagrees, arguing that the \"admirable invention of the railroad\" will \"do away with those stale ideas of home and fireside, and substitute something better. The old man disagrees, and Clifford begins to speak at length. He outlines his belief that mankind moves in an \"ascending spiral,\" where previous ideas are revived and reformed. In this case, the advent of the railroad will allow mankind to return to the nomadic culture of its primitive era, and will prevent people from becoming \"prisoner for life in brick, and stone, and old worm-eaten timber. Clifford becomes very animated and almost youthful during this lecture. He goes on to suggest that houses, particularly those created by people guilty of something, can visit old curses on future generations. Clifford describes a \"hypothetical\" house, with seven gables, where a dead man sits in the parlor. He says, \"I could never flourish there, nor be happy,\" and claims it would be a relief if this house were torn down or destroyed. He hopes for a more \"nomadic\" future, where houses are out of daily use. He also believes that a more spiritual age is approaching, and speaks on the unifying nature of the telegraph, which he believes will serve to make the world smaller by allowing lovers to talk over long distances. He deplores, however, the ability of the telegraph to aid in hunting down criminals, because it prevents them from being able to escape their crimes and start afresh, robs them of their rights, and deprives them of a \"city of refuge. The old man becomes very embarrassed and suspicious during Clifford's tirade. Clifford and Hepzibah get off the train at a lonely way station, where Clifford's strength leaves him. Exhausted, Clifford tells Hepzibah to do with him as she will", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210211164251/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/sevengables/section10/"}