{"name": "Chapter 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-8", "summary": "Matthew Cuthbert enjoys the ride to the train station, except for when he comes across women and has to nod at them--he is extremely shy around women besides his sister Marilla and Mrs. Rachel. When Matthew reaches the station, there is no train there and nobody on the platform except a young girl. Matthew asks the stationmaster when the train will be arriving; the stationmaster responds that the train has already come and that the little girl was dropped off for him. Matthew says that he was supposed to be picking up an orphan boy, and the stationmaster says that he had better talk to the girl about what happened. Matthew is very scared to talk to the girl, but he walks over to her anyway. She is wearing ugly and ill-fitting clothing and has bright red hair in two braids. Her face is thin, white, and freckled, with large gray-green eyes. The girl realizes that Matthew is there to take her home and greets him maturely, if quite verbosely. She tells Matthew that she was vividly imagining what she would do if he didn't come to pick her up. Matthew decides he must take the child home for the night since it is late and she has nowhere else to go. He offers to carry her bag for her, but the girl responds that she would rather carry it herself because \"I've got all my worldly goods in it, but it isn't heavy\". On the way to Matthew's buggy, the girl talks nonstop. She tells him how much she likes driving and how she is looking forward to having a home and belonging to someone after four months in the orphan asylum. When they begin driving back to Green Gables, the girl is quiet for a while, and then she begins to chatter again. She is highly imaginative and interested in nature and beauty. Matthew lets the girl carry the conversation by herself, for the most part, responding briefly when she asks him questions. However, the narrator notes that \"Matthew, much to his own surprise, was enjoying himself\". The girl expresses that she is glad to talk to someone who doesn't tell her to talk less or not to use big words. The girl changes the subject to her red hair, saying it is something that causes her great distress and that she cannot even escape by using her imagination. She is distracted from this conversation by the beauty of nature yet again, which causes her to exclaim and then fall into rapturous silence. When the girl finally has the ability to speak again, she tells Matthew that the avenue they are driving down should be called the White Way of Delight. She informs him that she likes to make up beautiful, fitting names for people and places. As they get close to Green Gables, the girl asks about the name of a pond and finds out that it is called Barry's Pond after the family that lives beside it. Matthew informs her that the family has a little girl named Diana who is eleven, the age of the orphan girl. The girl is scared to go over a bridge in the buggy, but she faces her fears by closing her eyes. When they approach the top of a hill overlooking much of Avonlea, the girl says she will guess which house is Green Gables. She guesses correctly and says that she was able to do so because \"as soon as I saw it I felt it was home\". Matthew is uneasy with the girl's declarations of happiness at having a home, knowing that they plan to send her back to the orphan asylum and get a boy to replace her. He thinks to himself that he is glad Marilla will be the one to break the news to the girl. Matthew and the girl arrive at Green Gables and walk into the house", "analysis": "L. M. Montgomery makes an interesting and impactful choice by starting Anne of Green Gables with a chapter from the perspective of Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Mrs. Rachel Lynde is a supporting character throughout the novel, but most of the chapters follow the actions of Anne, Marilla, and Matthew. Montgomery's choice to start with a chapter about Mrs. Rachel Lynde acclimates the reader to the culture of Avonlea, particularly the fact that things that are out of the norm will quickly be noticed and gossiped about. This is important for the reader to have in mind when Anne arrives in Avonlea a few chapters later because Anne is sensitive about feeling different from others and wants more than anything to feel accepted. Marilla and Mrs. Rachel Lynde display a variety of prejudices when discussing Marilla and Matthew's decision to take in an orphan boy. Mrs. Rachel Lynde feels that taking in an orphan is a bad idea and tells multiple stories about orphans causing havoc in their adopted families' homes. Those who end up as orphans are likely those from lower-income backgrounds since their parents may not be able to afford consistent health care or work dangerous jobs. Therefore, the reader may infer that Mrs. Rachel Lynde believes lower-income people are more likely to cause problems in a community. Marilla also shows prejudice against those from other countries, a practice known as xenophobia. Marilla says, \"There's never anybody to be had but those stupid, half-grown little French boys...no London street Arabs for me...Give me a native born at least...I'll feel easier in my mind and sleep sounder at nights if we get a born Canadian\" . It is likely that Marilla holds these views due to the fact that she has seldom traveled outside of Avonlea and may find the customs of foreigners unfamiliar. Montgomery causes readers to feel sympathy for Anne through dramatic irony as Anne and Matthew travel from the train station to Green Gables. The reader knows that Marilla and Matthew wanted an orphan boy to help Matthew on the farm, and Matthew thinks to himself that they will have to send her back to the orphanage. However, Anne does not know this and speaks with happiness and awe, telling Matthew, \"I've never had a real home since I can remember. It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home\" . Experiencing this irony makes the moment when Anne finds out she will be able to stay at Green Gables all the more impactful for the reader. From the beginning of her time in Avonlea, Anne is very self-conscious of her appearance making her different, which she sees as a negative thing. Anne asks Marilla whether they would want to keep her at Green Gables if she were beautiful and had brown hair, and she later tells Marilla that she doesn't pray to God because she thinks he gave her red hair on purpose. Since red hair is the rarest hair color, Anne has likely felt that she is different from everyone throughout her life. Having this difference on top of the neglect she faced due to being an orphan created a desire to try to fit in as much as possible. However, though Anne wants to fit in so that she will be accepted, it is actually her differences that make so many people in Avonlea love her. Anne has developed many defense mechanisms due to her traumatic and tumultuous childhood. Anne's main defense mechanism is using her imagination to distract her from sad situations. This serves her well much of the time, but sometimes it seems as if she were almost dissociating from reality, such as when the narrator says, \"Anne became more and more abstracted, eating mechanically, with her big eyes fixed unswervingly and unseeingly on the sky outside the window\" . Anne also elects not to experience certain things so that she will not have to go through the pain of missing them. As she explains, \"There is no use in loving things if you have to be torn from them, is there?\"  These defense mechanisms help Anne stay resilient through hard times, but as she settles into Green Gables and matures over the following years, she must learn to trust that she will not be abandoned again."}