{"name": "Chapter 38", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-31-38", "summary": "Marilla comes home in a dejected state from having her eyes checked. The oculist told her that she could go blind in as little as six months; to keep her vision for longer than that, she would have to give up reading and sewing. Anne tries to get Marilla's hopes up about maintaining her vision and reducing her headaches, but Marilla says she won't have anything to live for if she can't read or sew. When Marilla goes to sleep, Anne goes up to her bedroom and cries. She looks out her window and thinks about how much things have changed since she came home from Queen's; the narrator observes that \"before she went to bed there was a smile on her face and peace in her heart\". A few days later, Anne sees Marilla talking to a man from a nearby town. When Anne asks who the man is, Marilla responds that she was discussing selling Green Gables to him. Anne tells Marilla that she shouldn't sell Green Gables because she will stay at home with Marilla instead of going to Redmond College. Anne has already applied to teach at the Avonlea school as well as a school in a nearby town. She expects not to teach in Avonlea since Gilbert will be teaching there, but she says she will stay at Green Gables every night during the warm seasons and will come back on the weekends during winters. Marilla doesn't want Anne to sacrifice her scholarship and ambitions, but Anne says that she has merely changed her ambitions. There is gossip throughout Avonlea about Anne's decision to give up her scholarship. Many people think she is foolish to give it up, though Mrs. Rachel Lynde says it was foolish for a woman to think of receiving so much education in the first place. Anne assures Mrs. Rachel that she will still receive just as much education by studying all the same topics at home. Anne tells Mrs. Rachel that she will be teaching in a nearby town, and Mrs. Rachel informs her that she will actually be teaching in Avonlea because Gilbert told the school trustees to hire Anne instead. The next evening, Anne runs into Gilbert on her way back from visiting Matthew's grave. Anne thanks Gilbert, and Gilbert eagerly asks if they can be friends now after so many years of stubbornness. Anne tells Gilbert that she forgave him long ago. They stand together talking for half an hour, which Marilla notices and comments on when Anne comes back to Green Gables. The book ends with Anne sitting at her bedroom window feeling content that her life is full of aspirations, friendship, and dreams", "analysis": "This section of the book shows just how special Anne is. Not only is she one of the brightest students at the Avonlea school, but she also ties for first place on the entrance exam into Queen's College, which is taken by students from many different towns; on top of that, she goes on to win a scholarship to university, which at least fifty students were competing for. This is especially impressive since Anne had very little formal education before she was eleven. Anne's educational achievements demonstrate a moral of the story: that hard work and healthy rivalry can lead to success, even for people who have faced trauma or other hindrances. Time passes quickly in this final section of Anne of Green Gables. While the previous thirty chapters have described three years of Anne's life, her entire school year at Queen's passes in just three chapters. These chapters show how adaptable Anne is. She makes new friends, maintains her relationships with Marilla, Matthew, and Diana, and excels at her schoolwork. This is likely another positive coping skill that Anne gained due to her traumatic childhood. Because she moved to multiple houses and towns before age eleven, she had to learn how to make new relationships and find things in life to keep her happy and motivated. This is further evidence of the moral that people who have experienced trauma or difficulties can succeed in life. Montgomery uses small symbols to show how Anne has changed Marilla and Matthew over the years she has been in their lives. In particular, Marilla's opinions on beauty and vanity have shifted. For example, Montgomery writes, \"In her own white room, where Marilla had set a flowering house rose on the window sill, Anne looked about her and drew a long breath of happiness\" . This contrasts with Marilla's earlier statements that flowers don't belong indoors and Anne's feelings that the bedroom at Green Gables was too plain and bare. Because beauty and nature have always been important to Anne, they have become important to Marilla, too. Montgomery foreshadows Matthew's death at multiple points in Anne of Green Gables. First, the narrator says that the reason Marilla and Matthew are taking in an orphan boy is to help Matthew with farm work due to his declining health. Then, Marilla discusses Matthew's heart with both Anne and Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Finally, Montgomery heavily foreshadows Matthew's death at the end of Chapter 26 and the beginning of Chapter 27. Chapter 26 ends, \"Anne always remembered the silvery, peaceful beauty and fragrant calm of that night. It was the last night before sorrow touched her life; and no life is ever quite the same again when once that cold, sanctifying touch has been laid upon it\" . This is followed by the chapter title, \"The Reaper Whose Name Is Death\" . This foreshadowing prepares readers--particularly young readers--to cope with the difficult emotions around a central character dying. The end of Anne of Green Gables shows that stubbornness can be a negative and positive quality. Anne's stubbornness prevents her from having a positive relationship with Gilbert throughout their time at the Avonlea school and Queen's College. Anne only makes up with Gilbert after hearing a story from Marilla about how stubbornness led her to break up with Gilbert's father as a young girl. However, stubbornness is also shown to be a good quality through Anne's stubbornness about staying home at Green Gables and caring for Marilla. When Marilla is trying to convince Anne to go to university, Anne responds, \"You can't prevent me. I'm...'obstinate as a mule' as Mrs. Lynde once told me\" . In this case, stubbornness is not a matter of hubris, but rather devotion to a moral obligation."}