{"name": "Chapter 14", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-9-14", "summary": "One evening a few days before the picnic, Marilla asks Anne whether she has seen her amethyst brooch. Anne says that she did see it earlier that day and tried it on, but she put it back on the bureau afterward. Marilla looks for the brooch again and, unable to find it, thinks that Anne is lying about putting it back. She sends Anne to her room until she is ready to confess to having lost the brooch. Marilla tells Matthew about it, who takes Anne's side at first; however, after hearing that Marilla has checked everywhere, he merely thinks that he is glad that he doesn't have to deal with disciplining Anne. Marilla goes up to Anne's room the night before the picnic and tells Anne that she will not get to go to the picnic if she does not confess. Anne is devastated and begs Marilla to let her go, but Marilla stands firm. The next morning, the day of the picnic, Anne confesses to Marilla. She tells Marilla--in a voice that sounds like she is reciting a memorized lesson--that she took the amethyst brooch to play with outside and dropped it into a lake. Marilla becomes very angry and tells Anne she still cannot go to the picnic, as a punishment for her behavior. Anne screams and cries, but Marilla leaves her in the room. Marilla cleans the house all morning to avoid thinking about the situation with Anne. When she goes up to call Anne to lunch, Anne is still crying and says that her heart is broken. Marilla goes downstairs in exasperation and complains to Matthew. However, instead of comforting her, Matthew suggests letting Anne go to the picnic since she is so young and neglected. Marilla says that she can't, especially when it seems that Anne is not actually remorseful for what she did. After lunch, Marilla decides she will mend a shawl that she noticed on Monday had a hole in it. When Marilla pulls out the shawl, she sees the amethyst brooch is caught on it. Marilla immediately goes to Anne's bedroom with the brooch in hand. Anne tells her that she made up a confession to tell Marilla so that she could go to the picnic. Marilla says that they both have things to apologize for, and she says that Anne can go to the picnic. Anne is immediately overjoyed and rushes to get ready. Anne is happy and exhausted when she returns that evening from the picnic. After Anne has gone to bed, Marilla tells Matthew that Anne is hard to understand, but she believes she will turn out all right", "analysis": "In Chapter 9, we again see Anne's sensitivity about her looks when she yells at Mrs. Rachel Lynde after the older woman criticizes Anne's hair, freckles, and skinniness. This pattern will continue to get Anne into trouble throughout the book, such as when she attacks Gilbert at school after he makes fun of her hair, or when she tries to dye her hair black and ends up turning it green. For Anne, someone criticizing her looks is someone pointing out that she is different, and this makes Anne fear that she is unlovable. Anne's argument and apology to Mrs. Rachel Lynde also demonstrate Anne's unique ability to charm adults. First, the narrator says that Marilla is surprised at herself for defending Anne's actions to Mrs. Rachel Lynde, showing that Anne brings out a rare feistiness in Marilla. Though Marilla scolds herself, she finds herself wanting to laugh at Mrs. Rachel Lynde getting a taste of her own medicine. Then, Mrs. Rachel Lynde herself is charmed by Anne when the young girl apologizes. Mrs. Rachel Lynde remarks, \"She certainly is an odd child, but there is something kind of taking about her after all. I don't feel so surprised at you and Matthew keeping her as I did...On the whole, Marilla, I kind of like her\" . Anne's honest and emotional way of interacting with others may take people aback at first, but throughout the novel, almost everyone she meets ends up wanting to be her friend. L. M. Montgomery uses foreshadowing frequently in Anne of Green Gables. One example of this is when Marilla tells Anne, \"I guess Diana'll like you well enough. It's her mother you've got to reckon with. If she doesn't like you it won't matter how much Diana does\" . This quote foreshadows a major conflict later in the book when Diana's mother forbids Diana from being Anne's friend. By using foreshadowing, Montgomery creates tension, suspense, and curiosity throughout the novel. Another example of Montgomery's use of foreshadowing can be seen at the end of Chapter 13. Montgomery introduces the symbol of Marilla's amethyst brooch and specifically says that it \"was Marilla's most treasured possession\" . The narrator also notes that Anne was \"smitten with delighted admiration\"  and begged Marilla to hold it. This foreshadows the conflict between Anne and Marilla in Chapter 14 over whether Anne lost the amethyst brooch. The brooch is an important symbol because it represents Marilla's connection to her family. When Marilla thinks that Anne has lost the brooch, this temporarily ruptures the familial connection the two have been forging. Marilla's maternal feelings toward Anne grow rapidly during this section of the book, but we also see the deficits she has as a parent figure. Marilla tells Matthew that she can't imagine Green Gables without Anne, but she rarely says this kind of statement to Anne since she seems to think it would spoil her. This leads Anne to turn to Matthew for emotional support rather than Marilla. Marilla also has difficulty disciplining Anne. She is conflicted over whether to whip Anne following the conflict with Mrs. Rachel Lynde, and she tells Anne, \"You are the very wickedest girl I ever heard of\"  when she believes Anne lost her brooch. Though Anne does not react to this statement, it is important to remember that she was neglected and felt unloved throughout her childhood, so this kind of statement could confirm her feelings that she does not belong."}