{"name": "Chapter 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-8", "summary": "Marilla is shocked when she finds Matthew has brought home a little girl instead of a little boy. While Marilla and Matthew argue over how this mistake could have happened, the little girl realizes what is happening and begins to cry. Marilla tries to persuade the girl not to cry, and the girl's effusive response causes Marilla to smile. Marilla asks the girl's name. The girl first asks to be called Cordelia, a name she likes more than her own. When Marilla refuses, the girl says that her name is Anne Shirley--specifically, \"Anne\" spelled with an \"E. Marilla asks Anne how it came to pass that she was sent instead of a boy, and Anne reports that Mrs. Spencer had told the asylum that they wanted a girl around eleven years old. Marilla serves dinner, but Anne says that she is too upset to eat. Marilla decides to have Anne sleep in a bedroom in the east gable. Marilla leaves Anne in the room to change into her nightgown. Anne feels upset that the room is so bare in decoration. She changes into her nightgown and buries her face in the pillow on the bed. When Marilla comes to say goodnight, Anne protests that it is not a good night at all. When Marilla goes back downstairs, she finds that Matthew is smoking, which he only does when he is perturbed. Marilla tells Matthew that, the next day, she will go confront Mrs. Spencer about the mix-up and send the girl back to the asylum. Matthew agrees reluctantly, saying that if they were to keep her, they \"might be some good to her\" --and, besides, she is very interesting to talk to. Marilla ends the conversation saying that the girl will not be staying, and they go to bed. Upstairs, Anne cries herself to sleep", "analysis": "L. M. Montgomery makes an interesting and impactful choice by starting Anne of Green Gables with a chapter from the perspective of Mrs. Rachel Lynde. Mrs. Rachel Lynde is a supporting character throughout the novel, but most of the chapters follow the actions of Anne, Marilla, and Matthew. Montgomery's choice to start with a chapter about Mrs. Rachel Lynde acclimates the reader to the culture of Avonlea, particularly the fact that things that are out of the norm will quickly be noticed and gossiped about. This is important for the reader to have in mind when Anne arrives in Avonlea a few chapters later because Anne is sensitive about feeling different from others and wants more than anything to feel accepted. Marilla and Mrs. Rachel Lynde display a variety of prejudices when discussing Marilla and Matthew's decision to take in an orphan boy. Mrs. Rachel Lynde feels that taking in an orphan is a bad idea and tells multiple stories about orphans causing havoc in their adopted families' homes. Those who end up as orphans are likely those from lower-income backgrounds since their parents may not be able to afford consistent health care or work dangerous jobs. Therefore, the reader may infer that Mrs. Rachel Lynde believes lower-income people are more likely to cause problems in a community. Marilla also shows prejudice against those from other countries, a practice known as xenophobia. Marilla says, \"There's never anybody to be had but those stupid, half-grown little French boys...no London street Arabs for me...Give me a native born at least...I'll feel easier in my mind and sleep sounder at nights if we get a born Canadian\" . It is likely that Marilla holds these views due to the fact that she has seldom traveled outside of Avonlea and may find the customs of foreigners unfamiliar. Montgomery causes readers to feel sympathy for Anne through dramatic irony as Anne and Matthew travel from the train station to Green Gables. The reader knows that Marilla and Matthew wanted an orphan boy to help Matthew on the farm, and Matthew thinks to himself that they will have to send her back to the orphanage. However, Anne does not know this and speaks with happiness and awe, telling Matthew, \"I've never had a real home since I can remember. It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming to a really truly home\" . Experiencing this irony makes the moment when Anne finds out she will be able to stay at Green Gables all the more impactful for the reader. From the beginning of her time in Avonlea, Anne is very self-conscious of her appearance making her different, which she sees as a negative thing. Anne asks Marilla whether they would want to keep her at Green Gables if she were beautiful and had brown hair, and she later tells Marilla that she doesn't pray to God because she thinks he gave her red hair on purpose. Since red hair is the rarest hair color, Anne has likely felt that she is different from everyone throughout her life. Having this difference on top of the neglect she faced due to being an orphan created a desire to try to fit in as much as possible. However, though Anne wants to fit in so that she will be accepted, it is actually her differences that make so many people in Avonlea love her. Anne has developed many defense mechanisms due to her traumatic and tumultuous childhood. Anne's main defense mechanism is using her imagination to distract her from sad situations. This serves her well much of the time, but sometimes it seems as if she were almost dissociating from reality, such as when the narrator says, \"Anne became more and more abstracted, eating mechanically, with her big eyes fixed unswervingly and unseeingly on the sky outside the window\" . Anne also elects not to experience certain things so that she will not have to go through the pain of missing them. As she explains, \"There is no use in loving things if you have to be torn from them, is there?\"  These defense mechanisms help Anne stay resilient through hard times, but as she settles into Green Gables and matures over the following years, she must learn to trust that she will not be abandoned again."}