{"name": "Chapter 30", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-30", "summary": "One evening in November, Marilla tells Anne that Miss Stacy has come over to talk to her. Anne chatters for a long time without letting Marilla tell her what Miss Stacy came to talk about. When Marilla says that Miss Stacy came to talk about Anne, Anne gets flustered and confesses to reading a novel during Miss Stacy's history class. Marilla says that Miss Stacy did not come over to talk about this, but rather to discuss Anne joining a class of students studying for the entrance examinations for Queen's teachers college. Anne says that this is her dream but that she doesn't think the family has money for it. Marilla says not to worry about that. Anne is grateful and tells Marilla that she will do her very best to be a credit to her. Marilla reminds Anne that she won't be able to take the entrance exam for a year and a half, but she says it is time to really focus on school. The class of advanced students studying for the entrance exam consists of Anne, Gilbert, Ruby, Jane, Josie, Charlie, and Moody. Diana's parents do not plan to send her to Queen's, so she is not included in the group, which makes both Diana and Anne sad. Anne tells Marilla about the desired professions of her classmates, though she skips talking about Gilbert as usual. The narrator says that Anne and Gilbert's rivalry was now well-known and that Gilbert had reciprocated Anne's coldness ever since she rejected his apology by the pond. Anne still regrets that moment, but, since Gilbert is now cold to her, she is too proud to tell anyone this. The winter in Avonlea passes with Anne and her classmates in focused study. When the spring arrives, focus wanes for all the advanced students. Soon, it is time for summer vacation, and Anne tells Marilla she is putting her books away for the whole summer since it may be \"the last summer I'll be a little girl\". The next afternoon, Mrs. Rachel Lynde comes to Green Gables to see why Marilla had not been at the Aid meeting a few days before. Marilla tells her that \"Matthew had a bad spell with his heart\" and is not supposed to do any heavy work or get excited. Marilla and Mrs. Rachel sit together and discuss how much Anne has matured in the three years she has lived at Green Gables", "analysis": "Miss Stacy is an important character in Anne of Green Gables because she is a double for Anne in many ways. Like Anne, Miss Stacy is a new and different kind of person in Avonlea. Unlike previous teachers at the Avonlea school, Miss Stacy's curriculum includes outdoor exploration, physical education, and writing stories. This is encouraging to Anne who already loves nature and stories, leading her to excel at school. Furthermore, Anne becomes a teacher at the Avonlea school herself at the end of the novel, and she is likely influenced and inspired by Miss Stacy's teaching style. Matthew's relationship with Anne is central in this section of the book. His positive and relaxed attitude with Anne contrasts with his awkward, flustered manner toward Anne's friends and with the shopkeeper in Carmody. This contrast demonstrates to the reader that there is something special about Anne: she can charm and befriend anyone. Matthew also understands Anne better than Marilla does in some ways, as shown in this section. He realizes how much having a pretty dress with puffed sleeves would mean to Anne because it would allow her to fit in with her friends--something Marilla has been too stubborn and moralistic to truly consider. Though Mrs. Rachel Lynde is originally presented as a nosy and judgmental character, in this section of the book it becomes clear that she is also wise and empathetic when it comes to raising children. Earlier in the book, she surprises Marilla--and perhaps the reader--by telling Marilla to let Anne stop going to school for a while. She reasons that Anne will only get in more trouble if she is forced to go to school. In this section, Mrs. Rachel Lynde agrees with Matthew that Anne should be allowed to wear pretty clothes that fit in with other young women in Avonlea, and she states that \"There's no hard and fast method in the world that'll suit every child\" . Anne and Diana's conversation on Anne's birthday shows how girls were constricted by norms of femininity and modesty in the early 20th century. For example, Diana says, \"Alice Bell is only sixteen and she is wearing her  up, but I think it's ridiculous. I shall wait until I'm seventeen\" . Anne is depicted as traditionally feminine in some ways, such as caring about her appearance and clothing, but she also does not conform to some norms of femininity at the time. For example, she is as smart or smarter than all the boys at her school, she is daring and adventurous, and she has no interest in dating boys. Anne's story about Cordelia and Geraldine is used by Montgomery to bring out the themes present in the novel as a whole. Female friendship is at the center of Anne's story, and Anne and Diana's friendship is a central component of Anne of Green Gables. Romance, marriage, and betrayal in the middle of Anne's story call attention to Anne's conflicted feelings about femininity and her relationship with Gilbert. Finally, Anne's story ends with death and insanity, which recalls Anne's traumatic childhood and foreshadows that a death will occur at the end of Anne of Green Gables."}