{"name": "Chapter 26", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200927060003/https://www.gradesaver.com/anne-of-green-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-23-30", "summary": "After the Christmas concert, Anne finds it hard to get back to normal, boring school days. However, as the winter progresses, things do go back to normal, and soon, it is March and time for Anne's birthday. Anne feels very grown-up because she is thirteen, meaning that she is now a teenager. Anne tells Diana on a walk to school that she is trying to be like Mrs. Allan, the minister's wife. The two girls talk about coming milestones, such as being old enough to have a boyfriend at age fifteen and putting one's hair up at age sixteen or seventeen. Anne and Diana switch to talking about school. Miss Stacy often assigns compositions; for this Monday, the students are to write a story out of their own heads. Anne says that she has already written hers and tells Diana the plot, which is about friendship, love, betrayal, and death. Diana is amazed and envious at Anne's imagination, and Anne suddenly has the idea to create a story club where students from the Avonlea school can write stories, read them to one another, and discuss them. When Anne tells Marilla about the story club, Marilla says it is a waste of time. Anne tells Marilla that she is somewhat annoyed that when she shows her stories to adults like Miss Stacy and Aunt Josephine, they find them amusing rather than tragic. However, she feels that she is doing good in the world by cheering up Aunt Josephine, and she reflects again that she is trying to become a good person like Mrs. Allan. Anne says Mrs. Allan told her she used to be mischievous when she was a little girl, and that gave Anne faith that she, too, can grow up to be good", "analysis": "Miss Stacy is an important character in Anne of Green Gables because she is a double for Anne in many ways. Like Anne, Miss Stacy is a new and different kind of person in Avonlea. Unlike previous teachers at the Avonlea school, Miss Stacy's curriculum includes outdoor exploration, physical education, and writing stories. This is encouraging to Anne who already loves nature and stories, leading her to excel at school. Furthermore, Anne becomes a teacher at the Avonlea school herself at the end of the novel, and she is likely influenced and inspired by Miss Stacy's teaching style. Matthew's relationship with Anne is central in this section of the book. His positive and relaxed attitude with Anne contrasts with his awkward, flustered manner toward Anne's friends and with the shopkeeper in Carmody. This contrast demonstrates to the reader that there is something special about Anne: she can charm and befriend anyone. Matthew also understands Anne better than Marilla does in some ways, as shown in this section. He realizes how much having a pretty dress with puffed sleeves would mean to Anne because it would allow her to fit in with her friends--something Marilla has been too stubborn and moralistic to truly consider. Though Mrs. Rachel Lynde is originally presented as a nosy and judgmental character, in this section of the book it becomes clear that she is also wise and empathetic when it comes to raising children. Earlier in the book, she surprises Marilla--and perhaps the reader--by telling Marilla to let Anne stop going to school for a while. She reasons that Anne will only get in more trouble if she is forced to go to school. In this section, Mrs. Rachel Lynde agrees with Matthew that Anne should be allowed to wear pretty clothes that fit in with other young women in Avonlea, and she states that \"There's no hard and fast method in the world that'll suit every child\" . Anne and Diana's conversation on Anne's birthday shows how girls were constricted by norms of femininity and modesty in the early 20th century. For example, Diana says, \"Alice Bell is only sixteen and she is wearing her  up, but I think it's ridiculous. I shall wait until I'm seventeen\" . Anne is depicted as traditionally feminine in some ways, such as caring about her appearance and clothing, but she also does not conform to some norms of femininity at the time. For example, she is as smart or smarter than all the boys at her school, she is daring and adventurous, and she has no interest in dating boys. Anne's story about Cordelia and Geraldine is used by Montgomery to bring out the themes present in the novel as a whole. Female friendship is at the center of Anne's story, and Anne and Diana's friendship is a central component of Anne of Green Gables. Romance, marriage, and betrayal in the middle of Anne's story call attention to Anne's conflicted feelings about femininity and her relationship with Gilbert. Finally, Anne's story ends with death and insanity, which recalls Anne's traumatic childhood and foreshadows that a death will occur at the end of Anne of Green Gables."}