{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 28", "summary": "Chapter 28 Riding in a coach, Jane quickly exhausts her meager money supply and is forced to sleep outdoors. She spends much of the night in prayer, and the following day she begs for food or a job in the nearby town. No one helps her, except for one farmer who is willing to give her a slice of bread. After another day, Jane sees a light shining from across the moors. Following it, she comes to a house. Through the window, Jane sees two young women studying German while their servant knits. From their conversation Jane learns that the servant is named Hannah and that the graceful young women are Diana and Mary. The three women are waiting for someone named St. John. Jane knocks on the door, but Hannah refuses to let her in. Collapsing on the doorstep in anguish and weakness, Jane cries, \"I can but die, and I believe in God. Let me try to wait His will in silence. A voice answers, \"All men must die, but all are not condemned to meet a lingering and premature doom, such as yours would be if you perished here of want. The voice belongs to \"St. John,\" who brings Jane into the house. He is the brother of Diana and Mary, and the three siblings give Jane food and shelter. They ask her some questions, and she gives them a false name: \"Jane Elliott. Analysis : Chapters 27-28  Feeling. clamoured wildly. Oh, comply. it said. soothe him; save him; love him; tell him you love him and will be his. Who in the world cares for you. or who will be injured by what you do. Jane endures her most difficult trials in this section of the book: she resolves to leave Rochester although it pains her deeply, and she is forced to sleep outdoors and go hungry on the moors in her flight from Thornfield. However, this section is also where Jane proves to herself her endurance, her strength of principle, and her ability to forge new friendships. As she tells herself before leaving Thornfield, \"I care for myself. The more solitary, the more friendless, the more unsustained I am, the more I will respect myself. Ultimately this self-interest will make her relationships with others, including her eventual marriage, all the more meaningful and rewarding. Jane's departure from Thornfield is perhaps the most important decision she makes in the novel. In Rochester she found the love for which she had always yearned, and Thornfield was the first real home she ever knew. In fleeing them, Jane leaves a part of herself behind. But living with Rochester as his mistress would require a self-compromise that Jane is not willing to make. Even before she learns of Bertha's existence, Jane senses that in marrying Rochester she risks cementing herself into a position of inequality. She fears that Rochester would objectify her and that by \"marrying above her station\" she would come to the relationship already \"in debt\" to him. Now Jane sees more clearly than ever that a relationship with Rochester would mean the loss of her self-respect, and of her control over her life. Jane cannot bring herself to do what is morally wrong, simply out of weakness of will and emotional neediness. PARAGRAPH>Despite the happiness and the sense of acceptance that Thornfield and Rochester's love offer, Jane knows that staying would be a type of self-imprisonment. Jane must choose between emotional exile and spiritual and intellectual imprisonment. She knows she must flee while she can. Throughout the narrative of Jane's trials, the reader not only gains insight into Jane's personal constitution and character, but also into the society in which she lives. When Jane experiences the plight of the poor, the novel presents us with a bleak glimpse of a society in which the needy are shunned out of tightfistedness and distrust", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210123075639/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/section7/"}