{"name": "Chapter 14", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 14<PARAGRAPH>As the youth awakes, a gray mist is coming in over the fields, bending the first rays of sunlight. Fighting can be heard in the distance. Henry and the rest of the men try to get the last few moments of sleep. The light makes them look like corpses. The youth, in this forest, thinks that he is in a house of the dead. He gradually comes to his senses and sees the scene for what it is. PARAGRAPH>Soon comes the rumbling of drums and a bugle call. Heads begin to move and turn upward. The men curse softly as they are roused. Once an officer calls out, however, the men straighten up. Henry does the same. As he rises, his friend Wilson calls out to him if he is feeling okay. His head feels like a melon. When Wilson tries to examine the bandage in an attempt to help, Henry yells at him to be more careful. He is angry, but Wilson keeps calm. He leads Henry over to get food. PARAGRAPH>As Henry eats, Wilson continues to take care of him. The youth notices how much his friend has changed. He no longer seems concerned with his personal prowess, and he is not angry at little words against him. He is no longer a \"loud soldier\"; he seems reliable and confident. Henry used to think of him as swaggering and headstrong. He wonders at how he seems to have procured wisdom from somewhere. PARAGRAPH>Wilson asks if Henry thinks they will win today. Henry reminds Wilson that yesterday he said he would beat the whole rebel army himself. Wilson replies that he was indeed a bit of a fool \"in those days. Henry informs him of Jim Conklin's death. PARAGRAPH>An argument breaks out between some soldiers. Wilson, now referred to as \"the friend,\" goes over and breaks it up. When he returns, Henry remarks at his change. Wilson replies that it is true that he is different. He tells Henry that the regiment lost half its men the previous day. It was believed that they were dead, but they keep coming back from wherever they had scattered, just like Henry. To this, the youth replies, \"So", "analysis": "For all of Henry's worrying about his return to his regiment, the men who are awake when he arrives welcome him back. Despite this, and because of the constant questioning of the tattered man, Henry makes up a story about getting shot. He still cannot face the reality of his situation, let alone admit it. His childish, arrogant nature is still conspicuous. However, his actions are counter-balanced by the more mature and selfless actions of Wilson, the loud soldier. He takes care of Henry and his wound, trying to make him comfortable, complimenting his toughness, making sure he gets to sleep. The battle has brought out different things in each man.<PARAGRAPH>The relationship and contrast between Henry and Wilson is evidenced by the change in Wilson's denoted name. \"The loud soldier\" is no more and now he is \"the friend.\" Henry, still \"the youth,\" notes that before the battle Wilson was quick to tout his prowess but Wilson has clearly been humbled by what he has seen. Henry, however, has not matured enough. He persists in preserving the secret of his flight. He even yells at Wilson as the latter tries to change his bandages. Wilson remains calm while Henry cannot restrain his own expressions of irritation at small things. He does not recognize that others are glad to see that he is alive. When Wilson talks about troops coming back and how they were thankfully not dead, Henry says, \"so?\" in a very callous way. He has not learned the same lessons that Wilson has because he has not been through the same experiences as his friend. Henry is still stumbling blindly on the path to maturity.<PARAGRAPH>In Wilson's letters, Henry sees weakness rather than an expression of humanity. When he realizes that he still has the letters to Wilson's family handed to him before the battle, Henry does not think to spare his friend humiliation and give them back. Instead, he considers them a token of protection against his own shame. Yes, Henry ran, but he did so without witness , so he can still proclaim to be a man. Wilson, on the other hand, made a show of his fear. Henry feels a budding superiority over the man who has not only fought valiantly in the battle, but who showed him so much kindness. The zenith of his ridiculous, hubristic thoughts come when he deigns to hold the others who fled in contempt because they ran with \"wildness.\" He, on the other hand, fled \"with discretion and dignity.\" We know from the earlier chapter that this is not the case. He fled because others were fleeing. He fled because he too was afraid. And, in reality, he fled wildly. The ironic detachment between Henry and the narrator also signal Henry's lack of self-awareness and childishness.<PARAGRAPH>These chapters drive home one of the most pervasive elements of the novel - that Crane's protagonist is fantastically unlikeable. His immaturity, his pride, his distracted and fragmented manner of thinking, his cowardice, and his superficiality make it difficult for the reader to feel sympathy for him. Many great works of literature feature unlikeable characters -Anna Karenina in the eponymous novel, Raskolnikov in Crime and Punishment, and Mr. Darcy in Pride and Prejudice, for example - but it is still common to develop sympathy for them because of their situation, or discern a redeeming quality or two. Henry Fleming seems to leave a sour taste in the reader's mouth. It may be possible to feel sorry for him that he is trapped in a terrible and brutal war, but that sympathy recedes quickly when his thoughts are made plain.<PARAGRAPH>Henry is full of words for one of the few times in this book while on the trench line. He complains about the generals to his friend and later complains about being marched around only to be led to eventual defeat. The sarcastic man bites off his comments with a simple insult about his battle prowess. This quiets Henry for a time as he suspects his indiscretion is about to come to light. When the moment passes, he begins to rail out again. When Wilson, now mature, tries to say that everything will turn out okay in the end and to think positively, Henry snaps at him that it will not. Henry is now the \"loud soldier,\" speaking shallowly and without maturity.<PARAGRAPH>Again Crane uses powerful images of nature and color metaphors to communicate both Henry's shifting perceptions and the larger theme of nature. The color images, so strong and bellicose before, take on a much more placid feel as Henry takes in the sights caused by the fire in Chapter 13. The dark shadows and sleeping soldiers dominate the forms. However, the same fire that bathes them in warm orange and red is the fire of the regiment. These fires also make the trees overhead seem to be those same colors of war - gray and red. While the regiment is a place for comradeship, it is also a fighting force. This gray and red of the trees foreshadows the events of future chapters. As the youth awakens, the gray mist is back again, with all of its connotations of mystery and conflict. In the early light, Henry thinks that the forest is a house of the dead, but he sees his interpretation was \"not a fact of the present, but a mere prophecy.\" This image signals both the indifference of nature to the men's plight and inevitability of death in war.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420021644/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-red-badge-of-courage/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-16"}