{"name": "Chapter 20", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 20<PARAGRAPH>The men begin to slowly retreat. The lieutenant bellows at them to turn around. Another officer with a red beard yells at the soldiers to shoot into the enemy. Meanwhile, Wilson and Henry have a minor scuffle over who should carry the flag, both wanting to do so out of deference for the other's safety and their own pride. The youth pushes his friend away. PARAGRAPH>The regiment falls back to some trees and soon resumes its path amongst the trunks. Their numbers are depleted and they are receiving heavy fire. Most of them act discouraged, receiving the bullets like a deserved sentence. They feel as if they have tried to conquer an unconquerable thing. The rear of the regiment is still firing the occasional bullet at the enemy lines. The lieutenant has been hit in the arm; this makes him swear even louder. PARAGRAPH>The youth feels anger at the officer that called his regiment mule drivers. He hates the enemy, but hates the man who called them mule drivers even more. Despite all this, Henry keeps the flag erect. He yells at his fellows, but the regiment is running out of energy quickly. The smoke clears slightly, and he sees the enemy troops amassed across the way. They yell at once and fire a rallying shot at the regiment. The way in front seems eternal. Dismay descends on the men in a clouded haze. They begin to panic. Henry stays solid and strong with the flag. One soldier even approaches Henry to say goodbye. PARAGRAPH>The lieutenant, leaning on his sword like a cane, looks as if he feels all is lost. The smoke curls lazily as men hide from bullets. Suddenly, the lieutenant sees that the Rebels are attempting to sneak up on the regiment. The troops fire a quick volley at the approaching foes. Their uniforms were gray and looked new. They were not expecting the resistance that met them. The two groups of soldiers exchange volleys like boxers exchange blows. By ducking and dodging, Henry has glimpses of these men through the smoke. PARAGRAPH>Eventually, less resistance is offered and the troops stop firing. As the smoke clears, they see the ground in front of them, clear of fighters save for some corpses. The regiment had revenged themselves. They feel full of pride, trusting their weapons. And they were men", "analysis": "Though still \"the youth,\" Henry has changed from the day before. At the beginning of the fight that day, he is no longer thinking of the metaphoric monsters and war gods that threaten to eat him up. There is no large metaphor that he gives flesh and life -there is only an opposing army, coming at him in his position with an energy he does not feel and cannot understand. This fills him with rage instead of fear. While he thinks of the enemy as beasts having \"teeth and claws\" and being \"flies sucking insolently at his blood,\" they are still basically men. This is an important change from the day before. Given that the force he faces is of men and not mythical beasts, Henry is more likely to actually be brave. However, at first, his actions in battle were done without thought, consideration, or care. His heroism, if there was any in his actions, was accidental. Only when the lieutenant praises him does Henry begin to take pride in himself; he becomes a symbol of ferocity. Interestingly, this makes the youth fanatical, \"a barbarian,\" and \"a knight.\"<PARAGRAPH>These chapters highlight the difference between the foot soldiers of the novel and the men who inhabit the upper command. Throughout the story there have been occasional complaints from the troops about the general's lack of ability. It is true historically that in the Civil War, the Union army suffered from poor leadership in its upper ranks throughout much of the war. This fact, however, is not crucial for Crane's story. What is important is that the commanders do not see the men as individuals, but as a fighting force.<PARAGRAPH>The general and his staff almost crush a wounded man when riding along in the forest. They are oblivious to the suffering of this individual soldier and of individual soldiers in general. Their words are quotidian, not heroic. They are solidly technical and evaluative. Glory does not come easily even to a general. The general's words are a completely different way to look at the battle, separated from Henry by age, experience, and social class. There are few illusions held about the war. Henry, who has been obsessed with war glory since before his time in the army, waits for some grandiose language from these men. Instead, he learns that the attack they are about to commit to will likely kill many of the men. Henry's regiment is referred to as mules and brooms, tools to be employed and not men. The contradiction of this statement strikes Henry as odd and the dehumanization - that he is beginning to rise above - upsets him greatly.<PARAGRAPH>The doomed battle is strikingly rendered in gritty detail. Again, rather than a show of glory, the fighting is fraught with venal human emotions and utter confusion. The men become caught in between bravery and cowardice, reduced to inactivity. The lieutenant, who cares more for the success of the regiment than the individuals, presses the men to keep charging and fighting, rather than flee to safety. Yet soon his actions are reduced too, he only able to curse at his troops and tug at them to charge. Meanwhile the smoke of battle becomes so thick that the men do not know where to go. This adds to their general confusion, not just in the plot but also as a metaphor. They stop, illogically, in the middle of the battlefield because of it. However, Henry knows that on the other side, beyond this smoke of mystery, lay men of an opposing army. He must get through the smoke to see them and end his mythologizing of war.<PARAGRAPH>What breaks Henry from his lethargy is the vision of his regiment's flag. He latches on to the red and the white of war and power. The flag does not falter. His actions become slightly clearer, his energies more directed. He leaps for the flag. While it makes him more of a target, he also is attempting to master \"the colors.\" If he can handle the red and the white of the flag, he will finally master his experience of war. The flag is an important symbol for the troops, encapsulating what the young men are giving their lives for - freedom, country, and honor. As they lose their grasp on the direct motivation, they reach instead for the abstract, but powerful notion of brotherhood.<PARAGRAPH>Henry gains a sense of strength and pride while all of the other troops begin to falter. Throughout this part of the altercation, Henry can see the features of the enemy troops. They are no longer a strange force; they are actually men. In fact, they resemble his young regiment; their uniforms seem new, just like his was at the beginning of the novel. The mysteries of war are dissipating even more. He can see occasionally through the clouds of smoke and see that his foe is merely other men.<PARAGRAPH>The narrator adds at the end that now, the regiment \"were men.\" This is the crucial moment of the chapter. As a coming of age novel, the experience of this battle, where they saw and conquered their enemy, is the moment of maturity for the regiment. However, their trials are not over.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420021644/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-red-badge-of-courage/study-guide/summary-chapters-17-20"}