{"name": "Chapter 5", "summary": "Chapter 5<PARAGRAPH>The waiting makes Henry think of his home and the images he once despised take on a warm glow of nostalgia. Suddenly, someone cries, \"Here they come. Beyond the smoke, a brown swarm of men begins running down the hill. A general comes up on his horse, yelling to a colonel that the men have to hold them back. Henry sees the colonel regarding his men with resentment after the general gallops away. PARAGRAPH>The captain of Henry's company coaxes the troops to reserve their fire and not shoot wildly. Henry sweats out of pure nervousness. The fight is about to begin, and before he is ready or can consciously decide, he lowers his rifle and fires the first shot of the battle. Henry then loses concern for himself, and becomes \"not a man but a member. Whatever he was part of, it was in a critical state, and he was part of its desire. The noise of the firing reassures Henry in his actions. PARAGRAPH>The furious haste and noise make the atmosphere even more confusing: sweat blisters, his eyes are hot, and the blasts burn in his ears. He is not fighting the enemy of men so much as the swirling battle phantoms that surround him. He hears men speak around him as if he were sleeping. PARAGRAPH>No one has a heroic pose. They are moving as fast as they can, reloading and then firing almost at random in the smoke in front of them. The lieutenant of the company encounters a soldier fleeing in terror and beats him back into the ranks. Men occasionally drop from being hit. PARAGRAPH>Eventually the firing recedes, and the men rejoice. They have driven back the enemy. They attempt to recollect themselves. It takes Henry some moments to come back to his senses. He realizes the grime and smoke makes him choke. He looks at the men still standing and simply enjoys being able to look around. On the ground there lay a few contorted bodies. A battery still throws shells over the troops towards the enemy. Henry looks around and takes in the whole scene, moving horses, wounded men, and flags. Henry feels these flags look like beautiful birds that have outlasted a storm. Then he looks and notices the beautiful blue of the sky", "analysis": "Finally, Henry sees a battle and, at first, participates almost without thinking. He moves from thought to action, and from individual to member of a community:<PARAGRAPH>\"He became not a man but a member. He felt that something of which he was a part--a regiment, an army, a cause, or a country--was in crisis. He was welded into a common personality which was dominated by a single desire. For some moments he could not flee no more than a little finger can commit a revolution from a hand.\" <PARAGRAPH>Here, Henry becomes part of the army, which subverts individual need for the desire of the group. It does not matter what exactly the group is - a regiment, an army, a cause or a country. There is a greater organism than Henry and, as a part of it, he fights for their preservation as much as his own. However, there is a sense of detachment in group mentality as well. Henry feels like he is a member of a greater unit, but the unit  have been stripped of identity. He fights against \"swirling battle phantoms\" or \"machines of steel\" rather than other men. By dehumanizing the enemy he is able to shoot at them. Detachment is necessary to carry out acts of war.<PARAGRAPH>After the battle, Henry reverts to analyzing the environment around him. The smoke that hides them chokes him now, he sees the cannon shoot behind him, the corpses on the ground, and he basks in the peacefulness of the blue sky. The world has become a picture again, not a world of action. Henry is relieved he has passed the test, but his respite is short. When the battle resurges, fear grips Henry again and he deserts his regiment. Henry covers his cowardice with arrogance. He reasons he is not only wiser than the fools who stay and fight to certain death, his flight was more ordered and justified than the others who deserted. He even muses the general does not know what he is doing. To Henry, his fellow soldiers are all machines or fools, not higher beings like he. However, Henry is incorrect in his assessment of the battle. He overhears a general declaring the Union's victory and at first he feels as if he has been caught committing a crime. He then looks towards the battlefield and sees a yellow fog above the forest. This is an incredibly important metaphor. The color of cowardice, yellow, covers his view of the past battle and his actions. Though he reverts to thoughts of his superior intelligence to justify his running, his youth and inexperience show - and the yellow fog penetrates his thoughts.<PARAGRAPH>Henry's embarrassed retreat into the forest is similarly filled with conflicted emotion. In the forest, the sounds of the battle grow quiet. His \"return to Nature\" is somewhat akin to Thoreau's in Walden as he attempts to take lessons from nature in some way. Yet, he is not learning from nature as much as seeking justification for his actions. When he muses on the squirrel running from his thrown pinecone and how it somehow explains his running from danger, he is only explaining a situation that has already happened. The interpretation is not valid as he sees only what he wants to see. Instead, Nature is not the place of peace he believes it to be. His encounter with the corpse ultimately proves that Nature can be ugly and cruel and, moreover, indifferent to man. Nature's ambivalence is threatening to Henry. The uniform of the dead soldier, which used to be the blue of the Union army, has faded to green, the same color as the dragon from which he fled during battle. In this place of peace, Henry meets that same green animal of death.<PARAGRAPH>Henry's reunion with other soldiers also does little to comfort his mind. The mangled bodies of the wounded and dying paint a horrific scene. The tattered soldier who falls in step with Henry also forces him to confront his actions. Though badly injured, the tattered man was still in thrall of the army's power and beauty. He also speaks quite a bit, which is a stark contrast to Henry's relative muteness. Henry, so caught up in his own considerations, musings, and emotions, cannot think of a thing to say, even when asked direct questions. Henry begins to panic about his lack of a wound and the mark of dishonor that his health betrays; he has no red badge of courage. Henry cannot process this encounter and, like before when faced with an unknown, runs away.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420021644/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-red-badge-of-courage/study-guide/summary-chapters-5-8"}