{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 20", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Twenty: This chapter tells the story of Jane Fairfax, the granddaughter of Mrs. Bates, whose mother died when Jane was a small child. Jane was brought up by the Campbells, for Colonel Campbell had served in the army with Jane's late father, and the young girl had been well educated on his behalf. Emma is sorry to have Jane Fairfax visit, although her dislike is truly unfounded. When Jane visits, Emma is polite to her, despite her jealousy, and she even gains some minor information about Frank Churchill from Jane, who has met him. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: Jane Fairfax is an exemplar of the self-made woman, whose high regard in society comes not from her familial connections but from her talents and charm. Except for status, she equals Emma in every respect, and it is Emma's competitive nature that causes her to dislike Jane, assuming negative qualities where none may actually exist. Yet in their respective fates, Emma and Jane Fairfax differ considerably. Because of her lack of fortune, Jane Fairfax must enter a profession as a governess, a condition that requires her to sacrifice all of the pleasures of her life, while Emma will retain her life of leisure and luxury under all but the most extreme circumstances. PARAGRAPH>One of the major functions that Jane Fairfax serves in the novel is as a juxtaposition against the other characters. Although equal to Emma in all regards, she lacks status. This serves as a reminder that it is not Emma's sharp intelligence or talents that ultimately make her the head of Highbury society, but instead her family and fortune. And while her lack of a solid familial standing gives her a similar status to Harriet Smith, Jane Fairfax is poised, talented and refined. It is she who deserves to marry higher in society and to be Emma's closest companion, yet Emma's inability to be anything less than the center of attention makes this impossible. PARAGRAPH>Also notable are the parallels between Jane Fairfax and Frank Churchill, which Austen reinforces when Jane says that she has met the elusive Frank. Both are somewhat mysterious visitors connected to Highbury society through familial connections, but were raised outside of it by more elite families after their mothers had died. They share the ambiguity of belonging to one social group by birth but residing within a higher one by breeding", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-21"}