{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 15", "summary": "Chapter Fifteen: Mr. Elton asks Emma about Harriet Smith's illness, but it seems as if he were more concerned that Emma might possibly fall sick. By the end of the visit with the Westons,  Mr. Woodhouse is in an ill temper. It has started to snow, and Mr. Woodhouse fears that they will be unable to leave Randalls. The snow, however, subsidesm and carriages are brought to take the guests home. Emma finds herself in the same carriage as Mr. Elton, who professes his love for her. When Emma brings up Harriet Smith, he disparages her for her low social status and reminds Emma that he only spent time with Harriet when Emma was near and claims that Emma gave him encouragement. Emma is appalled by this revelation and promptly rejects Mr. Elton. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: This chapter contains some sharp insights into the social life in Austen's England. A light snow is enough to keep the guests of the Westons from possibly leaving, and to walk in such weather, as Isabella suggests that she could do, is unthinkable. Travel, even between two relatively close estates, can be arduous if conditions are not perfect. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Elton reveals himself to be far less sympathetic than before. When he contrives to be in the same carriage with Emma, he arranges a very private encounter with her outside of normally accepted social space. This is the first instance in the novel in which Emma is alone with a man , and the enclosed space of the carriage heightens the intimacy of the encounter. His protestations to Emma show that he deliberately feigned an interest in Harriet to be close to Emma, and his quick dismissal of Harriet as not of his rank shows a petty snobbery. PARAGRAPH>However, his quick dismissal of Harriet Smith for her status recalls similar objections that Emma herself made in regards to Harriet and Robert Martin. What Emma finds acceptable behavior for Harriet, she finds unacceptable for Mr. Elton. This turn of events is a perfect ironic retribution for Emma's earlier actions. The concern for status and breeding that Emma used as a weapon for Harriet Smith against Robert Martin she now finds used against her", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-21"}