{"name": "volume 1, Chapter 3", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Three: This chapter introduces a number of minor characters, including the impoverished Mrs. Bates and her daughter, Miss Bates; Mr. Elton, a local clergyman; Mrs. Goddard, the mistress of a boarding school; and most importantly Harriet Smith, a young girl whom Emma takes under her wing. Emma takes it upon herself to improve Harriet, starting with an adjustment of her choice of acquaintances, specifically the Martin family. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: The best and worst of Emma Woodhouse is revealed in her attempts to improve Harriet Smith. She has good intentions toward Harriet and genuinely wishes to help the young lady by introducing her into society and finding her a suitor, but Emma is also meddlesome and condescending. She assumes that she is the most appropriate person to \"improve\" her friend and has no qualms in persuading Harriet to go against her personal feelings. Emma immediately assumes that the Martins are inappropriate friends for Harriet, solely based on their social status and common upbringing. Mr. Knightley, however, thinks very highly of the family, despite their profession. PARAGRAPH>The chapter also clarifies the social hierarchy of Highbury society. The Woodhouses, the Westons and Mr. Knightley are at the top, since they own the largest estates. Below them in status is Mr. Elton, who is important in Highbury not because of wealth but because of his position as the vicar. Mrs. Bates, as the widow of the former vicar, also retains some status, though she has little money. At the lowest rung of society are single women such as Harriet Smith and Miss Bates. Miss Bates takes part in social functions because of her mother, but Harriet is only allowed among the better persons of Highbury because of her connection to Emma. Parentage is crucial for determining a character's social status, and Harriet does not know who her parents are. Emma assumes that Harriet's father must be a gentleman, and, because of her own social status, she can determine who is included", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-7"}