{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 48", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Forty-eight: Emma gives up hope that Mr. Knightley is in love with her. Even if he were, she would still not be able to marry him because of her father's need for constant attention. Mrs. Weston tells Emma that Jane Fairfax regrets being involved in a suspicious private engagement and wishes that she had handled the situation with greater decorum. Emma feels disheartened and alone, since the pregnant Mrs. Weston will soon be preoccupied with her child and Frank Churchill will no longer visit frequently. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: Emma Woodhouse has thus far been completely satisfied with the condition of her life. In her mind she has everything that she desires: fortune, status, and a comfortable social circle. Yet in this chapter she realizes that an integral part of her happiness depends on Mr. Knightley's affections. Although they have no romantic attachment as of yet, it is important to Emma that she is the most important woman in his life. Realizing that she might lose this position to Harriet Smith makes Emma aware how deeply she cares for him. This helps to explain why no attachment between Emma and Mr. Knightley has been formed earlier. Both already realized that they were the most important person in the other's life. PARAGRAPH>The discussion between Mrs. Weston and Emma concerning Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax brings up the important point that the two must certainly be in love with one another. Both endured a great deal of pain during their secret engagement and risked their reputation among society by deceiving their friends and family. As Emma states, \"her affection must have overpowered her judgment. Yet love cannot entirely excuse deception; both Jane and Frank behaved improperly. Since all turned out well for the two of them  they hurt nobody during their deception and will be properly married soon  Austen's major point is that their behavior was wrong for reasons of manners. Even without any negative consequences, the deception was wrong as a breach of decorum. PARAGRAPH>At this point in the novel, Emma is alone, outside the social interactions of her friends. Everyone else has already married  or plans to. She may always have her wealth and status, but Emma still may risk loneliness by clinging to her self-absorption. This isolation will not come from becoming a social pariah but will instead occur if she remains immature and vain among responsible adults with greater responsibilities to consider", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-43-49"}