{"name": "volume 1, Chapter 5", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Five: Mr. Knightley and Mrs. Weston discuss Emma's new friendship with Harriet Smith. Mrs. Weston approves of the friendship, believing that it will be beneficial to both. Mr. Knightley, on the other hand, believes that Harriet will do nothing to stimulate Emma on an intellectual level. More over, Harriet will do nothing but flatter her, something with which Emma is already well-acquainted. Mrs. Weston's position as a governess was ideal preparation, Mr. Knightley argues, because it trained her to think of others and often submit her own will. Still, he praises Emma for her beauty when Mrs. Weston presses him. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: More than any other character in the novel, Mr. Knightley expressed the author's views on each character. While other characters are overwhelmed by social status and wealth, Mr. Knightley is able to recognize personality traits and the truth of each character. In this chapter, Mr. Knightley takes the opportunity to point out Emma's flaws, an action that he will repeat consistently throughout the novel. Not only does this criticism contrast sharply with the way that Emma is treated by everyone else in the novel, but it suggests that Mr. Knightley may have deeper feelings for Emma. He is greatly concerned with Emma's behavior and worries that she has been misguided by those around her. PARAGRAPH>Therefore, when Mr. Knightley tells Mrs. Weston that Harriet Smith is not an appropriate friend for Emma, this must be taken as foreshadowing. The harm in the friendship is that Harriet will flatter Emma and indulge her worst qualities, while Emma will teach Harriet to be so refined that she will not fit among her true social equals. Again, status is significant: Harriet, given her suspicious birth and upbringing, must know her lower place in society. A friendship with the woman at the center of Highbury society will only be confusing and even damaging. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Knightley makes an important comment about how Emma prepared Mrs. Weston for marriage by making her submit to another's wishes. This highlights the role of a wife in marriage as completely subservient to the husband and indicates how exceptional Emma is in her circumstances. Emma, because of her fortune and status, has the power of a married man and must submit to no one's wishes. If she did marry, she would have to give up a great deal of her independence", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-7"}