{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 51", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Fifty-one: Mr. Knightley and Emma discuss Frank Churchill's letter come to the same conclusion: Frank Churchill did not behave well, but he was partially justified, especially since there has been no final harm. They also onsider the various options to deal with Emma's father. Mr. Knightley suggests moving him to Donwell Abbey with Emma, but Emma is concerned that it will cause the old man great discomfort. Finally they decide that Mr. Knightley will move to Hartfield instead. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: This chapter makes very clear that Mr. Woodhouse is more than just a harmless curmudgeon who takes pleasure in his complaints. He is an intractable obstacle for Emma, too concerned with his own comfort to allow his own daughter to marry. In this manner he parallels Mrs. Churchill: both characters use appearances of frailty and ill health to demand obedience from children they raised. PARAGRAPH>Austen also returns to the theme that Emma Woodhouse has the societal power of a man, rather than a single young woman. In this way, the relationship between Emma and Mr. Knightley reverses traditional gender roles. Mr. Knightley is the one who makes sacrifices and must modify his customs and behavior. It is he who must give up his home to move elsewhere upon marriage. PARAGRAPH>The considerations that the two of them make about their marriage reinforce the social dynamic in Highbury. A marriage between Mr. Knightley and Emma affects more than just those two. It affects Mr. Woodhouse, who might lose the daughter who cares for him. It affects Isabella's son, Henry, who now might lose his place as the inheritor of Donwell Abbey if Emma and Mr. Knightley produce an heir. This particular situation also affects Harriet Smith, who once again must bear the pain of rejection from a man who is too socially superior for her to rightfully consider", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-50-55"}