{"name": "volume 1, Chapter 9", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Nine: Mr. Elton gives Emma a poem that she assumes is intended for Harriet. When the riddle is deciphered, it is clearly a love poem, which convinces Emma of Mr. Elton's intentions toward Harriet. She continues to advise Harriet on romantic matters, specifically telling her to not betray her feelings to Mr. Elton. Mr. Woodhouse tells Emma and Harriet that Isabella  and her family will be coming to Hartfield soon. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: Once again Mr. Elton makes a romantic overture that is directed to an ambiguous source. The poem he writes is intended for Harriet Smith's collection, yet he first shows it to Emma. The poem itself is equally confusing; the answer to the riddle is \"courtship,\" yet the object of said courtship is described as a witty, intelligent, and beautiful woman, a description that even Emma cannot relate to Harriet. Manners provide some obstacle to resolving the situation. Since nothing can be openly declared, both Emma and Harriet must rely on the subtle clues that Mr. Elton gives. He can write a private riddle with the solution 'courtship,' but he cannot discuss the actual topic with either woman. PARAGRAPH>Games and riddles dominate this chapter of the novel, apt metaphors for Mr. Elton's courtship tactics. The title of the poem is \"Charade,\" and its solution is romance. And in this situation Mr. Elton is deliberately engaged in a charade. He now seems quite aware of Emma's intentions and plays along with them to remain close to Emma. He uses a number of means  to obscure the situation. His actions are certainly deliberate. PARAGRAPH>The chapter also reinforces the idea that the friendship between Emma and Harriet Smith does neither much good. Austen notes that Emma has done little reading since she became close with Harriet, and that all of their attempts to improve their minds ended with no effect. Furthermore, she gives another reminder that Harriet is intellectually inferior to Emma when they attempt to solve the riddle. Harriet gives only absurd answers, while Emma easily guesses the answer", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-8-14"}