{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 50", "summary": "Chapter Fifty: Emma now has two obstacles to a marriage with Mr. Knightley: her father and Harriet Smith. Emma cannot marry Mr. Knightley while her father lives, for any marriage would greatly inconvenience him. Moreover, she does not know how to break the news to Harriet. She attempts to get Harriet invited to stay with Isabella in London, where she could be distracted. Frank Churchill writes a letter to Mrs. Weston, which expresses regret for his deception and clarifies some of his behavior. He writes that Emma is a young woman unlikely ever to be attached, for she is so complete in herself, and that he was often tempted to let her know about Jane. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: This chapter serves mostly to clarify earlier inconsistencies in Frank Churchill's behavior, as well as imminent obstacles that Emma and Mr. Knightley must face. The letter from Frank Churchill also solves some of the plot's mysteries: he was the one who sent the piano to Jane Fairfax, and he ordered it when he was in London ostensibly getting his hair cut. When he left Emma to return to the Churchills and seemed to be on the verge of admitting something, he was considering telling her the secret of his engagement. Finally, when Jane Fairfax was miserable and ready to accept the job as a governess, it was because she was so ashamed of her secretive behavior she broke off the engagement. PARAGRAPH>The letter also once again returns to the issue of manners and unspoken emotions. Frank Churchill's assumptions contrast directly with Mr. Knightley's. While Mr. Knightley assumed that Emma believed herself to be the object of Frank Churchill's affections, Frank Churchill assumed that Emma realized that Frank and Jane were secretly in love. Because Emma's great propriety left so much unspoken, both men made equally invalid assumptions about what she believed", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-50-55"}