{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 25", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Twenty-five: Emma's good opinion of Frank Churchill is shaken when she hears that he has gone to London simply to get a haircut. The Coles, a family of low origin involved in trade, invite the better families of Highbury to dine with them. Although Emma thinks that this is an affront to her high place in society  she should decide her social circle and not have it decided for her  she accepts the invitation. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: Frank Churchill's trip to London for a haircut reveals a suspicious arrogance--travel is difficult, and to go to London simply for a haircut is an immense waste of time and resources--but Emma thinks only slightly less of him for it. She has made up her mind that she would like him, and perhaps marry him, far before she actually met him, and vain, indulgent actions such as this are downplayed or ignored. This resembles how she ignored Mr. Elton's faults until it was too late. However, in this situation it is Emma herself, not Harriet Smith, who risks humiliation and heartbreak. Austen, however, gives a more negative appraisal, noting that his actions show \"vanity, extravagance, love of change, restlessness of temper. PARAGRAPH>The Coles' party indicates how social life in Highbury is stratified. The Cole family may be wealthy, but they are involved in trade and thus should not presume to set the terms under which they interact with the higher members of their society. The chapter also returns to the idea that different segments of society have different forms of acceptable behavior: Emma is at its peak, and thus must consider how she treats others  leaving the Coles' party early would be an embarrassment to them. The Coles, in contrast, should know that they cannot presume to set social functions for their superiors and must wait for the Woodhouses, Westons and Mr. Knightley to reach out to them", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-22-28"}