{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 18", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Eighteen: The Westons are disappointed that Frank Churchill has not come to Highbury, and once again postponed his visit once. Mr. Knightley suspects that the Churchills are to blame for Frank's absence, but notes that Frank is nevertheless a grown, independent man who can do as he wishes. He feels that Frank Churchill is more interested in leisure activities. Emma argues with Mr. Knightley, by asserting that going against the Churchills' wishes would be impractical. Emma defends Frank Churchill at nearly every opportunity, while Mr. Knightley predicts that Frank Churchill will turn out to be insufferable. PARAGRAPH>Analysis: Without having met Frank Churchill, Emma has already decided that he is a wonderful person. When she quarrels with Mr. Knightley about Frank, she automatically assumes that Frank has good intentions and is perfectly honorable. Mr. Knightley, in contrast, suspects Frank Churchill to be lazy and dishonorable. Since Mr. Knightley tends to echo Austen's own views and predict character flaws, his objections must raise some doubt about Frank Churchill. Whatever influence that the Churchills have on Frank, he is still a grown man and can make decisions for himself; the Churchills can only do so much to prevent him from visiting his father. PARAGRAPH>Once again, the issues of social status and decorum are important considerations. Mr. Knightley assumes that one of the Churchills' great mistakes with Frank is making him believe that he is above his actual connections: he is too proud, luxurious, and selfish for his status in society. Frank Churchill therefore joins Harriet Smith and Mr. Elton as characters chastised for not knowing their proper place in society. In addition, Mr. Knightley claims that Frank Churchill may lead a disreputable life dedicated only to the pursuit of pleasure. In other words, he does not behave with the sense of honor and decency that a man of his situation should", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-21"}