

It was in the air.  White Fang sensed the coming calamity, even before
there was tangible evidence of it.  In vague ways it was borne in upon
him that a change was impending.  He knew not how nor why, yet he got his
feel of the oncoming event from the gods themselves.  In ways subtler
than they knew, they betrayed their intentions to the wolf-dog that
haunted the cabin-stoop, and that, though he never came inside the cabin,
knew what went on inside their brains.

"Listen to that, will you!" the dog-musher exclaimed at supper one night.

Weedon Scott listened.  Through the door came a low, anxious whine, like
a sobbing under the breath that had just grown audible.  Then came the
long sniff, as White Fang reassured himself that his god was still inside
and had not yet taken himself off in mysterious and solitary flight.

"I do believe that wolf's on to you," the dog-musher said.

Weedon Scott looked across at his companion with eyes that almost
pleaded, though this was given the lie by his words.

"What the devil can I do with a wolf in California?" he demanded.

"That's what I say," Matt answered.  "What the devil can you do with a
wolf in California?"

But this did not satisfy Weedon Scott.  The other seemed to be judging
him in a non-committal sort of way.

"White man's dogs would have no show against him," Scott went on.  "He'd
kill them on sight.  If he didn't bankrupt me with damage suits, the
authorities would take him away from me and electrocute him."

"He's a downright murderer, I know," was the dog-musher's comment.

Weedon Scott looked at him suspiciously.

"It would never do," he said decisively.

"It would never do!" Matt concurred.  "Why you'd have to hire a man
'specially to take care of 'm."

The other's suspicion was allayed.  He nodded cheerfully.  In the silence
that followed, the low, half-sobbing whine was heard at the door and then
the long, questing sniff.

"There's no denyin' he thinks a hell of a lot of you," Matt said.

The other glared at him in sudden wrath.  "Damn it all, man!  I know my
own mind and what's best!"

"I'm agreein' with you, only . . . "

"Only what?" Scott snapped out.

"Only . . . " the dog-musher began softly, then changed his mind and
betrayed a rising anger of his own.  "Well, you needn't get so all-fired
het up about it.  Judgin' by your actions one'd think you didn't know
your own mind."

Weedon Scott debated with himself for a while, and then said more gently:
"You are right, Matt.  I don't know my own mind, and that's what's the
trouble."

"Why, it would be rank ridiculousness for me to take that dog along," he
broke out after another pause.

"I'm agreein' with you," was Matt's answer, and again his employer was
not quite satisfied with him.

"But how in the name of the great Sardanapolis he knows you're goin' is
what gets me," the dog-musher continued innocently.

"It's beyond me, Matt," Scott answered, with a mournful shake of the
head.

Then came the day when, through the open cabin door, White Fang saw the
fatal grip on the floor and the love-master packing things into it.  Also,
there were comings and goings, and the erstwhile placid atmosphere of the
cabin was vexed with strange perturbations and unrest.  Here was
indubitable evidence.  White Fang had already scented it.  He now
reasoned it.  His god was preparing for another flight.  And since he had
not taken him with him before, so, now, he could look to be left behind.

That night he lifted the long wolf-howl.  As he had howled, in his puppy
days, when he fled back from the Wild to the village to find it vanished
and naught but a rubbish-heap to mark the site of Grey Beaver's tepee, so
now he pointed his muzzle to the cold stars and told to them his woe.

Inside the cabin the two men had just gone to bed.

"He's gone off his food again," Matt remarked from his bunk.

There was a grunt from Weedon Scott's bunk, and a stir of blankets.

"From the way he cut up the other time you went away, I wouldn't wonder
this time but what he died."

The blankets in the other bunk stirred irritably.

"Oh, shut up!" Scott cried out through the darkness.  "You nag worse than
a woman."

"I'm agreein' with you," the dog-musher answered, and Weedon Scott was
not quite sure whether or not the other had snickered.

The next day White Fang's anxiety and restlessness were even more
pronounced.  He dogged his master's heels whenever he left the cabin, and
haunted the front stoop when he remained inside.  Through the open door
he could catch glimpses of the luggage on the floor.  The grip had been
joined by two large canvas bags and a box.  Matt was rolling the master's
blankets and fur robe inside a small tarpaulin.  White Fang whined as he
watched the operation.

Later on two Indians arrived.  He watched them closely as they shouldered
the luggage and were led off down the hill by Matt, who carried the
bedding and the grip.  But White Fang did not follow them.  The master
was still in the cabin.  After a time, Matt returned.  The master came to
the door and called White Fang inside.

"You poor devil," he said gently, rubbing White Fang's ears and tapping
his spine.  "I'm hitting the long trail, old man, where you cannot
follow.  Now give me a growl--the last, good, good-bye growl."

But White Fang refused to growl.  Instead, and after a wistful, searching
look, he snuggled in, burrowing his head out of sight between the
master's arm and body.

"There she blows!" Matt cried.  From the Yukon arose the hoarse bellowing
of a river steamboat.  "You've got to cut it short.  Be sure and lock the
front door.  I'll go out the back.  Get a move on!"

The two doors slammed at the same moment, and Weedon Scott waited for
Matt to come around to the front.  From inside the door came a low
whining and sobbing.  Then there were long, deep-drawn sniffs.

"You must take good care of him, Matt," Scott said, as they started down
the hill.  "Write and let me know how he gets along."

"Sure," the dog-musher answered.  "But listen to that, will you!"

Both men stopped.  White Fang was howling as dogs howl when their masters
lie dead.  He was voicing an utter woe, his cry bursting upward in great
heart-breaking rushes, dying down into quavering misery, and bursting
upward again with a rush upon rush of grief.

The _Aurora_ was the first steamboat of the year for the Outside, and her
decks were jammed with prosperous adventurers and broken gold seekers,
all equally as mad to get to the Outside as they had been originally to
get to the Inside.  Near the gang-plank, Scott was shaking hands with
Matt, who was preparing to go ashore.  But Matt's hand went limp in the
other's grasp as his gaze shot past and remained fixed on something
behind him.  Scott turned to see.  Sitting on the deck several feet away
and watching wistfully was White Fang.

The dog-musher swore softly, in awe-stricken accents.  Scott could only
look in wonder.

"Did you lock the front door?" Matt demanded.  The other nodded, and
asked, "How about the back?"

"You just bet I did," was the fervent reply.

White Fang flattened his ears ingratiatingly, but remained where he was,
making no attempt to approach.

"I'll have to take 'm ashore with me."

Matt made a couple of steps toward White Fang, but the latter slid away
from him.  The dog-musher made a rush of it, and White Fang dodged
between the legs of a group of men.  Ducking, turning, doubling, he slid
about the deck, eluding the other's efforts to capture him.

But when the love-master spoke, White Fang came to him with prompt
obedience.

"Won't come to the hand that's fed 'm all these months," the dog-musher
muttered resentfully.  "And you--you ain't never fed 'm after them first
days of gettin' acquainted.  I'm blamed if I can see how he works it out
that you're the boss."

Scott, who had been patting White Fang, suddenly bent closer and pointed
out fresh-made cuts on his muzzle, and a gash between the eyes.

Matt bent over and passed his hand along White Fang's belly.

"We plumb forgot the window.  He's all cut an' gouged underneath.  Must
'a' butted clean through it, b'gosh!"

But Weedon Scott was not listening.  He was thinking rapidly.  The
_Aurora's_ whistle hooted a final announcement of departure.  Men were
scurrying down the gang-plank to the shore.  Matt loosened the bandana
from his own neck and started to put it around White Fang's.  Scott
grasped the dog-musher's hand.

"Good-bye, Matt, old man.  About the wolf--you needn't write.  You see,
I've . . . !"

"What!" the dog-musher exploded.  "You don't mean to say . . .?"

"The very thing I mean.  Here's your bandana.  I'll write to you about
him."

Matt paused halfway down the gang-plank.

"He'll never stand the climate!" he shouted back.  "Unless you clip 'm in
warm weather!"

The gang-plank was hauled in, and the _Aurora_ swung out from the bank.
Weedon Scott waved a last good-bye.  Then he turned and bent over White
Fang, standing by his side.

"Now growl, damn you, growl," he said, as he patted the responsive head
and rubbed the flattening ears.




White Fang landed from the steamer in San Francisco.  He was appalled.
Deep in him, below any reasoning process or act of consciousness, he had
associated power with godhead.  And never had the white men seemed such
marvellous gods as now, when he trod the slimy pavement of San Francisco.
The log cabins he had known were replaced by towering buildings.  The
streets were crowded with perils--waggons, carts, automobiles; great,
straining horses pulling huge trucks; and monstrous cable and electric
cars hooting and clanging through the midst, screeching their insistent
menace after the manner of the lynxes he had known in the northern woods.

All this was the manifestation of power.  Through it all, behind it all,
was man, governing and controlling, expressing himself, as of old, by his
mastery over matter.  It was colossal, stunning.  White Fang was awed.
Fear sat upon him.  As in his cubhood he had been made to feel his
smallness and puniness on the day he first came in from the Wild to the
village of Grey Beaver, so now, in his full-grown stature and pride of
strength, he was made to feel small and puny.  And there were so many
gods!  He was made dizzy by the swarming of them.  The thunder of the
streets smote upon his ears.  He was bewildered by the tremendous and
endless rush and movement of things.  As never before, he felt his
dependence on the love-master, close at whose heels he followed, no
matter what happened never losing sight of him.

But White Fang was to have no more than a nightmare vision of the city--an
experience that was like a bad dream, unreal and terrible, that haunted
him for long after in his dreams.  He was put into a baggage-car by the
master, chained in a corner in the midst of heaped trunks and valises.
Here a squat and brawny god held sway, with much noise, hurling trunks
and boxes about, dragging them in through the door and tossing them into
the piles, or flinging them out of the door, smashing and crashing, to
other gods who awaited them.

And here, in this inferno of luggage, was White Fang deserted by the
master.  Or at least White Fang thought he was deserted, until he smelled
out the master's canvas clothes-bags alongside of him, and proceeded to
mount guard over them.

"'Bout time you come," growled the god of the car, an hour later, when
Weedon Scott appeared at the door.  "That dog of yourn won't let me lay a
finger on your stuff."

White Fang emerged from the car.  He was astonished.  The nightmare city
was gone.  The car had been to him no more than a room in a house, and
when he had entered it the city had been all around him.  In the interval
the city had disappeared.  The roar of it no longer dinned upon his ears.
Before him was smiling country, streaming with sunshine, lazy with
quietude.  But he had little time to marvel at the transformation.  He
accepted it as he accepted all the unaccountable doings and
manifestations of the gods.  It was their way.

There was a carriage waiting.  A man and a woman approached the master.
The woman's arms went out and clutched the master around the neck--a
hostile act!  The next moment Weedon Scott had torn loose from the
embrace and closed with White Fang, who had become a snarling, raging
demon.

"It's all right, mother," Scott was saying as he kept tight hold of White
Fang and placated him.  "He thought you were going to injure me, and he
wouldn't stand for it.  It's all right.  It's all right.  He'll learn
soon enough."

"And in the meantime I may be permitted to love my son when his dog is
not around," she laughed, though she was pale and weak from the fright.

She looked at White Fang, who snarled and bristled and glared
malevolently.

"He'll have to learn, and he shall, without postponement," Scott said.

He spoke softly to White Fang until he had quieted him, then his voice
became firm.

"Down, sir!  Down with you!"

This had been one of the things taught him by the master, and White Fang
obeyed, though he lay down reluctantly and sullenly.

"Now, mother."

Scott opened his arms to her, but kept his eyes on White Fang.

"Down!" he warned.  "Down!"

White Fang, bristling silently, half-crouching as he rose, sank back and
watched the hostile act repeated.  But no harm came of it, nor of the
embrace from the strange man-god that followed.  Then the clothes-bags
were taken into the carriage, the strange gods and the love-master
followed, and White Fang pursued, now running vigilantly behind, now
bristling up to the running horses and warning them that he was there to
see that no harm befell the god they dragged so swiftly across the earth.

At the end of fifteen minutes, the carriage swung in through a stone
gateway and on between a double row of arched and interlacing walnut
trees.  On either side stretched lawns, their broad sweep broken here and
there by great sturdy-limbed oaks.  In the near distance, in contrast
with the young-green of the tended grass, sunburnt hay-fields showed tan
and gold; while beyond were the tawny hills and upland pastures.  From
the head of the lawn, on the first soft swell from the valley-level,
looked down the deep-porched, many-windowed house.

Little opportunity was given White Fang to see all this.  Hardly had the
carriage entered the grounds, when he was set upon by a sheep-dog, bright-
eyed, sharp-muzzled, righteously indignant and angry.  It was between him
and the master, cutting him off.  White Fang snarled no warning, but his
hair bristled as he made his silent and deadly rush.  This rush was never
completed.  He halted with awkward abruptness, with stiff fore-legs
bracing himself against his momentum, almost sitting down on his
haunches, so desirous was he of avoiding contact with the dog he was in
the act of attacking.  It was a female, and the law of his kind thrust a
barrier between.  For him to attack her would require nothing less than a
violation of his instinct.

But with the sheep-dog it was otherwise.  Being a female, she possessed
no such instinct.  On the other hand, being a sheep-dog, her instinctive
fear of the Wild, and especially of the wolf, was unusually keen.  White
Fang was to her a wolf, the hereditary marauder who had preyed upon her
flocks from the time sheep were first herded and guarded by some dim
ancestor of hers.  And so, as he abandoned his rush at her and braced
himself to avoid the contact, she sprang upon him.  He snarled
involuntarily as he felt her teeth in his shoulder, but beyond this made
no offer to hurt her.  He backed away, stiff-legged with
self-consciousness, and tried to go around her.  He dodged this way and
that, and curved and turned, but to no purpose.  She remained always
between him and the way he wanted to go.

"Here, Collie!" called the strange man in the carriage.

Weedon Scott laughed.

"Never mind, father.  It is good discipline.  White Fang will have to
learn many things, and it's just as well that he begins now.  He'll
adjust himself all right."

The carriage drove on, and still Collie blocked White Fang's way.  He
tried to outrun her by leaving the drive and circling across the lawn but
she ran on the inner and smaller circle, and was always there, facing him
with her two rows of gleaming teeth.  Back he circled, across the drive
to the other lawn, and again she headed him off.

The carriage was bearing the master away.  White Fang caught glimpses of
it disappearing amongst the trees.  The situation was desperate.  He
essayed another circle.  She followed, running swiftly.  And then,
suddenly, he turned upon her.  It was his old fighting trick.  Shoulder
to shoulder, he struck her squarely.  Not only was she overthrown.  So
fast had she been running that she rolled along, now on her back, now on
her side, as she struggled to stop, clawing gravel with her feet and
crying shrilly her hurt pride and indignation.

White Fang did not wait.  The way was clear, and that was all he had
wanted.  She took after him, never ceasing her outcry.  It was the
straightaway now, and when it came to real running, White Fang could
teach her things.  She ran frantically, hysterically, straining to the
utmost, advertising the effort she was making with every leap: and all
the time White Fang slid smoothly away from her silently, without effort,
gliding like a ghost over the ground.

As he rounded the house to the _porte-cochere_, he came upon the
carriage.  It had stopped, and the master was alighting.  At this moment,
still running at top speed, White Fang became suddenly aware of an attack
from the side.  It was a deer-hound rushing upon him.  White Fang tried
to face it.  But he was going too fast, and the hound was too close.  It
struck him on the side; and such was his forward momentum and the
unexpectedness of it, White Fang was hurled to the ground and rolled
clear over.  He came out of the tangle a spectacle of malignancy, ears
flattened back, lips writhing, nose wrinkling, his teeth clipping
together as the fangs barely missed the hound's soft throat.

The master was running up, but was too far away; and it was Collie that
saved the hound's life.  Before White Fang could spring in and deliver
the fatal stroke, and just as he was in the act of springing in, Collie
arrived.  She had been out-manoeuvred and out-run, to say nothing of her
having been unceremoniously tumbled in the gravel, and her arrival was
like that of a tornado--made up of offended dignity, justifiable wrath,
and instinctive hatred for this marauder from the Wild.  She struck White
Fang at right angles in the midst of his spring, and again he was knocked
off his feet and rolled over.

The next moment the master arrived, and with one hand held White Fang,
while the father called off the dogs.

"I say, this is a pretty warm reception for a poor lone wolf from the
Arctic," the master said, while White Fang calmed down under his
caressing hand.  "In all his life he's only been known once to go off his
feet, and here he's been rolled twice in thirty seconds."

The carriage had driven away, and other strange gods had appeared from
out the house.  Some of these stood respectfully at a distance; but two
of them, women, perpetrated the hostile act of clutching the master
around the neck.  White Fang, however, was beginning to tolerate this
act.  No harm seemed to come of it, while the noises the gods made were
certainly not threatening.  These gods also made overtures to White Fang,
but he warned them off with a snarl, and the master did likewise with
word of mouth.  At such times White Fang leaned in close against the
master's legs and received reassuring pats on the head.

The hound, under the command, "Dick!  Lie down, sir!" had gone up the
steps and lain down to one side of the porch, still growling and keeping
a sullen watch on the intruder.  Collie had been taken in charge by one
of the woman-gods, who held arms around her neck and petted and caressed
her; but Collie was very much perplexed and worried, whining and
restless, outraged by the permitted presence of this wolf and confident
that the gods were making a mistake.

All the gods started up the steps to enter the house.  White Fang
followed closely at the master's heels.  Dick, on the porch, growled, and
White Fang, on the steps, bristled and growled back.

"Take Collie inside and leave the two of them to fight it out," suggested
Scott's father.  "After that they'll be friends."

"Then White Fang, to show his friendship, will have to be chief mourner
at the funeral," laughed the master.

The elder Scott looked incredulously, first at White Fang, then at Dick,
and finally at his son.

"You mean . . .?"

Weedon nodded his head.  "I mean just that.  You'd have a dead Dick
inside one minute--two minutes at the farthest."

He turned to White Fang.  "Come on, you wolf.  It's you that'll have to
come inside."

White Fang walked stiff-legged up the steps and across the porch, with
tail rigidly erect, keeping his eyes on Dick to guard against a flank
attack, and at the same time prepared for whatever fierce manifestation
of the unknown that might pounce out upon him from the interior of the
house.  But no thing of fear pounced out, and when he had gained the
inside he scouted carefully around, looking at it and finding it not.
Then he lay down with a contented grunt at the master's feet, observing
all that went on, ever ready to spring to his feet and fight for life
with the terrors he felt must lurk under the trap-roof of the dwelling.


