{"name": "Chapter 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417171403/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-house-of-the-seven-gables/study-guide/summary-chapters-4-6", "summary": "A Day Behind the Counter: A dignified elderly gentleman, large and portly, stops outside the shop. He had a gravity and an appearance of influence and authority. He does not enter the shop, however. This man, Judge Jaffrey Pyncheon, disturbs Hepzibah, his cousin. The small child who bought gingerbread early that morning instead returns and buys more food. After this incident, Hepzibah retreats to the back parlor and stares at the portrait of Colonel Pyncheon, who greatly resembles Jaffrey. She once again looks at the miniature picture, lamenting that he was persecuted. Hepzibah returns to the shop to find an elderly man known as Uncle Venner to all had entered. He was largely regarded as mentally deficient, and considered as old as the House of the Seven Gables itself. Uncle Venner congratulates Hepzibah for opening her shop, but tells her that Jaffrey should have intervened to help her before she had to enter the workforce. However, she refuses to blame her cousin. Before leaving, Uncle Venner gives her advice, including to put on a bright face for her customers. Uncle Venner asks her when he' will return home, but she does not know what he is talking about. That night, a young girl, Phoebe, comes to the house. She is part of the Pyncheon family that lives in rural New England. Before letting Phoebe in, Hepzibah vows that Phoebe can stay only one night, for if Clifford were to find her here, it would disturb him.", "analysis": "In contrast to his Hepzibah, whose scowl obscures her kindness and frailty, Jaffrey Pyncheon gives an appearance of respectability and kindness that is at odds with his actual personality. He presents himself as a man of considerable influence and authority, honorable and even friendly. He does nothing overtly sinister when he approaches the store, and even smiles at the sight of Hepzibah. Yet Hepzibah feels a strange aversion toward Jaffrey; she associates him with Colonel Pyncheon, even calling him a modern day version of the sinister Colonel. It is Jaffrey Pyncheon whom Hawthorne mentioned in the first chapter detailing the Pyncheon history as the nephew who will inherit the House of the Seven Gables, the character who represents all of those qualities inherent in Colonel Pyncheon, and the two characters share a similar amoral boldness that cannot be hidden. Just as the artist evoked the character's harsh soul in the picture that represents Judge Pyncheon for posterity, Judge Jaffrey appears hostile and dangerous even when he simply passes by Hepzibah's shop. This chapter foreshadows the later introduction of Clifford Pyncheon, the man convicted of the Pyncheon murder so many years before. Hepzibah dutifully waits for the return of Clifford it is his picture that she often gazes upon and believes that she cannot make decisions about the house without him"}