{"name": "Chapter 17", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820035130/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmMainStreet54.asp", "summary": "Carol and her circle go to the lake cottage in a bobsled. They are very happy as they sing and race. Carol races with them and when she feels tired, she rests under the comforters and feels blissfully happy. Once they reach the lake cottage, Jack Elder lights the stove and Mrs. Elder and Mrs. Clark make coffee. Vida and Mrs. Mc Ganum unpack the doughnuts and the gingerbread. Mrs. Dyer warms up the hot dogs and Dr. Terry Gould hands them a bottle of whisky. They dance merrily. Sam Clark teases Harry Haydock about the sale in his shop and Kennicott about his driving, affectionately. Carol feels very happy and when Dave Dyer drops an icicle down Mrs. Mc Ganum's back she cheers hysterically. They eat ravenously. When the whisky is passed around Juanita takes a sip and is cheered. Carol also takes a sip and chokes over the whisky. Kennicott looks at her disapprovingly and she passes on the bottle disappointed. They play the game called charade-a game of make-believe. Carol is so inspired by the skill of the actors that she proposes the formation of a dramatic club. Every one is willing and Carol feels that at last she was getting a chance to organize some thing important. The members of the dramatic club hold their first meeting and elect Carol as their president. They begin with a disagreement over the plays to be enacted. Carol wants the recent plays but Ella wants Shakespeare. Carol wants to watch the four one act plays to be presented in Minneapolis. Though Kennicott is not very keen to watch the plays, he agrees. They take train no. 7 to Minneapolis and check in at an expensive hotel. Carol feels childishly thrilled by the luxuries in the hotel. She enjoys ordering the food going through the menu carefully. They buy many shirts for Kennicott and a dress for Carol. They walk around the city and observe the largest flourmills with cement elevators. They see beautiful houses and also slums. Then they watch a movie but sleep through it because they are exhausted. They have meals at Carol's sister's house. They meet the Mc Ganums and talk to them eagerly like long lost friends and ask for news about Gopher Prairie. Kennicott tries to coax Carol to skip the plays. But Carol is very keen to see them. Amateurs perform the plays but Carol enjoys them because Schnitzler, Shaw, Yeats and Lord Dunsany have written them. When the plays get over, Kennicott tells her that he would prefer to watch a cow boy movie any day.", "analysis": ""}