{"name": "Chapter 59", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200929182814/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/david-copperfield/summary/chapter-59", "summary": "David arrives in London in winter. He's been away for three years, so he expects to find everything changed, Indeed, Miss Betsey has returned to Dover and Traddles is doing well as a lawyer. David surprises Traddles with his return. He's a little disappointed because no one in Traddles's neighborhood seems aware of who he is. David is sure that Traddles has not found much of a reputation as a lawyer. He knocks on the door of Traddles's office. Traddles welcomes David with open arms and exclaims that he is glad to see David. He's sorry that David came so close to the blessed day but still missed the ceremony. David has no idea what he's talking about - he didn't receive Traddles's last letter. Traddles has finally married Sophy! Sophy emerges into the next room, taking David by surprise. She laughs and blushes. Several of Sophy's sisters have live with Traddles as well. Traddles enjoys their company: it's so charming and lively to have them about. The Beauty and Sarah are both there, along with the two youngest Crewlers and Louisa. Traddles explains to David that he put the whole matter once more to Reverend Horace Crewler, who finally agreed to let Traddles marry Sophy . To make money to improve their living situation, Traddles is working his tail off. Still, though, he's the happiest man in the world. The five Crewler sisters all troop in. They are all fresh and pretty, and while Sophy is not the prettiest, she is cheerful and bright. Sophy tells David that she has seen Agnes. David, meanwhile, observes how proud Sophy and Traddles are of Sophy's sisters, and how much care they take of them. Sophy is an incredible caretaker, and David predicts that she will be a perfect mother. David starts to think he can face the future even though he will have no home of the kind Traddles has found. It's is his own fault that Agnes will someday marry someone else, David thinks. He happens to see Mr. Chillip reading a newspaper at a coffee house. He is absolutely surprised, even though he knows that Mr. Chillip had left Blunderstone some years before. David greets Mr. Chillip, who absolutely does not recognize him. He tells Mr. Chillip his name, and finally Mr. Chillip comments on David's resemblance to his father. Mr. Chillip sympathizes with David: he thinks that being a writer must be terribly hard on the old brain. News of Dora's death has reached Mr. Chillip through Miss Murdstone. Apparently, Mr. Murdstone now lives very near Mr. Chillip's new home. Mr. Murdstone has married another very young woman. Mr. Chillip confides in David that Mr. Murdstone's new wife has been bullied into a broken spirit. Mr. and Miss Murdstone have reduced the new Mrs. Murdstone to a complete child, Mr. Chillip tells David. They guide her about town as though they were her keepers instead of her family. Mr. Murdstone still pretends that he is doing all of this bullying out of some kind of religious feeling - really, he's just a bad-tempered old cuss. Mr. Chillip is glad to be able to tell David all of this because he needs to vent: Mr. Murdstone has been getting worse and worse lately. Apparently, the Murdstones are not popular in the neighborhood. David spends some time telling Mr. Chillip about his own fortunes and his aunt - whom Mr. Chillip still remembers from the night David was born. David travels on to Dover, where he is welcomed by Mr. Dick, Peggotty, and Miss Betsey.", "analysis": ""}