{"name": "Chapter 27", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200929182814/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/david-copperfield/summary/chapter-27", "summary": "David decides to catch up with his old school friend, Traddles. He finds Traddles's lodging house in a shabby little side street. The house actually reminds him a lot of the days he spent boarding with the Micawbers. Indeed, just as David arrives, he sees a milkman asking the servant girl at the house if anyone is going to pay his bill: this really reminds him of his days with the Micawbers. David approaches the door and asks the servant girl if someone named Traddles lives there. He does! And Traddles welcomes David to his room. David notices that both Traddles's good nature and his bad luck seem not to have changed: Traddles is having serious money troubles. The two of them remind each other of the old days back with Mr. Creakle at Salem House. Traddles seems to have forgotten how brutal Mr. Creakle was to him, or at least, to have let it go. The uncle who raised Traddles died soon after Traddles left Salem House. Unfortunately, the uncle didn't like Traddles much, so he didn't leave Traddles any money in his will. So, Traddles was left alone without much money or any professional training. Luckily, a friend of his from school helped Traddles become a law clerk. Traddles has been tying to climb into the law business through working hard and making lots of connections . David's old friend has managed to make enough money to take the bar exams, which is what he's studying for now. Traddles is really happy with his situation, because he's gotten engaged to a lovely clergyman's daughter. Even though it'll be a long time before Traddles will be able to scrape together enough money to get married, he's still happy as a clam waiting to marry the girl he loves. Traddles tells David that Mr. and Mrs. Micawber, his landlords, are great company. David is absolutely astonished at the news that he is going to reunite with the Micawbers yet again. Just then, there is a distinctive knock at the door: it's Mr. Micawber! David asks how Mr. Micawber is, and how his wife and children are doing. Mr. Micawber answers that they are fine, all the while not recognizing David. Finally, when he sees David smile, Mr. Micawber startles and exclaims that it is Copperfield! Mr. Micawber calls down to Mrs. Micawber that they have a visitor she should see. Mr. Micawber asks after all the people he knew in Canterbury, where they last met. All the while, David can hear the sounds of Mrs. Micawber in the room next door, opening and shutting drawers: she's getting ready to receive guests. Finally, Mrs. Micawber comes in, looking a little sloppier than she used to but still making an effort for company. Mrs. Micawber faints at the sight of David. After reviving her with water from the well in the backyard, the Micawbers, David, and Traddles all chat for half an hour. Mr. Micawber asks David to stay for dinner, but David can see that Mrs. Micawber is worried about how much food they have on hand, so he refuses. David invites Traddles and the Micawbers to come and eat with him at his house. As David is leaving, Mr. Micawber pulls him aside. He explains that it is delightful to have someone as smart and pleasant around the house as Traddles, because otherwise, the neighborhood is disappointing. Mr. Micawber is currently involved in the corn trade, which is not making him much money. David's old landlord is hoping that something will turn up soon because Mrs. Micawber is, in fact, pregnant in short, to the infantine group\" .", "analysis": ""}