{"name": "Chapter XXII", "summary": "Chapter XXII: Some old scenes, and some new people. Steerforth spends much of his time in Yarmouth apart from David, making himself popular among the local fishermen and going out sailing with Mr. Peggotty. David revisits his old home. He feels sad at what he has lost, but happy that he has such good friends as Peggotty, Steerforth, and Betsey. When he returns to Mr. Peggotty's house, he finds Steerforth sitting by the fire in sullen and angry mood. Steerforth laments, \"I wish to God I had had a judicious father these last twenty years. I wish with all my soul I had been better guided. I wish with all my soul I could guide myself better. He adds that it would be better to be Mr. Peggotty or Ham than to be himself, \"twenty times richer and twenty times wiser,\" and to be a torment to himself. After they leave the house, Steerforth tells David that he has bought a boat, which he has named The Little Em'ly. Mr. Peggotty will use it in his absence. David praises Steerforth for his generosity to Mr. Peggotty, which embarrasses Steerforth. Steerforth says he plans to leave Littimer  behind him to fit out the boat after he leaves Yarmouth. Steerforth and David encounter Little Em'ly and Ham. They notice that a poor haggard-looking woman is following Little Em'ly at a distance. Steerforth and David go to dine at an inn, where they meet a dwarf, Miss Mowcher, who cuts Steerforth's hair and gossips with him about her wealthy clients and Little Em'ly. When David returns to Mr. Peggotty's house, Little Em'ly is talking to a young woman called Martha. Martha used to work with Em'ly at Mr. Omer's shop but she has now fallen into disgrace and is begging for Em'ly's help. Em'ly asks Ham to give Martha some money so that she can go to London, where no one knows her. After Martha leaves, Little Em'ly bursts into tears and says that she is not so good a girl as she ought to be. She says that she wants to feel more thankful than she is for Ham's love. Analysis of Chapters XIX-XXII. Uriah is seen gradually ensnaring Mr. Wickfield. He calls upon Mr. Wickfield to make business decisions when he is most drunk, thereby convincing Mr. Wickfield that he is unfit for business. Far from being humble, Uriah is only interested in controlling others for his own ends. This theme of covert manipulation is taken up in the plotline in which Steerforth visits Mr. Peggotty's house. Though he effortlessly charms everyone there and acts the part of a friend, his real feelings are a cold-hearted contempt for Mr. Peggotty's family, and his real motivation is to seduce Little Em'ly. This outcome is prefigured in David's visit to Mrs. Steerforth's house. In contrast with the simple and straightforward communications of Mr. Peggotty's family, in which members express love and support for each other, and mean what they say, Mrs. Steerforth and Rosa Dartle are neither straightforward nor loving. Mrs. Steerforth is a haughty and proud woman who only condescends to welcome David because he likes her precious and spoilt son: in common with her son, an ulterior motive underlies her manner. Rosa Dartle is an exemplar of indirectness. She is utterly unable to say what she means, indulging instead in a charade of blistering sarcasm. She questions Mrs. Steerforth and her son about their thoughts and opinions with an affected innocence, revealing their dishonorable motives and then feigning gratefulness for their assistance in educating her. The irony lies in the fact that Rosa, far from needing education from the Steerforths, sees their natures all too clearly and, in an ironic roundabout way, points out their faults. The most truthful aspect of Rosa lies not in what she says but in the livid scar on her lip. Steerforth admits that he inflicted this wound. Symbolically, this suggests that Rosa has long been in love with Steerforth, who has wounded her horribly. She has responded to this hurt by becoming bitter and twisted. Unlike Rosa, David remains blind to Steerforth's vain and dishonest nature. Even when Steerforth patronizes David and begins scheming to seduce Little Em'ly, David ascribes fine motives to Steerforth that he does not possess. Particularly ironic is David's naeve assumption that Steerforth's purchase of the boat is an act of generosity to Mr. Peggotty, when, in fact, Steerforth is planning to carry off Mr. Peggotty's adopted daughter. Dickens points the reader to David's youthful naivety and Steerforth's insincerity, and foreshadows the plotline involving Steerforth and Little Em'ly, by having the adult David reflect on Steerforth's ability to charm the Peggottys. David comments, \"If any one had told me, then, that all this was a brilliant game, played for the excitement of the moment. if any one had told me such a lie that night, I wonder in what manner of receiving it my indignation would have found a vent. Little Em'ly potential fate is also foreshadowed in the cautionary tale of Martha, Em'ly's former workmate who has fallen into disgrace. Though the nature of Martha's disgrace is not spelled out, there is no doubt that Dickens implies that she has become a prostitute. Both Martha and  Little Em'ly are examples of the undisciplined heart, in that they hold their bodies and their hearts too cheap and bestow them on unworthy recipients. Little Em'ly recognizes this in her impassioned lament that she has failed to appreciate Ham's steady love, but, like Steerforth, she proves too weak to rein in her wayward impulses. Steerforth does have a moment of self-reflection when he tells David that he regrets lacking the guidance of a father, but the moment soon passes and he does not act on the promptings of his conscience. Dickens's portrayal of the servant Littimer is heavily ironic and is used as a foreshadowing device. His quality of respectability is referred to so insistently that the reader cannot help but wonder just how respectable he really is. The child David, of course, takes Littimer's respectability at face value, but the irony that builds with each mention of the term suggests that Littimer's inner nature may turn out to be very different from his outward manners", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-xix-xxii"}