{"name": "Chapter XVII", "summary": "Chapter XVII: Somebody turns up. David receives a letter from Peggotty telling him that the furniture at his mother's house has been sold, that the Murdstones have moved away, and that the house is to be let or sold. Mr. Dick asks David if he knows the identity of the man who hides near Betsey's house and frightens her by creeping up behind her. One night, she was so frightened that she fainted. Mr. Dick has seen Betsey give him money. David has no idea who the man is. Mr. Dick takes to visiting the school, and becomes a good friend of Dr. Strong's. Uriah invites David to tea with him and his mother. David cannot decide whether he likes Uriah or detests him, but he agrees to the invitation because he does not wish to be thought too proud to visit the Heeps, as Uriah suggests he might be. David offers to teach Uriah some Latin to help with his law studies, but Uriah insists that he is too humble; he does not wish to outrage the feelings of his superiors by becoming too learned. David accompanies Uriah to his mother's house. Mrs. Heep is an older version of her son, and is equally keen to impress David with her humbleness. The Heeps pump David for information about Mr. Wickfield and Agnes, and David, not wanting to appear aloof, lets out more than he intends. He begins to feel manipulated. The gathering is interrupted by the appearance of Mr. Micawber, who happened to be passing in the street and saw David through the open door. David introduces Mr. Micawber to the Heeps. David accompanies Mr. Micawber to the hotel where he and his family are staying. Mrs. Micawber tells David that her husband did not succeed in finding a job in Plymouth and that her relatives there did not make them welcome. They are once again in a perilous financial situation. The next day, David feels uneasy when he sees Mr. Micawber walking arm-in-arm with Uriah. Despite the Micawbers' poverty, David enjoys a lavish dinner with them, at which they are very merry. However, the next day, he receives a letter from Mr. Micawber lamenting that he is unable to pay his hotel bill and that he expects his imminent \"destruction. Alarmed, David hurries to the hotel, but is relieved to see the Micawbers looking cheerful aboard the coach to London", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxv-xviii"}