{"name": "Chapter LVIII", "summary": "Chapter LVIII: Absence. David travels through Italy and settles in a valley in Switzerland. He is oppressed with sorrow at the loss of Dora, Steerforth, and Ham. One day, he receives a letter from Agnes. She writes that she is prospering and that she trusts that David will turn his suffering to good. He feels the sadness lift from his mind, and realizes how much he loves Agnes, but resolves that he will wait a year after Dora's death before making any decisions. In the meantime, he will try to become the fine person that Agnes believes him to be. He makes many friends in the valley, and writes a story, which Traddles publishes. His health, which was not good when he left England, is restored. He reflects that he foolishly threw away Agnes's love in his boyhood, and it was the dim awareness of this that made him feel as if he lacked something during his marriage to Dora. When these thoughts first come to him, he feels that he has a chance to cancel out the mistakes of the past, and marry Agnes. But as time passes, he convinces himself that it is too late, and that he has deservedly lost her. Having spent three years abroad, David returns to England. Analysis of Chapters LIII-LVIII. The storm has been referred to as the novel's climax, but in fact it hardly qualifies, since it only resolves two plotlines  that are incidental to the main character  and his plotline. However, the storm is an extremely important element in the story. It marks a transition point between the emotional conflicts and turmoil that precede it and the calmer, more reflective section that follows. The section before the storm focuses mainly on the plotlines involving supporting characters, and things that happen to David that are more or less outside his control; the section after the storm focuses mainly on David and his inner growth. Thus the storm is a catharsis or purification of emotional disturbances that had grown out of control: in particular, Steerforth's undisciplined nature and Ham's grief. It is fitting that Steerforth should meet his end in a storm at sea. Throughout the novel, he has manipulated and controlled other characters, causing chaos in their lives. The storm is a force of nature that he cannot control and which has no respect for those aspects of his nature that keep other people in thrall, such as charm and good looks. In a moment of poetic justice, the chaos that he caused rebounds on him, and destroys him. Even in his death, however, Steerforth's selfish nature is apparent. He is the last man alive on his ship, after the other men have been swept to their deaths, and his waving his red cap at those on the shore almost seems like an arrogant boast. Also, though he is only seconds from death, he has not yet finished his reckless destruction of the lives of others, in that Ham dies trying to save him. Ham's death is, like Steerforth's, a release of a sort. According to Mr. Peggotty, since Little Em'ly left, Ham has been placing himself in harm's way. When he goes into the sea to try to save Steerforth, a huge wave comes, and \"he seemed to leap up into it with a mighty bound. Though this is not quite suicide, Ham is certainly meeting death halfway. After the storm and the departure of the emigrants, the story is free to focus on the main character, David, and his maturation. Dora's death is instrumental in this process. Dora's childish and undisciplined nature mirrored David's childish and undisciplined infatuation with her. After she is dead, David's quieter, more mature love for Agnes has room to blossom. His sorrowful feeling that he has left it too late to be with Agnes is a vital part of his deserving her: he needs to recognize the harm he has done in throwing away her love, and he must feel repentance for it, before he has the right to offer her his heart. The manner of Dora's death is significant. In a moving death scene, Dora finally comes of age. With shining honesty, she tells David that she married too young and that he would have tired of her if she had lived longer. The fact that Dora dies in Agnes's arms rather than David's emphasizes the distance that has grown between the married pair and symbolizes Dora's blessing on Agnes as her successor. The fact that we later find out that Dora has explicitly given her blessing to David's marrying Agnes is almost incidental, as it has already been shown symbolically", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-liii-lviii"}