{"name": "Chapter XLVI", "summary": "Chapter XLVI: Intelligence. David is acquiring some fame as a writer. He is passing Mrs. Steerforth's house one day when a maid comes out and tells him that Rosa Dartle would like to see him. David finds her in the garden, and she summons Littimer and instructs him to tell David what has happened with Steerforth and Little Em'ly. Littimer reports that he has been traveling with the couple in continental Europe. At first, Steerforth was happy with Little Em'ly, who was very \"improvable\" and learned the languages of the countries they visited. But after some time, Steerforth became tired of her moods, and abandoned Little Em'ly with Littimer in a villa in Naples. Steerforth told Littimer to marry Em'ly himself, but Em'ly became furious and hysterical at this proposal. Littimer locked her in a room to prevent her doing any harm, but she escaped through a window and ran away. Littimer has seen nothing of her since. Steerforth insulted Littimer, and Littimer left his service and returned to England. He is now looking for a job. David says that he will report what Littimer has said to Mr. Peggotty, and he warns Littimer to stay out of public places. Littimer is unafraid, as in England, people are not allowed to take the law into their own hands. Rosa tells David that Steerforth is sailing off the coast of Spain, and that there is a breach between him and his mother. Rosa and Mrs. Steerforth  blame Little Em'ly for everything that has happened, with Rosa calling her a devil. They want her to be found in order to protect Steerforth from falling prey to her again. David reports what he has learned to Mr. Peggotty, who is in London. They decide to seek out Martha to ask her to help find Little Em'ly. They find her walking the city streets and follow her to a quieter area, where they will not be observed talking to her", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-xliii-xlvii"}