{"name": "Chapter LXIV", "summary": "Chapter LXIV: A last retrospect. David reflects on his life at the time when he finished writing his story. He sees himself and Agnes surrounded by their children; Betsey, over eighty years old but still active and upright; and Peggotty, still doing her needlework just as she did when David was a child. Betsey, who for so long compared David with his non-existent imaginary sister, Betsey Trotwood, is now godmother to a real Betsey Trotwood, one of David and Agnes's daughters. Rosa Dartle is still quarreling with Mrs. Steerforth. Julia Mills is married to a rich man and thinks of nothing but money. Jack Maldon continues to sneer at Dr. Strong. Dr. Strong is working on his dictionary and still happily married to Annie. Traddles, now a successful lawyer, lives in marital bliss with Sophy and as many of her sisters as are visiting. David ends his story with a prayer that his dear Agnes may be with him all his life. Analysis of Chapters LIX-CLXIV. Even in this final section of the novel, Dickens does not abandon his habit of keen observation of social problems. David's visit to the prison is a masterpiece of satire that retains its resonance even today. It points out the delusions of those reformers who, out of vanity, blind themselves to the failure of their theories; and highlights the problem  of prisoners who have worked out what certain elements of the prison authorities want to hear, and who faithfully deliver the desired message. Mr. Creakle is perhaps unable to see the hypocrisy of his fake penitents because his own hypocrisy blinds him to that quality in others, and because his vanity demands to be fed by the belief that he is reforming corrupted minds. This section provides resolutions for many of the characters, who receive their just deserts in line with the simple moral structure of the novel. Betsey, Mr. Peggotty, and Peggotty, who are good-hearted characters, enjoy a strong and robust old age. Betsey and Peggotty are much loved by David and his family, just as they have loved him. The self-centered Rosa Dartle and Mrs. Steerforth have failed to get over Steerforth's death and have condemned themselves to bitterness and quarreling. Mr. Creakle once ran a school like a prison and now is in charge of a real prison. Uriah and Littimer are mentally trapped within their dishonest natures just as physically, they are trapped in prison. Similarly, the Murdstones, once again engaged in destroying the spirit and happiness of an innocent, are disliked in their community and undergo a continual punishment; for they are turned inward, to feed upon their own hearts, and their own hearts are very bad feeding. The honest and loyal Traddles is successful and happy in his marriage. Little Em'ly and Mrs. Gummidge have transformed themselves through their sufferings and are rewarded by becoming useful and prosperous members of society. Mr. Micawber, who performed a selfless service to humanity in exposing Uriah at the expense of his own employment, is rewarded with prosperity and honor in his adopted community. The most deserving character is Agnes, who has loved David steadfastly and selflessly since she first knew him. She has stood by him as a friend even when he married another woman, given him wise advice in troubled times, and never complained or indulged in self-pity when her love was not returned in kind. At last, David is mature enough to deserve Agnes. Critics have commented that the recent fates of certain characters represent certain qualities that contribute to David's final maturation during his time of mourning and reflection in Switzerland. The deaths of the childish Dora and the frivolous Steerforth mark the end of David's enslavement to his own immature, frivolous, undisciplined emotional impulses, and marks his readiness to receive Agnes's quieter love. Ham's death is an act of heroic selflessness that is reflected in David's new consideration of Agnes's needs and desires over his own. Mr. Peggotty's tireless search for Little Em'ly shows the steady devotion that David will apply in his new life with Agnes and their children", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-lix-lxiv"}