{"name": "Chapter XXXII", "summary": "Chapter XXXII: The beginning of a long journey. David still loves Steerforth, though he recognizes his unworthiness and knows that they will never renew their friendship. Mr. Peggotty tells David that if he should ever meet Steerforth, he will kill him. He plans to begin his search for Little Em'ly in London. Mrs. Gummidge promises to stay and look after the house and keep it ready in case Little Em'ly returns. David is sought out by Miss Mowcher, who is in great distress over the part she unknowingly played in Little Em'ly's fate. When David expresses surprise that she is upset, she launches into a speech defending herself against popular prejudice, saying that it is not her fault that she was born a dwarf and that she has to affect a tough manner in order to survive in the world. She explains that Littimer told her that it was David who was in love with Little Em'ly. Littimer convinced her that Em'ly was in danger from David, and that Steerforth was trying to warn Em'ly of this. Thus, Miss Mowcher was persuaded to carry a letter from Steerforth to Little Em'ly, which marked the beginning of their affair. Miss Mowcher says she hopes that David believes her, advising him never to \"associate bodily defects with mental. David says that he does believe her, and that they were both innocent instruments of Steerforth. The next day, David and Mr. Peggotty travel to London. They visit Mrs. Steerforth. Mr. Peggotty gives her Little Em'ly's letter to read, and asks her if Steerforth is likely to keep his word and marry Em'ly. Mrs. Steerforth is unmoved by the letter and says it is out of the question for her son to marry a girl who is socially so inferior to him. She hints at her willingness to offer Mr. Peggotty money in compensation, but he refuses. Then, in an angry outburst, she voices her fury against her son, saying that he must get rid of Little Em'ly if he ever hopes to be forgiven. David realizes that Steerforth and his mother are alike in their unyielding spirits. Mrs. Steerforth dismisses Mr. Peggotty and David. As they are leaving, Rosa Dartle reproaches David for bringing Mr. Peggotty to the house. Rosa calls Steerforth corrupt, but says she cares nothing for Mr. Peggotty or his \"common niece. Mr. Peggotty sets off to look for Little Em'ly", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxxxi-xxxiv"}