{"name": "Chapter XXVIII", "summary": "Chapter XXVIII: Mr. Micawber's gauntlet. Mr. and Mrs. Micawber and Traddles accept David's invitation to dine at his apartment. Mrs. Crupp reluctantly agrees to cook for the party, but her dishes are unappetizing and the meat is undercooked. The guests re-cook the meat on the fire in David's rooms. The party is interrupted by Littimer, who is looking for Steerforth. Littimer insists on taking over the cooking and serving duties, which puts a dampening atmosphere on events. He refuses to tell David about Steerforth's recent movements, and eventually leaves. While discussing Mr. Micawber's talents and prospects, Mrs. Micawber says that her husband must \"throw down the gauntlet to society\" and advertise for employment in the newspapers. After the Micawbers go home, David warns Traddles not to lend Mr. Micawber any money, or to lend him his name in order to obtain credit. Traddles admits that he has already lent him his name. Mr. Micawber claimed that the bill was taken care of, but David wonders if this is true. When everyone has left, Steerforth arrives at David's apartment. Steerforth speaks contemptuously of Traddles, but David defends him. Then he reveals that he has come from Yarmouth. He has brought a letter for David from Peggotty. Peggotty writes that Mr. Barkis is very ill. Steerforth says that people die every day, and that what is important is to \"Ride over all obstacles, and win the race. David says he will visit Peggotty tomorrow, but Steerforth asks him to delay his visit by a day and to come with him to his mother's house. David agrees. David reads a letter that Mr. Micawber gave him before leaving. Mr. Micawber writes that all his belongings, along with those of Traddles, have been seized by bailiffs for his non-payment of a debt, which was not, after all, taken care of", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chapters-xxvii-xxx"}