{"name": "Chapter XXVI", "summary": "Chapter XXVI: I fall into captivity. David worries about how far Agnes will take her devotion to her father - implying that she may marry Uriah to remove the weight of caring for her from her father. David slightly mistrusts Steerforth now, and feels grateful that he is not with him. Mr. Spenlow invites David to his home and introduces him to his beautiful daughter, Dora, and her companion, who turns out to be Miss Murdstone. David falls in love with Dora at first sight. Miss Murdstone takes David aside and suggests that they both put aside their past differences and behave as if they were distant acquaintances. David replies that he feels that she was cruel to him and his mother, but he agrees to her suggestion. David meets Dora in the garden. As he converses with her, he grows even more infatuated. In the weeks that follow, David buys expensive clothes in the hopes of seeing - and impressing - Dora. When he does meet her, he worries afterwards in case she does not care for him. Mrs. Crupp notices that he is miserable, and guesses that he is in love. She tells him to cheer up and find some pastime to distract him. Analysis of Chapters XXIII-XXVI. Dickens creates vivid pictures to manipulate the reader's response to his characters. Some commentators have linked this skill to the fact that this novel, like many of Dickens' works, was originally written to be serialized. The more colorful and caricatured a character was, the more likely it was that the readers would remember him or her when they read the next episode. One example of a vivid picture is Uriah lying in front of David's fire, \"his legs extending to I don't know where, gurglings taking place in his throat, stoppages in his nose, and his mouth open like a post-office. Dickens here calls upon the reader's senses of sight and hearing, and, in David's concern to have his room aired after Uriah has slept in it, even that of smell. Another memorable picture is that of Uriah sitting on the roof of the coach in which he and Agnes are returning to Canterbury. Uriah, serpent-like and devilish, becomes \"her evil genius writhing on the roof, as if he had her in his clutches and triumphed. In this section, Dickens satirizes that part of the legal profession that is called the Doctors' Commons when he has Mr. Spenlow point out that the best kind of business was a disputed will, as the argument could be drawn out at great length. Also, because the expenses would come out of the estate at the end of the case, there was seldom any concern about keeping the proctor's fee low. Dickens also emphasizes that the job of proctor was able to keep a man in comfort with very little in the way of hard work, and that proctors operate as a clique, sending the same case round and round a small group of courts all run by the same legal practitioners. Dickens portrays proctors as a group of people whose concern is for themselves, not their clients. David is approaching adulthood but his perception of people is as yet immature. He is still mesmerized by Steerforth's charm and fails to see that he is vain and self-seeking. While David trusts him so much that he asks his advice on a career, Steerforth is contemptuous of the profession of proctor that David is considering, but nevertheless advises him to follow it. The implication is that Steerforth does not care enough about David to give him considered advice. In fact, Steerforth is a negative influence on David, leading him into a night of dissipation that leaves him poorer and sicker than before. While David idolizes Steerforth, he is blind to the fact that Agnes loves him, and even blinder to the fact that she would be an extremely suitable partner for him. Agnes, unlike Steerforth, has David's interests at heart and is genuinely concerned by Steerforth's influence over him. But David consigns her to the role of sister, and instead, falls in love with Dora, who is superficially enchanting but woefully unsuited to the role of his wife. Like David's mother, Dora is still a child, whose failure to control her snappy little dog Jip foreshadows her future failure to manage her household and her marriage. The superficial nature of David's relationship with Dora is shown in his concern with parading in new, expensive and uncomfortable clothes in order to impress her. Clothes make the outward appearance, not the inner man, and Dora appears not to be very interested in David's real nature. Indeed, she seems to be more interested in relating to her dog than to David. Agnes, in contrast, sees David at a low point, when he is drunk, ill, and behaving embarrassingly at the theatre. She does not judge David, but sees clearly what is going on in his life, counsels him with love, and invites him to confide in her as she confides in him. Agnes treats David as her equal and behaves as his equal, unlike Dora, who takes the role of child with all the adults in her life - her father, Miss Murdstone, and David. In spite of Dora's childlike nature, however, Dickens does not underestimate her power. The title of Chapter XXVI is \"I fall into captivity,\" and as soon as David meets Dora, he is as if under a spell: \"She was more than human to me. She was a Fairy, a Sylph, I don't know what she was - any thing that no one ever saw, and every thing that every body ever wanted. I was swallowed up in an abyss of love in an instant. He is \"a captive and a slave\" and loves her \"to distraction,\" that is, to the point of madness. These images show David's idealization of Dora, and the loss of his own identity and freedom in his love for her. His relationship with Dora is divorced from reality, which bodes ill for the practical requirements he has of a wife", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210214143214/https://www.novelguide.com/david-copperfield/summaries/chaptersxxiii-xxvi"}