{"name": "Volume II, Chapter Nine - The Gorgon's Head", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-2-chapter-9", "summary": "The chateau of the Marquis is a pretty great place. \"Chateau,\" by the way, is a French word for an estate or manor house of the nobility. This particular chateau seems very stony. It's got stone walls and stone battlements and stone lions on top of the stone battlements. The Marquis asks if his nephew has arrived. He hasn't. Asking for his supper to be laid, the Marquis stares out the window for a time. Finally, as he's coming to supper, the servants announce the arrival of his nephew. And his nephew is...Charles Darnay. We sort of knew that was coming. The two greet each other, but they don't exactly seem happy to be reunited. Darnay apologizes for being late. He's been detained by...business. Ever the gentleman, the Marquis accepts his apology. Darnay says that his task carried him into great danger--even possible death. We're guessing that he's referring to the trial for treason here. Moreover, he suspects that the Marquis was actually trying to support the accusations against him. Ever the gentleman, the Marquis doesn't say anything. Darnay suspects that the only reason he wasn't locked up forever in France is that the Marquis has been out of favor with the court for a while. In other words, his meddling in Darnay's business probably wouldn't have worked out the way the Marquis intended. Lamenting that the family name has fallen into such low regard, the Marquis suggests that people hate him because he's so much better than they are. Darnay doesn't exactly agree. Declaring that he's renounced his relationship with the family, Darnay begs his uncle to repair some of the damage that the family has done to those around them. Darnay says that his mother's dying wish was that the family would right some of the wrongs they've caused. The Marquis laughs at this folly. Angry, Darnay declares that he gives up his rights to the family land. He has a life in England now. The Marquis asks if Darnay has ever met a former patriot in England--a doctor with a young daughter. Darnay says he has. As Darnay leaves for the night, the Marquis mutters that he'd like to see him burned in his bed. Silence descends on the house. As the sun rises, terror grips the house. The Marquis has been stabbed in the night.", "analysis": ""}