{"name": "Volume II, Chapter Thirteen - The Fellow of No Delicacy", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-2-chapter-13", "summary": "Sydney Carton's not exactly a man with a lot of charm. Any charm he does have, however, he never displays when he goes to visit the Manettes. Today, for some reason, his feet seem to find their way to the Manettes' house of their own accord. He finds Lucie there alone. When she sees him, she immediately notices that he's even less well than he usually is. That's not saying much. She asks Carton what's wrong. He responds that his life is miserable and hopeless. She asks why he can't change. We know, we know--it's a useless question. Someone had to ask it, though. Carton doesn't answer directly. Instead, he begins one of the strangest love scenes in all of Dickens' novels. We're not even really sure that it's a love scene. See, Carton knows that Lucie couldn't love a man like him. In fact, that's exactly what he tells her. Dismayed, Lucie doesn't know what to say. Sure, she feels badly for Carton. She even cares about him. But the saddest thing in this whole deal is that he's right--and they both know it. True to her good-natured self, though, Lucie asks if there's anything that she can do to help him without promising to love him. Carton says that if anyone could have reformed him, she could have. It looks like he's past saving, then. Just like he thought he was. Apparently, Carton just dropped by to unburden himself...sort of like a very, very painful self-help session. Distraught, Lucie asks again if there's no way that she could be a force for good in his life. Carton seems to have moved past this, however. He begs her to keep this conversation confidential; it's the last time he'll ever confide in anyone, and he'd like to remember that it ended well. Seeing that Lucie seems upset, he entreats her not to be troubled by his sorrows. More than anything, he wants her to be happy. In fact, he's so committed to her happiness that he begs her to remember that he would give his own life to keep those that she loves safe. Bidding Lucie farewell, Carton rushes out the door.", "analysis": ""}