{"name": "Volume I, Chapter Two - The Mail", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-1-chapter-2", "summary": "Our friendly narrator sets the scene: it's a Friday night in November. We're on the Dover road. This should spark some bells for anyone who spent the summer traveling around Europe. Long, long ago, in the years before the Chunnel was built, people who wanted to travel to France took a boat from Dover to Calais. Based on this information, we're guessing that we're about to see some traveling going on. It's just a hunch. Anyhow, we zoom in on a guy who's supposed to be traveling by mail coach to Dover. A mail coach is a coach that, well, carries mail. And people. It's drawn by horses. We say that he's supposed to be in the coach because, at the moment, he's walking in the mud alongside it. In fact, all of the passengers on the coach are walking beside it. In the mud. And no one's all that happy about it. The horses, you see, have gotten bogged down in the mud. Since this is long before the time of cars , the passengers don't have any choice but to hop out and walk. Besides being muddy, it's cold and foggy and altogether disgusting. The longer we think about it, the less we understand why anybody would want to travel to Dover at all. Finally, the coachman manages to push the horses up to the top of the muddy hill. By the time they climb up it, it's almost 10:00. All of a sudden, the coachman hears horses' hooves pounding in the distance. A rider is following them! Everyone stops and listens as a horse draws up to the carriage. The rider of the horse asks for Mr. Jarvis Lorry. A small man answers. He seems to think that the rider's name is Jerry. As it turns out, this is because the rider's name is Jerry. We're starting to trust this Mr. Lorry already. Jerry gives Mr. Lorry a letter. All of the other passengers eye Jerry suspiciously. Now that Mr. Lorry's got a letter from Jerry, they eye him suspiciously, too. Mr. Lorry assures Joe that there's nothing wrong. He is from Tellson's Bank in London. Mentioning the name of Tellson's seems to do the trick. All of a sudden, everyone trusts Mr. Lorry. He reads the note that Jerry handed to him, and tells Jerry to ride back to London to deliver one message: \"Recalled to Life.\" Sound interesting? Just wait. It is! The coach starts off again . As it travels, Joe remarks to Tom that the message Mr. Lorry gave to Jerry was rather cryptic. Tom agrees. They puzzle over it for the rest of the journey.", "analysis": ""}