{"name": "Volume I, Chapter Three - The Night Shadows", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-1-chapter-3", "summary": "Let's all start with some philosophical reflections, shall we? If you really think about it, do you actually know the people around you? Do you really? If not, where does that leave you? Sad and lonely? Exactly. Our narrator starts out this chapter with some cheerful reflections. You don't know the people you love. Not really. Hey, we don't know the people we love. Every man is an island. It's all very existential. Actually, it's all very good writing, as well. We totally recommend that you check it out. It's only about a paragraph long. The synopsis, though, is this: death sucks so badly because it forces us to realize how much we don't know about the people around us. Meanwhile, Jerry is sitting in an alehouse, puzzling over the meaning of his latest assignment. He can't figure out the message that he's supposed to deliver, at all. Nonetheless, he decides to set off to London to deliver it. Meanwhile, the mail coach rattles its way down the road to Dover. Inside, Mr. Lorry dozes as he thinks. All of the sounds in the mail coach begin to sound like the sounds he knows so well--the sounds of Tellson's bank. Despite the comforting sounds of the bank, however, Mr. Lorry remains uneasy. He's uneasy because he's been given a difficult task: he's about to dig up the dead. Ugh! Wait, isn't that illegal? Well, yes. But that's not the sort of digging we're talking about. We'll get to that later. For now, though, Mr. Lorry imagines a conversation that he has with the dead. He asks the dead man if he's been recalled to life; the dead man says that he doesn't know. He asks the dead man if he'd like to see \"her.\" The man has a different answer for each time Mr. Lorry imagines the conversation. Sometimes he's very happy, other times he's almost angry. Playing the conversation out in his head over and over again, Mr. Lorry finally asks the dead man how long he's been buried. The answer, \"eighteen years,\" terrifies Mr. Lorry.", "analysis": ""}