{"name": "Book the Third: The Track of a StormVolume III, Chapter One - In Secret", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-3-chapter-1", "summary": "In 1792, traveling through France is pretty slow going. Okay: traveling in the 1700s was pretty slow all the time. We know that. But now it's extra slow. Even slower than before. Sloooooooow. Darnay, of course, happens to be traveling in 1792. He's not getting too far. Everywhere he goes, he's stopped. People have to check his papers. Then they have to re-check them. Meanwhile, Darnay waits for several hours. This happens over and over. And over. Finally, in the middle of the night, he's taken prisoner by a group of patriots. They deliver him to the local authorities, who decide that he's an emigrant and must be sent to Paris immediately. When Darnay tries to protest, he gets smacked around for a while. Apparently, folks have figured out that he's an aristocrat. Needless to say, they're not too happy about the news. Bundled into a carriage, Darnay begins the halting, slow journey to the capital. The patriots force him to pay for an armed escort into the capital. After all, anything could happen to him on the road. On the way, a man screams out that a decree has been passed: the property of all emigrants can be confiscated by the Republic. Darnay begins to realize that his trip might just be a bit more complicated than he'd planned. The crowds aren't all that pleased to see him pass. Some even threaten to kill the aristocrat. Others mutter that he'll be judged when he gets to Paris. Friendly country, huh? At the gates of the city, a guardsman asks for the papers of the prisoner. Darnay isn't too excited about the fact that he's gone from being a traveler to an emigrant to a prisoner. Sure enough, he's taken to the prison. Defarge is there. He identifies Darnay as \"Citizen Evremonde.\" The officer holding Darnay's papers looks at him, nods, and condemns him to prison. Aghast, Darnay wants to know why. He's done nothing wrong--nothing against the law. The man smiles grimly. He informs Darnay that there are new laws now. In fact, under these laws, emigrants have no rights at all. As they walk away, Defarge quietly asks Darnay if he's Dr. Manette's son-in-law. Darnay says he is. Desperate, Darnay turns to Defarge and begs for help. Defarge refuses. It's not in his power. Darnay asks if he'll be imprisoned without trial or any attention to justice. Sniffing a bit, Defarge says that many people have been unfairly imprisoned before. Darnay responds, \"But not by me.\" Defarge looks darkly at him for a minute, then walks in silence. Darnay asks for one favor: that Defarge will tell Mr. Lorry that Darnay has been imprisoned in La Force. Refusing, Defarge declares that he's a patriot. He can do nothing to help aristocrats. With that, Defarge turns Darnay over to the gaoler of La Force. The prison isn't that great a place to be. It's smelly and dark and all-around disgusting. Within the prison, Darnay is greeted by faded aristocrats who crowd against him in the small rooms. They're almost ghostly; their courtly manners are...just a bit creepy in this dismal location. Darnay ends up in a small tower. He begs the gaoler to sell him a pen and paper. The gaoler refuses. At present, the only thing Darnay can buy is food. Left alone in his cell, Darnay begins to pace frantically.", "analysis": ""}