{"name": "Volume I, Chapter Four - The Preparation", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210115212823/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/tale-of-two-cities/summary/volume-1-chapter-4", "summary": "Mr. Lorry finally arrives in Dover. He makes sure that there's a boat that's bound for Calais and leaving the next morning, and then he heads to the inn. As he comes down from his room for dinner, the landlady and the surrounding guests observe him: Mr. Lorry is a nice, neatly-dressed little man of around sixty years. He seems to be completely prim and proper, except for his eyes: they appear to be full of compassion and emotion. As our narrator points out, compassion and emotion aren't exactly valuable characteristics for a banker to possess. It's probably safe to assume that Mr. Lorry's worked hard to hide them well from his colleagues. When Mr. Lorry's breakfast arrives, he informs the landlady that a young woman will soon be arriving. He thinks that she'll ask for someone from Tellson's bank, but she won't know Mr. Lorry by name. Sure enough, the landlady has heard of Tellson's. She and Mr. Lorry have a friendly chat about the wonders of that reputable bank. Here's the synopsis: Tellson's is very, very reputable. It's been in London for 150 years. It also has a branch in Paris that's been around for nearly as long as the one in London. The landlady is suitably impressed. Wandering around the city of Dover, Mr. Lorry spends his day hashing and re-hashing the imaginary conversation he had with the dead man while he traveled. Around supper time, however, he returns to the inn. A young girl arrives just as he does; she's upstairs when he returns. A bit uneasy, Mr. Lorry pulls at his wig. That doesn't seem to do much good at all, but apparently it makes him feel better. He goes up to the young girl's room. By the fire, he sees a slender, young, pretty girl whose eyes are incredibly expressive--and incredibly familiar. In fact, they look just like the eyes of a young child whom he once carried from Calais to Dover eighteen years earlier. Miss Manette asks Mr. Lorry to be seated. She's been told that Mr. Lorry has information regarding her late father's property. He sits and explains that he's been sent to explain...something. After awkwardly attempting to explain that something for a good while, he finally puts forth a \"hypothetical\" story. Before he begins, however, he makes it absolutely clear that he is a \"man of business.\" As such, he asks for Miss Manette to listen to a small business matter. Long ago, a \"man of business\" was the trustee of a French doctor. This doctor had a small child. Ring any bells? It sure does for Miss Manette. She's turned pale and is listening excitedly. Mr. Lorry hastens to assure her that he feels nothing. He's a mere machine of the bank. Funny, the longer he talks, the harder it is for us to believe that. Miss Manette recognizes the story as being very, very much like that of her father's. Mr. Lorry agrees. There's one difference, however: this doctor is still alive. He urges Miss Manette to think of his story as a mere matter of business, but it doesn't seem to be working very well. Finally, he tells her that the mother of the young girl died when the child was two, after searching for her father for two years. Her father...well, her father has been found. He's alive. He may not be much more than alive, but at least they've finally found him. Mr. Lorry proposes that he and Miss Manette go together to Paris to find her father. Turning completely ashen, Miss Manette murmurs that she's going to see a ghost. She seems to have fainted completely away. Mr. Lorry has no idea what to do. Suddenly, a wild-looking red-haired woman rushes into the room. She flies into a fury at Mr. Lorry. How dare he upset her darling in this way? Ordering Mr. Lorry to fetch some smelling salts, she quickly brings Lucie back to consciousness. Mr. Lorry humbly asks if the woman will accompany Lucie to France. She offers a brusque reply: she's never seen any need to cross the water. For her mistress, however, she'll do anything.", "analysis": ""}