{"name": "part ii, Chapter III", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter III<PARAGRAPH>\"The Author sent for to Court. The Queen buys him of his Master the Farmer, and presents him to the King. He disputes with his Majesty's great Scholars. An Apartment at Court provided for the Author. He is in high Favour with the Queen. He stands up for the Honour of his own Country. His Quarrels with the Queen's Dwarf. PARAGRAPH>Having heard about the wondrous little creature that is making his way around the kingdom, the queen sends for him and his master to come to court. Gulliver immediately impresses the queen with his compliments and general manner, so she asks the farmer if he would be willing to sell Gulliver. The farmer, believing that Gulliver will die in about a month because he has lost so much weight from performing, quickly names a price. Gulliver is happy to live at court and be done with performing. He asks only that Glumdalclitch stay as well to continue taking care of him. PARAGRAPH>Afterward the queen carries Gulliver to the king's chamber. The king at first believes that Gulliver is some sort of mechanical creature, but he eventually believes that Gulliver is just helpless. Gulliver tries to explain that where he is from, everything is proportionate to him. PARAGRAPH>The queen has a small apartment built and new fine clothes tailored for Gulliver. She enjoys his company very much. Gulliver often comments that watching the Brobdingnag people eat or getting too close to their faces is quite repulsive. PARAGRAPH>Gulliver and the king spend a great deal of time discussing politics. Gulliver explains how things work where he is from. The king laughs at English politics, which puts Gulliver off at first. Soon, however, Gulliver realizes that his adventures have begun to sway him to the same opinion; his perspective has begun to change. PARAGRAPH>Gulliver finds an enemy in the queen's dwarf, who seems to be jealous of all the attention Gulliver is getting", "analysis": "Whatever Gulliver did not gain in perspective  during his time in Lilliput, he gains in Brobdingnag.  His time here not only gives Gulliver an understanding of what it is like to be powerless, but it also shows Gulliver how the Lilliputians must have felt when near him.  Of course this situation is even more intimidating because here there are many giants, while in Lilliput he was the only one.  This is how a Lilliputian would feel in England.  The differences Gulliver experiences between the two islands are heightened because of the close proximity of the trips.  Gulliver feels even smaller in Brobdingnag than he would have felt if he had never journeyed to Lilliput.<PARAGRAPH>Gulliver's newfound understanding of perspective helps him to feel powerless more profoundly-first for himself, when he curls up and rather pathetically hopes to die, and then for others, especially for the Lilliputians he left behind.  As his fear rises, he becomes more and more emotional, eventually becoming so overwhelmed that he gives up, curling up into the fetal position.<PARAGRAPH>Once Gulliver is brought to the farmer's house, many challenges await him because of his lack of power in this land.  A mere baby threatens his life, as do two common rats.  Gulliver is able to fight them off in a seemingly heroic fashion, but it is clear that he could have lost the fight.  Gulliver is also surprised by the aesthetic differences of the world from this new perspective.  The nurse's breast is disgusting to him because he can clearly see every deformity and blemish.  He imagines what the Lilliputians thought of his physicality.<PARAGRAPH>In these chapters we again see Gulliver as less than heroic.  Just as in Lilliput, when Gulliver did not fight against his captivity , here Gulliver does nothing to try to avoid being captured.  He waits until he is about to be stepped on before taking any action at all.  And he only begs for mercy from the giant Brobdingnags.  Gulliver relies on the protection of a young girl who tucks him into a doll's cradle at night. Gulliver survives and thrives only partly on the basis of his good manners. For the most part, he is a pet and a curiosity.<PARAGRAPH>Gulliver's compliance continues when he is required to perform so that the farmer can earn money.  Gulliver becomes drastically emaciated, but he never resists what he is being told to do.  In fact, readers do not really learn that Gulliver hated his task until he is out of danger and complains to the queen of Brobdingnag.  Once Gulliver is seemingly safe at the court and has gained favor with the queen, he remains a plaything with very little respect, especially from the ladies at court.<PARAGRAPH>As a tiny person in the Brobdingnag world, Gulliver endures several trials that a larger person would never have to suffer.  This again reminds the reader of the importance of physical strength as well as intellectual strength.  Even when combat is not an issue, a large stature intimidates one's opponent.  As a tiny person, Gulliver is left to the whims of those around him.   In the fifth chapter, for instance, Gulliver is captured by a small monkey that would have been a minor threat in England.<PARAGRAPH>The overreaction of the queen and the rest of the government to this incident sheds important light on the Brobdingnag government.  It seems that this government is rash.  The killing of the monkey also shows that Gulliver has more status in the court than that of a toy or an animal. His nemesis is the dwarf, who used to be the small man in court.<PARAGRAPH>The king and Gulliver have long conversations about politics, but the king never really considers Gulliver's opinions on important matters. Being small, Gulliver is considered petty, and the idea of gaining power through gunpowder is anathema to the king. Through Gulliver's discussions with the king, the reader learns that perspective extends beyond size to opinion.  After several days of discussing the governments of England and Brobdingnag, the king declares the English to be \"the most pernicious Race of Little odious Vermin that Nature ever suffered to crawl upon the Surface of the Earth.\"  Again Gulliver's Travels brings light to the fact that people from different backgrounds often have different opinions on the same subjects, even though people tend to follow similar patterns. Gulliver finds that each people prefers its own ways, but a traveler who spends a long time elsewhere might  come to prefer the foreigners' ways over his own. Experience, thought, and tradition are important considerations in making this choice.<PARAGRAPH>As for gunpowder, for Gulliver , gunpowder represents the height of achievement primarily because of the power it has provided. The Brobdingnag king, however, is not corrupted by power.  He is able to see that the negative effects of gunpowder would far outweigh the positive ones in his society.  He might be right that Gulliver is narrow-minded, but his tirade on the general stupidity of the Brobdingnags takes the opposite point of view. Still, on this issue he is unable to see his own faults or those of his society. It is up to Swift to show us, through Gulliver's tale, what Gulliver's insistence on gunpowder means.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417013424/https://www.gradesaver.com/gullivers-travels/study-guide/summary-part-ii-a-voyage-to-brobdingnag"}