{"name": "Chapters 25\u201327", "summary": "Chapter 25  Emma\u2019s good opinion of Frank Churchill is injured when he makes a day trip to London just to have his hair cut. Though Emma does not feel inclined to give up her vow to remain single, she decides that Frank is pleasing enough that she does not mind being associated with him in other people\u2019s minds. Mr. Knightley thinks Frank is a silly young man, just as he had suspected. \tMeanwhile, an invitation from the Coles, successful tradespeople who live in Highbury, creates a conundrum for Emma. She had originally decided that she would not accept an invitation from the nouveau-riche family, but when everyone except the Woodhouses receives an invitation to a dinner party at the Coles\u2019 home, Emma feels left out. When an invitation arrives, she decides to accept it.  Chapter 26  Emma arrives at the Coles\u2019 party behind Mr. Knightley. Because Knightley usually walks, Emma is surprised that he has come in his carriage. At dinner, it is revealed that Jane Fairfax has received the mysterious gift of a pianoforte. People assume the piano is from Colonel Campbell, but Emma tells Frank she suspects that it is a gift from Mr. Dixon. When Jane arrives later, she blushes when questioned about the piano. \tMeanwhile, Mrs. Weston tells Emma that Mr. Knightley brought his carriage so that he could convey Jane home. Mrs. Weston suggests that a match may be forming between Jane and Mr. Knightley, but Emma resists this supposition vigorously, explaining that she cannot bear the thought of Mr. Knightley marrying because then her nephew, George and Isabella\u2019s son Henry, will not be able to inherit Donwell Abbey, the Knightley estate in the town of the same name. Mrs. Weston suspects that Mr. Knightley is the one who sent Jane the pianoforte. \tEmma and Jane sing and play the piano for the company, with Frank accompanying. When Frank persuades Jane to sing one more song after her voice has begun to grow hoarse, Mr. Knightley intervenes. Emma questions Mr. Knightley about the carriage and pianoforte. His answers convince her that he did not send the gift, but do not enable her to decide if he has feelings for Jane. When impromptu dancing begins, she is relieved that he does not ask Jane to dance. Emma is also pleased that Frank immediately asks her and not Jane for a dance. There is time for only two dances, however, before the party breaks up. Frank comments to Emma that he is lucky the dancing had to end; otherwise he would have found himself asking Jane Fairfax for a dance.  Chapter 27  Emma is thoroughly pleased with her evening at the Coles, but she is uncertain about the appropriateness of telling Frank about her suspicions about Jane or acknowledging the superiority of Jane\u2019s musical abilities. At the Coles\u2019 party, Harriet heard that Mr. Martin had dined with the Cox family, and there is a rumor that a Cox daughter would like to marry Mr. Martin. To distract and protect Harriet, Emma accompanies her on a shopping trip. They then decide to pay a visit to the Bates household and run into Frank and Mrs. Weston on their way. The visit seems to have been Frank\u2019s idea, but he offers to stay with Emma and send Mrs. Weston to make the visit on her own. Emma sends him along, knowing that he will later come see her at Hartfield, but Miss Bates then comes into the shop to ask Emma to come give her opinion of Jane\u2019s new pianoforte. In her rambling, Miss Bates reveals that Mr. Knightley has sent his last apples of the season to Jane, who is particularly fond of them.<PARAGRAPH>", "analysis": "Chapters 25\u201327 Emma\u2019s indecision about whether to attend the Coles\u2019 dinner party brings the novel\u2019s complicated treatment of the issue of class to the fore. It is difficult for us, as modern-day, democratically minded readers, to agree with Austen\u2019s acceptance of the idea that class differences delineate real differences in intelligence and moral and emotional refinement. Yet Mr. Knightley\u2019s objection to a match between Harriet and Mr. Elton, because Harriet\u2019s unknown parentage means that she belongs to a lower class, makes it seem that Austen reinforces the class hierarchy. Throughout the novel, Knighley\u2019s reason and judgment stand in as surrogates for Austen\u2019s own, and whether or not she believes that class distinctions are always fair, Austen certainly does not aim to overturn the notion of class. \tAt the same time, Austen ridicules Emma\u2019s scrupulous and wavering decision about whether to refuse the Coles\u2019 invitation, emphasizing Emma\u2019s vanity. When the narrator tells us that Emma \u201cregretted that her father\u2019s known habits would be giving her refusal less meaning than she could wish\u201d\u2014that Emma is worried that the Coles will think she has refused the invitation because her father is antisocial rather than because the Coles are beneath the Woodhouses\u2014we see that Emma doesn\u2019t simply believe herself superior to the Coles. She mean-spiritedly desires to make the Coles feel slighted. The fact that both Mr. Weston and Mr. Knightley accept the Coles\u2019 invitation further reinforces the unreasonable nature of Emma\u2019s scruples. \tIn her evaluation of Frank Churchill, Emma shows her understanding of class to be truly superficial and dangerous. When Frank elegantly laughs off his folly in going to London for a haircut, Emma observes, \u201c[S]illy things do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent way. Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not always folly. It depends upon the character of those who handle it.\u201d Frank does not seem to us the \u201csensible\u201d person Emma tells herself he is, so we see that the real reason Emma excuses Frank\u2019s frivolous behavior is his elegant, charming manner\u2014the result of his high-class upbringing. Finally, when Mr. Knightley meets Emma at the Coles\u2019, he mocks Emma\u2019s approving statement that his arrival by carriage befits a gentleman, saying, \u201cHow lucky that we should arrive at the same moment; for, if we had met first in the drawing-room, I doubt whether you would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual.\u201d Knightley\u2019s comment highlights the fact that Emma does sometimes base her class consciousness on appearances but also that, for Emma\u2019s opinions of Knightley, their usual familiarity overrides this potentially dangerous way of looking at things.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227043948/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/emma/section9/"}