{"name": "Chapters 40\u201342", "summary": "Chapter 40  Harriet comes to tell Emma that her infatuation with Mr. Elton has passed and to relinquish the trinkets she has kept to remember him by. First, she shows Emma a bit of court-plaster (used at the time as a bandage) that she had lent to Mr. Elton when he cut himself. He had used what he needed but discarded the rest, which Harriet then kept. Emma feels guilty in recalling that she had lied and said that she did not have any court-plaster, so that Harriet would have the opportunity to be Elton\u2019s healer. Harriet\u2019s second trinket is a useless bit of pencil Elton had discarded. She throws both items into the fire, and Emma hopes that Frank might take Elton\u2019s place. Her hopes seem to be rewarded when, during another conversation, Harriet says she will never marry, inciting Emma\u2019s suspicion that Harriet does not think that she will marry because she is interested in someone of a higher class. After some hesitation, Emma asks if Harriet has feelings for someone of higher rank. Harriet says yes, and Emma comments that she is not surprised, given the service that this person rendered Harriet. Emma says that they must not discuss it anymore, and she advises Harriet to be cautious but not to give up all hope.  Chapter 41  Mr. Knightley begins to suspect that there is some secret understanding between Frank and Jane. During a walk with Emma, Harriet, Mr. and Mrs. Weston, Frank, Jane, and Miss Bates, Knightley witnesses a strange exchange. Frank asks Mrs. Weston if anything has come of Mr. Perry\u2019s plan to buy a carriage. She has no idea what he is talking about, and he swears that she wrote of it in a letter to him some months ago. She denies it, and Frank decides he must have dreamed it. Miss Bates remembers that there was talk of the Perrys getting a carriage at her house (with Jane present) but that it was a secret. Mr. Knightley observes Frank trying to catch Jane\u2019s eye after this. \tThe party reaches Hartfield, and Emma persuades everyone to come in for tea. A word game ensues, which Mr. Knightley watches. Frank constructs the word \u201cblunder\u201d using alphabet tiles, which he shows to Jane. Then he constructs the word \u201cDixon,\u201d shows it to Emma, who laughs, and then shows it to Jane, who pushes the puzzle away in anger. When the party breaks up, Knightley stays behind to speak to Emma\u2014he knows that everyone considers her the object of Frank\u2019s affection, and he wishes to warn her. Knightley asks Emma about the \u201cDixon\u201d joke, and, embarrassed, she refuses to explain. He tells her his suspicion about Jane and Frank, and she laughs at him, stating unequivocally that she can answer for Frank\u2019s indifference to Jane. Knightley is silenced and irritated by Emma\u2019s implication that she is in Frank\u2019s confidence.  Chapter 42  An outing to Box Hill is planned, but it has to be postponed because of a lame horse. Mr. Knightley half-jokingly suggests that the party come to his estate instead. Mrs. Elton seizes upon the idea, and Knightley has to be firm to prevent her from planning all the details. Meanwhile, the lame horse heals, and it is decided that the Box Hill party will follow the one at Donwell Abbey, Knightley\u2019s estate. At Donwell Abbey, Emma enjoys examining Knightley\u2019s house and grounds. She overhears Jane resisting a governess \u201csituation\u201d that Mrs. Elton has found for her. Walking through the garden, Emma finds Harriet and Knightley looking out over the Martin family home and thinks the two an odd grouping, but is nevertheless convinced that Harriet is in good hands. Mrs. Weston is worried by the fact that Frank is late coming from Richmond. At the house, Emma encounters an agitated Jane, who asks her to tell everyone else that she has walked home. Frank then turns up out of humor and in the course of conversation says that he would like to go abroad. Emma teases him out of his mood, and he promises to join the Box Hill trip.", "analysis": "Chapters 40\u201342 Even though Emma has resolved to use more discretion in promoting a match between Harriet and Frank than she used when encouraging Harriet\u2019s affection for Mr. Elton, she manages to cause a misunderstanding precisely because she shies away from explicit statements. When Emma says of Harriet\u2019s new object of affection, \u201cThe service he rendered you was enough to warm your heart,\u201d she is referring to Frank, who saved Harriet from the Gypsies. Harriet, however, thinks of Mr. Knightley, who saved her from humiliation by asking her to dance. \tIn the way it keeps us in the dark about the truth of various characters\u2019 feelings, Emma reads like a detective novel. The picnic presents subtle mysteries: Jane\u2019s agitation is not explained, nor is Frank\u2019s sudden ill temper. We suspect that Jane\u2019s and Frank\u2019s bad moods must be linked, but Austen keeps us in suspense as to what exactly has transpired. Even straightforward Mr. Knightley is drawn into the atmosphere of speculation when he suggests that Jane and Frank have been corresponding throughout Frank\u2019s absence. Also, Knightley wrongly takes Emma\u2019s statement that Frank has no feelings for Jane as a suggestion that Frank and Emma have some sort of romantic association. In truth, Emma\u2019s confidence is purely the result of the unflattering things Frank has said to her about Jane.<PARAGRAPH>The word game the party plays in Chapter 41 functions as a metaphor for all the games of private concealment and revelation that characterize Highbury society. Emma and Mr. Knightley are both able to decode the words that Frank makes, but, because they possess different kinds of information, they interpret these words differently. Knightley understands that the word \u201cblunder\u201d must refer to Frank\u2019s misplaced question to Mrs. Weston about Mr. Perry\u2019s carriage, a message that Emma is unable to decode. Emma interprets \u201cDixon\u201d as a cruel joke on Jane, but Knightley rightly understands that Frank\u2019s presentation of the word to Jane is a mark of some intimacy between them. When Knightley observes to himself, \u201cThese letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick. It was a child\u2019s play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank Churchill\u2019s part,\u201d he makes explicit the novel\u2019s suggestion that social intercourse is a game with particular rules. Like a game, social interaction requires skill and sometimes produces winners and losers. \tAlthough the narrator typically describes all events from Emma\u2019s point of view, Chapter 41 is unique in that it is narrated entirely from Mr. Knightley\u2019s point of view, depending on what he can see of the word games transpiring in the parlor. By shifting to Mr. Knightley\u2019s point of view, we get a new perspective on the mixture of knowledge and bewilderment that each character experiences. This new emphasis on Mr. Knightley\u2019s character and point of view subtly alerts us that he is becoming a central character.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227043948/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/emma/section14/"}