{"name": "volume 1, CHAPTER 10", "summary": "CHAPTER 10 Summary Emma, accompanied by Harriet, pays a visit to a poor, sick family in Highbury. On the way, they pass along the road that leads to the cottage of Elton. Emma suggests that Harriet will soon be staying in that cottage. Harriet then asks Emma why she is not married and does not desire to marry. Emma explains that she has not yet met any young man superior to her in intelligence, whom she can love. Also, since she has money, she is not afraid of remaining unmarried; she knows she will not end up like Miss Bates, depending on the charity of others. As the mistress of Hartfield, she has social position and can stay occupied with her drawing, reading, singing, and handicrafts. Finally, she feels she does not need children since she has her nephews and nieces to love. When Emma and Harriet visit the poor family, Emma gives them financial help. On their way home, they meet Elton; he has seen them going into town and has watched for their return, but he makes it seem like chance. When he walks with them, Emma purposely falls behind to leave Elton and Harriet together. Emma then stops to repair her shoelace, which she has purposely broken. Elton asks the ladies to go to his house so Emma can find some ribbon to temporarily put in her shoe. Emma leaves Elton and Harriet alone and takes a long time to adjust her shoes. She hopes that Elton will take the opportunity to propose to Harriet. Emma is disappointed to find that they hardly speak to one another. She consoles herself and believes that Elton will propose to Harriet in the future. Notes Emma's visit to the poor sick family shows her kindness to and consideration for the poor, as is expected of the upper classes. This is in contrast to Emma's willfulness and conceit. When she speaks with Harriet about why she is not married, she tells her that she has found no man who is intelligent enough for her. She also explains that she is rich and does not need a husband to support her. Emma's arrogant attitude is unbecoming. Emma's distaste for Miss Bates also reveals her social snobbery and her dislike for Miss Bates' habit or reading about her niece, Jane Fairfax, hints that Emma views her as a rival. Emma's views on marriage are filled with self-delusion. She protests too loudly about getting married herself, and the reader knows that she is too immature to analyze her own feelings properly. Her conversation about marriage, however, highlights the problems of women in the times of Jane Austen. Emma herself is in favor of marriage for love and admits that she has not met a man whom she can really love. Emma, however, is very lucky, for she has the means to support herself and nieces and nephews to love. Unfortunately, most young women in her time had to marry primarily for economic security. If they were unable to find a husband, they would wind up as old maids, to be pitied and dependent on the charity of others. Miss Bates is a perfect example", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820053844/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmEmma24.asp"}