{"name": "Chapter  10", "summary": "Chapter 10<PARAGRAPH>Summary<PARAGRAPH>Victor's wanderings bring him to the glacier on Mount Montanvert and the monster confronts him again. Victor wishes to destroy his creation or die in the attempt, but the monster convinces Victor to listen to his story.<PARAGRAPH>The monster has been living in a hut and there he tells his story to Victor.<PARAGRAPH>Interpretation<PARAGRAPH>Again there are numerous Gothic references in this chapter, and further examples of Shelley's descriptive writing is evident here. Victor: \"I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded over the crevices in the ice among which I had walked with caution; his stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of a man '''''.. abhorred monster! Fiend that thou art! The tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! You reproach me with your creation; come on then, that I may extinguish the spark which I so negligently bestowed.\" In reply the monster eloquently responds, \"Life, although it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. Remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my joints more supple. '''' I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and docile to my natural lord and king.\"<PARAGRAPH>Shelley reveals to the reader that this is an intelligent creation that is aware of its relationship to Victor, the author of his life. So we now have a twist to the tale in that this monster is a reasoning being and, therefore, just like any other man know the difference between good and evil.<PARAGRAPH>Again, there is reference to a storm providing the reader with a hint of what is to come. This scene on the glacier parallels the earlier North Pole scenes and perhaps Shelley uses this pristine environment to contrast with the blackness of the monster and his evil intent. No doubt Victor is surprised at the eloquence of the monster, and this makes him curious to hear the monster's story. The monster also likens himself to Adam who was God's first creation, just as he is Victor's."}