{"name": "Overview", "summary": "Jane Eyre is the story of a young, orphaned girl (shockingly, she\u2019s named Jane Eyre) who lives with her aunt and cousins, the Reeds, at Gateshead Hall. Like all nineteenth-century orphans, her situation pretty much sucks.<PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Reed hates Jane and allows her son John to torment the girl. Even the servants are constantly reminding Jane that she\u2019s poor and worthless. At the tender age of ten, Jane rises up against this treatment and tells them all exactly what she thinks of them. (We wish we could\u2019ve been there to hear it!) She\u2019s punished by being locked in \"the red room,\" the bedroom where her uncle died, and she has a hysterical fit when she thinks his ghost is appearing. After this, nobody knows what to do with her, so they send her away to a religious boarding school for orphans\u2014Lowood Institute.At Lowood, which is run by the hypocritical ogre Mr. Brocklehurst, the students never have enough to eat or warm clothes. However, Jane finds a pious friend, Helen Burns, and a sympathetic teacher, Miss Temple. Under their influence, she becomes an excellent student, learning all the little bits and pieces of culture that made up a lady\u2019s education in Victorian England: French, piano-playing, singing, and drawing.<PARAGRAPH>Unfortunately, an epidemic of typhus breaks out at the school, and Helen dies\u2014but of consumption, not typhus. (We always knew she\u2019d be a martyr.) Jane remains at Lowood as a student until she\u2019s sixteen, and then as a teacher until she\u2019s eighteen. When Miss Temple leaves the school to get married, Jane gets a case of wanderlust and arranges to leave the school and become a governess.The governess job that Jane accepts is to tutor a little French girl, Ad\u00e8le Varens, at a country house called Thornfield. Jane goes there thinking that she\u2019ll be working for a woman named Mrs. Fairfax, but Mrs. Fairfax is just the housekeeper; the owner of the house is the mysterious Mr. Rochester, and he's Ad\u00e8le's guardian, although we\u2019re not sure whether she\u2019s his daughter. Jane likes Thornfield, although not the third floor, where a strange servant named Grace Poole works alone and Jane can hear eerie laughter coming from a locked room.One evening when Jane\u2019s out for a walk, she meets a mysterious man when his horse slips and he falls\u2014of course, this is Mr. Rochester. Jane and Rochester are immediately interested in each other. She likes the fact that he\u2019s craggy, dark, and rough-looking instead of smooth and classically handsome. She also likes his abrupt, almost rude manners, which she thinks are easier to handle than polite flattery. He likes her unusual strength and spirit and seems to find her almost unworldly; he\u2019s always comparing her to a fairy or an elf or a sprite.Rochester quickly learns that he can rely on Jane in a crisis\u2014one evening, Jane finds Rochester asleep in his bed with the curtains and his bedclothes on fire, and she puts out the flames and rescues him. Jane and Rochester have fascinating conversations in the evenings and everything seems to be going really well\u2026 until Rochester invites a bunch of his rich friends to stay at Thornfield, including the beautiful Blanche Ingram. Rochester lets Blanche flirt with him constantly in front of Jane to make her jealous and encourages rumors that he\u2019s engaged to Blanche. Don't worry, though\u2014it's really only Jane he wants.During the weeks-long house party, a man named Richard Mason shows up, and Rochester seems afraid of him. At night, Mason sneaks up to the third floor and somehow gets stabbed and bitten (ew). Rochester asks Jane to tend Richard Mason's wounds secretly while he fetches the doctor. The next morning before the guests find out what happened, Rochester sneaks Mason out of the house.Before Jane can discover more about the mysterious situation, she gets a message that her Aunt Reed is very sick and is asking for her. Jane, forgiving Mrs. Reed for mistreating her when she was a child, goes back to take care of her dying aunt. When Jane returns to Thornfield, Blanche and her friends are gone, and Jane realizes how attached she is to Mr. Rochester. Although he lets her think for a little longer that he\u2019s going to marry Blanche, eventually Rochester stops teasing Jane and proposes to her. She blissfully accepts.Everything seems to be going great... until we notice that there\u2019s still a third of the book left. That means something bad is about to happen.It's the day of Jane and Rochester's wedding. It should be the happiest day of Jane's life, but during the church ceremony two men show up claiming that Rochester is already married. Dum dum dummm. Rochester admits that he is married to another woman, but tries to justify his attempt to marry Jane by taking them all to see his wife.<PARAGRAPH>Mrs. Rochester is Bertha Mason, the \"madwoman in the attic\" who tried to burn Rochester to death in his bed, stabbed and bit her own brother (Richard Mason), and who\u2019s been doing other creepy things at night. Rochester was tricked into marrying Bertha fifteen years ago in Jamaica by his father, who wanted him to marry for money and didn't tell him that insanity ran in Bertha\u2019s family. Rochester tried to live with Bertha as husband and wife, but she was too horrible, so he locked her up at Thornfield with a nursemaid, Grace Poole.<PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, he traveled around Europe for ten years trying to forget Bertha and keeping various mistresses. Ad\u00e8le Varens (Jane's student) is the daughter of one of these mistresses, though she may not be Rochester\u2019s daughter. Eventually he got tired of this lifestyle, came home to England, and fell in love with Jane.After explaining all this, Rochester claims that he\u2019s not really married because his relationship with Bertha isn\u2019t a real marriage. The main problem is that he can\u2019t divorce her (because it was pretty tough to get a divorce at all in the Victorian period, and Bertha\u2019s behavior isn\u2019t grounds for a divorce, since she\u2019s mentally ill and therefore not responsible for her actions). He wants Jane to go and live with him in France, where they can pretend to be a married couple and act like husband and wife. Jane refuses to be his next mistress and runs away before she\u2019s tempted to agree.Jane travels in a random direction away from Thornfield. Having no money, she almost starves to death before being taken in by the Rivers family, who live at Moor House near a town called Morton. The Rivers siblings\u2014Diana, Mary, and St. John\u2014are about Jane\u2019s age and well-educated, but somewhat poor. They take whole-heartedly to Jane, who has taken the pseudonym \"Jane Elliott\" so that Mr. Rochester can\u2019t find her. Jane wants to earn her keep, so St. John arranges for her to become the teacher in a village girls\u2019 school.<PARAGRAPH>When Jane\u2019s uncle Mr. Eyre dies and leaves his fortune to his niece, it turns out that the Rivers siblings are actually Jane\u2019s cousins, and she shares her inheritance with the other three. (Now she\u2019s Jane Heir, hey-o.)St. John, who is a super-intense clergyman, wants to be more than Jane\u2019s cousin (back when that wasn't considered gross). He admires Jane\u2019s work ethic and asks her to marry him (how un-romantic), learn Hindustani, and go with him to India on a long-term missionary trip. Jane is tempted because she thinks she\u2019d be good at it and that it would be an interesting life. Still, she refuses because she knows she doesn\u2019t love St. John. To top it off, St. John actually loves a different a girl named Rosamond Oliver, but he won\u2019t let himself admit it because he thinks she would make a bad wife for a missionary.Jane offers to go to India with him, but just as his cousin and co-worker, not as his wife. St. John won't give up and keeps pressuring Jane to marry him. Just as she\u2019s about to give in, she supernaturally hears Mr. Rochester\u2019s voice calling her name from somewhere far away.The next morning, Jane leaves Moor House and goes back to Thornfield to find out what\u2019s going on with Mr. Rochester. She finds out that Mr. Rochester searched for her everywhere and, when he couldn\u2019t find her, sent everyone else away from the house and shut himself up alone. After this, Bertha set the house on fire one night and burned it to the ground. Rochester rescued all the servants and tried to save Bertha, too, but she committed suicide and he was injured. Now Rochester has lost an eye and a hand and is blind in the remaining eye.Jane goes to Mr. Rochester and offers to take care of him as his nurse or housekeeper. What she really hopes is that he'll ask her to marry him\u2014and he does. They have a quiet wedding, and after two years of marriage Rochester gradually gets his sight back. St. John Rivers, meanwhile, goes to India alone and works himself to death there over the course of several years.", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210624193654/https:/www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/jane-eyre/summary"}