{"name": "Chapter 9", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 9<PARAGRAPH>Hindley came in raging drunk and swearing, and caught Ellen in the act of trying to hide Hareton in a cupboard for his safety. Hindley threatened to make Nelly swallow a carving knife, and even tried to force it between her teeth, but she bravely said she'd rather be shot, and spat it out. Then he took up Hareton and said he would crop his ears like a dog, to make him look fiercer, and held the toddler over the banister. Hearing Heathcliff walking below, Hindley accidentally dropped the child, but fortunately Heathcliff caught him. Looking up to see what had happened, he showed \"the intensest anguish at having made himself the instrument of thwarting his own revenge\". In other words, he hated Hindley so much that he would have liked to have him to kill his own son by mistake. If it had been dark, Ellen said, \"he would have tried to remedy the mistake by smashing Hareton's skull on the steps. Hindley was somewhat shaken, and began to drink more. Heathcliff told Nelly he wished Hindley would drink himself to death, but that was unlikely to happen as he had a strong constitution. PARAGRAPH>In the kitchen Cathy came to talk to Nelly. Cathy said she was unhappy, that Edgar had asked her to marry him, and she had accepted. She asked Nelly what she should have answered. Nelly asked her if and why she loved Edgar; she said she did for a variety of material reasons: \"he will be rich, and I shall like to be the greatest woman in the neighborhood, and I shall be proud of such a husband\". Nelly disapproved, and Cathy admitted that she was sure she was wrong: she had had a dream in which she went to heaven and was unhappy there because she missed Wuthering Heights. She said:<PARAGRAPH>\"I have no more business to marry Edgar Linton than I have to be in heaven; and if the wicked man in there had not brought Heathcliff so low, I shouldn't have thought of it. It would degrade me to marry Heathcliff, now; so he shall never know how I love him; and that, not because he's handsome, Nelly, but because he's more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same, and Linton's is as different as a moonbeam from lightening, or frost from fire. PARAGRAPH>Heathcliff left after hearing that it would degrade her to marry him and did not hear Cathy's confession of love. Nelly told Cathy that Heathcliff would be deserted if she married Linton, and Cathy indignantly replied that she had no intention of deserting Heathcliff, but would use her influence to raise him up. Nelly said Edgar wouldn't like that, to which Cathy replied: \"Every Linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing, before I could consent to forsake Heathcliff. PARAGRAPH>Later that night it turned out that no one knew where Heathcliff was. Cathy went out in the storm looking for him, unsuccessfully--he had run away. The next morning she was sick. After some time she went to stay with the Lintons  a healthier environment  and she got better, although Edgar and Isabella's parents caught the fever from her and died. She returned to Wuthering Heights \"saucier, and more passionate, and haughtier than ever\". When Nelly said that Heathcliff's disappearance was her fault, Cathy stopped speaking to her. She married Edgar three years after Mr. Earnshaw's death, and Ellen unwillingly went to live with her at the Grange, leaving Hareton to live with his wretched father and Joseph", "analysis": "In this chapter we first hear young Heathcliff speak, and it is worth noting how his language differs from the narrators we have heard so far. He is more expressive and emotional than Lockwood or Ellen, and his speech is more literary than Ellen's and less artificial than Lockwood's. He tends to speak in extreme and vibrant terms: expressing his scorn for Edgar Linton's cowardice and whiny gentility, he says: \"I'd not exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for Edgar Linton's at Thrushcross Grange  not if I might have the privilege of flinging Joseph off the highest gable, and painting the housefront with Hindley's blood!\"  He admires the comparative luxury of the Grange and recognizes its beauty, but he remains entirely devoted to the freedom of his life with Cathy, and cannot understand the selfishness of the spoiled children: \"When would you catch me wishing to have what Catherine wanted?\" His devotion to Cathy is clear, and he sees it as completely natural and inescapable: \"she is so immeasurably superior to them  to everyone one earth; is she not, Nelly?\"  He admires Cathy for her bravery, and he possesses that same kind of courage.<PARAGRAPH>The image of the two civilized children inside the beautiful room forms a parallel to the two wild children outside. Through this use of parallelism, Bronte turns the window glass into a kind of mirror. However, the 'mirror' shows the complete opposite rather than the true images of those who look into it. Although the children are of similar ages, their breeding differs dramatically, as does their relationship--Edgar and Isabella fight, but Heathcliff and Cathy are inseparable.<PARAGRAPH>This chapter marks the end of Cathy and Heathcliff's time of happiness and perfect understanding; Cathy has moved into a different sphere, that of the genteel Lintons, and Heathcliff cannot follow her. Although Cathy still cares for the things she did when the two of them ran wild together, she is under a lot of pressure to become a lady, and she is vain enough to enjoy the admiration and approval she gets from Edgar, Hindley and his wife. Cathy's desire to inhabit two worlds--the moors with Heathcliff and the parlor with Edgar--is a central driving force for the novel and eventually results in tragedy. Emily Bronte had experienced a personal inability to remain true to herself while interacting in conventional social terms, and she chose to abandon society as a result. Cathy takes a different route.<PARAGRAPH>Just as the window separated the Wuthering Heights children from the Lintons in the last chapter, a material object separates Cathy from Heathcliff in this one. The fine dress she wears is a very real boundary between the old friends: it must be sacrificed  if the two of them are to be as close as they were before. It is valuable for economic reasons , for social ones , and because of its artificial beauty. These issues will consistently come between Cathy and Heathcliff; he is right to recognize the dress and what it represents as a threat to his happiness.<PARAGRAPH>Hindley's dissipation and moral degradation are further evidence that only a strong character can survive defeat or bereavement without becoming distorted. His desperation is a result of his lack of firm foundations: Ellen says that he \"had room in his heart for only two idols--his wife and himself--he doted on both and adored one\"  Evidently it is impossible to live well when only caring about one's self, as Hindley does following his wife's death. It would be interesting to compare Hindley's behavior and Heathcliff's in the opening chapters: both survive after the deaths of their beloveds, and both live in a chaotic and cheerless Wuthering Heights. Heathcliff, however, has not entirely lost contact with Cathy: their closer relationship rules out a complete separation, even after death. Emily Bronte's obvious model for Hindley is her brother Branwell, who was sinking into dissipation when she was writing the novel.<PARAGRAPH>This is the first time we really see Cathy behaving badly, showing that her temper makes the gentle and repressed life led by Edgar Linton unsuitable for her. Here she blushes with rage and in a later chapter she refers to her blood being much hotter than Edgar's: heat and coolness of blood are markers of different personalities. The physical differences between Cathy and Edgar are linked to their moral differences, not only in their appearances but even in their blood and bones.<PARAGRAPH>The atmosphere of careless violence, despair, and hatred in the first part of the chapter is almost suffocating. Heathcliff's willingness to kill an innocent child out of revenge is the first real indication of his lack of morality. It is unclear whether that immorality is a partly a result of his hard childhood and miserable circumstances, or whether he was always like that. Certainly he appears quite changed from the sensitive boy who wanted to look nice so Cathy wouldn't reject him for Edgar, and who relied trustfully on Ellen, but he had spoken of wanting to paint the house with Hindley's blood much earlier.<PARAGRAPH>The definition of love for Cathy and Heathcliff is perhaps Emily Bronte's original creation. It is not based on appearances, material considerations, sexual attraction, or even virtue, but rather a shared being. Cathy says: \"I am Heathcliff--he's always, always in my mind--not as a pleasure, any more than I am always a pleasure to myself--but as my own being\" . In this sense, her decision to marry Edgar is a terrible mistake: she will be abandoning the essence of herself. Apparently the sexual aspect of love is so meaningless for her that she believes marriage to Edgar will not come between her and Heathcliff: she would not consciously abandon her soul. Heathcliff thinks otherwise, since he runs away.<PARAGRAPH>Catherine's belief that Edgar should not be jealous of her relationship with Heathcliff emphasizes the difference in her mind between her passionate love for her adopted brother and ordinary love affairs. Catherine says that just as she does not envy Isabella's blonde hair, so Edgar shouldn't become jealous when Cathy praises Heathcliff--he should be glad for her sake. The comparison with Isabella suggests that Cathy and Heathcliff are sister and brother, which is evidently not the case--but it is a comparison that makes sense to her.<PARAGRAPH>Catherine makes several analogies to the natural world: Heathcliff would crush Isabella \"like a sparrow's egg\" , and he is \"an arid wilderness of furze and whinstone\" . Isabella uses what seems to be a natural metaphor, but is in fact a literary one: she compares Catherine to \"a dog in the manger\"  for keeping Heathcliff to herself. The sisters-in-law speak and think quite differently despite superficial similarities.<PARAGRAPH>There are also important differences between the ways that Edgar and Catherine view class. Edgar thinks that Heathcliff, \"a runaway servant\" , should be entertained in the kitchen, not the parlor. Catherine jokes that she will have two tables laid, one for the gentry  and one for the lower classes . Likewise, she and Heathcliff both call the narrator Nelly, while Edgar coldly calls her Ellen.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420090808/https://www.gradesaver.com/wuthering-heights/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10"}