{"name": "Chapter 8", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 8<PARAGRAPH>Hindley's wife Frances gave birth to a child, Hareton, but did not survive long afterwards: she had consumption. Despite the doctor's warnings, Hindley persisted in believing that she would recover, and she seemed to think so too, always saying she felt better, but she died a few weeks after Hareton's birth. Ellen was happy to take care of the baby. Hindley \"grew desperate; his sorrow was of a kind that will not lament, he neither wept nor prayed--he cursed and defied--execrated God and man, and gave himself up to reckless dissipation\". The household more or less collapsed into violent confusion--respectable neighbors ceased to visit, except for Edgar, entranced by Catherine. Heathcliff's ill treatment and the bad example posed by Hindley made him \"daily more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity. Catherine disliked having Edgar visit Wuthering Heights because she had a hard time behaving consistently when Edgar and Heathcliff met, or when they talked about each other. Edgar's presence made her feel as though she had to behave like a Linton, which was not natural for her. PARAGRAPH>One day when Hindley was away, Heathcliff was offended to find Catherine dressing for Edgar's visit. He asked her to turn Edgar away and spend the time with him instead but she refused. Edgar was by this time a gentle, sweet young man. He came and Heathcliff left, but Ellen stayed as a chaperone, much to Catherine's annoyance. She revealed her bad character by pinching Ellen, who was glad to have a chance to show Edgar what Catherine was like, and cried out. Catherine denied having pinched her, blushing with rage, and slapped her, then slapped Edgar for reproving her. He said he would go; she, recovering her senses, asked him to stay, and he was too weak and enchanted by her stronger will to leave. Brought closer by the quarrel, the two \"confess themselves lovers\". Ellen heard Hindley come home drunk, and out of precaution unloaded his gun", "analysis": "In this chapter we first hear young Heathcliff speak, and it is worth noting how his language differs from the narrators we have heard so far. He is more expressive and emotional than Lockwood or Ellen, and his speech is more literary than Ellen's and less artificial than Lockwood's. He tends to speak in extreme and vibrant terms: expressing his scorn for Edgar Linton's cowardice and whiny gentility, he says: \"I'd not exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for Edgar Linton's at Thrushcross Grange  not if I might have the privilege of flinging Joseph off the highest gable, and painting the housefront with Hindley's blood!\"  He admires the comparative luxury of the Grange and recognizes its beauty, but he remains entirely devoted to the freedom of his life with Cathy, and cannot understand the selfishness of the spoiled children: \"When would you catch me wishing to have what Catherine wanted?\" His devotion to Cathy is clear, and he sees it as completely natural and inescapable: \"she is so immeasurably superior to them  to everyone one earth; is she not, Nelly?\"  He admires Cathy for her bravery, and he possesses that same kind of courage.<PARAGRAPH>The image of the two civilized children inside the beautiful room forms a parallel to the two wild children outside. Through this use of parallelism, Bronte turns the window glass into a kind of mirror. However, the 'mirror' shows the complete opposite rather than the true images of those who look into it. Although the children are of similar ages, their breeding differs dramatically, as does their relationship--Edgar and Isabella fight, but Heathcliff and Cathy are inseparable.<PARAGRAPH>This chapter marks the end of Cathy and Heathcliff's time of happiness and perfect understanding; Cathy has moved into a different sphere, that of the genteel Lintons, and Heathcliff cannot follow her. Although Cathy still cares for the things she did when the two of them ran wild together, she is under a lot of pressure to become a lady, and she is vain enough to enjoy the admiration and approval she gets from Edgar, Hindley and his wife. Cathy's desire to inhabit two worlds--the moors with Heathcliff and the parlor with Edgar--is a central driving force for the novel and eventually results in tragedy. Emily Bronte had experienced a personal inability to remain true to herself while interacting in conventional social terms, and she chose to abandon society as a result. Cathy takes a different route.<PARAGRAPH>Just as the window separated the Wuthering Heights children from the Lintons in the last chapter, a material object separates Cathy from Heathcliff in this one. The fine dress she wears is a very real boundary between the old friends: it must be sacrificed  if the two of them are to be as close as they were before. It is valuable for economic reasons , for social ones , and because of its artificial beauty. These issues will consistently come between Cathy and Heathcliff; he is right to recognize the dress and what it represents as a threat to his happiness.<PARAGRAPH>Hindley's dissipation and moral degradation are further evidence that only a strong character can survive defeat or bereavement without becoming distorted. His desperation is a result of his lack of firm foundations: Ellen says that he \"had room in his heart for only two idols--his wife and himself--he doted on both and adored one\"  Evidently it is impossible to live well when only caring about one's self, as Hindley does following his wife's death. It would be interesting to compare Hindley's behavior and Heathcliff's in the opening chapters: both survive after the deaths of their beloveds, and both live in a chaotic and cheerless Wuthering Heights. Heathcliff, however, has not entirely lost contact with Cathy: their closer relationship rules out a complete separation, even after death. Emily Bronte's obvious model for Hindley is her brother Branwell, who was sinking into dissipation when she was writing the novel.<PARAGRAPH>This is the first time we really see Cathy behaving badly, showing that her temper makes the gentle and repressed life led by Edgar Linton unsuitable for her. Here she blushes with rage and in a later chapter she refers to her blood being much hotter than Edgar's: heat and coolness of blood are markers of different personalities. The physical differences between Cathy and Edgar are linked to their moral differences, not only in their appearances but even in their blood and bones.<PARAGRAPH>The atmosphere of careless violence, despair, and hatred in the first part of the chapter is almost suffocating. Heathcliff's willingness to kill an innocent child out of revenge is the first real indication of his lack of morality. It is unclear whether that immorality is a partly a result of his hard childhood and miserable circumstances, or whether he was always like that. Certainly he appears quite changed from the sensitive boy who wanted to look nice so Cathy wouldn't reject him for Edgar, and who relied trustfully on Ellen, but he had spoken of wanting to paint the house with Hindley's blood much earlier.<PARAGRAPH>The definition of love for Cathy and Heathcliff is perhaps Emily Bronte's original creation. It is not based on appearances, material considerations, sexual attraction, or even virtue, but rather a shared being. Cathy says: \"I am Heathcliff--he's always, always in my mind--not as a pleasure, any more than I am always a pleasure to myself--but as my own being\" . In this sense, her decision to marry Edgar is a terrible mistake: she will be abandoning the essence of herself. Apparently the sexual aspect of love is so meaningless for her that she believes marriage to Edgar will not come between her and Heathcliff: she would not consciously abandon her soul. Heathcliff thinks otherwise, since he runs away.<PARAGRAPH>Catherine's belief that Edgar should not be jealous of her relationship with Heathcliff emphasizes the difference in her mind between her passionate love for her adopted brother and ordinary love affairs. Catherine says that just as she does not envy Isabella's blonde hair, so Edgar shouldn't become jealous when Cathy praises Heathcliff--he should be glad for her sake. The comparison with Isabella suggests that Cathy and Heathcliff are sister and brother, which is evidently not the case--but it is a comparison that makes sense to her.<PARAGRAPH>Catherine makes several analogies to the natural world: Heathcliff would crush Isabella \"like a sparrow's egg\" , and he is \"an arid wilderness of furze and whinstone\" . Isabella uses what seems to be a natural metaphor, but is in fact a literary one: she compares Catherine to \"a dog in the manger\"  for keeping Heathcliff to herself. The sisters-in-law speak and think quite differently despite superficial similarities.<PARAGRAPH>There are also important differences between the ways that Edgar and Catherine view class. Edgar thinks that Heathcliff, \"a runaway servant\" , should be entertained in the kitchen, not the parlor. Catherine jokes that she will have two tables laid, one for the gentry  and one for the lower classes . Likewise, she and Heathcliff both call the narrator Nelly, while Edgar coldly calls her Ellen.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210420090808/https://www.gradesaver.com/wuthering-heights/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10"}