{"name": "Section 3: Chapters VIII-IX", "summary": "Chapter VIII, \u201cOn Those Who Have Become Princes By Crime,\u201d is one of the key chapters of The Prince. In it, Machiavelli seems to distinguish between outright cruelty and the kind of clever ruthlessness he describes earlier in the work (as exemplified by Cesare Borgia). He makes use of two examples: the first ancient, and the second modern. Agathocles massacred all the senators and richest citizens of Syracuse, and thereby became prince. Oliverotto da Fermo murdered his uncle and other citizens, and forced Fermo to make him its prince. An interesting side-note: Oliverotto was later killed by Cesare Borgia at Sinigaglia, having fallen victim to another statesman\u2019s trickery. How, Machiavelli asks, did these two men \u201clive long, secure lives in their native cities, defend themselves from foreign enemies, and [manage to] never be conspired against by their fellow citizens?\u201d His answer: because their cruelty was put to good use.<PARAGRAPH>Cruelty can be considered well-used if carried out in one stab, the wicked deeds executed all at once, and if it can be interpreted as necessary for self-preservation. This distinction leads Machiavelli to the following argument: \u201cWe may add this note that when a prince takes a new state, he should calculate the sum of all the injuries he will have to do, and do them all at once, so as not to have to do new ones every day; simply by not repeating them, he will then be able to reassure people, and win them over to his side with benefits.\u201d<PARAGRAPH>The next chapter, \u201cOn the Civil Principate,\u201d concerns another kind of prince: one who gains power \u201cnot through crimes or other intolerable violence, but by the choice of his fellow citizens (and this may be called a civil princedom, success in which depends neither completely on skill nor completely on fortune, but rather on a kind of lucky shrewdness).\u201d A prince can rise in this fashion in one of two ways: either by the will of the people, or by the will of the nobles. \u201cIn every city,\u201d Machiavelli goes on to argue, \u201cthere are two different humors, one rising from the people\u2019s desire not to be ordered and commanded by the nobles, and the other from the desire of the nobles to command and oppress the people.\u201d If nobles see they are having trouble with the people, they make one of their own a prince; he becomes their puppet, and therefore they get what they want on a larger scale. If the people feel that the nobles are oppressing them, they will try to make one of their own a prince; he then becomes their shield against the nobles.<PARAGRAPH>As nobles are particularly difficult to deal with, a prince of any kind should try to win the favor of the populace and keep it dependent on the state. Machiavelli rejects the notion that \u201cThe man who counts on the people builds his house on mud,\u201d though he does concede that a prince should not let \u201chimself think that the people will come to his aid when he is in trouble.\u201d As with so much else, it is all about balance.", "analysis": "Machiavelli has a reputation, largely based on The Prince, for a cold-hearted worldview, political cynicism, and philosophical ruthlessness. However, this reputation is largely exaggerated. As influential as Machiavelli\u2019s ideas may have been on future generations of totalitarians, realpolitik maestros, and Kissinger think-alikes, his own approach is far more complex: it reflects a taste for expediency and an emphasis on ends over means, but is muted by a concern for human needs and a genuine interest in human nature.<PARAGRAPH>Consider the following sentence, from Chapter IX: \u201cIn fact the aim of the common people is more honest than that of the nobles, since the nobles want to oppress others, while the people simply want not to be oppressed.\u201d Machiavelli adopts an altogether bitter tone when describing the nobles \u2013 their greed, their power-lust, their selfishness \u2013 and seems to argue that a good prince should rise above such petty wants and lowly attributes. If anything, a prince should pay more attention to the people than to the nobles. While such a formulation may seem to be common sense, it reflects an almost democratic view: the will of the many over the will of the few, protection for the powerless against the threats of the powerful.<PARAGRAPH>That this chapter follows a chapter exclusively devoted to criminal princes is telling. Machiavelli seems unsure whether to condone what he labels as \u201ccruelty\u201d or to condemn it. He seems to take a certain pleasure in recounting the wicked deeds of an Agathocles or an Oliverotto da Fermo; what these men did is indefensible, and yet it worked. Machiavelli, ever the theoretician, proceeds to meditate on why it worked. He nearly traps himself in a philosophical cul-de-sac when, about to explain what he means by well-used cruelty, he writes: \u201cif it\u2019s permissible to say good words about something which is evil in itself.\u201d<PARAGRAPH>Why are the actions of Agathocles and Oliverotto evil, while those of Cesare Borgia are not? We are reminded of Borgia, since it was he who lured Oliverotto to his death. Never would Machiavelli refer to Borgia as a criminal prince, yet he murdered the leaders of rival factions to clear the way for his own ascent, much as did Agathocles and Oliverotto, and he made an example of his lieutenant general after using him to pacify his kingdom, just to save face. To Machiavelli, this is cleverness at its best: actions justified by their very brilliance. It\u2019s not hard to see why everyone from Macbeth to the Corleone family to Stalin have been labeled Machiavellian at various junctures. But would Machiavelli approve? It seems that because the deeds of Agathocles and Oliverotto reflected not so much urgent necessity as a kind of deep-seated bloodlust, they are distinguishable from Borgia\u2019s moves. Whatever the reasoning, Machiavelli\u2019s distinction is notable.<PARAGRAPH>Machiavelli has not touched the bottom of this particular well, in later chapters continues to examine the line between justifiable and unjustifiable cruelty. Nonetheless, what emerges at this juncture in The Prince is the simple assertion, fundamental to the book\u2019s argument, that some cruelty is good and some is not. This rejection of the categorical in favor of the relative or comparative is an important one: there is a sense in which the contradictions in Machiavelli\u2019s theorizing may reflect his own uncertainty as to when cruelty can be excused. It is worth remembering that he was imprisoned and tortured prior to writing The Prince; without lashing out at the Medici family, he does, in his introductory letter, suggest that the cruelty he experienced was unjustified: \u201cyou [Lorenzo de Medici] will recognize how unjustly I suffer the bitter and sustained malignity of fortune.\u201d The exile rails against the cruelty carried out against him while defending the cruelty of past princes. At the same time, he refers to historical figures such as Agathocles as wicked men; he writes that people should either be \u201ccaressed or destroyed,\u201d and then later turns around and argues that the common people are honest (therefore autonomous human beings with their own virtues) and more noble in their sentiments than the nobles. None of these various positions constitutes a complete about-face vis-\u00e0-vis an earlier position, but the shifting of rhetoric and the slipperiness of Machiavelli\u2019s tone does suggest that he himself has not finished grappling with what is perhaps the most fundamental question of all: when do the ends no longer justify the means?", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210417004655/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-prince/study-guide/summary-section-3-chapters-viii-ix"}