{"name": "Chapters25-27", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020210431/https://www.novelguide.com/oliver-twist/summaries/chap25-chap27", "summary": "Fagin, Charlie Bates, the Dodger, and Tom were all sitting in the hideout late one evening. The boys began teasing Tom about his affection for Betsy, and Fagin began discussing it as well. They heard that someone was at the front door, and were very careful in answering it. When they discovered that the visitor was Toby Crackit they brought him inside startled that he was alone without Bill and Oliver. Toby asked for food and drink before he would tell his tale, and so Fagin supplied him with the requested provisions. Finally, Toby asked them where Sikes was and Fagin became upset. Toby then told the tale of the robbery and how Oliver had been shot. He said that he and Bill separated and left Oliver in the ditch because they were trying to save themselves. At this Fagin screamed and left the building terribly angry and upset that he lost Oliver. Chapter 26: Fagin wandered the streets and went to the market place where the thieves sell their wares. He asked for information on Sikes and not finding any, went to a place called The Cripples. Again he asked for information of Sikes and found none. Finally, he went to Sikes house and found it occupied by only Nancy. He expressed to her is concern about Oliver and Nancy told him that Oliver was better off dead than with them. Fagin did not agree with her, and convinced that Sikes was not there, finally went back to his own residence. There, lurking in the shadows, he found a mysterious acquaintance of his. He told the man about wanting to find Oliver and the man said that he thought it better for himself at least, that he didn't. The only name the mysterious man had was Monks. As they were finishing their conversation, Monks swore that he saw a woman lurking about, but when they searched for her, nothing could be found. . Chapter 27: While Mrs. Corney was out, the beadle stood waiting in her residence examining it. When she returned, flustered from her visit to the dying woman, the beadle took care of her. After she settled down, he proposed marriage to her. She accepted, and said that after she was married to him, she would tell him what happened that night. She told him then to make funeral arrangements, so when he left her house; he went straight to the Sowerberry's home. There he found Noah Clayborn and the maid Charlotte talking of kissing. He chastises them, appalled that they would discuss or do such things, and satisfied that he completed his task, left.", "analysis": ""}