{"name": "Chapters40-42", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020210431/https://www.novelguide.com/oliver-twist/summaries/chap40-chap42", "summary": "Nancy told Rose what she had had learned about Oliver from eavesdropping on Fagin. The proof of Oliver's parentage had been destroyed, and Monks referred to the boy as his brother and wanted Oliver's identity to forever remain a secret. Nancy revealed that she was the woman who had stolen Oliver out of the street long ago, and Rose tried to convince her to stay and be protected. Nancy declined, saying that she must get back so she could take care of Sikes who she hinted at being in love with. She said that she could be found walking the London Bridge Sunday at midnight if she is ever needed. Chapter 41: Rose pondered what to do with the information when Oliver came in and happily informed her that they had spotted Mr. Brownlow in the street, and now knew where he lived. Rose decided that the best thing to do was to talk to Mr. Brownlow so she and Oliver went there directly. Rose was received well, and when she told them her business and the story of what happened to Oliver, they were delighted. Oliver came in then, and was happy to see his old friends and they him. Mr. Brownlow, Rose, and Losberne then decided that it would be best if they trapped Monks and figured out what he knew. They agreed to bring the help of Mr. Grimwig and Harry Maylie into it, and get Nancy to identify the man for them. . Chapter 42: Noah Claypole and Charlotte left the Sowerberry's, stole money, and were on their way to London. They stop at the Three Cripples for the night. One of the thieves, Barney was at the bar, and showed the strangers to Fagin when he wandered in. Fagin decided that he liked the look of Noah, and Noah told Charlotte that he would be a gentleman and her, a lady by becoming a thief. Fagin over heard this and approached Noah on the subject. They arranged a deal that Noah and Charlotte would begin working for the Jew for a sum of twenty pounds. They arranged to meet the following morning.", "analysis": ""}