{"name": "Chapters16-18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020210431/https://www.novelguide.com/oliver-twist/summaries/chap16-chap18", "summary": "Nancy and Mr. Sikes drag Oliver to another of the thieves' hideouts. When they entered, Fagin, Dodger, and Charlie Bates were there. They were happy to see Oliver and astonished at his clothing. Once they figured out he had five pounds on him and valuable books under his arms, Fagin and Mr. Sikes began fighting over who got to keep the books and the money. Oliver begins to protest, saying that they should return the books to Mr. Brownlow because he does not want him to think that he stole them. Then he calls for the police, and Fagin begins to beat him. Nancy then jumps into the way and threatens Fagin. She throws so much of a fit that she passes out. They took Oliver's clothes, locking him in a little room, and because of his illness and the day's adventures, he went straight to sleep. Chapter 17: Meanwhile, the beadle, Mr. Bumble, visits Mrs. Mann on his way to London to pay her the stipend for her care of the orphans. While he is there, Mrs. Mann tells him that a few more of the children in her care have passed away, and Mr. Bumble seems unconcerned but asks after little Dick who has been sickly. Mrs. Mann brings Dick into see Mr. Bumble, and asks a request after he dies. He wants them to write a note for Oliver Twist giving him his love because he feels bad that Oliver is completely alone. Both Mr. Bumble and Mrs. Mann are shocked, and after the beadle leaves for London, Mrs. Mann locks Dick in the closet. When Mr. Bumble gets to London, he sees a flyer asking for any information past or present on Oliver Twist. He answers the ad, and tells Mr. Brownlow terrible things about Oliver and his childhood. Mr. Bumble is disappointed, pays the beadle, and says that he never wants to here anyone mention the name Oliver Twist again. . Chapter 18: Fagin chastised Oliver the next day and locked him back in his room for a few more days. After that period of time passed, he was allowed to wander around the house by himself when no one was home all day with nothing to do but think. One night, Dodger asked Oliver to shine his shoes for him, and happy to have company, he consented. While doing so, Oliver listened as they tried to convince him to learn all he could from Fagin about theft, because it was a good profession for him. Fagin heard them speaking thus, and gave his own speech to them all including a new thief that had come in, Tom Chitling. From that day forward, Oliver was not left alone and was thankful for it. Instead, Fagin was slowly teaching him the ways of thievery by training him that their black company was still better than being completely alone.", "analysis": ""}