{"name": "Chapter 31- Chapter 33", "summary": "Chapter 31: Emma dreams up many possible endings for her relationship with Frank. The conclusion of each is that she refuses him, so it strikes her that she cannot be very much in love with him.  She realizes that she must be on her guard when they meet again so that she doesn't encourage him.  Mrs. Weston receives a letter from Frank that says much of Emma and even gives an apology for his not having time to say goodbye to her beautiful little friend. Emma soon gets the idea that perhaps he could be in love with Harriet.  Mr. Elton's wedding day approaches, so Harriet needs more attention.  Emma is convinced that Frank should give her up for Harriet.\n\tChapter 32: Mr. Elton is married, and Emma does not want to be the last to visit Mrs. Elton, so she soon visits, taking Harriet.  After the short visit Emma is sure she does not like Mrs. Elton, as she is not elegant.  Harriet says that she thinks she will not mind seeing Mr. and Mrs. Elton together as she thinks Mrs. Elton is charming.  When Mrs. Elton returns Emma's visit, Emma is even more convinced that she does not like her.  She thinks that she is vain and satisfied with herself.  She could not talk enough of her brother-in-law, Mr. Suckling, and his home, Maple Grove, as this is the high pride of her life.  She goes on and on about Maple Grove, and about how her sister and brother-in-law will be visiting.  Mrs. Elton also suggests that Emma go to Bath, and that she could give her introductions to the society there.  The idea that she would be indebted to Mrs. Elton for introductions is almost more than Emma can bear.  Mrs. Elton then suggests that she and Emma start a musical society in Highbury, and Emma tries to change the subject.  Emma is also offended that Mrs. Elton says she is surprised at Mrs. Weston's being a gentlewoman when she was Emma's governess and that she calls Mr. Knightley just 'Knightley.' After Mrs. Elton has gone, Emma thinks much about her offences.\n\tChapter 33: At later meetings, Emma is even more convinced that Mrs. Elton is self-important, presuming, familiar, ignorant and ill-bred, but Mr. Elton goes around congratulating himself on bringing such a woman to Highbury.  Emma soon realizes that Mrs. Elton has drawn away from her and become cold and distant, probably since Emma did not encourage their friendship.  She also sees that both Mr. and Mrs. Elton are sneering and negligent to Harriet.  Mrs. Elton does take very much to Jane Fairfax though.  She takes it on as her duty to find a good situation for Jane since she is destined to be a governess.  She says she will introduce her wherever she can.  Emma feels sorry for Jane, and is quite surprised when Jane accepts her attentions.  When she speaks of her surprise to Mrs. Weston, Mrs. Weston supposes that Jane just wants to get away from her aunt for a while.  Mr. Knightley agrees, saying that if another had paid her attention, meaning Emma, she might not have had to go to Mrs. Elton.  Mr. Knightley speaks highly of Jane, and Emma suggests that he might think more highly of her than he can admit.  He catches her hint, and says that he does not think that Jane would accept him if he asked her to marry him, and that he would never ask her anyway, as he does not think of her like that.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421073237/http://www.novelguide.com/emma/summaries/chap31-33"}