{"name": "Chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-7-12", "summary": "Maisie is now back her mother's house being cared for and taught by Mrs. Wix. After such a long time not having any lessons, Maisie spends long, fulfilling days studying with Mrs. Wix. Maisie's mother won't see Maisie for three days once she has arrived at the house, but Sir Claude visits the schoolroom often. Sir Claude tells Maisie that Ida does not know about him visiting Beale's house, let alone getting to know Beale's new wife. When Maisie finally does get an audience with her mother, she plays dumb to keep Sir Claude's positive relationship with Mrs. Beale a secret. As the weeks go on, Ida often goes days at a time without seeing Maisie. Sir Claude also is away from the house for days at a time, but he always brings back presents for both Maisie and Mrs. Wix to show he's been thinking of them. Maisie's adoration for Sir Claude grows because of how well he treats Mrs. Wix. She thinks about how \"He shook hands with her, he recognised her, as she said, and above all, more than once, he took her, with his stepdaughter, to the pantomime and, in the crowd, coming out, publicly gave her his arm\". In other words, he treats Mrs. Wix not only as a person, but as if she is a respectable, beautiful lady. Mrs. Wix takes to talking about her love for Sir Claude to Maisie, figuring that Maisie can handle it because she is already aware of such matters from her parents' relationships. Maisie admits that she loves Sir Claude too. Ida and Sir Claude seem happily married for the most part--while they each sometimes go off for multiple days alone, they also go off together, likely to enjoy \"brilliant society\". While they are away, Maisie and Mrs. Wix are left alone to scrounge for dinner in the pantry, often ending up hungry. Maisie finds out that Mrs. Beale has been trying to visit her, but Ida will not allow it. Ida is especially adamant about this not happening because \" stepfather had backed her stepmother up\". Maisie asks Sir Claude if he is still in communication with Mrs. Beale but doesn't get an answer", "analysis": "James creates parallels through purposefully confusing names in this section and throughout the rest of the book. Specifically, he has Miss Overmore take on the name Mrs. Beale once she marries Beale Farange. This is confusing because Ida is still generally referred to as Mrs. Farange, the last name of her ex-husband and the name the reader might expect Miss Overmore to take after marriage. The women's uses of these names are revealing on a number of levels. Firstly, Ida keeping the last name Farange shows her continued connection to Beale Farange. As the narrator ironically states in the first chapter of the book, Ida and Beale were in a way more married after their divorce. Secondly, Miss Overmore taking the name Mrs. Beale rather than Mrs. Farange shows that she has a less deep connection with him, as a first name has more connection to one's surface identity while a last name connects to one's family and history. Finally, Mrs. Farange and Mrs. Beale having names that could cause the reader to confuse which character is which brings out parallels between the women, such as their scheming natures and lack of genuine care for Maisie. Sir Claude's photograph, which Mrs. Wix shows and eventually gives to Maisie, is an important symbol in the book. Upon seeing the photo, Maisie instantly adores the man. The fact that Maisie feels such fixation on the man from only his photograph might imply that her love for Sir Claude is superficial. However, others might think this is evidence of a connection so deep that it could be experienced immediately--like love at first sight. In addition, Mrs. Wix having to make the decision of whether to let Maisie keep the photograph foreshadows Mrs. Wix's love for Sir Claude and Maisie's need to choose between the two caretakers in the last chapters of the book. Maisie's education is an important theme in these chapters, particularly because it is so neglected at such an important time in her childhood. Once Miss Overmore marries Beale to become Mrs. Beale, she focuses more on her husband than her student-cum-step-daughter. The couple does purport to explore the idea of Maisie attending boarding school, but this never comes to fruition. When Maisie is returned to the care of Mrs. Wix at her mother's house, she and Mrs. Wix spend whole days studying to make up for lost time; however, it was stated upon the introduction of Mrs. Wix earlier in the book that the woman had little formal education herself and mostly \"taught\" Maisie through telling her stories. Maisie's lack of education throughout the book is tangible evidence of the negative effect of her upbringing. Just as the emotional neglect she has suffered will likely affect her ability to form stable relationships, her educational neglect could prevent her from understanding the world and supporting herself. The subject of Maisie's parents cheating on their new spouses finally becomes explicit in Chapter 11 when the character of Mr. Perriam is introduced. While Maisie's parents have both acquired new, younger spouses in the chapters leading up to this point, this has been done after they were divorced from one another, and only vague reference is made to social taboos they may have broken while married. With the introduction of Mr. Perriam, it becomes clear to the reader that Ida is an adulterer. A number of Ida's lovers will be introduced throughout the rest of the book, including Lord Eric, the Captain, and Mr. Tischbein; Beale also has at least one extramarital affair, with a woman named the Countess, while married to Mrs. Beale. While Mrs. Beale's reaction to Beale's adultery will be shown to be strongly negative, Sir Claude seems to be almost completely unfazed by Ida's, perhaps because of his guilt over his continuing relationship with Mrs. Beale. A thread of irony that runs throughout What Maisie Knew, but is is made explicit in Chapter 12, is the fact that Maisie has more parents and homes than a child usually would, and yet she feels alone and homeless. Maisie thinks to herself, \"With two fathers, two mothers and two homes, six protections in all, she shouldn't know 'wherever' to go\" . This paradox calls attention to the impact of Maisie's parents' actions and speech toward her; because they constantly fight over her custody, she does not feel a sense of love and stability."}