{"name": "Chapter 18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-18", "summary": "The Exhibition at Earl's Court is not as great as Mrs. Beale and Maisie had hoped. Because of their lack of money, they have to have only a small meal beforehand, and they can't actually see a lot of the sideshows because they cost money. They look around but see Sir Claude nowhere, causing them even more frustration. Suddenly, Mrs. Beale sees Beale, Maisie's father. Maisie immediately assumes that he lied to Mrs. Beale about where he would be, like her mother lied to Sir Claude the day they ran into her in the park. Beale is with a woman who Mrs. Beale says must be Mrs. Cuddon. Quickly, Beale approaches Mrs. Beale and Maisie and takes Maisie with him into a carriage, leaving Mrs. Beale and the other woman behind. He doesn't speak, but he trembles and hugs her to him. When the carriage stops, it is not at Beale's house but rather a fancy house with an electric light. They go inside, and Beale tells Maisie it is the house of an \"American Countess. Maisie is very impressed by the Countess's riches, and she is happy when Beale says that the Countess should join them shortly. Beale speaks harshly about his wife, Mrs. Beale, when she is brought up, but Maisie is happy to be receiving such unusual attention from her father. Beale continues to show Maisie the lavish items in the Countess's living room and treats Maisie affectionately, even playing with her hair as she sits on his lap. Maisie insightfully thinks that her father does not actually know her but wants her to play along as if they are close", "analysis": "Sir Claude's character begins to be tarnished in this section due to his repeated lying to Maisie. While Sir Claude might have originally been seen by the reader as one of the book's protagonists, James makes sure to give all of his adult characters, including Sir Claude, negative qualities. The reader is forced to feel as Maisie does: that the world of adults is full of deceit and instability. While Sir Claude eventually tells Maisie that he lied to her to protect her from getting \"mixed up\" , it seems likely that he didn't tell more for the sake of his own guilt and his fear of Ida. Maisie and Sir Claude's relationship is also negatively affected in this section by Maisie using her performative stupidity on him for the first time. At the age of six or seven, Maisie taught herself to appear stupid when her parents Ida and Beale asked her to repeat rude messages to one another. This act contrasts Maisie with a normally developing child, who would not have to pretend not to understand but rather would be truly innocent. Maisie not using her performance of stupidity with Sir Claude until this point in the book showed that she trusted him to see her for herself rather than as a pawn to get information. This makes her choice to pretend to be stupid when he asks her about her conversation with the Captain an important turning point in their relationship. Maisie's interaction with the Captain in Chapter 16 shows that Maisie still loves and wants the best for her mother after all the trauma she has experienced. She believes that the Captain truly loves her mother, and she begs him to not love her mother \"only for just a little...like all the others\" . Maisie seems to do this completely selflessly, which shows great maturity, but she also seems naively to not understand her mother's nature. When Ida reveals that she is no longer with the Captain later in the book, Maisie strangely seems more upset than when Ida has separated from Beale or Sir Claude. Perhaps Maisie puts so much faith in the relationship between the Captain and Ida because through the Captain's adoring eyes, Maisie herself was able to love and forgive her mother. Besides containing Maisie's longest interaction with her father in the course of the novel, Chapter 18 stands out for the many symbols of wealth, to which James continually draws the reader's attention. Of particular importance is the symbol of the electric light outside the Countess's house. Electricity would have been very rare at a private residence in the late 19th century; it was invented in 1879 and took decades to become commercially widespread. This is supported by how Maisie describes seeing the lightbulb, noting, \"the vividness, the almost blinding whiteness of the light\" . This shows that she does in unfamiliar with the object. The electric lightbulb is used to show how rich the Countess is, as well as to show her contemporary style, in contrast with many of the other women in Maisie's life. It is important to note that wealth and social status were not one and the same in late 19th century England. Ida and Beale Farange are undoubtedly part of the upper class, attending upscale social gatherings and interacting with people of wealth and import. However, this section makes it clear that both characters struggle financially. Ida's lack of money is shown primarily through Mrs. Wix, a lower-class and poorly-educated woman, being Maisie's governess. Maisie notes earlier in the book that Mrs. Wix is not always paid and that when Ida and Sir Claude travel together, she and Mrs. Wix must scrape together odd meals from whatever is left in the house. Maisie is similarly limited while at her father's house, a fact which is most obvious at the beginning of Chapter 18. James writes that, \" had partaken together at home of the light vague meal--Maisie's name for it was a 'jam-supper' -- to which they were reduced when Mr. Farange sought his pleasure abroad\" . Then, while at the Exhibition, they can not see any of the sideshows because of a \"paucity of sixpences\" , a quite small sum of money. This is contrasted when later in the chapter Maisie goes to the Countess's house and sees how the truly rich live."}