{"name": "CHAPTER 32", "summary": "CHAPTER 32 Summary With the winter months approaching and the work being less, Angel decides to have the wedding around Christmas and sets the date for December 31. He buys Tess a wedding outfit and makes plans to stay in an old D'Urberville mansion the week after their wedding. He also makes arrangements for the marriage license. Tess still worries about telling Angel the truth. She writes another letter to her mother seeking further advice, but Joan does not reply to this one. As a result, Tess moves forward with the wedding plans but fears that her happiness will not last. Notes Angel continues to control matters. He sets the date for the wedding and plans the honeymoon. Unfortunately, Angel's choice of the old D'Urberville mansion is the cruel hand of fate at work. Angel also continues to work on making Tess into the woman he wants her to be. He is delighted that she has learned \"his manner and habits, his speech and phrases, his likings and his aversions. Angel feels certain that in a couple of months she will be ready to present to his parents. There also continues to be a constant battle within Tess, who is fearful of lurking dangers. The unanswered letter to Joan makes her apprehensive. Her own silence drives her to distraction. She realizes Angel is a sensitive soul, and an explanation about her past after the wedding is sure to hurt him. Tess fears her happiness will be short-lived, a clear foreshadowing of the tragic fate of this young woman. Tess also remembers Joan's ballad that once a woman loses her chastity she is no longer suitable to become a wife. The words of the song terrify her, and she fears that her wedding robe will betray her as it had betrayed Queen Guinevere. It is important to note that Angel seems to have some reservations about the wedding. He asks Crick to keep the date of the marriage a secret, and he does not publish the banns, as is customary. He also is not ready to take Tess home to meet his parents", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTessD40.asp"}