{"name": "CHAPTER 18", "summary": "CHAPTER 18 Summary In this chapter, Angel Clare is developed in much more detail, especially in the aspects that will affect Tess. He is the youngest son of Mr. Clare, who is a Vicar in Emminster and respected throughout Wessex. He is the only one of the three sons not to choose a vocation in the ministry; as a result, his father has not sent him to Cambridge, and for several years Angel is at loose ends. He goes to London for a while, unsuccessfully seeking a profession; while there he is involved with an older woman. He realizes he is more suited for country living, and at age twenty-six has decided to learn the farming business, which he feels will allow him to have \"intellectual liberty. He is currently a trainee on the Talbothay farm, but he is not treated as an ordinary farmhand. Instead, he is treated as a gentleman who is learning the farming business. At the dairy, Angel at first remains aloof, eating by himself. Soon, however, he finds his fellow farm workers interesting and begins to eat with them, enjoying their company. He also begins to notice the beauty of nature and to enjoy outdoor life. After Tess arrives, Angel also notices her innocent beauty. He is deeply attracted towards her freshness and assumes she is a virgin. Angel judges her to be more than an ordinary milkmaid and is eager to get to know her. Tess, however, maintains a distance with Angel, because the ghosts of her stained past haunt her. Notes Several aspects of Angel Clare should be noted, for they will figure in his future relationship with Tess. His father, the Vicar in Emminster, has denied Angel an education at Cambridge because he has not chosen to go into the ministry; Mr. Clare is obviously a conservative person with fixed ideas. He, however, is respected as a special parson throughout Wessex, and some of his traits have been passed on to Angel. Everyone on the farm also recognizes Angel as someone different and special; even Mrs. Crick believes he should not eat with the other farmhands, for she perceives him as much better than her regular employees. Like Tess, he has had an adventure away from home, spending some time in London and having an affair with an older woman. In the end, however, he realizes he is best suited for country living. Angel Clare immediately recognizes that Tess is not an ordinary girl. Her pretty and delicate looks compensate for any sophistication that she lacks. Her mild manner and pure nature are reflected on her face. Her charming and attractive personality cannot easily be hidden. As a result, this beautiful young lady captivates Angel. It is important to notice the great irony in this chapter. From the moment Angel sets his eyes on Tess, he presumes her to be a virgin because of her loveliness. It never occurs to him that this delicate female could carry the stigma of a sordid past", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTessD28.asp"}