{"name": "CHAPTER 31", "summary": "CHAPTER 31 Summary Tess writes to her mother telling her about her dilemma with Angel and seeking her advice. Joan is very quick in replying. She advises her to bury her sorrowful past, stating that Tess was not at fault. She also discourages her daughter from telling Angel about her past and defends it by saying that many women have concealed such experiences. Tess is relieved at her mother's advice. For the first time, she feels she can celebrate her happiness. When Angel announces their engagement to Mr. Crick and the farmhands, everyone celebrates with the couple. The milkmaids are particularly delighted for Tess. Angel asks Tess to set the date for the wedding, but Tess hesitates once again, wishing things could just continue in the present peaceful state of existence. Angel decides that they should wed before he starts his new business. Tess thinks again that she must tell Angel about her past before the day of the wedding. Notes Joan responds to her daughter immediately with practical advice. She warns Tess not to confess her past to Angel, fearing Tess may lose the golden opportunity of getting a good husband. Although Joan's guidance is against moral standards, it is based upon love and concern of a mother for her daughter. Joan knows that Tess's past, if revealed, will stand in the way of her daughter's happiness. Joan also realizes that there is unequal treatment meted out to women for sins of passion, and she truly feels Tess has been the innocent victim of Alec D'Urberville, who has not suffered at all. Joan's advice convinces Tess to remain silent, and she feels greatly relieved at the decision. She even celebrates her upcoming marriage with the other farmhands, particularly the milkmaids. At the back of her mind, however, she still feels that it is treacherous to betray the man she loves and thinks that her silence is wrong and immoral. When Angel insists that the wedding take place before he begins his new business, Tess promises herself once again to tell Angel the truth before they marry", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTessD40.asp"}