{"name": "CHAPTER 37", "summary": "CHAPTER 37 Summary The night before Tess is to leave, she sees her husband sleep- walking. He assumes her to be dead and places her in a stone coffin after wrapping her up in a sheet and carrying her to the old Abbey church. She handles the situation very boldly and with subtle persuasion brings him back to the house. She does not mention the incident the next morning, and Angel does not seem to remember it. On their way to Marlott the next morning, Tess and Angel visit with the Cricks, but keep their separation a secret from them. When they draw near to Tess's hometown, Angel turns to go. He leaves Tess with a good sum of money, takes the diamonds from her, and then forbids her to approach him in person. He tells her to communicate only through letters until he decides to come for her. Tess agrees to his commands, departs for home, and slips again into her suffering, melancholy mood. Notes Love survives on mutual trust, and since Tess has broken that trust, Angel has difficulty dealing with her. His sleepwalking expresses his state of mind. His heart refuses to believe that the girl he loves could cause him so much agony. He is convinced that the real Tess is dead; therefore, he subconsciously buries her. It is a far-fetched and melodramatic scene. Tess suffers through the whole incident in silence. Through years of practice, she has learned to accept her punishment gracefully. On the day of their separation, Angel is a picture of practicality. He goes to the dairy and completes his business with Mr. Crick, not mentioning the fact that he and Tess are separating. He accompanies his wife on her journey until they reach the outskirts of Marlott. Then Angel gives her some money, retrieves his diamonds, and tells Tess not to contact him in person, only through letters. He says he will try to accept their situation and will contact her in the future. Tess feels totally devastated and hopeless", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTessD45.asp"}