{"name": "CHAPTER 19", "summary": "CHAPTER 19 Summary Angel tries to befriend Tess. He even lines up her cows for her, which is against the rules. She says something to Angel about it, but then regrets having spoken. The same night, as she is walking in the garden, she hears Angel strumming on a harp. When he spies her, he takes the opportunity to ask her the reason for her somber behavior. She hides the truth and talks about life in general. Angel is surprised at both her intelligence and her pessimism and again thinks of her as more than a milkmaid. Tess wonders why a \"decidedly bookish, musical, thinking young man should have chosen deliberately to be a farmer, and not a clergyman, like his father and brother. Tess points out the difference in learning between them, and Angel offers to help her in reading. She turns him down, stating that what she wants to learn cannot be found in books. Nonetheless, Tess is anxious to have Angel think kindly about her. She discusses him with Mr. Crick and is amazed to learn from him that Angel does not have a good opinion about old families. As a result, Tess again feels she has no chance with Angel. Notes Each day introduces a new facet of Tess's personality to Angel. She appears ever intriguing and fresh to him. While Tess is unaware of Angel's strong attraction to her, she does enjoy his presence on the farm and her conversations with him. The early spring has changed to warm summer with a spread of \"juicy grass\" and dazzling flowers. Tess has settled into her routine as a milkmaid, but is fearful that fate will intervene to destroy her peaceful days at Talbothay's. She is happier than she has ever been, but believes her joy cannot continue. Her pessimism confuses Angel, but her intelligence and independent thought surprise him. With fascination, he listens to her talk about her own individuality. He offers to teach her anything of her interest and is baffled that she refuses him. She grows philosophical and wants to know why the sun shines \"on the just and the unjust alike. Not knowing her background, Angel finds her question quite puzzling and challenging. It is important to notice the image that Hardy creates around Angel. His name is significant; in addition, he is seen lounging in the garden and playing a harp. He is also pictured as extremely intelligent and kind. It is no wonder that Tess thinks of him almost as a god and believes his music to be heavenly. Hardy, however, hints that this way of thinking is dangerous; a love affair between the couple cannot be smooth. The author foreshadows this fact by making the garden  filled with ugly images, including offensive smells and slug slime. Just as Tess's innocence and purity have been spoiled by the world, even this idyllic scene has its darkness", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTessD28.asp"}