{"name": "CHAPTER 33", "summary": "CHAPTER 33 Summary Before the wedding, Angel takes Tess into town to make some purchases. While she waits for Angel, Tess is spotted by an acquaintance from Trantridge, who rudely makes a comment about her lack of chastity. Angel hears the remark and hits the man. The Trantridge man apologizes, Angel gives him some money, and they go peacefully on their separate ways. The incident unnerves Tess, and she looks forward to moving far away where she will not be recognized. But that night, she decides she must confess her past to Angel in a letter. She writes down everything and slips the letter under Angel's door. The next day she is pleasantly surprised by his warmth and love and thinks he is forgiving her. Tess breathes a sigh of relief that the ordeal is over. On the day of the wedding she is shocked to discover her sealed letter beneath the carpet in his room. Since the wedding is about to begin, she decides to tell Angel in person about her past. She destroys the letter and rushes to find her future husband. She tells him she wants to confess her faults before the wedding. Angel, not wanting to spoil the day, assures Tess that there is plenty of time in the future to talk about their wrongdoings. With no choice left, a dismayed Tess proceeds with her wedding. It is a quiet ceremony held in the local church. Notes The work of fate is clearly seen in this chapter. While Tess and Angel are shopping in town, Tess is recognized by a male acquaintance from Trantridge, who casts aspersions upon her character. Angel defends his future wife by striking the man, but the whole incident, right before the wedding, unnerves Tess and plants a seed of doubt in Angel's mind. The incident also convinces Tess to write a letter of confession to Angel, which she does that very night. Fate also has a hand in the letter. When Tess slips it under Angel's door, it goes underneath the rug; therefore, Angel never sees it. When Angel is warm and kind to Tess the next morning, she reads it as a sign of his understanding and forgiveness and feels very relieved. On the morning of the wedding, she discovers the truth about the letter. She tears up the unopened envelope and rushes to tell Angel the truth in person. He refuses to hear any of her confession, stating there will be plenty of time for such things in their future. Dismayed by the power of fate, a confused Tess goes through with the marriage ceremony. The honest and kind young woman worships Angel, almost like a god; but she feels terribly troubled that she has been unable to tell him about her tainted past, even though she has made two earnest tries to do so. Her troubled heart receives a further jolt after the wedding when she sees the D'Urberville carriage that will take them away and when she hears the cock crow. Hardy explains that when a cock crows in the afternoon it brings ill luck. Thus, the stage is set for a series of tragic events in Tess's life", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTessD43.asp"}