{"name": "Chapter 26", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 26<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale watches Zenobia cry, wondering if she has forgotten him, or if he is supposed to be her priest. Finally she sits up, deathlike in her pallor. She laughs that Coverdale is turning this into a ballad, but that this is a woman's doom. She continues, saying, \"the whole universe, her own sex and yours, and Providence, and Destiny, to boot, make common cause against the woman who swerves one hair's breath out of the beaten track\". Coverdale tries to disagree. PARAGRAPH>Zenobia laments that Hollingsworth threw away a woman who could have served him better than Priscilla with her \"blind, instinctive love\"  could. It was not his fault, though, as she should have known he would never want her broken, useless heart. She says she will leave Blithedale and hopes Coverdale will give him a message. A moment later she changes her mind and says she has none. Taking the flower out of her hair, she says she is weary of this place and that it was a foolish dream. Her hand is cold when Coverdale touches it. PARAGRAPH>Her plan is to go into a nunnery, and she says farewell and walks away. Her spirit seems to hang over the place. Coverdale flings himself down on the ground. He falls asleep and has strange, tragic dreams before he wakes", "analysis": "The novel comes to a close with the startling but not at all surprising death of Zenobia; the marriage of Hollingsworth and Priscilla; and Coverdale's permanent absence from Blithedale. Coverdale's obsession with his friends is clearly not over, as the mere construction of his narrative makes clear.<PARAGRAPH>The first thing to address is Zenobia's death, which has been substantially alluded to and foreshadowed. Coverdale cannot resist sowing the seeds of this coming event right before it happens, as when he mentions how cold her hands were. Ffrangcon Lewis discusses Zenobia's death in the context of the ever-present theme of theatricality, concluding that \"Coverdale comes to resemble a grotesque version of Professor Westervelt, the exhibitor of the veiled lady, as he paddles out three necromantic passes with his boat above the concealed body of the drowned Zenobia.\" There is the same spiritual and sexual theater present in this moment; it is also the consummating event in the theatrical performance going on in Coverdale's head. It is unknown how much Zenobia controlled the perception of the tragedy of her death; she certainly did sow seeds that could allude to her suicide, always wont to speak and act melodramatically. And as is made clear many times by her admirers, she was fit for the stage. Lewis notes, \"Hawthorne's grim satirical implication is that Hollingsworth's and Coverdale's sins are to be remembered in the sepulchral orisons of the dead Zenobia, and that Zenobia's final gesture is indeed an eloquent piece of self-conscious self-dramatization.\"<PARAGRAPH>Both Zenobia and Priscilla warrant more analysis, as they are complicated characters that do not remain within the neat boundaries they may be assumed to inhabit. Allan and Barbara Lefcowitz call them both \"chiaroscuric\", and in particular find Priscilla fascinating. They point to her little silk purses as emblematic of her secretiveness and covert sexuality, which contrast with the open, bold flower of Zenobia. Priscilla's eyes are often closed, and she can hear things no one else can. At one point she clutches a letter to her bosom guiltily, tying her to Hawthorne's Hester Prynne. The authors speculate that she may have even had a past as a prostitute. Moodie, as a morally bankrupt and impoverished man, sells her purses in a way that suggests he may pimp her body out as well. The veiled lady \"may have been merely a safe Puritanical cover  for the sinister facts of Priscilla's true past identity\". Allusions to her terrible, unsavory, and disreputable past are common; there were \"contemporary associations between the seamstress profession and of the prostitute or fallen women\" and \"links between mesmerism and sexual exploitation.\" This theory obviously can't be definitively proven, but it is certainly wroth considering.<PARAGRAPH>The authors also note that Zenobia and Priscilla do not actually seem that different from each other, identifying them as \"the major and minor key of the same melody, or the manifest and latent content of the same dream\" rather than just the \"white\" and \"dark\" lady. Both are associated with plants, albeit different ones. Both are secretive, both are involved with masks. Hawthorne seems sympathetic to both, but as the novel proceeds, Priscilla loses some of her nuance and mystique, \" increasingly ethereal, pallid, and passive, more the flimsy paradigm of some vague principle of floating good.\" At the end of the novel she is merely Hollingsworth's guardian, and the perhaps indirect and unfortunate cause of rendering him depressed, empty, and defeated.<PARAGRAPH>Hollingsworth's choice, then, is not because he loves Priscilla; indeed, the sexual attraction between him and Zenobia is quite palpable. He chooses her because of her money, which used to be Zenobia's. His project to build the edifice truly did consume him and ruin lives in the process, as Coverdale often chides him.<PARAGRAPH>As for Coverdale, he remains away from Blithedale, content with his bachelor lifestyle and creature comforts. He is a failed poet, and a failed utopian experimenter. He abandoned Blithedale, and abandoned Zenobia. His narrative reveals a man obsessive, less-than-circumspect, and perhaps complicit in the problematic events he narrates. Some critics propose that Coverdale was a lot more implicated in Zenobia's death than he would like to share, or even remember. McElroy and McDonald suggest that he may have returned to Blithedale with certain expectations about Zenobia after ensuring that she did not get to be with Hollingsworth , but that when she spurned him again he murdered her. They write that perhaps \"his mind refuses to remember what he did, though he half-suspects himself.\" It is obvious that he is obsessed with her sexually, given his ruminations on her married and virginal state, and his allusions to being jealous of Hollingsworth. The position of her dead body suggests strangling, and there are other clues, such as her hands looking as if she struggled against Providence and her having referred to Coverdale as such earlier in the text. The writers conclude that \"By strangling Zenobia, 'Judge Coverdale' meted out 'justice' to a 'fallen' woman who disdained his affection, and he also punished her lover, whose life is destroyed by guilt for her death.\" This theory is certainly provocative and not commonly agreed upon, but it indicates just how rife with interpretations the novel is - how rich, how deep, how ambiguous and complex it is.<PARAGRAPH>", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-25-29"}