{"name": "Chapter 19", "summary": "Chapter 19<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale is stung by Zenobia's lowering of the shades, and that she does not seem to know the purity of his intentions. She should have selected him for the holder of her secrets, not Hollingsworth. He might still have to judge, and to deliver punishment, but he would do it out of love. PARAGRAPH>He glimpses an astral light in her room across the way, and chides himself for being silly - he ought to go over there and pay his respects. After all, they were friends. PARAGRAPH>He arrives and she greets him with a face of smiling scorn, laughing that he seems to take such an interest in her affairs. He realizes they actually have no real intimacy between them, and things are very different from their first meeting. He looks at her jewels and costly garments and the cold, bright flower in her hair. He asks her if she ever was a part of Blithedale, and she scoffs that those ideas have their time and place but \"it must be a very circumscribed mind that can find room fro no others\". PARAGRAPH>The brightness of the room is dazzling; the furniture is sumptuous and sets off Zenobia's proud figure. She appears powerful and stunningly beautiful. PARAGRAPH>Coverdale asks if she has given up Blithedale, to which she replies that she has not but that there are other worlds as good or better. PARAGRAPH>To provoke her, as he is now annoyed, he mentions Hollingsworth's singular vision. She becomes flushed and he thinks he has succeeded in revealing her true feelings. She hotly defends Hollingsworth's greatness, as a great man often has the inspiration of only one idea. PARAGRAPH>Despite her scorn of him, Coverdale admires her fidelity to the man. He asks Zenobia if Priscilla is there, and remarks that it is dangerous for the young woman to be near a man like Hollingsworth. With a low voice, Zenobia calls for Priscilla", "analysis": "This set of chapters features incredible revelations : Priscilla is the Veiled Lady; Priscilla and Zenobia are sisters; Hollingsworth chooses Priscilla over Zenobia; Westervelt's role as manipulative mesmerist is made clear. Coverdale also reveals himself as an unreliable narrator, and the tone of the work shifts markedly into one that is more fragmented and dreamlike.<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale is one of critics' favorite topics, and with good reason. He is a voyeur, looking out panoptically, part of the action to an extent but more a watcher and a commenter. His preoccupation with his friends is unhealthy; he is jealous and embittered by their triangle and thus we cannot totally trust his observations. Kelley Griffith Jr. writes, \"the narrator is biased, unreliable, unlikeable, and he distorts his characters\" and that he has \"a highly sensitive, ironical, intelligent, though disturbed mind\". His narrative is reminiscent of those of postmodern writers in that it is like an interior monologue. The dream is the primary device Hawthorne uses to give form to the novel. While the first half of the novel moves logically, the second half starting from Coverdale's removal to the city is dreamlike, with \"chaotic ordering of events and  refusal to fructify many of the crucial developments in the first half.\" Griffith notes three types of dreams -the utopian dream of the Blithedalers; the dream created by imagination and memory; and the dream one has when sleeping. Coverdale has the second two quite often, and threads the first part of his narrative with references to daydreams and dreams. Hawthorne also \"equates Coverdale's fits of imagination with a dream state\"; the meeting with Westervelt can come under scrutiny. Coverdale's dreams cannot be trusted, especially as they intrude on his daily life.<PARAGRAPH>There is certainly a shift in the second part of the novel, which Griffith calls \"literally a different story\" and \"a voyage through chaos - mental chaos\". Coverdale falls into the same stupefied state as the pigs he marvels at on his way out; his total lack of surprise at seeing his friends in the boarding house across the way is also consistent with a dream rather than reality. His sluggish, languid existence is dreamlike to say the least, and we cannot fully trust what he is recounting. The episode with Moodie-as-Fauntleroy is also suspicious. Griffith writes, \"the saloon contains art works which either idealize reality or overemphasize it\". Moodie's story is told while drunk, and Coverdale admits to some artistic license. Coverdale's return to Blithedale is also dreamlike and hellish, a phantasmagoria of strange creatures and interludes. Overall, Coverdale works his friends and their situations up in his imagination and \"brings in his own guilt resulting from his moral obligation to them .\"<PARAGRAPH>John Harmon McElroy and Edward L. McDonald agree, writing in their article that the coincidences in the second half of the novel defy rationality. Coverdale knew Zenobia had an apartment in the city, yet he marvels that he manages to look right into it from his hotel. Anther \"coincidence\" is that he happens to be at the Lyceum hall where Hollingsworth is. There are many questions about Coverdale's role in passing along information, such as Moodie's plan to take the money from Zenobia and give it to Priscilla. The authors also find it odd that Coverdale has such a somber attitude about visiting Blithedale again when he is there ostensibly to visit friends.<PARAGRAPH>Finally, mesmerism was something that Hawthorne despised, and its ridiculousness and dangerousness are revealed in the chapter with Priscilla-as-the-Veiled-Lady. Westervelt, with consent from Moodie, brought her into it against her will, and it seems likely that Zenobia and Hollingsworth helped push her back into it. Hollingsworth then becomes her savior, but it is likely that that happens because he knows he can use her fortune  to build his visionary edifice.<PARAGRAPH>", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24"}