{"name": "Chapter 22", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 22<PARAGRAPH>Many years ago a wealthy man named Fauntleroy had a wife and young daughter, but his life was empty and he committed a crime to feel alive. He was exiled and lost his family, and lived in an old ruin of a house in a New England town. He never did anything illegal again but lived a colorless existence. PARAGRAPH>He married again and had another daughter, but his wife died and he was left alone with the child. The daughter, Priscilla, was tremulous, shy, and a waif. The only thing that sustained her was hearing stories of her older, half-sister. PARAGRAPH>Neighbors said strange things of Priscilla, connecting her to the supernatural. It was believed she had the second sight and gifts of prophecy. One day they saw a handsome, well-dressed man enter their house to speak with Priscilla and Moodie. Rumors sprung up around him as well, suggesting he was a wizard. PARAGRAPH>As for the other daughter, she grew up in affluence and wanted for nothing, save a mother's hand to curb her wild ways. Some said she had a secret marriage to an \"unprincipled\" young man. Her reputation was not damaged, though, as \"the sphere of ordinary womanhood was felt to be narrower than her development required\". PARAGRAPH>One day, Fauntleroy, now called \"Moodie,\" was visited by Zenobia, who had a message saying he wanted to see her. He was impressed by her beauty but did not tell her who he was. He only asked her to be good to a young woman named Priscilla. PARAGRAPH>After she left he wondered if it was right to let her have all his fortune and not give any to Priscilla, but he knew it would not be good for the latter", "analysis": "This set of chapters features incredible revelations : Priscilla is the Veiled Lady; Priscilla and Zenobia are sisters; Hollingsworth chooses Priscilla over Zenobia; Westervelt's role as manipulative mesmerist is made clear. Coverdale also reveals himself as an unreliable narrator, and the tone of the work shifts markedly into one that is more fragmented and dreamlike.<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale is one of critics' favorite topics, and with good reason. He is a voyeur, looking out panoptically, part of the action to an extent but more a watcher and a commenter. His preoccupation with his friends is unhealthy; he is jealous and embittered by their triangle and thus we cannot totally trust his observations. Kelley Griffith Jr. writes, \"the narrator is biased, unreliable, unlikeable, and he distorts his characters\" and that he has \"a highly sensitive, ironical, intelligent, though disturbed mind\". His narrative is reminiscent of those of postmodern writers in that it is like an interior monologue. The dream is the primary device Hawthorne uses to give form to the novel. While the first half of the novel moves logically, the second half starting from Coverdale's removal to the city is dreamlike, with \"chaotic ordering of events and  refusal to fructify many of the crucial developments in the first half.\" Griffith notes three types of dreams -the utopian dream of the Blithedalers; the dream created by imagination and memory; and the dream one has when sleeping. Coverdale has the second two quite often, and threads the first part of his narrative with references to daydreams and dreams. Hawthorne also \"equates Coverdale's fits of imagination with a dream state\"; the meeting with Westervelt can come under scrutiny. Coverdale's dreams cannot be trusted, especially as they intrude on his daily life.<PARAGRAPH>There is certainly a shift in the second part of the novel, which Griffith calls \"literally a different story\" and \"a voyage through chaos - mental chaos\". Coverdale falls into the same stupefied state as the pigs he marvels at on his way out; his total lack of surprise at seeing his friends in the boarding house across the way is also consistent with a dream rather than reality. His sluggish, languid existence is dreamlike to say the least, and we cannot fully trust what he is recounting. The episode with Moodie-as-Fauntleroy is also suspicious. Griffith writes, \"the saloon contains art works which either idealize reality or overemphasize it\". Moodie's story is told while drunk, and Coverdale admits to some artistic license. Coverdale's return to Blithedale is also dreamlike and hellish, a phantasmagoria of strange creatures and interludes. Overall, Coverdale works his friends and their situations up in his imagination and \"brings in his own guilt resulting from his moral obligation to them .\"<PARAGRAPH>John Harmon McElroy and Edward L. McDonald agree, writing in their article that the coincidences in the second half of the novel defy rationality. Coverdale knew Zenobia had an apartment in the city, yet he marvels that he manages to look right into it from his hotel. Anther \"coincidence\" is that he happens to be at the Lyceum hall where Hollingsworth is. There are many questions about Coverdale's role in passing along information, such as Moodie's plan to take the money from Zenobia and give it to Priscilla. The authors also find it odd that Coverdale has such a somber attitude about visiting Blithedale again when he is there ostensibly to visit friends.<PARAGRAPH>Finally, mesmerism was something that Hawthorne despised, and its ridiculousness and dangerousness are revealed in the chapter with Priscilla-as-the-Veiled-Lady. Westervelt, with consent from Moodie, brought her into it against her will, and it seems likely that Zenobia and Hollingsworth helped push her back into it. Hollingsworth then becomes her savior, but it is likely that that happens because he knows he can use her fortune  to build his visionary edifice.<PARAGRAPH>", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24"}