{"name": "Chapter 13", "summary": "Chapter 13<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale remarks that Blithedale also indulged in leisure activities, such as drama, reading poetry, and creating tableaux vivants. One evening Zenobia proclaims that she is weary of this, as their true selves show through too much. She decides to tell a story to the group, which Coverdale repeats in his narrative. PARAGRAPH>Entitled \"The Silvery Veil\", it is about the Veiled Lady, who had attained much fame. A group of young men were talking about her, sharing stories and rumors and their ideas about what was under the veil. One young man named Theodore proclaimed he saw her, and the others shouted him down. A wager was set regarding Theodore solving the mystery of the Veiled Lady. PARAGRAPH>That evening Theodore went to an exhibition of the Veiled Lady and hid behind the screen. He observed the strange, spectral figure floating and flitting about the room. Once they were alone, the Veiled Lady called him forth. Surprised, Theodore announced his intention to find out her truth. She softly told him what his options were: to leave and never think of her again; to not lift the veil but win her love and loyalty; or to lift the veil and have her be his evil fate. PARAGRAPH>Theodore thought he would be trapped in an eternal relationship with an ugly woman, and chose to lift the veil. The Veiled Lady was sad at this, but consented to let him lift her veil. Theodore glimpsed the most beautiful, sweet face, but she vanished immediately. PARAGRAPH>In another place, a young maiden appeared amongst a group of visionaries. She became close to another woman there. That lady met a man in an Oriental robe who warned her that the young maiden was her deadliest foe, and that she must take this veil, throw it over the young maiden, and cry out, \"Arise, Magician, here is the Veiled Lady\" and he would take her. The lady did this, and the Magician came and took the girl as his slave forever. PARAGRAPH>When Zenobia concludes her story, she throws a bit of gauze on Priscilla for affect, surprising everyone and making Priscilla uncomfortable", "analysis": "Theater, masks, stories, and art pervade the text. Despite the Community's lofty purposes, and their stated goal to till the earth, they are mostly artists and intellectuals who derive more pleasure from their games and leisure activities. Zenobia's story and Coverdale's exit to the city mark a turning point in the novel, where the narrative becomes more dreamlike, fragmented, unreliable, and infused with the language of the spiritual and the dramatic.<PARAGRAPH>Eliot's Pulpit is a fascinating yet often overlooked component of the novel, one that is tied in with larger questions about the relationship between the past and the present. It is related to the Puritans, who were moral and convicted but at the same time hypocritical and deluded. Critic Byron Stay writes of Eliot's Pulpit, explaining that the author \"uses the wilderness setting...to represent Puritan strength in order to contrast the Blithedalers with their seventeenth-century counterparts.\" The Pulpit \"mirrors and distorts the self-perceptions of the characters\" and shows how they have very flimsy identities. It is a \"neutral territory\" where the characters inability to embody early ideals becomes plain.<PARAGRAPH>First, Stay explains who Eliot was: a Puritan apostle to the Indians and a writer, whom Hawthorne admired as a man with true character and a representative of \"the survival of Puritan integrity in a world dominated by Puritan brutality.\" The Blithedalers may think that they are like him, but Hawthorne makes it clear that they are not. They think they are beyond \"Puritan frigidity\" but they truly aren't. Hollingsworth's philanthropy is false, and overall the Blithedalers have much more in common with the nonsectarian founders of Massachusetts Bay than they do with the Pilgrims of Plymouth. Their vision is much more self-interested than spiritual. Stay writes that the characteristics of the rock itself are telling; \"The jaggedness of the rock suggests the Puritan-like callousness which undergirds the Blithedale experiment and foreshadows its impending disintegration. It also points to the psychological fissures which threaten each character from within.\" Since Coverdale only notices its softness, it is clear he cannot see the real truth behind appearances. If there is a focus on softness in the beginning, the shift to hardness later reveals the breakdowns each character is experiencing. The return to Eliot's Pulpit at the end of the novel, in which Zenobia holds sway, alludes to the witch trials of Salem and failures of Puritanism. Stay concludes, \"Against the backdrop of Eliot's Pulpit, the utopians repeat Puritan history, but because they lack the Puritans' sense of moral direction, they are ultimately reduced to playing out a parody of Puritan barbarism.\" The characters' disintegration is the \"decline that Hawthorne saw in the character of the mid-century American.\"<PARAGRAPH>Leo B. Levy also looks at the novel in its historical context, noting how \"the extinction of predominantly rural America at the moment of its proposed revival at Blithedale threatens all traditional ties and institutions.\" Coverdale is between the old and the new, judging his friends according to traditional standards but aware of the changes imposing themselves on him as well. Both Coverdale and Hollingsworth embody \"the sternness of the Puritan age\", while Coverdale is indicative of the ultimate failure of uniting urban culture with the country -he is \"a new kind of individual\" and \"the displaced person\". Hawthorne is making his views  clear through Coverdale; the author \"saw the value of an internal narrator whose integrity could be doubted precisely because he was so damaged by the conditions he describes as any of the other characters.\"<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale displays his voyeuristic tendencies to full effect here, obsessing over his friends across the way. His position at the window mirrors that of the hermitage. The vortex, the voyage into chaos that is Coverdale's obsession, manifests strongly here.<PARAGRAPH>Zenobia's story of the Veiled Lady is important, as it foreshadows the revelation of Priscilla later in the novel, and is also a part of the general theme of veiling and masks in the novel. The Blithedalers love to dress up, play roles and act, and, less in a spirit of fun, mask their true intentions and identities. Everyone has a secret, and ambiguity reigns.<PARAGRAPH>", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-18"}