{"name": "Chapter 9", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 9<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale states that it is probably not advisable to look too exclusively into individual men and women. He now sees that he did Hollingsworth wrong by probing into his character too much, but at the time the man and Zenobia and Priscilla were a problem he could not solve. He loves Hollingsworth but finds in him \"a stern and dreadful peculiarity\" , common in a person who has a single focus, an idol to which they sacrifice themselves. PARAGRAPH>He comments that young girls often come into the orbits of men like these, and fancy themselves in love. PARAGRAPH>Priscilla has grown very pretty, and is now always bubbly and effervescent. She is like all young girls in their freeness, in their ever-shifting revelries and pursuits. She plays pranks and perpetrates mischief more than anyone else in the community, and occasionally meets with mishaps. Everyone loves her, though, and laughs at her. Coverdale finds her delicate like an instrument. PARAGRAPH>One day he asks her what is the use of frolicking about so much, and being so merry. He asks if she has nothing dismal to think about. She gives him an unintelligible look. He says he would rather look backwards than forward, as it is unknown. She laughs that he makes her sad by talking about the past, and runs off to sit by Hollingsworth. PARAGRAPH>Zenobia stares at them, and calls Priscilla over to tell her something. She tells the younger girl that she needs a duenna with experience of life, and she shall be that to her. Priscilla is a bit perturbed, and asks twice if Zenobia is mad at her; Zenobia jokes that she will beat her in her room. PARAGRAPH>Coverdale notes that Hollingsworth is not unconscious of Zenobia's charms but he enjoys Priscilla's sympathy with his purposes more. PARAGRAPH>Coverdale sees that Zenobia needs no help of his, but feels some interest in her and her noble traits. PARAGRAPH>The community gossips that Zenobia and Hollingsworth are lovers. There is a walk they always go on, and a spot where it is assumed they might build a cottage for themselves. PARAGRAPH>When Coverdale says something to Hollingsworth about building a cottage in a removed spot, he replies that his edifice must be out in the open. Coverdale is confused", "analysis": "In this next set of chapters, Hawthorne proffers more questions and a few answers. We find out that Priscilla is Moodie's daughter, but that is all; we do not know his relationship with Zenobia, or anything else about Priscilla's past. We find out Hollingsworth's true purpose in being at Blithedale. We meet Westervelt, a dapper but insidious and mysterious young man whom Coverdale assumes has an indiscreet relationship with Zenobia. And we are left wondering at the relationships springing up between Hollingsworth, Zenobia, and Priscilla. While it is hinted that Zenobia and Hollingsworth are involved, Priscilla's role complicates it.<PARAGRAPH>In terms of Priscilla, she is a much more enigmatic character than commonly assumed. Critics tend to focus on Hawthorne's \"dark ladies\" - Hester, Zenobia - and their various mysteries, and pay less attention to the virginal young woman that also populate his pages. Priscilla is certainly described in ways that indicate purity, as in her paleness, quietness, and slight stature, but Hawthorne complicates this by associating her with wildness and by placing clues about her probably less-than-moral past.<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale continues to act the part of the voyeur. He has his \"hermitage,\" a lofty hideout where he can sit alone and watch those perambulating below. Hawthorne always associates Coverdale with these sorts of spaces; later in the novel his room at the hotel is a perfect, 19th century version of Rear Window in which he can spy on those in the boardinghouse across the way. He also articulates his growing obsession, commenting that he knows it is perhaps better not to pry into people's characters too much, lest you find something you never should have seen, but that he could not help it. He is also apt to refer to his three friends as a problem he cannot solve, indicating just how concerned he is with them. It is probably during this time in the narrative that the three of them begin to be suspicious of Coverdale and his interest in them, although the actual break is never officially known.<PARAGRAPH>Some readers may wonder about Charles Fourier and his place within the novel. The French social theorist wrote of an alternative social organization based on independent cooperative units, with each unit containing 1620 individuals who took care of each others needs from the material to the social to the sexual. It was assumed that Brook Farm incorporated some of Fourier's principles, although it was not the case when Hawthorne participated. As Annette Kolodny writes in her annotations to the novel, Hollingsworth grows angry in his discussion about Fourier with Coverdale because the theorist \"proposed satisfying, rather than repressing, individuals' instinctive and selfish needs, including the sexual. Only when gratified, Fourier argued, would self-interest and instinctual desires cease to disrupt and distort human relations; a unrepressed society, in his view, fostered harmony and cooperation.\" Most characters in Blithedale are nowhere near this progressive perspective; Zenobia is the only one who would espouse this degree of comfort with sexual freedom. Coverdale maintains the position of judge, while Hollingsworth's singular focus on his philanthropic endeavors precludes him from fully engaging with these sorts of complications.<PARAGRAPH>Another real-world personage to note briefly is Margaret Fuller, a contemporary of Hawthorne's. Fuller, a women's rights activist and writer, is usually associated with Zenobia, but Hawthorne playfully confuses his readers by suggesting Priscilla's resemblance to her.<PARAGRAPH>", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-7-12"}