{"name": "Chapter 16", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 16<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale decides he will take leave of the Community for a few days. Silas Foster is gruffly irritated, wondering if he will return. Truthfully, Coverdale feels as if the luster of Blithedale has dimmed; he is not on good terms with his former friends, and the whole Community has felt the effect of his break with Hollingsworth. Coverdale thus wants to travel elsewhere and get away from the bedlam of the Community. He thinks he has lost touch with the actual world since they only discuss how the world ought to be. PARAGRAPH>On his way out he asks Zenobia if he should promote any intention of hers to deliver a lecture on women's rights, to which she sadly says they have none. She looks at him and tells him she has a sense that a phase of their lives is finished. She once thought he could be a confidant but thought he was too young to be a Father Confessor and was not a girlish friend. Now, she says, if she had a confidant it would have to be an angel or a madman. He also bids farewell to Priscilla, whom he calls a little prophetess, and asks if she senses anything foreboding, or a major change. She does not. PARAGRAPH>He passes mutely by Hollingsworth, but actually goes to say farewell to the pigs outside. He marvels at their comfortable indolence and their deep sleep amid their own weight. He is sad when Silas Foster comments that they will eat them soon", "analysis": "Theater, masks, stories, and art pervade the text. Despite the Community's lofty purposes, and their stated goal to till the earth, they are mostly artists and intellectuals who derive more pleasure from their games and leisure activities. Zenobia's story and Coverdale's exit to the city mark a turning point in the novel, where the narrative becomes more dreamlike, fragmented, unreliable, and infused with the language of the spiritual and the dramatic.<PARAGRAPH>Eliot's Pulpit is a fascinating yet often overlooked component of the novel, one that is tied in with larger questions about the relationship between the past and the present. It is related to the Puritans, who were moral and convicted but at the same time hypocritical and deluded. Critic Byron Stay writes of Eliot's Pulpit, explaining that the author \"uses the wilderness setting...to represent Puritan strength in order to contrast the Blithedalers with their seventeenth-century counterparts.\" The Pulpit \"mirrors and distorts the self-perceptions of the characters\" and shows how they have very flimsy identities. It is a \"neutral territory\" where the characters inability to embody early ideals becomes plain.<PARAGRAPH>First, Stay explains who Eliot was: a Puritan apostle to the Indians and a writer, whom Hawthorne admired as a man with true character and a representative of \"the survival of Puritan integrity in a world dominated by Puritan brutality.\" The Blithedalers may think that they are like him, but Hawthorne makes it clear that they are not. They think they are beyond \"Puritan frigidity\" but they truly aren't. Hollingsworth's philanthropy is false, and overall the Blithedalers have much more in common with the nonsectarian founders of Massachusetts Bay than they do with the Pilgrims of Plymouth. Their vision is much more self-interested than spiritual. Stay writes that the characteristics of the rock itself are telling; \"The jaggedness of the rock suggests the Puritan-like callousness which undergirds the Blithedale experiment and foreshadows its impending disintegration. It also points to the psychological fissures which threaten each character from within.\" Since Coverdale only notices its softness, it is clear he cannot see the real truth behind appearances. If there is a focus on softness in the beginning, the shift to hardness later reveals the breakdowns each character is experiencing. The return to Eliot's Pulpit at the end of the novel, in which Zenobia holds sway, alludes to the witch trials of Salem and failures of Puritanism. Stay concludes, \"Against the backdrop of Eliot's Pulpit, the utopians repeat Puritan history, but because they lack the Puritans' sense of moral direction, they are ultimately reduced to playing out a parody of Puritan barbarism.\" The characters' disintegration is the \"decline that Hawthorne saw in the character of the mid-century American.\"<PARAGRAPH>Leo B. Levy also looks at the novel in its historical context, noting how \"the extinction of predominantly rural America at the moment of its proposed revival at Blithedale threatens all traditional ties and institutions.\" Coverdale is between the old and the new, judging his friends according to traditional standards but aware of the changes imposing themselves on him as well. Both Coverdale and Hollingsworth embody \"the sternness of the Puritan age\", while Coverdale is indicative of the ultimate failure of uniting urban culture with the country -he is \"a new kind of individual\" and \"the displaced person\". Hawthorne is making his views  clear through Coverdale; the author \"saw the value of an internal narrator whose integrity could be doubted precisely because he was so damaged by the conditions he describes as any of the other characters.\"<PARAGRAPH>Coverdale displays his voyeuristic tendencies to full effect here, obsessing over his friends across the way. His position at the window mirrors that of the hermitage. The vortex, the voyage into chaos that is Coverdale's obsession, manifests strongly here.<PARAGRAPH>Zenobia's story of the Veiled Lady is important, as it foreshadows the revelation of Priscilla later in the novel, and is also a part of the general theme of veiling and masks in the novel. The Blithedalers love to dress up, play roles and act, and, less in a spirit of fun, mask their true intentions and identities. Everyone has a secret, and ambiguity reigns.<PARAGRAPH>", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210620063347/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-blithedale-romance/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-18"}