{"name": "Chapter 18", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20", "summary": "Alan woke first and spoke to David. David however refused to lift his head and told him that they must part company. Alan demanded to know why and David explained that he did not wish to be near a man who either participated in or committed a murder. By describing how foolish it would be for Alan to take part in a murder for his safety and his clan's, Alan was able to convince David that he had no part in the crime. He was less successful in answering if he knew the identity of the murderer but David appreciated his skillful avoidance of the question and his loyalty to his own code of morals. David thought Alan immoral when he threw the soldiers off the murderer's track but was nevertheless quieted. Alan illustrated the danger David was in now that the soldiers thought that he was an accomplice in the murder. David was skeptical but was finally persuaded that he was safer to follow Alan than trust the Campbell's justice system. Alan alerted David to the hardships they would have to endure on the run but David was still uplifted to learn that they would be heading south. They rested as the soldiers searched for them far off. David learned of the events following his capsize. Two more great waves came and toppled the ship upon the reef so that water poured in. The bedridden seamen cried out in such horror that the able bodied men hopped into the dingy and paddled to shore. Another wave pushed the ship in their pursuit but was soon pulled under and sunk to the bottom. The seamen rowed silently to the shore. At this moment, Hoseason demanded that they ambush Alan. Reluctantly the crew spread out to attack him until Riach stood and defended Alan. He suggested Alan run which Alan did. Because Alan had caught a glimpse of David holding onto the spar in the water, he hoped David might have survived and left clues along his path to guide the boy. As Alan ran, he alerted all he saw to the wreck on the beach.", "analysis": "This chapter is mainly explanatory, as Alan illustrates to David why he would not have participated in the crime, the probable difficulty of their journey versus the injustice David would face in a Campbell court, and the events which befell the Covenant and its crew after David was thrown overboard. The great ship has sunk to the sea floor. Symbolically, the womb which David had been trapped inside had been destroyed, freeing him to a more independent existence, one would think. However, after four days of living alone on the isle and managing to survive rather ingeniously, David follows the path of a condemned rebel instead of searching for a route home. By luck, or happenstance, David is thrown into a situation where he finds Alan. From this point until David reaches the Shaws at the end of the book, the two men are virtually inseparable. There are points where David considers leaving Alan but he does not wish to betray the kind friend. Still, it is curious. If we look at David's adventures as a rite of passage, can he experience a true rite of passage when he will travel with a companion on whom he is so dependent. Is that a path to maturity or dependence. Or can one be mature and dependent simultaneously. Perhaps we will discover that David and Alan are codependent, which would support the analysis that David and Alan are two halves of one self, or doubles of one being. Yet, what does this say about adulthood. Was Stevenson actually saying anything about adulthood. David morally believes that since he and Alan are innocent of the crime that they should aid not hinder the Sheriff and that they had no reason to run because their innocence would have been revealed. He does not understand the complex clan politics which exist in the Highlands, and which is partially explained in the historical note given at the beginning of the novel. His attempt to be rational and reasonable is thus rejected by Alan who feels that any jury David faced would be made up of Campbells, who were incapable of holding a fair trial. Each man does not understand the views of the other but David finally agrees to trust Alan as he is in his home territory. But one must realize that Alan's views are subject to a great bias because of his notion that anything to do with a Campbell is evil. Proof of this bias surfaced in Alan's reaction to David's friend Minister Campbell. The bias that each has - David's bias for reason and Alan's bias for romanticized resentment - drives their blindness to truth and is synecdochal for the very characters of David and Alan"}