{"name": "Chapter 24", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-25", "summary": "One of Cluny's gillies, while carrying Alan and David's bags, led them to a hiding place near Loch Rannoch. The march occurred in silence as David was angered by Alan's actions at the Cage and Alan was embarrassed. David thought often of separation. He wished that Alan would suggest the idea. But Alan was not this gracious and David would not be so ungrateful as to suggest it himself. David also resented that Alan assumed that David would share the money he took back from Cluny. With these two subjects of pride boiling in David's temper, he remained silent, barely making eye contact with Alan. Alan noticed and finally apologized, noting that he did not wish to be where he was not welcome. Defensively, David reprimanded Alan for thinking that David would fail his friend. Alan expressed that he felt much in debt to David so David should make his life easier. This comment infuriated David more, who exclaimed that he had not reproached Alan for his stupidity in the least and was now being criticized for keeping silent. This quieted Alan and they walked quietly again. When they reached the Loch, Alan and the gillie disagreed on their course of action. The gillie finally won and took them into Campbell territory. The land was barren and covered in fog. Their health received no relief and David felt increasingly bad. His throat was sore and a stitch in his side grew worse. When he slept in his wet beds at night, he could not help but see images from the nightmares of his journey. As the rains continued, he hoped for his grave but said nothing to Alan. Instead, he tried more to show his endurance. Alan grew weary of being apologetic and finally forgave himself and became more arrogant than before. David grew worse until his legs were virtually giving way underneath him. When he fell, however, he stood up so quickly that Alan did not give his fall much notice. Alan started berating the proud boy with name calling. Finally, after being called Whig and feeling as if he was about to die, David exploded with anger. He criticized Alan, espousing that Alan should pay respect to the Whigs and Campbells who continually beat him. Alan was offended but David continued, finally pulling his sword and challenging Alan. Alan revealed his sword but then threw it upon the ground, collapsing into sadness. David's anger finally left him but he could not take back what he had said. He appealed to Alan with his seriously ill health. Alan ran to his side, apologized graciously, and offered to carry him though David was much larger in size.", "analysis": "The Quarrel chapter is discussed frequently by critics when they discuss Kidnapped. The critic, Eigner, describes the type of tension Stevenson was looking to illustrate in his writing, \"And it is this division , a division characterized not so much by strangeness but by animosity, that Stevenson sought to portray in the David Balfour romances. He continues to comment on the animosity which Stevenson believed existed between the two Scottish cultures, and the two spirits within himself. He states, \"Stevenson's herois neither polished nor elegant, and he is not altogether charmed by the glittering Highlander, at least not at first sight. He has been much more carefully trained to recognize and to turn aside from the devil. David is certainly not charmed by Alan and has been questioning himself from the first why he has remained with the man. For sure, a friendship has formed and David feels loyal to the alliance, but he still thinks that Alan is selfishly endangering David's life. Note, however, that David rarely stops to think that perhaps he is endangering Alan's life also. The progress would be much faster, in all likelihood, for Alan alone. A combination of David's exhaustion and his boiling resentment concerning Alan's selfishness and ingratitude work to fuel an anger in David which finally explodes. Unlike Alan, David does not express his inner feelings in an outward manner very often. We often see Alan whistling a tune in happiness, composing a song about himself, or throwing around insults. David, the more conservative and highminded Lowlander, uses a base of what is proper and judges others within that matrix, as in the gambling incident in Cluny's Cage for instance. Money and material items are much more important to the mercantile Lowlander. Thus the liberty that Alan took with David's money and the manner in which he afterwards assumed that David would share, infuriates David's Lowlander, practical sensibilities. He is no longer able to see past the prejudices he had been instilled with and attacks Alan with the bias with which he was raised. The quarrel is a metonym for the constant skirmishes and tension between the two breeds of Scotsman, and between the duality of the self. Finally, the quarrel is also a depiction of the lack of resolution or judgment within Stevenson's writing of Highlander/Lowlander politics. As critic Kiely claims, \"The quarrel between David and Alan is a typical example of the extent to which history colors and intensifies a private conflict without ultimately lifting it above the level of adolescent skirmish. Though the political history and tension definitely adds a more serious and painful level to this argument, the quarrel stems more from exhaustion and petty grievances than from a political disagreement. Alan is not able to fight his friend no matter what David has just said and David finally admits that he has been speaking out of great illness and injured pride. However, we can not help but note that many of the arguments and slurs which David and Alan throw at each other when angered are products of a deeply prejudiced and divided nation"}