{"name": "Chapter 26", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-26-30", "summary": "In less than a month, David was pronounced well again and he and Alan prepared for their journey. In Alan's eyes, the hunt for them had likely slackened. They would be nearing the Forth, a river just south of the border between the Highlands and the Lowlands. If they went directly over the bridge, Alan hoped, they could possibly pass unnoticed. The less obvious routes would be watched more. Thus they set out toward Stirling Bridge. They followed Alan Water until it flowed into the Forth and then hid close to Sterling Castle. David pressed for crossly the bridge directly but Alan was wary. There seemed to be no guard but Alan advised that they lay low. Later that night they watched a small woman waddle across the bridge. She went unbothered until suddenly a guard, likely awakened, stopped her. They had no chance to get across with the guard awake. Alan crawled further away from the bridge and David, forced to follow, saw his meeting with Mr. Rankeillor further postponed. When they reached a road, they began arguing over the next step. David thought it best to find a way to cross the river, whereas Alan figured they had a better chance crossing the sea in a boat. David argued they did not have the money. Alan persisted that he would find a way. They walked all through the night until reaching the town of Limekilns. In the morning, they bought cheese and bread. After they had left, Alan asked David about the lass who had served them. Alan was glad that David found her pretty and devised a plan to make her feel sorry for David so that she would help them get a boat. David did not want to trick her but finally agreed. Alan told the girl how ill David was and how much they needed to cross the river because they were in trouble. The girl felt very sorry for David but was not convinced to help until David told her how he wanted to see Mr. Rankeillor. He also mentioned that he was loyal to King George. With these two references, the lass decided he was a good person and agreed to help. She told them to hide down by the water. The men left for that spot and were only troubled during the day by a piper who saw them and asked too many questions. Finally, late at night, they noticed a boat coming toward them, rowed by the lass herself. She had trusted no one else, but waited until her father was asleep and took them across the river. She would accept no thank you, but dropped them off on the opposite shore and paddled quickly back.", "analysis": "The bridge which crosses the Forth, just below the dividing line between the Highlands and Lowlands, is very symbolic. Technically, as Alan tells David, they cross the dividing line before they reach the bridge, returning David to his own territory. However, David does not feel different because he and Alan are still on the run from the law and their scenario has not changed. The bridge is the obstacle which stands between David and freedom - the freedom to be a non-hunted man and the freedom to pursue his rightful wealth. Queensferry and Mr. Rankeillor stand on the opposite shore, metonyms for David inheritance. The bridge symbolizes the path back into civilization for David, a civilization which recognizes innocence and which would follow the law in order to help him against his Uncle Ebenezer. Moreover, the bridge represents the very gap between Alan and David because it stands between David's Lowland home and his Highland adventures. And just as the quarrel that David and Alan have is not resolved, the bridge is never crossed by David and Alan. They can never cross the bridge because the gap between David and Alan is unbridgeable. Taking the metaphor even further, Stevenson is alleging that the very gap within the soul is also unbridgeable. David is trying to set foot on his own land, his own identity, in order to reconnect with himself. Yet, Alan resists, symbolically, because of the differences between himself and the land on the other side of the bridge. The danger of his own culture keeps him on his land until he perform one more act symbolic of his character, and this is the manipulation of the pretty lass. We see that David has changed little when he finally nears the end of his journey. He is not making the decisions, he is embarrassed by Alan's illustrative romanticism, and he strictly stands by the conservative stances with which he was instilled. This static progress along his rite of passage is shown in his attitude toward the pretty lass. He feels the need to interfere in Alan's conversation with her in order to add that he will be meeting Rankeillor, whom he deems a respectable Lowlander, and that he is loyal to King George. In effect, his interjection does help to persuade the lass, but note that David feels the need to overtly confirm his identification with the stereotypical characteristics of the Lowland people. He has not grown past these definitions nor has he accepted into his sensibility the awareness of the Highlands which he has acquired. The righteousness which led him in his actions at the Shaws at the beginning of the book will cyclically, and statically, return him to it"}