{"name": "Chapter 2", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-5", "summary": "Early in the second day of David's journey to the House of Shaws, he came to the top of a hill and observed the sea and the city of Edinburgh. Proudly he marched ahead, asking for directions to the region of Cramond. The closer he approached Glasgow the more he was excited to notice the airs of the city, furnished by militia men in red coats. Once in Cramond, the boy asked the way to the house of Shaws but received an odd response, a mix of surprise and bewilderment. So David changed his inquiry from asking for directions to asking for an opinion of the Shaws, thinking that his country garb was the reason for the surprise. However the reactions changed little. A fellow pulling a cart told him that he should stay away from Ebenezer Balfour. A dapper little barber declared that Mr. Balfour was no kind of a man at all. Disillusioned, David sat down to think. If he had been within an hour walk of returning to Mr. Campbell he would have done so. The boy rose and continued toward the house, stopping once again to ask a passerby for directions. The stout woman he asked pointed to the exact building in which Mr. Balfour resided, a dreary place in apparent ruin. The woman was so enraged by her memories of the house and its inhabitants that she spit upon the ground. In a day where people still believed in witches, David was worried. As he observed the surrounding area of the house, however, the scene became more pleasant. The landscape was dotted with sheep and flowers, giving him the courage to continue. The actual entrance to the house was difficult to find as much of its construction seemed unfinished. The house was drearier in person and the night was falling. He heard quiet sounds of life and nervously knocked at the door. No response came. The sounds within stopped. He almost ran. Overcome by anger, David shouted and pounded on the door. Above his head, an old man peered out with a loaded gun. David replied he had come with a letter. The old man told him to leave it and go away but David refused, declaring that it was a letter of introduction. As David told the man his name, the man paused for awhile and finally asked if his father was dead. David knew not how to reply but the old man answered his own question and reluctantly let the boy in.", "analysis": "This chapter begins symbolically with David's arrival over a hill top, illuminating to him the world which lies below. The hills are small obstacles for David on the way to his new future and as he reaches the summit of each, he is able to peer below at a new and different world. He first spies the sea and Edinburgh, illustrating how far in Scotland he has traveled from a little country kirk. As he continues, he mentions taking a road by the capital and seeing militia men in their red coats. The appearance of industry, travel, and men defending country not only fill his heart with excitement because of their grandness but because of his patriotic pride. The text states, \"and both brought my country heart into my mouth. One of Stevenson's own personal journeys seemed to surround his meditation on the Scottish persona. As far as he could see, regardless of the many divisions and conflicts between the differing clans of Scotsmen, all felt a very special pride at being Scottish. This theme is reflected in the emotions which sweep through David as he lays his eyes on the Scottish cities he nears. The house of Shaws, which first is established as a place of wealth and distinction beyond what David imagined could have been his father's home, quickly is transformed into a dark, foreboding destination through the sentiment David witnesses while asking for directions. At first looking inward, David assumes he has brought on the surprise but he soon realizes it is the place itself. Suddenly, his bright future is clouded and the house is colored with a different and darker enigmatic allure than it was previously. It is by no mistake of Stevenson's that David reaches the house as the sun leaves the sky. The darkening of the sky and the death of the day foreshadow the truth behind the rumors that David learns and work to make the house more grotesque and foreboding. Furthermore, the characters whom he asks for directions become more and more violently opposed to Ebenezer Balfour, the proprietor of the Shaws, as David nears the house. The last woman spits on the ground at the thought of Ebenezer and the house. Stevenson has prepared the reader for quite a scene once the house is reached. David keeps after his goal not because of pure determination, as one might expect from a hero, but because he is too far from home to return to it without at least seeing the house for himself. This sense of decision making is symbolic of David's decision process, or passive sense of determinism, throughout the novel, as highlighted by critic, Donald McFarlan. McFarlan writes, \"While David is an endurer and survivor, Stevenson is at great pains to point out that he never initiates action or ever consciously makes a decision. However, in this light, his character may actually seem more human, giving the reader a hero whom does the best he can with the situations he is given but is not brave enough to initiate action often on his own. We see this characteristic again when David makes his way to the doorstep of the Shaws after hearing noises within which stop as he approaches. Suddenly, he begins shouting and banging on the door. We are proud of him for not giving up, but we are also conscious that he simply gets angry and shouts. He does not decide to. It is simply determined by Stevenson that this behavior will bring results and he is let into the house"}