{"name": "Chapter 8", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10", "summary": "One night at midnight a man came down from his deck duty to the forecastle, whispering that he had finally done it. David and the others knew at once that he was referring to Mr. Shuan and poor Ransome. Moments later Hoseason came into the forecastle commanding that David run to the round-house as he and Ransome were to change jobs. Seamen entered carrying Ransome's limp and pale body and David quickly ran past and across the the deck to the round-house. Mr. Shuan sat at the table staring blankly as David and then the Captain entered. Shuan was the other officer below Hoseason besides Riach and was naturally kind except when drinking, which was common. Riach entered with a look that said that Ransome was dead. They stood staring at Shuan until Shuan reached for the bottle of liquor on the table. Riach intercepted the bottle, yelling that he had done enough damage, and threw it over the side of the boat. Shuan stood up as if to murder him as well but Hoseason stepped between them, demanding to know if Shuan realized he had killed the boy. Shuan sat down, exclaiming that Ransome had brought him a dirty container. Hoseason led the man to a bunk and bade him to lie down and sleep. Riach cried that Hoseason should have done something earlier to which Hoseason replied that Riach must never speak of the murder on land but must say that Ransome had fallen overboard. He then chastised Riach for throwing away a good bottle of liquor and asked David to retrieve another for them. After this night, David continuously served meals for the three men. He slept in the round-house on a cold, hard bed where he was constantly interrupted. Still, the work was not difficult and he was often fed quite well. He rather appreciated working more than thinking because it gave him less time to be discouraged about his upcoming future.", "analysis": "Ransome's death is by far the largest event of the ninth chapter. From the beginning, Ransome was a tragic figure of Stevenson's since he was a boy who was constantly tortured by the life he had been forced to lead. He did not know what it was like to live normally or have parents to care for him. Many times, Riach and others would give him liquor, causing him to act more foolish and embarrassing the crew members, who could not help but see the tragedy inherent in the boy's existence. Furthermore, Ransome's life is arrested in its development by death. He thus would never become anything else besides the foolish, unfortunate boy. David notes that Ransome's ghost remained over Shuan, Hoseason, Riach, and David himself for a long while. The tragedy, the death of the innocent, had occurred long before Ransome's death and would thus continue to haunt the ship members who had so ceremoniously spoiled the child. We noted earlier that Ransome was the only child figure encountered in Kidnapped and thus could serve as a figure of comparison for the childhood that David was growing away from. His early death can be looked at in two distinct ways. In David's process of maturation, he has been reborn into a new stage of development when he comes out of the darkness on the ship. Ransome's death, though violent, could then be understood as a metaphor for the death of David's childhood. Due to the cruelty of his uncle, David has been violently and quickly torn from the last roots of innocence, and torn from the life which is rightfully his. The second way of regarding Ransome's death would be to see it as a step in the strengthening of David's resolve. He finds himself very helpless on the ship which is why he feels so discouraged. The ship moves toward the Carolinas steadily and he cannot stop its progress, or so he thinks. By having to replace Ransome in the round-house, David is allowed to interact more with the three officials of the ship. He fills a subservient role however, serving the men at every meal. Yet the first-hand experience he gains by watching the scene directly after Ransome dies allows an anger to rise inside of David. The death foreshadows the rebellion which David will participate in. Without the impetus of Ransome's death, it is doubtful David would have had the courage to side with Alan Breck"}