{"name": "Chapter 20", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20", "summary": "During the night, they moved quickly, mostly running as dawn approached. Alan would pause occasionally at a house in order to keep his neighbors updated. When the sun rose, the two were in the middle of a valley, quite visible. The valley appeared empty but Alan ran on, coming soon to a stream. He leapt onto a rock in the middle of the river, followed shortly by David. David looked at the wide berth between them and the other side and became overwhelmed by fear. Alan tried to encourage David but saw that he may never move. Forcing David to drink some brandy, Alan then lifted himself up and leapt across. David, tipsy from the liquor, knew he must jump immediately. He took a giant jump, but only reached the shore with his fingertips. Barely grasping on, David was finally pulled onto land by Alan. Alan instantly began running again. He slowed under a great rock, giving David a chance to breath. He then hitched himself up onto the rock by stepping on David's shoulders. From there, he was able to help David up. Once on top, David was able to see a sunken area in which the men could lie and be hidden from sight. Alan finally relaxed and teased David about his jumping abilities. He said however that he was to blame for their predicament. Because of Alan losing his way during the night, they had been in the open valley at dawn. Also, he had forgotten to bring water with them and had only the brandy. Alan told David that he could sleep first. Hours later, David was awakened abruptly by the feel of Alan's hand across his face. He had been snoring. David did not care but upon sitting up, noticed the large amount of red coated soldiers scattered across the valley. Because of the proximity of the soldiers, David and Alan were forced to lie flat upon the rocks as silently as possible. In the sunlight, the rock became so hot that only the little area of peat and moss on the rock stayed cool. Only one man could fit on this, so they took turns lying on the burning rock surface. The heat was unbearable and the hot rum did not help. Sometimes, the red coats came close enough to touch the rock. Finally, as the afternoon came, a shadow crept across the land and allowed the men to slip down behind the rock into the shade. As the soldiers moved closer to the riverside, Alan and David slipped away along the other side of the valley. It was slow moving but when the sun went down they were able to stand upright and travel faster. They reached a river and lay happily in it, drinking the water. Much refreshed, they continued until Alan was sure enough of their safety that he whistled tunes as they walked.", "analysis": "This chapter really begins the arduous and tumultuous trek which David and Alan undertake together to escape from Appin back to Queensferry. The route will be circuitous and haphazard since they must escape detection. It will bring David many times near death. And here from the start, the two must face danger. We will learn a little more about their dynamic as we watch the journey in its infant stage. The first real obstacle that is approached is the large river, in the middle of which a rock stands. Alan leaps onto the rock and is ready to jump to the far riverbed. David has a look on his face which immediately tells Alan that he is too frightened to jump. He freezes, similar to the time he is faced with shooting a man in the round-house on the ship. Shooting a man is a horrible act and one that David never thought he would be doing. Jumping from a rock to the shore does not compare in severity. However, the rock incident can be looked at as a metaphor for David's active life, as we have begun to explore. David is a rather unusual hero and narrator. It is ironic that the first-person narrator, a character and a voice endowed with great agency, has such a passive active life within the novel. Of course, the events are determined by David's route and the eyes the readers look through are David's own. However, few of the actions are precipitated by David. The largest protests he seems to raise throughout the novel are over moral issues, such as gambling, lying, and drinking. Kiely called David an \"inactive\" and \"inept\" hero because of the lack of agency the character holds. He is incapable of risking the jump from rock to shore without the aid of brandy to loosen his inhibitions. With Alan's pleading and the brandy, David is finally able to make that jump. But the question remains, can he make the jump to independent thought and adulthood. He is an incomplete and fractured hero. A quotation a little further on in the chapter again highlights David's passivity in his battle with self and agency. The text asserts, \"I followed him at once, and instantly fell all my length, so weak was I and so giddy with that long exposure. This quotation refers to Alan leading David off of the heated rock into the shade. David following Alan off the rock is an obvious semantic symbol for David's reliance on the agency which Alan possesses. Also, notice the stressed idea of the long exposure the men had faced on the rock. They were exposed to a long period of scorching sunlight which burnt and drained their bodies excessively. As sunlight often functions as a symbol for knowledge, the quotation could be said to illustrate an overexposure to knowledge. David has suddenly been placed in a very adult position of a condemned man on the run. Furthermore, the theme of man versus nature surfaces in the quotation as we observe David struggling with the land which, as a mercantile Lowlander, he did not often have to manage"}