{"name": "Chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10", "summary": "A week of terrible weather passed where the boat made few strides forward and more than a few backwards. Finally the officers decided to follow the winds further south. Here they met dense fog and swelling waves. Seamen had to listen day and night for breakers so as to not collide with the land. One night, as David served Hoseason and Riach their supper, the ship struck another boat. The boat's crew sunk to the bottom except for one man who had sat as a passenger on the boat. He was a small man dressed in very fine clothes. Beneath his great coat, pistols and a large sword were revealed. He spoke prettily to the Captain who expressed his sympathy toward the sunken boat. The conversation soon progressed to religion as the Captain implied to the man that he could tell from his French coat that he was a Jacobite, and thus not loyal to King George. The Captain and the rest of the sailors were Protestant. The stranger asked if he could be dropped in France, which was his original destination, for which he would highly reward the Captain. Hoseason refused, sending David to retrieve food for the stranger. When David returned, the man had revealed a belt of guineas and was trying to make a deal with the Captain. The stranger repeated to Hoseason that the money was not his but was the property of his chieftain. He offered Hoseason thirty guineas if he was let off seaside and sixty if dropped at Linnhe Loch. The stranger explained that betraying him to the red coats would result in no money for Hoseason. The money was part of a rent which King George was looking for from the stranger's chieftain. Consequently, the Captain agreed on sixty guineas. Once Hoseason left, David asked if the exciting fellow was a Jacobite. The stranger stipulated that David was a Whig. He then sent David to Hoseason for the key to the liquor cabinet. When David neared, he overheard the three officers planning to mug the man of his belt of gold. David was enraged but entered to ask for the key. The men saw their chance and told David to get the pistols in the round-house for them so that the stranger would not be suspicious. He agreed but rushed back to the man to tell him of the Captain's murderous intentions. David did not wish to witness another murder. The stranger, who called himself Alan Breck Stewart, was startled by the news. He and David prepared for the ambush by checking entrances to the round-house and preparing weapons. David had little experience and so Alan placed him in his bunk to watch the back door.", "analysis": "Weather is generally symbolic in novels, allowing the reader to gain a sense of the changes in plot from the way in which the weather is described. In this case, the chapter begins by illustrating great storms which toss the boat to such an extent that the officers decide to change course and move away from their destination. Once this is accomplished, the crew is met with fog so great that they are forced to listen to the sea at all times simply in order to avoid hitting the land. In other words, the men aboard the ship are blind as to what is to come that they are forced to rely solely on their ears. A disaster is clearly foreshadowed because of the extent of the blindness and the uneasiness established by the highly inclimate weather. However, although the weather is foreboding, David mentions that \"danger in the air, and was excited. A sense of change, a turning of the tide, is \"in the air\" highlighting for the reader that something new is soon to be introduced. Alan Breck Stewart's arrival is the great event which occurs. Critics, including Donald McFarlan, have remarked that neither David nor Alan are complete characters on their own. Instead, each fulfills half of a whole person, one complementing the other. After recently witnessing the death of David's childhood, Alan is born onto the ship. These events provide David with the courage to attack the injustices he has witnessed aboard the ship. Alone, he experienced very little active power, following whatever orders he was given. For instance, after Ransome's death, he scurries to the round-house when ordered to by Hoseason. However, within pages of Alan joining the ship, David has decided to turn against the crew and aid a man whom he has just met. The two men are two poles coming together and forming a stronger man. Without David, Alan would not have known about the Captain's plans to kill him. Thematically, Stevenson illustrates the duality of self in the unity of these two halves. Religion is an interesting topic looked at in this chapter. For the first time, the Protestant characters meet a character of conflicting faith and loyalty. The irony enjoined in the characters of Hoseason and the crew becomes glaringly apparent. Hoseason tells Alan, \"I am a true-blue Protestant and I thank God for it. Further, David tells the reader, \"It was the first word of any religion I had heard from him, but I learnt afterwards he was a great churchgoer while on shore. And yet, Hoseason is the same man who witnessed the killing of small boy but did not reprimand the murderer. He agreed to kidnap David for a sum and sell him into slavery. The hypocrisy is great but Stevenson does little to criticize. Instead, he characterizes the irony and hypocrisy which is often embodied in religion and allows the reader to draw his own conclusions. We know David to be of this faith too and we have very little criticism for him. Furthermore, we will come to observe that within the constructs that Hoseason has set for himself, he often follows his rules to the letter. In terms of of the faith he follows, he is logical and rational, fulfilling the established traits of the typical Scottish lowlander"}