{"name": "Chapter 7", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-6-10", "summary": "Awash with sickness, David awoke in a hole of overwhelming darkness. He was being thrashed about in a rocking motion and was bruised all over his body. He soon realized that he lay in the underbelly of the ship, Covenant. Furious at his uncle and at his own foolishness, his senses overcame him. When he awoke, David was met with the same confusion, pain, and tossing he had first experienced. In his desperation, he hoped the boat would meet destruction, setting him free from his prison even if in death. Lost between sorrow, sickness, and sleep, David finally encountered another human when a man with a lantern woke him. The man tried to give him some meat but David could not eat it and so he fixed brandy and water. Then, the man washed his head wound. The next time he came, David lay with a giddiness spread through his body which was hard to bear. The man entered with the Captain and addressed Hoseason with reproach regarding the boy's condition. Hoseason seemed unconcerned, refused to have the boy moved, and turned to climb back to the deck. The other man, identified as Mr. Riach, retorted that if Hoseason wanted to be a paid murderer then he would have nothing to do with it. Outraged at this claim, Hoseason bid him do as he pleased. Riach, a bit drunk, defiantly cut David from his shackles and brought him to a bunk in the forecastle. Here, daylight shone in and other men were often present. David was joyous. He was forbidden to go on deck but did reclaim his health, thanks to Riach, and was visited by many of the men of the ship. Some would bring medicine or food, one would sit and tell of his wife and children, and many of them returned David's money which had been stolen upon his kidnapping. They were far from the beasts David had at first imagined. David was also able to spend some time with young Ransome who proved to be as tainted a boy as he had seemed on land. He could not believe the stories David would tell him of good parents and happy times on land, believing instead the sea fables he had heard from sailors. Riach would sometimes give him drink which only made him more foolish and shamed many of the sailors. The Covenant moved steadily toward the Carolinas where David's uncle had given him to be sold into slavery. David's only hope was a conversation he had with Riach while Riach was drunk. After hearing David's story, Riach promised to help him write a letter to Campbell and Rankeillor in hope of getting help.", "analysis": "David awakes in the underbelly of a ship, an indirect literary allusion to the Biblical story of Jonah who is swallowed by a whale in the Book of Jonah. It is possible to make this connection since Stevenson was brought up in a highly religious, Presbyterian environment and because the Bible was one of the gifts given to David by Minister Campbell and thus may be expected to enter into the core of the story at some point. But, is David being punished. What has he done wrong. It is not that David has done something wrong to deserve this treatment. Instead, David is being taught a lesson on survival and the self. He is stripped of his identity and property, reduced to one who is being sold as a slave. The dark cavity that he finds himself in thus is also a metaphor for the womb. Like Jonah is reborn when he is spewed from the great fish, David is reduced to a weak, quasi-fetal state before rebirth. The state David finds himself in after being kidnapped is one of the largest obstacles along his journey to manhood and threatens to reverse his growth and independence. Once David is revived by Mr. Riach, David is happy to be placed in the forecastle because there is daylight, symbolizing a higher knowledge of the self as opposed to the overwhelming darkness and ignorance he faced below, and human contact. Through contact with the crew, David learns that the men are not the primitive animals he had once thought they were. He learns that one should not judge another man on his appearance. Critics have pointed out that many of David's obstacles appear impossible to overcome at first but then, upon a closer look, are quite manageable. We experienced this type of brightening when David climbed the unfinished tower at the Shaws and we will see it often in the following chapters. Without David needing to act in any manner, he is taken out of the darkness. The ship's crew is rather helpful to him and Riach even offers to help David write to the people who can help him Mr. Rankeillor and Mr. Campbell. His rite of passage continues, spewing him into a completely new environment which becomes manageable once he gains the knowledge to see it in a truthful light"}