{"name": "Chapter 35", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20191229020202/http://www.novelguide.com/around-the-world-in-eighty-days/summaries/chapter-35", "summary": "\"In which Phileas Fogg does not have to repeat his orders to Passepartout twice\" Fogg goes home and sends Passepartout to buy food. He accepts his fate with \"habitual tranquility\" . After all that he has been through, he realizes that he has failed by something \"he could not have foreseen\" . The only money he has left is what he owes on the bet. He is ruined. Aouda is full of grief for Fogg. She worries he will think of suicide, and Passepartout decides to keep an eye on him. The next day Fogg tells them that he blames no one, when Passepartout blames himself for the failure. Fogg says he will speak to Aouda in the evening, but wants to spend the day alone. This is Sunday, and Fogg does not go to his club. He shuts himself up and puts his affairs in order. At half past seven in the evening, Fogg goes to speak to Aouda. He apologizes for bringing her to England. He had planned on giving her money and now what little he has, he gives to her, as he needs nothing. He mentions that he has no friends, but Aouda declares she is not only his friend, she proposes that they get married. Fogg is very happy and declares he loves her. Fogg tells Passepartout to go get the Reverend Samuel Wilson to marry them, on tomorrow, Monday.", "analysis": "Commentary on Chapter 35 Fogg is struck that he had not foreseen the event that defeated him. He tells Aouda \"circumstances have been against me\" . Fogg's control crumbles, and he admits it. Yet, he appears to accept what fate has dealt, though his friends worry he will commit suicide. This raises more suspense about what Fogg will do now that he is ruined. Passepartout thinks that \"all the world had been mistaken in Phileas Fogg\" . The narrator comments that Fogg has not been changed by his trip; he has \"the same calm, the same impassibility\" . Aouda can hold back no longer and unlike the usual modest English heroine, proposes to Fogg. Not only is she forgiven for this because she is an Indian princess, it seems Fogg is too passive and calm to do it, even though he admits he loves her. No one, not even Aouda, guessed his feelings. He is the noble but ever stoic English gentleman. Notice that in the last two chapters particular attention has been paid to the day of the week. They come to London late on Saturday; it is now Sunday, and the marriage will take place tomorrow, on Monday."}