{"name": "Chapter 6", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 6: Remarkable Incident of Dr. Lanyon<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>At the beginning of Chapter 6, we learn that \"time has passed\" and no one has been able to capture Hyde. Jekyll, however, free from the evil influence of Hyde, has become a new man. He entertains, devotes himself to charity, and is highly sociable. In early January, Utterson attends a dinner party at Jekyll's home, at which Dr. Lanyon is also present. All were jovial and friendly, and had a wonderful time. Only days afterwards, Utterson pays Jekyll a visit and learns from Poole that the doctor has secluded himself and will see no one. After a week of this seclusion, Utterson visits Dr. Lanyon to see if he might be aware of Utterson's reason for withdrawing from the world so suddenly. Dr. Lanyon greets Utterson, who describes his and Jekyll's friend as though, \"he had his death-warrant written upon his face. Lanyon explains that he has suffered a terrible shock, and \"shall never recover. When Utterson mentions that Jekyll is also ill, Lanyon adamantly replies that he never wishes to speak of Jekyll again. Confused and shaken, Utterson returns home and writes Jekyll a letter, asking for an explanation for his mysterious behavior. Jekyll's reply, which arrives the next day, states, \"I have brought on myself a punishment and a danger that I cannot name. One week later, Dr. Lanyon dies and leaves Mr. Utterson a letter with instructions only to read it following the death or disappearance of Dr. Jekyll. An honorable man who respects his friends' and client's wishes, Utterson does not open the letter. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Bit by bit, Utterson's logical grasp on the world is loosening. Jekyll's behavior is becoming increasingly suspicious and mysterious, and Utterson cannot logically determine its cause. Moreover, his friend Lanyon who had been friendly with Jekyll only a few days before refuses to speak of the man and claims he has suffered a deathly shock. Lanyon had previously acted as a pillar of reason, who clung to powerful principles and dismissed Jekyll's scientific theories as \"balderdash. However, he now claims to have witnessed a shock so great that it will cause his demise. Apparently, Lanyon has been shaken to the core, and perhaps his belief in logic and sound science has been proven wrong. In this chapter, mystery and the supernatural begin to take over. As Lanyon passes away, and Jekyll admits serious although vague wrongdoing, Utterson's world begins to tumble out of control", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210410173945/https://www.gradesaver.com/dr-jekyll-and-mr-hyde/study-guide/summary-chapters-4-6"}