{"name": "Chapter VI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-i-vi", "summary": "The Jealous Mistress Harriet continued to suffer from Dr. Flint's dogging of her steps. Her mistress could have helped these young slaves, but it was apparently a crime to want to be virtuous. Dr. Flint used exceedingly clever means to try and find Harriet and speak to her of vile things, and she would respond to him in anger. He grew enraged and her situation worsened daily. When Harriet turned sixteen, it was obvious that Mrs. Flint despised her very presence. She was incensed when she found out that Dr. Flint had selected Harriet to sleep with their daughter in his apartment. She called Harriet in and asked her to answer her questions honestly. Harriet promised to do so, and Mrs. Flint asked her to tell her everything that has happened between her husband and Harriet. Harriet complied. Mrs. Flint's face showed rage, grief, and hopelessness. She often wept. As she was not a refined woman, Harriet bore the brunt of her jealousy and anger. Harriet was made to sleep in a room adjoining her mistress's own. Mrs. Flint behaved so strangely that Harriet feared for her own life. She tried to trick her husband into confessing but he was too wily. Thankfully they never whipped her because the whole town knew her and this would have exposed Dr. Flint's conduct. Harriet's grandmother began to notice things and tried to find ways to buy her, but Dr. Flint always protested that she belonged to his daughter. Harriet ruminated on the evils of slavery, mentioning that northerners were also complicit in sending fugitives back to the south and delighting in marrying their daughters to slaveholders. She believed that this \"peculiar institution\" deadened morality, but she gives a few examples of white people in which virtue was not wholly extinct", "analysis": "Harriet's Jacobs's narrative, the first published narrative by a female former slave, is a remarkable adventure story, a poignant personal memoir that addresses the formation of identity, and a testament to the evils of slavery. In these early chapters Harriet introduces herself - a young slave girl who did not even know she was enslaved until she was six - and the immoral and cruel master and mistress she worked for. Some of the major themes of the text are presented early on; these include the terrible severing of familial ties in slave families, the hypocrisy and impiety of white southerners, and the particular trials of slave women through their lustful persecution by their white masters. Jacobs's story is of such significance because for so long the voices of black women were, as scholar Johnnie M. Stover writes, \"ignored, sentimentalized, or reduced in scope as addenda to the abolitionist-inspired texts.\" 19th century autobiographies by black women used their unique voices to interpret life experiences in the context of an America that sought to deny the identity of African Americans. Within the format of an autobiography, which Jacobs chooses to tell her tale, black women can attack the literary, sociological, and political systems that seek to marginalize them. Their narratives both blatantly and subtly demonstrate their capacity to use their voices instead of remaining silent. One literary strategy Harriet Jacobs employs in her autobiography is that of the sentimental novel. This genre, immensely popular with white women in the 19th century, usually pitted a virtuous female heroine against a predatory man; the heroine either died or triumphed and became a paragon of morality and femininity. In these chapters, Jacobs appeals to the sympathies of these white women - her primary audience - by presenting herself as virtuous and humble, showcasing the evil of Dr. Flint, and focusing on the relationships between mothers and children. She is trying to \"equalize the relationship between herself and her readership.\" These readers will also note that Harriet Jacobs, like other black women writers, does not separate herself from her community. Oftentimes the female narrator's voice is not just one voice but many; Jacobs will often step outside of her narration and encourage the reader to some realization or sentiment. This is different from slave narratives written by men, such as Frederick Douglass or Olaudah Equiano. In these narratives the male figure is independent, authoritative, strong, and heroic. There is not as much of a focus on familial or communal ties. One of the ways in which Harriet Jacobs resists oppression in her autobiography is through language. An African-American vernacular has been long recognized as created and developed by slaves; this was a way of speaking that was not a new language but a way of reshaping the language of the dominant society to use with people who sought to demean, dehumanize, or suppress them. This mother tongue \"misled, confused, tricked, or made a fool of the oppressor\" and tried to keep the oppressor off balance. The first strategy was using tools of subtle resistance; Stover writes that this meant using \"concealment, guile, hesitations, mumbling, secrecy, shifts in point of view, silence, and whispering.\" Jacobs often steps away from the narrative to offer her critique or her interpretation of events. She also uses rhetorical questions in order to provoke a feeling or emotion in her readership without directly criticizing them. She demonstrates how whispering was a way for slaves to communicate with each other, since much direct contact was limited. This mother tongue of silence allowed slaves to withhold information and conceal their true feelings or what they have seen or heard. The second strategy is masking - a tool that says one thing but means another; this includes \"biblical allusion/allegory, dissembling, innuendo, ironic humor, laughter, misdirection, physical antics, sarcasm, signals, song, and understatement.\" In regards to biblical allusions, Harriet often invokes the snake as a symbol for slavery or slaveholders, an allusion to the Garden of Eden as well as the abolitionist symbol of its cause. She also uses misdirection later in the text, trying to fool Dr. Flint about her true whereabouts, and uses disguise to conceal her escape. The third is tools of flagrant resistance, such as \"back talk, impertinence, impudence, insolence, invective, irony, lying, rage, and sass.\" Harriet is often very bold with Dr. Flint; her grandmother is as well. She also does not shy away from exhorting northern women to heed her situation. Within the text, the character of Betty exemplifies black woman's sass and Benjamin and William embody rage. Overall, the autobiography was a way for African American women to preserve their personal and cultural memory \"while at the same time challenging the sociopolitical, economic, and literary structures that minimized the contributions of that culture.\""}