{"name": "Chapter XLI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-xxxvii-xli", "summary": "Free At Last In the final chapter, Harriet wrote of her grandmother, who occasionally dictated letters that were sent to Harriet in New York. One day a letter came which said that Dr. Flint had died, leaving his family in an unhappy financial situation. Harriet was relieved he was dead, but knew that she was not out of danger yet. Mrs. Flint was open in that her daughter could not lose such a valuable slave. Harriet chanced to see the newspaper announcement of the arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Dodge in the city one evening, and became frightened. She hurried to tell Mrs. Bruce, who gave her the child again and bade her escape to a friend's house. Several people came to Mrs. Bruce's home to inquire after her, but of course they were told nothing. Mr. Dodge had been a Yankee peddler and was now, through his social-climbing marriage, a slaveholder. He had not gotten along well with Emily Flint's brother, however, and was left no property by Dr. Flint. It was thus important that he procure Harriet. Harriet had a friend, a black man, who agreed to go to Mr. Dodge and pretend to ask about his own family back in town. Mr. Dodge knew what he was up to and threatened him. Mrs. Bruce became nervous and told Harriet she had to leave town, and that her house was being watched. Harriet was frustrated and depressed that she had to keep running; she had been chased for half of her life. However, she and the baby were sent to New England again to keep safe. Mrs. Bruce wrote to Harriet and asked her if she might ask Mr. Dodge if she could buy Harriet. Harriet wrote back that she did not even want to be sold as a piece of property at all anymore; she would rather escape to California to join her brother and son. Mrs. Bruce employed someone to negotiate with Mr. Dodge anyway, however, and he agreed once he realized how much he needed the money. A brief letter from Mrs. Bruce informed Harriet that she was now free, and another man standing near Harriet as she read confirmed that he had seen the bill of sale. Harriet wrote that \"I am deeply grateful to the generous friend who procured it, but I despise the miscreant who demanded payment for what never rightfully belonged to him or his. Although she had not wanted Mrs. Bruce to purchase her freedom, she felt as if a heavy load had been lifted from her shoulders. Harriet writes that she heard of the death of Aunt Marthy not long after that woman rejoiced in her granddaughter's freedom. Uncle Phillip also passed away and was honored with an obituary. Harriet was free but wished she had a home of her own. Duty and love kept her working for Mrs. Bruce, the woman who had risked so much to help a poor bondwoman survive and attain her cherished freedom", "analysis": "In these final chapters, Harriet is now thoroughly ensconced in the north, working for both Mrs. Bruces and trying to set up a home for herself and her children. The north, particularly New York, is not as friendly to African Americans as Harriet  previously believed. As discussed in the previous analysis, northerners were afflicted by pervasive racism as well and had moved to segregate many areas of public life. While offering many opportunities for blacks, the north also offered its own challenges. Harriet is much struck by the differences between America and England, writing that for the first time in her life she was not treated differently because of her complexion. There, people seemed free of hypocrisy, which extended into their views on religion as well. Although Harriet was a religious woman before traveling to England, her faith deepened during her time abroad. Writing of a clergyman with whom she stayed, she observed \"the beauty of his daily life inspired me with faith in the genuineness of Christian professions. Grace entered my heart, and I knelt at the communion table, I trust, in true humility of soul.\" One particular area of interest in the newer scholarly work on Harriet Jacobs is her entrance into the capitalist world from the precapitalist economic system of the south. The north had industrialized and emphasized contract relations as the basis of economic freedom; the south was characterized by a paternalistic ethos that was corrupt and antiquated. This contributed to the ideological divide between the two regions and informs Harriet's experiences in both. In the society she left, as scholar Virginia Cope writes, \"paternalism imagines an organic society of reciprocal relations in which some are born to rule, others to obey.\" This was categorically different from the north's emphasis on free labor. The paternalistic ideal was rarely achieved, however, for masters and mistresses were not benevolent or even wise, denying slaves promised freedom  or by being corrupted and so obsessed with control that they ignored their own self interest . Harriet also links the sexual exploitation of slave women with the economics of the slave society, explaining that masters benefitted from producing offspring by their slaves. Harriet was keen on denouncing the slave system throughout her text. When she reaches Philadelphia - the land of free labor and contracts - she immediately enters into capitalism by making a purchase of veils and gloves. Cope writes, \" demonstrates her ability to compete in a vibrant, competitive market, skillfully deploying the anonymity resumed in the transaction to hide her ignorance as well as her legal status.\" She is officially a consumer, the ultimate product of capitalism. She finds employment and is able to support herself and her children. However, the journey into the northern world is also one of disillusionment; northern racism creates uncomfortable and oppressive conditions much like slavery did. Harriet is forced into a second-class carriage, insulted by northern whites, and cannot sell her labor for what it is actually worth. She is not able to attain her own home, which, as she ends Incidents with - \"The dream of my life is not yet realized. I do not sit with my children in a home of my own. I still long for a hearthstone of my own, however humble\"  - is a failing of the north's free market economy which is successful partly by marginalizing African American laborers. Like the chapter on the Nat Turner Rebellion, Incidents gives a first-person perspective of one of the historical events that is ubiquitous in American history textbooks - the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850. A product of the Compromise of 1850, an attempt to keep the Union together orchestrated by Henry Clay and Stephen Douglas, the Act was extremely controversial. Northern authorities were required to return any captured fugitive slaves to their masters in the south. Often financial incentives or promotions were granted to officials who complied. Likewise, heavy fines were incurred by officials for inaction and by civilians who aided or abetted runaway slaves. Abolitionists nicknamed the Act the \"Bloodhound Law\" because of the dogs that were used to find escaped runaway slaves. Harriet explains that the Act was a \"reign of terror to the colored population\" and threw everyone into consternation and anxiety. Many northerners, however, refused to enforce the provisions of the law, which led to greater tensions between the two regions. In the final chapter Harriet's freedom is purchased by Mrs. Bruce against her wishes. Her response to Mrs. Bruce's proposal to buy her from Mr. Dodge is not the customary response that white readers might have expected. By the time this offer is suggested, Harriet has finally come to accept herself as free because she does not buy into the system that designated her as a slave; it is false, specious. She explains \"the more my mind had become enlightened, the more difficult it was for me to consider myself an article of property\" . After Mrs. Bruce purchases her freedom, Harriet experiences a feeling of gratitude and relief, but it is mingled with her disbelief that she, a human being, could be sold: \"So I was sold at last! A human being sold in the free city of New York!\"  No doubt the bill of sale would be a relic of a terrible past for contemporary readers to marvel at. Harriet's description of her reaction to being freed solidifies her reputation as a woman with a penchant for unswerving honesty and forthrightness; she does not sugarcoat her feelings or placate her readers. The end of her story is happy, as she and her children are free, but it is also tinged with melancholy. She cannot yet afford the home that she wants - a dream modeled on her early experience with her parents. It is also sobering to look beyond the text and realize that Jacobs was writing Incidents in secret in the home of her employers the Willis family  because of the assumption that Nathaniel Parker Willis would not approve of her endeavor. Her work is candidly forthright when she was not yet able to be."}