{"name": "Chapter XXXVI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-xxxi-xxxvi", "summary": "The Hairbreadth Escape While visiting Ellen, Mrs. Hobbs told Harriet that her brother wanted to see her. Harriet felt she had no choice but to comply, and went to see Mr. Thorne. He was very friendly, but Harriet was still wary. Ellen told her that Mr. Hobbs and Mr. Thorne drank excessively, and years later Harriet found out that the latter whispered lascivious things in Ellen's ear. One day Ellen was playing with the Hobbs children when Mr. Thorne came outside and tore up a letter into small fragments. Ellen was nervous about this, and with the children's help, they pieced the letter back together. Her suspicions were confirmed: Mr. Thorne had written to Dr. Flint telling him about Harriet. Harriet was shocked and distressed to have to leave the place where she felt so comfortable. She decided to tell Mrs. Bruce everything, and \"she listened with true womanly sympathy, and told me she would do all she could to protect me. How my heart blessed her. Two prominent men, Judge Vanderpool and Lawyer Hopper, were consulted. They suggested Harriet go to Boston. Harriet wanted to take Ellen with her, and to her surprise, Mrs. Hobbs in her regret over her brother's actions, agreed to let her go if she would return in ten days. Harriet avoided making that promise. Mother and daughter made it to the steamboat Rhode Island and were taken aboard. The captain was very kind to them and they were accommodated pleasantly though it was not customary for blacks to sleep below deck. When they reached Boston Harriet was filled with elation; \"for the first time in many years, I had both my children together with me. Harriet and a friend decided to live together and share expenses. Harriet undertook the task of teaching Ellen to read so she could enter an intermediate school", "analysis": "Having reached the north, Harriet \"verily believed myself to be a free woman\" . However, after visiting her daughter and hearing from Mrs. Hobbs that Ellen was to be young Miss Hobbs's waiting maid, Harriet changed her mind, writing \"I called myself free, and sometimes felt so; but I knew I was insecure\" . This tenuous state of freedom would plague Harriet throughout her time in the north because, as discussed briefly in the analysis for Chapters XIX-XXIV, she vacillated between thinking she was free because she was in the northern states and knew that she was a human being and not a piece of property, and realizing that she was still a slave and someone \"owned\" her. Harriet's experience in the north is very significant. She is shocked to observe that, although the slave system is not a reality there, northerners are not free of racial prejudice. Segregation by race was common, as Harriet discovers when she hears that \"they don't allow colored people to go in the first-class cars\" . Her travels to upstate New York with Mrs. Bruce yield more of the same revelations. Throughout the north \"I found the same manifestations of that cruel prejudice, which so discourages the feelings, and represses the energies of the colored people\" . Harriet decides that the best way to combat this sort of treatment was have more self-respect and stand up for one's rights; by doing this, \"we shall cease to be trampled under foot by our oppressors\" . The inclusion of this rather damning illumination of the engrained racism of northerners was included to cause reflection and spur to action Harriet's white northern female readership. It is a testament to her strength of character that she did not shy away from condemning subtler forms of bondage. These chapters also contrast \"good\" white people with \"bad\" white people. Of course, the Flints are the worst type of white people, but Mr. Thorne gives them a run for their money. Not only is he a dissolute drinker, he is lecherous and duplicitous, whispering sexual things into Ellen's ears while she stays with the Hobbs family. His most grievous offense, however, is his betrayal of Harriet to Dr. Flint. Like most southern whites, he hid his evilness behind a smiling mask of amiability and informality. When he meets with Harriet, she notes that \"he met me in a very friendly manner, congratulated me on my escape from slavery, and hoped I had a good place, where I felt happy\" . This is blatantly false and deceitful, and it is not long before he shows his true colors. However, the \"true and sympathizing\" Mrs. Bruce  redeems the white race in Harriet's eyes. An Englishwoman , Mrs. Bruce embodies some of the best traits of humankind: she is accepting, solicitous, kind, and understanding. She is the first white person whom Harriet actually trusts, writing \"I found that the gentle deportment of Mrs. Bruce and the smiles of her lovely babe were thawing my chilled heart\" . She also benefits from Mrs. Bruce's intelligence: \"My narrow mind began to expand under the influences of her intelligent conversation\" . Finally, when Harriet confesses to Mrs. Bruce that she is a runaway slave and is in danger, Mrs. Bruce does not condemn her or shrink away from her; \"she listened with true womanly sympathy and told me she would do all she could to protect me\" . It is not a stretch that Jacobs hoped that northern women readers would read about Mrs. Bruce  and seek to emulate that paragon of virtue and charity. The value of the black community is reinforced here, as Harriet reunites with her children in stirring and emotional scenes. She is also reunited with her brother William. For some time Harriet is able to have her greatest desire - to live with her children and be a real mother to them. At the end of Chapter XXXVI she writes that \"the winter passed pleasantly, while I was busy with my needle, and my children with their books\" . The bonds between these family members are impermeable; no matter how many times they are separated from each other, they embrace each other immediately and fall back into their comfortable, loving, and mutually supportive relations."}