{"name": "Chapter 6", "summary": "Chapter 6. In November, Carol has the parlor partition removed and refurnishes the large space with Oriental touches. Everyone in town takes an interest. During this time Carol makes the acquaintance of Mrs. Bogart, her backyard neighbor, who is the town's Baptist busybody and self-appointed arbiter of morality. Her fourteen year old son, Cyrus, is the toughest member of the toughest gang in town. Mrs. Bogart visits Carol and questions her on everything from her religious faith to the cost of her new furniture. Carol is relieved when she finally leaves. It was normal for husband's to give their wives money as they needed it but after Carol observes other wives asking their husband's for money she tells Kennicott that unless he remembers to give her money regularly she will starve rather than beg. From then on he remembers, most of the time, to give her money and Carol puts off insisting upon a regular allowance. Although she exercises thrift in managing the household she doesn't hesitate to spend money on fancy food from the city and decorations for her housewarming party - she wants to sweep Gopher Prairie out of its malaise. She is disheartened to see how readily her guests form into the stolid formation of a committee doing business. She resolves to stir them up. She gets the group to dance and, prodded by Vida, Carol insists that Raymie sing. As he sings, however, she realizes that he isn't any good. Next, she announces a game she learned in Chicago called \"Sheeps and Wolves. To the group's disbelief she makes them all remove their shoes and search about the darkened house on the hands and knees. When the lights come back on the sight of the disheveled participants convinces Carol that she is making progress. She distributes Chinese robes and leads them through a mock musical recital with combs and drums followed by a meal of exotic  Chinese dishes. She notices that Guy Pollock, the drab but cultured lawyer, is paying special attention to her. Eventually the group returns to its mundane chit-chat but Carol, exhausted by the effort of keeping the party going, allows them to follow their nature. After the group leaves, Kennicott congratulates her on the best party the town has seen and the Weekly Dauntless reports it a great success. The following week the Dashaways give a party where the usual stunts are performed. Analysis. Here we meet Carol, a high-minded daughter of the American mid-west. Her nave but genuine desire to improve the world first manifests itself during her years at Blodgett where she first develops a desultory passion for social reform. Her desire to makeover a prairie town not only foreshadows her eventual efforts in Gopher Prairie, they make them possible. During a period in which she is disillusioned by her work in the library Will Kennicott is able to successfully woo her where others have failed because he unwittingly touches upon the desire of her college days - to mold a town, to help people and to be someone who can effect change. Having tried Chicago and St. Paul, Carol believes that all these things are possible in a small town like Gopher Prairie. The capriciousness she displayed in college continues when Carol becomes a wife. On the train ride to<PARAGRAPH>advertisement<PARAGRAPH>Gopher Prairie she vacillates between foreboding and hope and once ensconced in her new home she rejects the town but shows every sign of wanting to be accepted as \"Doc Kennicott's\" bride. As a romantic Carol tries to convince herself that Gopher Prairie is a frontier town imbued with the spirit of the pioneers. As a naturalist, however, she recognizes that it is a \"junk heap\" sorely in need of refinement. These chapters establish the basic struggle between Carol, who can never be still and satisfied, and Gopher Prairie, which values stasis and satisfaction above all else", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210211232013/https://www.novelguide.com/main-street/summaries/chapters1-6"}