{"name": "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn: Summary & Analysis | Chapter 19-20 | Study Guide | CliffsNotes", "summary": "After two or three peaceful days on the raft, Huck is searching for some berries in a creek when he comes upon two desperate men. The men are obviously being chased, and Huck tells them how to lose the dogs, and they escape. The men, one around 70 and the other around 30 years old, join Huck and Jim on the raft.\nEach man quickly discovers that they both are con artists, and they decide to work together. Shortly after their agreement, the youngest breaks into tears and claims that he is the Duke of Bridgewater and must be treated with respect. After a thoughtful moment, the oldest uses the same tactic and claims to be the Dauphin, the rightful heir to the French throne. Huck believes the men are simple con men but decides not to challenge them in order to keep the peace.\nThe duke and the king begin scheming, and with new plans, they land the raft below the one-horse town of Pokeville, which is practically deserted because of a nearby camp meeting. When the duke heads off to find a printing shop, the king decides to attend the meeting. At the meeting, the townspeople sing hymns and go up to the pulpit for forgiveness. The king joins the festivities and professes to be an old pirate who has reformed and seen the errors of his past. He burst into tears and passes around his hat and collects $87 dollars and a jug of whisky.\nWhen they return to the raft, Huck and Jim find that the duke has printed a handbill that describes Jim as a runaway slave from New Orleans. The handbill, the duke argues, will allow them to run the raft during the day without intrusion. The next morning, Jim says he can abide one or two kings but no more than that.<PARAGRAPH>", "analysis": "Chapter 19 continues to outline the carefree and unaffected environment aboard the raft. The days pass \"smooth and lovely,\" and Twain uses the opportunity to portray the beauty of the Mississippi and its natural surroundings. During this time, Huck's narrative is filled with calm images of approaching dawn, small breezes, hot breakfasts, and a sky \"speckled with stars.\"\nThe peaceful environment of the raft is shattered by the arrival of the duke and the king. At this point, the raft, which has been a kind of sanctuary, is invaded by society. The two men symbolize the stark contrast of the river to the shore and once again outline the raft/shore dichotomy. In a larger sense, the duke and the king represent the confidence men that roamed both the urban and rural landscape of nineteenth-century America, always attempting to prey on the gullible and naive. The confidence man of early frontier literature used not only society's vices but also its convictions and trust to employ his schemes, and the duke and the king exemplify the trickster who takes advantage of an ignorant society.\nAt first, the men appear harmless, and Huck quietly rejects their preposterous claims of royalty. Huck's gesture of kindness is similar to his compassion for the doomed men aboard the Walter Scott, but he quickly realizes the danger that the frauds present. His recognition of their true character is important, for he understands that the two pose a particular threat to Jim. Huck's insight, however, is not surprising, for the men are simply exaggerations of the characters that Huck and Jim have already encountered during their journey. Huck has learned that society is not to be trusted, and the duke and the king quickly show that his concern is legitimate.\nThe inclusion of the camp meeting is a perfect example of the confidence man. Along with its playful burlesque of religion, the camp meeting shows a gullible audience that is swindled because of its faith. The ensuing scene is reminiscent of George Washington Harris' \"Sut Lovingood's Lizards\" and Johnson J. Hooper's \"Simon Suggs Attends a Camp Meeting.\" Both authors were influential for Twain and reflect a society that is scammed because of its misplaced faith or hypocrisy.\nGlossary\ngar needlefish.\ngaloot  a person, esp. an awkward, ungainly person.\ncarpet-bag an old-fashioned type of traveling bag, made of carpeting.\ntar and feather to cover a person with tar and feathers as in punishment by mob action.\nmesmerism hypnotism.\nbilgewater water that collects in the bilge of a ship, slang for worthless or silly talk.\ntick a cloth case covering that is filled with cotton, feathers, or hair to form a mattress or pillow.\ngingham a yarn-dyed cotton cloth, usually woven in stripes, checks, or plaids.\ncalico a printed cotton fabric.\ncamp-meeting here, a religious revival.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201101055818/https://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/a/the-adventures-of-huckleberry-finn/summary-and-analysis/chapters-1920"}