{"name": "part 2, Chapter 8", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter Eight Mediaeval:<PARAGRAPH>Summary:<PARAGRAPH>We now move to Part 2 of the novel, the bulk of which is set in Surrey, England, in and around the Honeychurch home. Many months have passed since Lucy kissed George in Italy. We are at Windy Corner, the home of the Honeychurches. It is August, and the sun is bright outside; the Honeychurches always draw all the curtains to protect the furniture. Lucy's mother, Mrs. Honeychurch, is writing a letter. Lucy's nineteen-year-old brother, Freddy, is studying an anatomy book. They converse about what is going on outside: Cecil Vyse is proposing to Lucy, not for the first time. They discuss Cecil; he asked permission to propose both from Mrs. Honeychurch and Freddy. Cecil also asked Freddy if Lucy marrying Cecil would be a wonderful thing for Windy Corner. Freddy told him no. Mrs. Honeychurch likes Cecil well enough, but Freddy does not. PARAGRAPH>Cecil comes in, somewhat agitated. The Honeychurch custom of closing the curtains to protect furniture annoys him. Forster describes him as medieval, like a Gothic statue, tall, resembling the angular and severe statues of saints that adorn cathedrals. He is very self-conscious, and something about him suggests celibacy. At Mrs. Honeychurch's prodding, he announces that Lucy has agreed to marry him. Lucy takes her brother and mother out into the garden to tell them about the proposal, while Cecil stays inside and thinks about the last few months. PARAGRAPH>Cecil and Lucy have known each other for years, but not well. They met again in Rome. Cecil fell in love with her over the course of the following few months. In Rome, he hinted that they should be married and was rebuffed. In the Alps, three months after Rome, he proposed again; she refused again. Now, at last, he has her. He thinks about how he will improve the decor of Windy Corner; he also thinks of how he will \"improve\" Lucy, by introducing her into higher levels of society. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Beebe arrives to announce that Sir Harry Otway has bought Cissie and Albert, two homes, from Mr. Flack. The two men chat amiably about the Honeychurches and their servants. Mr. Beebe has not yet heard that Lucy and Cecil are engaged, and Mr. Beebe speaks freely about Lucy. He says that she plays music wonderfully and lives quietly, but this division cannot last. One day, he believes, she will live as she plays and become something truly heroic. Cecil slips in that he has proposed to Lucy and been accepted. In his response, Mr. Beebe cannot keep bitter disappointment out of his voice. The Honeychurches come back inside, and the group eventually settles down to a tea party. Cecil learns that \"Fiasco\" is the time-honored family slang for \"fiance. The family accepts him good-naturedly, treating him with humor and kindness. PARAGRAPH>Analysis:<PARAGRAPH>Forster associates Cecil with the medieval; he uses the medieval as a symbol of the sexless, the severe, and the humorless. There is a paradigm of Western history that sees the medieval as a stifling and unenlightened period that followed the end of the classical world. In this paradigm, the end of the medieval comes with the rebirth of classical learning in the Renaissance. Italy is the land of both the Roman Empire and the Renaissance: Forster structures his novel in a way that mirrors this paradigm of history. We begin in Italy, but Part 2 is dominated by Lucy's relationship with Cecil and a return to England. The very last chapter of the novel has Lucy with George back in Italy, and so we finish the novel with Lucy's own private Renaissance. It is no accident that Lucy compares George to a figure from myth while Forster compares Cecil to a Gothic statue. Although Lucy met Cecil in Italy, Forster deliberately makes sure that we never see him there. He associates George with Italy, the mysterious, the individualistic, the imaginative, the living myth. Cecil is tied to England, the all-too-known and knowing, the snobbish, the indoctrinated, the statue. Lucy's development reenacts history: from Italy and George  to Cecil and the Gothic  and then back to Italy and George again. PARAGRAPH>Her family, though financially comfortable, is far from the refinement and high aristocracy to which Cecil is accustomed. Many of their habits are embarrassingly  bourgeois: we open with Freddy and Mrs. Honeychurch sitting in the dark so that the sunlight won't damage the furniture. But the Honeychurches are not pretentious social climbers. They are a loving and generous family, kind to each other and to their friends. Their frugality belies a past when the family was not so rich, and their treatment of friends and each other shows that their frugality does not curb their basic goodness and generosity. PARAGRAPH>But Cecil no sooner wins Lucy's acceptance than he starts thinking about how he can \"improve\" Windy Corner. He plots ways to refurnish the home, and he hopes to separate Lucy from the world she has known and introduce her to what he thinks is a better one. Woman's independence is an important theme of the novel. All her life, Lucy has had her decisions made for her. In Italy, she allowed Charlotte to make critical choices for her, although inwardly she protested. After her engagement to Cecil, the question becomes one of independence or submission. She is young and uncertain, but will she continue allowing others to tell her what she should think. Will she break away from Cecil and make her choices. Mr. Beebe has had high hopes for Lucy; he cannot keep the disappointment and bitterness from his voice after he hears of the engagement. He realizes young Lucy's potential before she herself does, and the reader must wait to see if and when Lucy will break free of others and go against convention", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210422211837/https://www.gradesaver.com/a-room-with-a-view/study-guide/summary-chapters-5-8"}