{"name": "act 5, Scene 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419164219/https://www.gradesaver.com/richard-ii/study-guide/summary-act-5", "summary": "Bolingbroke, now crowned King Henry IV, asks about his son Hal, who is famous for being a spendthrift and is known to hang around brothels and taverns. Henry comments, \"Yet through both / I see some sparks of better hope, which elder days / May happily bring forth\". Aumerle arrives and throws himself to the ground in front of Henry, begging the king to be allowed to speak to him in private. Henry grants his request, and Aumerle then locks the entrance to the King's chambers. York arrives soon there after, and realizing what has happened, stands outside the door and warns Henry that his son is a traitor. Henry opens the door and lets York in, who immediately shows him the letter signed by his son. Aumerle begs for forgiveness, and his mother, the Duchess of York, arrives and also pleads for a pardon. York then asks the king to not be lenient on his son, because he is afraid that Aumerle will merely revolt again in the future. Henry decides to pardon Aumerle, but orders York to take some soldiers and kill the other traitors", "analysis": "Richard for the first time abandons language in this final act. Throughout the play he has not fought with anyone, preferring instead to defend himself with language. However, in scene five he becomes the aggressor, succeeding in killing two men before being killed himself. This change in Richard, from using language and ceremony to adopting war and violence, comes too late for him. Had he chosen to fight earlier in the play, history might have been different. The death of Richard is a significant liability for Henry IV, because it puts him in the same position Richard was in at the beginning. Regardless of how Henry seized the throne, as long as Richard was alive he could say that Richard had ceded the power to rule over to him. However, with Richard's death this is no longer possible. Now Henry must defend against the same accusations he leveled against Mowbray, namely those of treason. Indeed, as in many of Shakespeare's plays, this one does not end completely, but rather will be followed by Henry IV, Part I, Part II and Henry V."}