

I must now return to Miss Alethea Pontifex, of whom I have said perhaps
too little hitherto, considering how great her influence upon my hero's
destiny proved to be.

On the death of her father, which happened when she was about thirty-two
years old, she parted company with her sisters, between whom and herself
there had been little sympathy, and came up to London.  She was
determined, so she said, to make the rest of her life as happy as she
could, and she had clearer ideas about the best way of setting to work to
do this than women, or indeed men, generally have.

Her fortune consisted, as I have said, of 5000 pounds, which had come to
her by her mother's marriage settlements, and 15,000 pounds left her by
her father, over both which sums she had now absolute control.  These
brought her in about 900 pounds a year, and the money being invested in
none but the soundest securities, she had no anxiety about her income.
She meant to be rich, so she formed a scheme of expenditure which
involved an annual outlay of about 500 pounds, and determined to put the
rest by.  "If I do this," she said laughingly, "I shall probably just
succeed in living comfortably within my income."  In accordance with this
scheme she took unfurnished apartments in a house in Gower Street, of
which the lower floors were let out as offices.  John Pontifex tried to
get her to take a house to herself, but Alethea told him to mind his own
business so plainly that he had to beat a retreat.  She had never liked
him, and from that time dropped him almost entirely.

Without going much into society she yet became acquainted with most of
the men and women who had attained a position in the literary, artistic
and scientific worlds, and it was singular how highly her opinion was
valued in spite of her never having attempted in any way to distinguish
herself.  She could have written if she had chosen, but she enjoyed
seeing others write and encouraging them better than taking a more active
part herself.  Perhaps literary people liked her all the better because
she did not write.

I, as she very well knew, had always been devoted to her, and she might
have had a score of other admirers if she had liked, but she had
discouraged them all, and railed at matrimony as women seldom do unless
they have a comfortable income of their own.  She by no means, however,
railed at man as she railed at matrimony, and though living after a
fashion in which even the most censorious could find nothing to complain
of, as far as she properly could she defended those of her own sex whom
the world condemned most severely.

In religion she was, I should think, as nearly a freethinker as anyone
could be whose mind seldom turned upon the subject.  She went to church,
but disliked equally those who aired either religion or irreligion.  I
remember once hearing her press a late well-known philosopher to write a
novel instead of pursuing his attacks upon religion.  The philosopher did
not much like this, and dilated upon the importance of showing people the
folly of much that they pretended to believe.  She smiled and said
demurely, "Have they not Moses and the prophets?  Let them hear them."
But she would say a wicked thing quietly on her own account sometimes,
and called my attention once to a note in her prayer-book which gave
account of the walk to Emmaus with the two disciples, and how Christ had
said to them "O fools and slow of heart to believe ALL that the prophets
have spoken"--the "all" being printed in small capitals.

Though scarcely on terms with her brother John, she had kept up closer
relations with Theobald and his family, and had paid a few days' visit to
Battersby once in every two years or so.  Alethea had always tried to
like Theobald and join forces with him as much as she could (for they two
were the hares of the family, the rest being all hounds), but it was no
use.  I believe her chief reason for maintaining relations with her
brother was that she might keep an eye on his children and give them a
lift if they proved nice.

When Miss Pontifex had come down to Battersby in old times the children
had not been beaten, and their lessons had been made lighter.  She easily
saw that they were overworked and unhappy, but she could hardly guess how
all-reaching was the regime under which they lived.  She knew she could
not interfere effectually then, and wisely forbore to make too many
enquiries.  Her time, if ever it was to come, would be when the children
were no longer living under the same roof as their parents.  It ended in
her making up her mind to have nothing to do with either Joey or
Charlotte, but to see so much of Ernest as should enable her to form an
opinion about his disposition and abilities.

He had now been a year and a half at Roughborough and was nearly fourteen
years old, so that his character had begun to shape.  His aunt had not
seen him for some little time and, thinking that if she was to exploit
him she could do so now perhaps better than at any other time, she
resolved to go down to Roughborough on some pretext which should be good
enough for Theobald, and to take stock of her nephew under circumstances
in which she could get him for some few hours to herself.  Accordingly in
August 1849, when Ernest was just entering on his fourth half year a cab
drove up to Dr Skinner's door with Miss Pontifex, who asked and obtained
leave for Ernest to come and dine with her at the Swan Hotel.  She had
written to Ernest to say she was coming and he was of course on the look-
out for her.  He had not seen her for so long that he was rather shy at
first, but her good nature soon set him at his ease.  She was so strongly
biassed in favour of anything young that her heart warmed towards him at
once, though his appearance was less prepossessing than she had hoped.
She took him to a cake shop and gave him whatever he liked as soon as she
had got him off the school premises; and Ernest felt at once that she
contrasted favourably even with his aunts the Misses Allaby, who were so
very sweet and good.  The Misses Allaby were very poor; sixpence was to
them what five shillings was to Alethea.  What chance had they against
one who, if she had a mind, could put by out of her income twice as much
as they, poor women, could spend?

The boy had plenty of prattle in him when he was not snubbed, and Alethea
encouraged him to chatter about whatever came uppermost.  He was always
ready to trust anyone who was kind to him; it took many years to make him
reasonably wary in this respect--if indeed, as I sometimes doubt, he ever
will be as wary as he ought to be--and in a short time he had quite
dissociated his aunt from his papa and mamma and the rest, with whom his
instinct told him he should be on his guard.  Little did he know how
great, as far as he was concerned, were the issues that depended upon his
behaviour.  If he had known, he would perhaps have played his part less
successfully.

His aunt drew from him more details of his home and school life than his
papa and mamma would have approved of, but he had no idea that he was
being pumped.  She got out of him all about the happy Sunday evenings,
and how he and Joey and Charlotte quarrelled sometimes, but she took no
side and treated everything as though it were a matter of course.  Like
all the boys, he could mimic Dr Skinner, and when warmed with dinner, and
two glasses of sherry which made him nearly tipsy, he favoured his aunt
with samples of the Doctor's manner and spoke of him familiarly as "Sam."

"Sam," he said, "is an awful old humbug."  It was the sherry that brought
out this piece of swagger, for whatever else he was Dr Skinner was a
reality to Master Ernest, before which, indeed, he sank into his boots in
no time.  Alethea smiled and said, "I must not say anything to that, must
I?"  Ernest said, "I suppose not," and was checked.  By-and-by he vented
a number of small second-hand priggishnesses which he had caught up
believing them to be the correct thing, and made it plain that even at
that early age Ernest believed in Ernest with a belief which was amusing
from its absurdity.  His aunt judged him charitably as she was sure to
do; she knew very well where the priggishness came from, and seeing that
the string of his tongue had been loosened sufficiently gave him no more
sherry.

It was after dinner, however, that he completed the conquest of his aunt.
She then discovered that, like herself, he was passionately fond of
music, and that, too, of the highest class.  He knew, and hummed or
whistled to her all sorts of pieces out of the works of the great
masters, which a boy of his age could hardly be expected to know, and it
was evident that this was purely instinctive, inasmuch as music received
no kind of encouragement at Roughborough.  There was no boy in the school
as fond of music as he was.  He picked up his knowledge, he said, from
the organist of St Michael's Church who used to practise sometimes on a
week-day afternoon.  Ernest had heard the organ booming away as he was
passing outside the church and had sneaked inside and up into the organ
loft.  In the course of time the organist became accustomed to him as a
familiar visitant, and the pair became friends.

It was this which decided Alethea that the boy was worth taking pains
with.  "He likes the best music," she thought, "and he hates Dr Skinner.
This is a very fair beginning."  When she sent him away at night with a
sovereign in his pocket (and he had only hoped to get five shillings) she
felt as though she had had a good deal more than her money's worth for
her money.



