

Miss Pontifex soon found out that Ernest did not like games, but she saw
also that he could hardly be expected to like them.  He was perfectly
well shaped but unusually devoid of physical strength.  He got a fair
share of this in after life, but it came much later with him than with
other boys, and at the time of which I am writing he was a mere little
skeleton.  He wanted something to develop his arms and chest without
knocking him about as much as the school games did.  To supply this want
by some means which should add also to his pleasure was Alethea's first
anxiety.  Rowing would have answered every purpose, but unfortunately
there was no river at Roughborough.

Whatever it was to be, it must be something which he should like as much
as other boys liked cricket or football, and he must think the wish for
it to have come originally from himself; it was not very easy to find
anything that would do, but ere long it occurred to her that she might
enlist his love of music on her side, and asked him one day when he was
spending a half-holiday at her house whether he would like her to buy an
organ for him to play on.  Of course, the boy said yes; then she told him
about her grandfather and the organs he had built.  It had never entered
into his head that he could make one, but when he gathered from what his
aunt had said that this was not out of the question, he rose as eagerly
to the bait as she could have desired, and wanted to begin learning to
saw and plane so that he might make the wooden pipes at once.

Miss Pontifex did not see how she could have hit upon anything more
suitable, and she liked the idea that he would incidentally get a
knowledge of carpentering, for she was impressed, perhaps foolishly, with
the wisdom of the German custom which gives every boy a handicraft of
some sort.

Writing to me on this matter, she said "Professions are all very well for
those who have connection and interest as well as capital, but otherwise
they are white elephants.  How many men do not you and I know who have
talent, assiduity, excellent good sense, straightforwardness, every
quality in fact which should command success, and who yet go on from year
to year waiting and hoping against hope for the work which never comes?
How, indeed, is it likely to come unless to those who either are born
with interest, or who marry in order to get it?  Ernest's father and
mother have no interest, and if they had they would not use it.  I
suppose they will make him a clergyman, or try to do so--perhaps it is
the best thing to do with him, for he could buy a living with the money
his grandfather left him, but there is no knowing what the boy will think
of it when the time comes, and for aught we know he may insist on going
to the backwoods of America, as so many other young men are doing now."  .
. . But, anyway, he would like making an organ, and this could do him no
harm, so the sooner he began the better.

Alethea thought it would save trouble in the end if she told her brother
and sister-in-law of this scheme.  "I do not suppose," she wrote, "that
Dr Skinner will approve very cordially of my attempt to introduce organ-
building into the _curriculum_ of Roughborough, but I will see what I can
do with him, for I have set my heart on owning an organ built by Ernest's
own hands, which he may play on as much as he likes while it remains in
my house and which I will lend him permanently as soon as he gets one of
his own, but which is to be my property for the present, inasmuch as I
mean to pay for it."  This was put in to make it plain to Theobald and
Christina that they should not be out of pocket in the matter.

If Alethea had been as poor as the Misses Allaby, the reader may guess
what Ernest's papa and mamma would have said to this proposal; but then,
if she had been as poor as they, she would never have made it.  They did
not like Ernest's getting more and more into his aunt's good books, still
it was perhaps better that he should do so than that she should be driven
back upon the John Pontifexes.  The only thing, said Theobald, which made
him hesitate, was that the boy might be thrown with low associates later
on if he were to be encouraged in his taste for music--a taste which
Theobald had always disliked.  He had observed with regret that Ernest
had ere now shown rather a hankering after low company, and he might make
acquaintance with those who would corrupt his innocence.  Christina
shuddered at this, but when they had aired their scruples sufficiently
they felt (and when people begin to "feel," they are invariably going to
take what they believe to be the more worldly course) that to oppose
Alethea's proposal would be injuring their son's prospects more than was
right, so they consented, but not too graciously.

After a time, however, Christina got used to the idea, and then
considerations occurred to her which made her throw herself into it with
characteristic ardour.  If Miss Pontifex had been a railway stock she
might have been said to have been buoyant in the Battersby market for
some few days; buoyant for long together she could never be, still for a
time there really was an upward movement.  Christina's mind wandered to
the organ itself; she seemed to have made it with her own hands; there
would be no other in England to compare with it for combined sweetness
and power.  She already heard the famous Dr Walmisley of Cambridge
mistaking it for a Father Smith.  It would come, no doubt, in reality to
Battersby Church, which wanted an organ, for it must be all nonsense
about Alethea's wishing to keep it, and Ernest would not have a house of
his own for ever so many years, and they could never have it at the
Rectory.  Oh, no!  Battersby Church was the only proper place for it.

Of course, they would have a grand opening, and the Bishop would come
down, and perhaps young Figgins might be on a visit to them--she must ask
Ernest if young Figgins had yet left Roughborough--he might even persuade
his grandfather Lord Lonsford to be present.  Lord Lonsford and the
Bishop and everyone else would then compliment her, and Dr Wesley or Dr
Walmisley, who should preside (it did not much matter which), would say
to her, "My dear Mrs Pontifex, I never yet played upon so remarkable an
instrument."  Then she would give him one of her very sweetest smiles and
say she feared he was flattering her, on which he would rejoin with some
pleasant little trifle about remarkable men (the remarkable man being for
the moment Ernest) having invariably had remarkable women for their
mothers--and so on and so on.  The advantage of doing one's praising for
oneself is that one can lay it on so thick and exactly in the right
places.

Theobald wrote Ernest a short and surly letter _a propos_ of his aunt's
intentions in this matter.

"I will not commit myself," he said, "to an opinion whether anything will
come of it; this will depend entirely upon your own exertions; you have
had singular advantages hitherto, and your kind aunt is showing every
desire to befriend you, but you must give greater proof of stability and
steadiness of character than you have given yet if this organ matter is
not to prove in the end to be only one disappointment the more.

"I must insist on two things: firstly that this new iron in the fire does
not distract your attention from your Latin and Greek"--("They aren't
mine," thought Ernest, "and never have been")--"and secondly, that you
bring no smell of glue or shavings into the house here, if you make any
part of the organ during your holidays."

Ernest was still too young to know how unpleasant a letter he was
receiving.  He believed the innuendoes contained in it to be perfectly
just.  He knew he was sadly deficient in perseverance.  He liked some
things for a little while, and then found he did not like them any
more--and this was as bad as anything well could be.  His father's letter
gave him one of his many fits of melancholy over his own worthlessness,
but the thought of the organ consoled him, and he felt sure that here at
any rate was something to which he could apply himself steadily without
growing tired of it.

It was settled that the organ was not to be begun before the Christmas
holidays were over, and that till then Ernest should do a little plain
carpentering, so as to get to know how to use his tools.  Miss Pontifex
had a carpenter's bench set up in an outhouse upon her own premises, and
made terms with the most respectable carpenter in Roughborough, by which
one of his men was to come for a couple of hours twice a week and set
Ernest on the right way; then she discovered she wanted this or that
simple piece of work done, and gave the boy a commission to do it, paying
him handsomely as well as finding him in tools and materials.  She never
gave him a syllable of good advice, or talked to him about everything's
depending upon his own exertions, but she kissed him often, and would
come into the workshop and act the part of one who took an interest in
what was being done so cleverly as ere long to become really interested.

What boy would not take kindly to almost anything with such assistance?
All boys like making things; the exercise of sawing, planing and
hammering, proved exactly what his aunt had wanted to find--something
that should exercise, but not too much, and at the same time amuse him;
when Ernest's sallow face was flushed with his work, and his eyes were
sparkling with pleasure, he looked quite a different boy from the one his
aunt had taken in hand only a few months earlier.  His inner self never
told him that this was humbug, as it did about Latin and Greek.  Making
stools and drawers was worth living for, and after Christmas there loomed
the organ, which was scarcely ever absent from his mind.

His aunt let him invite his friends, encouraging him to bring those whom
her quick sense told her were the most desirable.  She smartened him up
also in his personal appearance, always without preaching to him.  Indeed
she worked wonders during the short time that was allowed her, and if her
life had been spared I cannot think that my hero would have come under
the shadow of that cloud which cast so heavy a gloom over his younger
manhood; but unfortunately for him his gleam of sunshine was too hot and
too brilliant to last, and he had many a storm yet to weather, before he
became fairly happy.  For the present, however, he was supremely so, and
his aunt was happy and grateful for his happiness, the improvement she
saw in him, and his unrepressed affection for herself.  She became fonder
of him from day to day in spite of his many faults and almost incredible
foolishnesses.  It was perhaps on account of these very things that she
saw how much he had need of her; but at any rate, from whatever cause,
she became strengthened in her determination to be to him in the place of
parents, and to find in him a son rather than a nephew.  But still she
made no will.



