

Letters had been written to Miss Pontifex's brothers and sisters, and one
and all came post-haste to Roughborough.  Before they arrived the poor
lady was already delirious, and for the sake of her own peace at the last
I am half glad she never recovered consciousness.

I had known these people all their lives, as none can know each other but
those who have played together as children; I knew how they had all of
them--perhaps Theobald least, but all of them more or less--made her life
a burden to her until the death of her father had made her her own
mistress, and I was displeased at their coming one after the other to
Roughborough, and inquiring whether their sister had recovered
consciousness sufficiently to be able to see them.  It was known that she
had sent for me on being taken ill, and that I remained at Roughborough,
and I own I was angered by the mingled air of suspicion, defiance and
inquisitiveness, with which they regarded me.  They would all, except
Theobald, I believe have cut me downright if they had not believed me to
know something they wanted to know themselves, and might have some chance
of learning from me--for it was plain I had been in some way concerned
with the making of their sister's will.  None of them suspected what the
ostensible nature of this would be, but I think they feared Miss Pontifex
was about to leave money for public uses.  John said to me in his
blandest manner that he fancied he remembered to have heard his sister
say that she thought of leaving money to found a college for the relief
of dramatic authors in distress; to this I made no rejoinder, and I have
no doubt his suspicions were deepened.

When the end came, I got Miss Pontifex's solicitor to write and tell her
brothers and sisters how she had left her money: they were not
unnaturally furious, and went each to his or her separate home without
attending the funeral, and without paying any attention to myself.  This
was perhaps the kindest thing they could have done by me, for their
behaviour made me so angry that I became almost reconciled to Alethea's
will out of pleasure at the anger it had aroused.  But for this I should
have felt the will keenly, as having been placed by it in the position
which of all others I had been most anxious to avoid, and as having
saddled me with a very heavy responsibility.  Still it was impossible for
me to escape, and I could only let things take their course.

Miss Pontifex had expressed a wish to be buried at Paleham; in the course
of the next few days I therefore took the body thither.  I had not been
to Paleham since the death of my father some six years earlier.  I had
often wished to go there, but had shrunk from doing so though my sister
had been two or three times.  I could not bear to see the house which had
been my home for so many years of my life in the hands of strangers; to
ring ceremoniously at a bell which I had never yet pulled except as a boy
in jest; to feel that I had nothing to do with a garden in which I had in
childhood gathered so many a nosegay, and which had seemed my own for
many years after I had reached man's estate; to see the rooms bereft of
every familiar feature, and made so unfamiliar in spite of their
familiarity.  Had there been any sufficient reason, I should have taken
these things as a matter of course, and should no doubt have found them
much worse in anticipation than in reality, but as there had been no
special reason why I should go to Paleham I had hitherto avoided doing
so.  Now, however, my going was a necessity, and I confess I never felt
more subdued than I did on arriving there with the dead playmate of my
childhood.

I found the village more changed than I had expected.  The railway had
come there, and a brand new yellow brick station was on the site of old
Mr and Mrs Pontifex's cottage.  Nothing but the carpenter's shop was now
standing.  I saw many faces I knew, but even in six years they seemed to
have grown wonderfully older.  Some of the very old were dead, and the
old were getting very old in their stead.  I felt like the changeling in
the fairy story who came back after a seven years' sleep.  Everyone
seemed glad to see me, though I had never given them particular cause to
be so, and everyone who remembered old Mr and Mrs Pontifex spoke warmly
of them and were pleased at their granddaughter's wishing to be laid near
them.  Entering the churchyard and standing in the twilight of a gusty
cloudy evening on the spot close beside old Mrs Pontifex's grave which I
had chosen for Alethea's, I thought of the many times that she, who would
lie there henceforth, and I, who must surely lie one day in some such
another place though when and where I knew not, had romped over this very
spot as childish lovers together.  Next morning I followed her to the
grave, and in due course set up a plain upright slab to her memory as
like as might be to those over the graves of her grandmother and
grandfather.  I gave the dates and places of her birth and death, but
added nothing except that this stone was set up by one who had known and
loved her.  Knowing how fond she had been of music I had been half
inclined at one time to inscribe a few bars of music, if I could find any
which seemed suitable to her character, but I knew how much she would
have disliked anything singular in connection with her tombstone and did
not do it.

Before, however, I had come to this conclusion, I had thought that Ernest
might be able to help me to the right thing, and had written to him upon
the subject.  The following is the answer I received--

   "Dear Godpapa,--I send you the best bit I can think of; it is the
   subject of the last of Handel's six grand fugues and goes thus:--

   [Music score]

   It would do better for a man, especially for an old man who was very
   sorry for things, than for a woman, but I cannot think of anything
   better; if you do not like it for Aunt Alethea I shall keep it for
   myself.--Your affectionate Godson, ERNEST PONTIFEX."

Was this the little lad who could get sweeties for two-pence but not for
two-pence-halfpenny?  Dear, dear me, I thought to myself, how these babes
and sucklings do give us the go-by surely.  Choosing his own epitaph at
fifteen as for a man who "had been very sorry for things," and such a
strain as that--why it might have done for Leonardo da Vinci himself.
Then I set the boy down as a conceited young jackanapes, which no doubt
he was,--but so are a great many other young people of Ernest's age.



