

When he was in his third year a magazine was founded at Cambridge, the
contributions to which were exclusively by undergraduates.  Ernest sent
in an essay upon the Greek Drama, which he has declined to let me
reproduce here without his being allowed to re-edit it.  I have therefore
been unable to give it in its original form, but when pruned of its
redundancies (and this is all that has been done to it) it runs as
follows--

   "I shall not attempt within the limits at my disposal to make a
   _resume_ of the rise and progress of the Greek drama, but will confine
   myself to considering whether the reputation enjoyed by the three
   chief Greek tragedians, AEschylus, Sophocles and Euripides, is one
   that will be permanent, or whether they will one day be held to have
   been overrated.

   "Why, I ask myself, do I see much that I can easily admire in Homer,
   Thucydides, Herodotus, Demosthenes, Aristophanes, Theocritus, parts of
   Lucretius, Horace's satires and epistles, to say nothing of other
   ancient writers, and yet find myself at once repelled by even those
   works of AEschylus, Sophocles and Euripides which are most generally
   admired.

   "With the first-named writers I am in the hands of men who feel, if
   not as I do, still as I can understand their feeling, and as I am
   interested to see that they should have felt; with the second I have
   so little sympathy that I cannot understand how anyone can ever have
   taken any interest in them whatever.  Their highest flights to me are
   dull, pompous and artificial productions, which, if they were to
   appear now for the first time, would, I should think, either fall dead
   or be severely handled by the critics.  I wish to know whether it is I
   who am in fault in this matter, or whether part of the blame may not
   rest with the tragedians themselves.

   "How far I wonder did the Athenians genuinely like these poets, and
   how far was the applause which was lavished upon them due to fashion
   or affectation?  How far, in fact, did admiration for the orthodox
   tragedians take that place among the Athenians which going to church
   does among ourselves?

   "This is a venturesome question considering the verdict now generally
   given for over two thousand years, nor should I have permitted myself
   to ask it if it had not been suggested to me by one whose reputation
   stands as high, and has been sanctioned for as long time as those of
   the tragedians themselves, I mean by Aristophanes.

   "Numbers, weight of authority, and time, have conspired to place
   Aristophanes on as high a literary pinnacle as any ancient writer,
   with the exception perhaps of Homer, but he makes no secret of
   heartily hating Euripides and Sophocles, and I strongly suspect only
   praises AEschylus that he may run down the other two with greater
   impunity.  For after all there is no such difference between AEschylus
   and his successors as will render the former very good and the latter
   very bad; and the thrusts at AEschylus which Aristophanes puts into
   the mouth of Euripides go home too well to have been written by an
   admirer.

   "It may be observed that while Euripides accuses AEschylus of being
   'pomp-bundle-worded,' which I suppose means bombastic and given to
   rodomontade, AEschylus retorts on Euripides that he is a 'gossip
   gleaner, a describer of beggars, and a rag-stitcher,' from which it
   may be inferred that he was truer to the life of his own times than
   AEschylus was.  It happens, however, that a faithful rendering of
   contemporary life is the very quality which gives its most permanent
   interest to any work of fiction, whether in literature or painting,
   and it is a not unnatural consequence that while only seven plays by
   AEschylus, and the same number by Sophocles, have come down to us, we
   have no fewer than nineteen by Euripides.

   "This, however, is a digression; the question before us is whether
   Aristophanes really liked AEschylus or only pretended to do so.  It
   must be remembered that the claims of AEschylus, Sophocles and
   Euripides, to the foremost place amongst tragedians were held to be as
   incontrovertible as those of Dante, Petrarch, Tasso and Ariosto to be
   the greatest of Italian poets, are held among the Italians of to-day.
   If we can fancy some witty, genial writer, we will say in Florence,
   finding himself bored by all the poets I have named, we can yet
   believe he would be unwilling to admit that he disliked them without
   exception.  He would prefer to think he could see something at any
   rate in Dante, whom he could idealise more easily, inasmuch as he was
   more remote; in order to carry his countrymen the farther with him, he
   would endeavour to meet them more than was consistent with his own
   instincts.  Without some such palliation as admiration for one, at any
   rate, of the tragedians, it would be almost as dangerous for
   Aristophanes to attack them as it would be for an Englishman now to
   say that he did not think very much of the Elizabethan dramatists.  Yet
   which of us in his heart likes any of the Elizabethan dramatists
   except Shakespeare?  Are they in reality anything else than literary
   Struldbrugs?

   "I conclude upon the whole that Aristophanes did not like any of the
   tragedians; yet no one will deny that this keen, witty, outspoken
   writer was as good a judge of literary value, and as able to see any
   beauties that the tragic dramas contained as nine-tenths, at any rate,
   of ourselves.  He had, moreover, the advantage of thoroughly
   understanding the standpoint from which the tragedians expected their
   work to be judged, and what was his conclusion?  Briefly it was little
   else than this, that they were a fraud or something very like it.  For
   my own part I cordially agree with him.  I am free to confess that
   with the exception perhaps of some of the Psalms of David I know no
   writings which seem so little to deserve their reputation.  I do not
   know that I should particularly mind my sisters reading them, but I
   will take good care never to read them myself."

This last bit about the Psalms was awful, and there was a great fight
with the editor as to whether or no it should be allowed to stand.  Ernest
himself was frightened at it, but he had once heard someone say that the
Psalms were many of them very poor, and on looking at them more closely,
after he had been told this, he found that there could hardly be two
opinions on the subject.  So he caught up the remark and reproduced it as
his own, concluding that these psalms had probably never been written by
David at all, but had got in among the others by mistake.

The essay, perhaps on account of the passage about the Psalms, created
quite a sensation, and on the whole was well received.  Ernest's friends
praised it more highly than it deserved, and he was himself very proud of
it, but he dared not show it at Battersby.  He knew also that he was now
at the end of his tether; this was his one idea (I feel sure he had
caught more than half of it from other people), and now he had not
another thing left to write about.  He found himself cursed with a small
reputation which seemed to him much bigger than it was, and a
consciousness that he could never keep it up.  Before many days were over
he felt his unfortunate essay to be a white elephant to him, which he
must feed by hurrying into all sorts of frantic attempts to cap his
triumph, and, as may be imagined, these attempts were failures.

He did not understand that if he waited and listened and observed,
another idea of some kind would probably occur to him some day, and that
the development of this would in its turn suggest still further ones.  He
did not yet know that the very worst way of getting hold of ideas is to
go hunting expressly after them.  The way to get them is to study
something of which one is fond, and to note down whatever crosses one's
mind in reference to it, either during study or relaxation, in a little
note-book kept always in the waistcoat pocket.  Ernest has come to know
all about this now, but it took him a long time to find it out, for this
is not the kind of thing that is taught at schools and universities.

Nor yet did he know that ideas, no less than the living beings in whose
minds they arise, must be begotten by parents not very unlike themselves,
the most original still differing but slightly from the parents that have
given rise to them.  Life is like a fugue, everything must grow out of
the subject and there must be nothing new.  Nor, again, did he see how
hard it is to say where one idea ends and another begins, nor yet how
closely this is paralleled in the difficulty of saying where a life
begins or ends, or an action or indeed anything, there being an unity in
spite of infinite multitude, and an infinite multitude in spite of unity.
He thought that ideas came into clever people's heads by a kind of
spontaneous germination, without parentage in the thoughts of others or
the course of observation; for as yet he believed in genius, of which he
well knew that he had none, if it was the fine frenzied thing he thought
it was.

Not very long before this he had come of age, and Theobald had handed him
over his money, which amounted now to 5000 pounds; it was invested to
bring in 5 per cent and gave him therefore an income of 250 pounds
a year.  He did not, however, realise the fact (he could realise nothing
so foreign to his experience) that he was independent of his father till
a long time afterwards; nor did Theobald make any difference in his
manner towards him.  So strong was the hold which habit and association
held over both father and son, that the one considered he had as good a
right as ever to dictate, and the other that he had as little right as
ever to gainsay.

During his last year at Cambridge he overworked himself through this very
blind deference to his father's wishes, for there was no reason why he
should take more than a poll degree except that his father laid such
stress upon his taking honours.  He became so ill, indeed, that it was
doubtful how far he would be able to go in for his degree at all; but he
managed to do so, and when the list came out was found to be placed
higher than either he or anyone else expected, being among the first
three or four senior optimes, and a few weeks later, in the lower half of
the second class of the Classical Tripos.  Ill as he was when he got
home, Theobald made him go over all the examination papers with him, and
in fact reproduce as nearly as possible the replies that he had sent in.
So little kick had he in him, and so deep was the groove into which he
had got, that while at home he spent several hours a day in continuing
his classical and mathematical studies as though he had not yet taken his
degree.



