

Ernest felt now that the turning point of his life had come.  He would
give up all for Christ--even his tobacco.

So he gathered together his pipes and pouches, and locked them up in his
portmanteau under his bed where they should be out of sight, and as much
out of mind as possible.  He did not burn them, because someone might
come in who wanted to smoke, and though he might abridge his own liberty,
yet, as smoking was not a sin, there was no reason why he should be hard
on other people.

After breakfast he left his rooms to call on a man named Dawson, who had
been one of Mr Hawke's hearers on the preceding evening, and who was
reading for ordination at the forthcoming Ember Weeks, now only four
months distant.  This man had been always of a rather serious turn of
mind--a little too much so for Ernest's taste; but times had changed, and
Dawson's undoubted sincerity seemed to render him a fitting counsellor
for Ernest at the present time.  As he was going through the first court
of John's on his way to Dawson's rooms, he met Badcock, and greeted him
with some deference.  His advance was received with one of those ecstatic
gleams which shone occasionally upon the face of Badcock, and which, if
Ernest had known more, would have reminded him of Robespierre.  As it
was, he saw it and unconsciously recognised the unrest and
self-seekingness of the man, but could not yet formulate them; he
disliked Badcock more than ever, but as he was going to profit by the
spiritual benefits which he had put in his way, he was bound to be civil
to him, and civil he therefore was.

Badcock told him that Mr Hawke had returned to town immediately his
discourse was over, but that before doing so he had enquired particularly
who Ernest and two or three others were.  I believe each one of Ernest's
friends was given to understand that he had been more or less
particularly enquired after.  Ernest's vanity--for he was his mother's
son--was tickled at this; the idea again presented itself to him that he
might be the one for whose benefit Mr Hawke had been sent.  There was
something, too, in Badcock's manner which conveyed the idea that he could
say more if he chose, but had been enjoined to silence.

On reaching Dawson's rooms, he found his friend in raptures over the
discourse of the preceding evening.  Hardly less delighted was he with
the effect it had produced on Ernest.  He had always known, he said, that
Ernest would come round; he had been sure of it, but he had hardly
expected the conversion to be so sudden.  Ernest said no more had he, but
now that he saw his duty so clearly he would get ordained as soon as
possible, and take a curacy, even though the doing so would make him have
to go down from Cambridge earlier, which would be a great grief to him.
Dawson applauded this determination, and it was arranged that as Ernest
was still more or less of a weak brother, Dawson should take him, so to
speak, in spiritual tow for a while, and strengthen and confirm his
faith.

An offensive and defensive alliance therefore was struck up between this
pair (who were in reality singularly ill assorted), and Ernest set to
work to master the books on which the Bishop would examine him.  Others
gradually joined them till they formed a small set or church (for these
are the same things), and the effect of Mr Hawke's sermon instead of
wearing off in a few days, as might have been expected, became more and
more marked, so much so that it was necessary for Ernest's friends to
hold him back rather than urge him on, for he seemed likely to develop--as
indeed he did for a time--into a religious enthusiast.

In one matter only, did he openly backslide.  He had, as I said above,
locked up his pipes and tobacco, so that he might not be tempted to use
them.  All day long on the day after Mr Hawke's sermon he let them lie in
his portmanteau bravely; but this was not very difficult, as he had for
some time given up smoking till after hall.  After hall this day he did
not smoke till chapel time, and then went to chapel in self-defence.  When
he returned he determined to look at the matter from a common sense point
of view.  On this he saw that, provided tobacco did not injure his
health--and he really could not see that it did--it stood much on the
same footing as tea or coffee.

Tobacco had nowhere been forbidden in the Bible, but then it had not yet
been discovered, and had probably only escaped proscription for this
reason.  We can conceive of St Paul or even our Lord Himself as drinking
a cup of tea, but we cannot imagine either of them as smoking a cigarette
or a churchwarden.  Ernest could not deny this, and admitted that Paul
would almost certainly have condemned tobacco in good round terms if he
had known of its existence.  Was it not then taking rather a mean
advantage of the Apostle to stand on his not having actually forbidden
it?  On the other hand, it was possible that God knew Paul would have
forbidden smoking, and had purposely arranged the discovery of tobacco
for a period at which Paul should be no longer living.  This might seem
rather hard on Paul, considering all he had done for Christianity, but it
would be made up to him in other ways.

These reflections satisfied Ernest that on the whole he had better smoke,
so he sneaked to his portmanteau and brought out his pipes and tobacco
again.  There should be moderation he felt in all things, even in virtue;
so for that night he smoked immoderately.  It was a pity, however, that
he had bragged to Dawson about giving up smoking.  The pipes had better
be kept in a cupboard for a week or two, till in other and easier
respects Ernest should have proved his steadfastness.  Then they might
steal out again little by little--and so they did.

Ernest now wrote home a letter couched in a vein different from his
ordinary ones.  His letters were usually all common form and padding, for
as I have already explained, if he wrote about anything that really
interested him, his mother always wanted to know more and more about
it--every fresh answer being as the lopping off of a hydra's head and
giving birth to half a dozen or more new questions--but in the end it
came invariably to the same result, namely, that he ought to have done
something else, or ought not to go on doing as he proposed.  Now,
however, there was a new departure, and for the thousandth time he
concluded that he was about to take a course of which his father and
mother would approve, and in which they would be interested, so that at
last he and they might get on more sympathetically than heretofore.  He
therefore wrote a gushing impulsive letter, which afforded much amusement
to myself as I read it, but which is too long for reproduction.  One
passage ran: "I am now going towards Christ; the greater number of my
college friends are, I fear, going away from Him; we must pray for them
that they may find the peace that is in Christ even as I have myself
found it."  Ernest covered his face with his hands for shame as he read
this extract from the bundle of letters he had put into my hands--they
had been returned to him by his father on his mother's death, his mother
having carefully preserved them.

"Shall I cut it out?" said I, "I will if you like."

"Certainly not," he answered, "and if good-natured friends have kept more
records of my follies, pick out any plums that may amuse the reader, and
let him have his laugh over them."  But fancy what effect a letter like
this--so unled up to--must have produced at Battersby!  Even Christina
refrained from ecstasy over her son's having discovered the power of
Christ's word, while Theobald was frightened out of his wits.  It was
well his son was not going to have any doubts or difficulties, and that
he would be ordained without making a fuss over it, but he smelt mischief
in this sudden conversion of one who had never yet shown any inclination
towards religion.  He hated people who did not know where to stop.  Ernest
was always so _outre_ and strange; there was never any knowing what he
would do next, except that it would be something unusual and silly.  If
he was to get the bit between his teeth after he had got ordained and
bought his living, he would play more pranks than ever he, Theobald, had
done.  The fact, doubtless, of his being ordained and having bought a
living would go a long way to steady him, and if he married, his wife
must see to the rest; this was his only chance and, to do justice to his
sagacity, Theobald in his heart did not think very highly of it.

When Ernest came down to Battersby in June, he imprudently tried to open
up a more unreserved communication with his father than was his wont.  The
first of Ernest's snipe-like flights on being flushed by Mr Hawke's
sermon was in the direction of ultra-evangelicalism.  Theobald himself
had been much more Low than High Church.  This was the normal development
of the country clergyman during the first years of his clerical life,
between, we will say, the years 1825 to 1850; but he was not prepared for
the almost contempt with which Ernest now regarded the doctrines of
baptismal regeneration and priestly absolution (Hoity toity, indeed, what
business had he with such questions?), nor for his desire to find some
means of reconciling Methodism and the Church.  Theobald hated the Church
of Rome, but he hated dissenters too, for he found them as a general rule
troublesome people to deal with; he always found people who did not agree
with him troublesome to deal with: besides, they set up for knowing as
much as he did; nevertheless if he had been let alone he would have
leaned towards them rather than towards the High Church party.  The
neighbouring clergy, however, would not let him alone.  One by one they
had come under the influence, directly or indirectly, of the Oxford
movement which had begun twenty years earlier.  It was surprising how
many practices he now tolerated which in his youth he would have
considered Popish; he knew very well therefore which way things were
going in Church matters, and saw that as usual Ernest was setting himself
the other way.  The opportunity for telling his son that he was a fool
was too favourable not to be embraced, and Theobald was not slow to
embrace it.  Ernest was annoyed and surprised, for had not his father and
mother been wanting him to be more religious all his life?  Now that he
had become so they were still not satisfied.  He said to himself that a
prophet was not without honour save in his own country, but he had been
lately--or rather until lately--getting into an odious habit of turning
proverbs upside down, and it occurred to him that a country is sometimes
not without honour save for its own prophet.  Then he laughed, and for
the rest of the day felt more as he used to feel before he had heard Mr
Hawke's sermon.

He returned to Cambridge for the Long Vacation of 1858--none too soon,
for he had to go in for the Voluntary Theological Examination, which
bishops were now beginning to insist upon.  He imagined all the time he
was reading that he was storing himself with the knowledge that would
best fit him for the work he had taken in hand.  In truth, he was
cramming for a pass.  In due time he did pass--creditably, and was
ordained Deacon with half-a-dozen others of his friends in the autumn of
1858.  He was then just twenty-three years old.



