

This move on Ernest's part was variously commented upon by his friends,
the general opinion being that it was just like Pontifex, who was sure to
do something unusual wherever he went, but that on the whole the idea was
commendable.  Christina could not restrain herself when on sounding her
clerical neighbours she found them inclined to applaud her son for
conduct which they idealised into something much more self-denying than
it really was.  She did not quite like his living in such an
unaristocratic neighbourhood; but what he was doing would probably get
into the newspapers, and then great people would take notice of him.
Besides, it would be very cheap; down among these poor people he could
live for next to nothing, and might put by a great deal of his income.  As
for temptations, there could be few or none in such a place as that.  This
argument about cheapness was the one with which she most successfully met
Theobald, who grumbled more _suo_ that he had no sympathy with his son's
extravagance and conceit.  When Christina pointed out to him that it
would be cheap he replied that there was something in that.

On Ernest himself the effect was to confirm the good opinion of himself
which had been growing upon him ever since he had begun to read for
orders, and to make him flatter himself that he was among the few who
were ready to give up _all_ for Christ.  Ere long he began to conceive of
himself as a man with a mission and a great future.  His lightest and
most hastily formed opinions began to be of momentous importance to him,
and he inflicted them, as I have already shown, on his old friends, week
by week becoming more and more _entete_ with himself and his own
crotchets.  I should like well enough to draw a veil over this part of my
hero's career, but cannot do so without marring my story.

In the spring of 1859 I find him writing--

   "I cannot call the visible Church Christian till its fruits are
   Christian, that is until the fruits of the members of the Church of
   England are in conformity, or something like conformity, with her
   teaching.  I cordially agree with the teaching of the Church of
   England in most respects, but she says one thing and does another, and
   until excommunication--yes, and wholesale excommunication--be resorted
   to, I cannot call her a Christian institution.  I should begin with
   our Rector, and if I found it necessary to follow him up by
   excommunicating the Bishop, I should not flinch even from this.

   "The present London Rectors are hopeless people to deal with.  My own
   is one of the best of them, but the moment Pryer and I show signs of
   wanting to attack an evil in a way not recognised by routine, or of
   remedying anything about which no outcry has been made, we are met
   with, 'I cannot think what you mean by all this disturbance; nobody
   else among the clergy sees these things, and I have no wish to be the
   first to begin turning everything topsy-turvy.'  And then people call
   him a sensible man.  I have no patience with them.  However, we know
   what we want, and, as I wrote to Dawson the other day, have a scheme
   on foot which will, I think, fairly meet the requirements of the case.
   But we want more money, and my first move towards getting this has not
   turned out quite so satisfactorily as Pryer and I had hoped; we shall,
   however, I doubt not, retrieve it shortly."

When Ernest came to London he intended doing a good deal of
house-to-house visiting, but Pryer had talked him out of this even before
he settled down in his new and strangely-chosen apartments.  The line he
now took was that if people wanted Christ, they must prove their want by
taking some little trouble, and the trouble required of them was that
they should come and seek him, Ernest, out; there he was in the midst of
them ready to teach; if people did not choose to come to him it was no
fault of his.

"My great business here," he writes again to Dawson, "is to observe.  I
am not doing much in parish work beyond my share of the daily services.  I
have a man's Bible Class, and a boy's Bible Class, and a good many young
men and boys to whom I give instruction one way or another; then there
are the Sunday School children, with whom I fill my room on a Sunday
evening as full as it will hold, and let them sing hymns and chants.  They
like this.  I do a great deal of reading--chiefly of books which Pryer
and I think most likely to help; we find nothing comparable to the
Jesuits.  Pryer is a thorough gentleman, and an admirable man of
business--no less observant of the things of this world, in fact, than of
the things above; by a brilliant coup he has retrieved, or nearly so, a
rather serious loss which threatened to delay indefinitely the execution
of our great scheme.  He and I daily gather fresh principles.  I believe
great things are before me, and am strong in the hope of being able by
and by to effect much.

"As for you I bid you God speed.  Be bold but logical, speculative but
cautious, daringly courageous, but properly circumspect withal," etc.,
etc.

I think this may do for the present.



