

This advice, besides being obviously sensible, would end in saving Ernest
both time and suspense of mind, so we had no hesitation in adopting it.
The case was called on about eleven o'clock, but we got it adjourned till
three, so as to give time for Ernest to set his affairs as straight as he
could, and to execute a power of attorney enabling me to act for him as I
should think fit while he was in prison.

Then all came out about Pryer and the College of Spiritual Pathology.
Ernest had even greater difficulty in making a clean breast of this than
he had had in telling us about Miss Maitland, but he told us all, and the
upshot was that he had actually handed over to Pryer every halfpenny that
he then possessed with no other security than Pryer's I.O.U.'s for the
amount.  Ernest, though still declining to believe that Pryer could be
guilty of dishonourable conduct, was becoming alive to the folly of what
he had been doing; he still made sure, however, of recovering, at any
rate, the greater part of his property as soon as Pryer should have had
time to sell.  Towneley and I were of a different opinion, but we did not
say what we thought.

It was dreary work waiting all the morning amid such unfamiliar and
depressing surroundings.  I thought how the Psalmist had exclaimed with
quiet irony, "One day in thy courts is better than a thousand," and I
thought that I could utter a very similar sentiment in respect of the
Courts in which Towneley and I were compelled to loiter.  At last, about
three o'clock the case was called on, and we went round to the part of
the court which is reserved for the general public, while Ernest was
taken into the prisoner's dock.  As soon as he had collected himself
sufficiently he recognised the magistrate as the old gentleman who had
spoken to him in the train on the day he was leaving school, and saw, or
thought he saw, to his great grief, that he too was recognised.

Mr Ottery, for this was our attorney's name, took the line he had
proposed.  He called no other witnesses than the rector, Towneley and
myself, and threw himself on the mercy of the magistrate.  When he had
concluded, the magistrate spoke as follows: "Ernest Pontifex, yours is
one of the most painful cases that I have ever had to deal with.  You
have been singularly favoured in your parentage and education.  You have
had before you the example of blameless parents, who doubtless instilled
into you from childhood the enormity of the offence which by your own
confession you have committed.  You were sent to one of the best public
schools in England.  It is not likely that in the healthy atmosphere of
such a school as Roughborough you can have come across contaminating
influences; you were probably, I may say certainly, impressed at school
with the heinousness of any attempt to depart from the strictest chastity
until such time as you had entered into a state of matrimony.  At
Cambridge you were shielded from impurity by every obstacle which
virtuous and vigilant authorities could devise, and even had the
obstacles been fewer, your parents probably took care that your means
should not admit of your throwing money away upon abandoned characters.
At night proctors patrolled the street and dogged your steps if you tried
to go into any haunt where the presence of vice was suspected.  By day
the females who were admitted within the college walls were selected
mainly on the score of age and ugliness.  It is hard to see what more can
be done for any young man than this.  For the last four or five months
you have been a clergyman, and if a single impure thought had still
remained within your mind, ordination should have removed it:
nevertheless, not only does it appear that your mind is as impure as
though none of the influences to which I have referred had been brought
to bear upon it, but it seems as though their only result had been
this--that you have not even the common sense to be able to distinguish
between a respectable girl and a prostitute.

"If I were to take a strict view of my duty I should commit you for
trial, but in consideration of this being your first offence, I shall
deal leniently with you and sentence you to imprisonment with hard labour
for six calendar months."

Towneley and I both thought there was a touch of irony in the
magistrate's speech, and that he could have given a lighter sentence if
he would, but that was neither here nor there.  We obtained leave to see
Ernest for a few minutes before he was removed to Coldbath Fields, where
he was to serve his term, and found him so thankful to have been
summarily dealt with that he hardly seemed to care about the miserable
plight in which he was to pass the next six months.  When he came out, he
said, he would take what remained of his money, go off to America or
Australia and never be heard of more.

We left him full of this resolve, I, to write to Theobald, and also to
instruct my solicitor to get Ernest's money out of Pryer's hands, and
Towneley to see the reporters and keep the case out of the newspapers.  He
was successful as regards all the higher-class papers.  There was only
one journal, and that of the lowest class, which was incorruptible.



