

As he lay on his bed day after day slowly recovering he woke up to the
fact which most men arrive at sooner or later, I mean that very few care
two straws about truth, or have any confidence that it is righter and
better to believe what is true than what is untrue, even though belief in
the untruth may seem at first sight most expedient.  Yet it is only these
few who can be said to believe anything at all; the rest are simply
unbelievers in disguise.  Perhaps, after all, these last are right.  They
have numbers and prosperity on their side.  They have all which the
rationalist appeals to as his tests of right and wrong.  Right, according
to him, is what seems right to the majority of sensible, well-to-do
people; we know of no safer criterion than this, but what does the
decision thus arrived at involve?  Simply this, that a conspiracy of
silence about things whose truth would be immediately apparent to
disinterested enquirers is not only tolerable but righteous on the part
of those who profess to be and take money for being _par excellence_
guardians and teachers of truth.

Ernest saw no logical escape from this conclusion.  He saw that belief on
the part of the early Christians in the miraculous nature of Christ's
Resurrection was explicable, without any supposition of miracle.  The
explanation lay under the eyes of anyone who chose to take a moderate
degree of trouble; it had been put before the world again and again, and
there had been no serious attempt to refute it.  How was it that Dean
Alford for example who had made the New Testament his speciality, could
not or would not see what was so obvious to Ernest himself?  Could it be
for any other reason than that he did not want to see it, and if so was
he not a traitor to the cause of truth?  Yes, but was he not also a
respectable and successful man, and were not the vast majority of
respectable and successful men, such for example, as all the bishops and
archbishops, doing exactly as Dean Alford did, and did not this make
their action right, no matter though it had been cannibalism or
infanticide, or even habitual untruthfulness of mind?

Monstrous, odious falsehood!  Ernest's feeble pulse quickened and his
pale face flushed as this hateful view of life presented itself to him in
all its logical consistency.  It was not the fact of most men being liars
that shocked him--that was all right enough; but even the momentary doubt
whether the few who were not liars ought not to become liars too.  There
was no hope left if this were so; if this were so, let him die, the
sooner the better.  "Lord," he exclaimed inwardly, "I don't believe one
word of it.  Strengthen Thou and confirm my disbelief."  It seemed to him
that he could never henceforth see a bishop going to consecration without
saying to himself: "There, but for the grace of God, went Ernest
Pontifex."  It was no doing of his.  He could not boast; if he had lived
in the time of Christ he might himself have been an early Christian, or
even an Apostle for aught he knew.  On the whole he felt that he had much
to be thankful for.

The conclusion, then, that it might be better to believe error than truth
should be ordered out of court at once, no matter by how clear a logic it
had been arrived at; but what was the alternative?  It was this, that our
criterion of truth--i.e. that truth is what commends itself to the great
majority of sensible and successful people--is not infallible.  The rule
is sound, and covers by far the greater number of cases, but it has its
exceptions.

He asked himself, what were they?  Ah! that was a difficult matter; there
were so many, and the rules which governed them were sometimes so subtle,
that mistakes always had and always would be made; it was just this that
made it impossible to reduce life to an exact science.  There was a rough
and ready rule-of-thumb test of truth, and a number of rules as regards
exceptions which could be mastered without much trouble, yet there was a
residue of cases in which decision was difficult--so difficult that a man
had better follow his instinct than attempt to decide them by any process
of reasoning.

Instinct then is the ultimate court of appeal.  And what is instinct?  It
is a mode of faith in the evidence of things not actually seen.  And so
my hero returned almost to the point from which he had started
originally, namely that the just shall live by faith.

And this is what the just--that is to say reasonable people--do as
regards those daily affairs of life which most concern them.  They settle
smaller matters by the exercise of their own deliberation.  More
important ones, such as the cure of their own bodies and the bodies of
those whom they love, the investment of their money, the extrication of
their affairs from any serious mess--these things they generally entrust
to others of whose capacity they know little save from general report;
they act therefore on the strength of faith, not of knowledge.  So the
English nation entrusts the welfare of its fleet and naval defences to a
First Lord of the Admiralty, who, not being a sailor can know nothing
about these matters except by acts of faith.  There can be no doubt about
faith and not reason being the _ultima ratio_.

Even Euclid, who has laid himself as little open to the charge of
credulity as any writer who ever lived, cannot get beyond this.  He has
no demonstrable first premise.  He requires postulates and axioms which
transcend demonstration, and without which he can do nothing.  His
superstructure indeed is demonstration, but his ground is faith.  Nor
again can he get further than telling a man he is a fool if he persists
in differing from him.  He says "which is absurd," and declines to
discuss the matter further.  Faith and authority, therefore, prove to be
as necessary for him as for anyone else.  "By faith in what, then," asked
Ernest of himself, "shall a just man endeavour to live at this present
time?"  He answered to himself, "At any rate not by faith in the
supernatural element of the Christian religion."

And how should he best persuade his fellow-countrymen to leave off
believing in this supernatural element?  Looking at the matter from a
practical point of view he thought the Archbishop of Canterbury afforded
the most promising key to the situation.  It lay between him and the
Pope.  The Pope was perhaps best in theory, but in practice the
Archbishop of Canterbury would do sufficiently well.  If he could only
manage to sprinkle a pinch of salt, as it were, on the Archbishop's tail,
he might convert the whole Church of England to free thought by a _coup
de main_.  There must be an amount of cogency which even an Archbishop--an
Archbishop whose perceptions had never been quickened by imprisonment for
assault--would not be able to withstand.  When brought face to face with
the facts, as he, Ernest, could arrange them; his Grace would have no
resource but to admit them; being an honourable man he would at once
resign his Archbishopric, and Christianity would become extinct in
England within a few months' time.  This, at any rate, was how things
ought to be.  But all the time Ernest had no confidence in the
Archbishop's not hopping off just as the pinch was about to fall on him,
and this seemed so unfair that his blood boiled at the thought of it.  If
this was to be so, he must try if he could not fix him by the judicious
use of bird-lime or a snare, or throw the salt on his tail from an
ambuscade.

To do him justice it was not himself that he greatly cared about.  He
knew he had been humbugged, and he knew also that the greater part of the
ills which had afflicted him were due, indirectly, in chief measure to
the influence of Christian teaching; still, if the mischief had ended
with himself, he should have thought little about it, but there was his
sister, and his brother Joey, and the hundreds and thousands of young
people throughout England whose lives were being blighted through the
lies told them by people whose business it was to know better, but who
scamped their work and shirked difficulties instead of facing them.  It
was this which made him think it worth while to be angry, and to consider
whether he could not at least do something towards saving others from
such years of waste and misery as he had had to pass himself.  If there
was no truth in the miraculous accounts of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, the whole of the religion founded upon the historic truth
of those events tumbled to the ground.  "My," he exclaimed, with all the
arrogance of youth, "they put a gipsy or fortune-teller into prison for
getting money out of silly people who think they have supernatural power;
why should they not put a clergyman in prison for pretending that he can
absolve sins, or turn bread and wine into the flesh and blood of One who
died two thousand years ago?  What," he asked himself, "could be more
pure 'hanky-panky' than that a bishop should lay his hands upon a young
man and pretend to convey to him the spiritual power to work this
miracle?  It was all very well to talk about toleration; toleration, like
everything else, had its limits; besides, if it was to include the bishop
let it include the fortune-teller too."  He would explain all this to the
Archbishop of Canterbury by and by, but as he could not get hold of him
just now, it occurred to him that he might experimentalise advantageously
upon the viler soul of the prison chaplain.  It was only those who took
the first and most obvious step in their power who ever did great things
in the end, so one day, when Mr Hughes--for this was the chaplain's
name--was talking with him, Ernest introduced the question of Christian
evidences, and tried to raise a discussion upon them.  Mr Hughes had been
very kind to him, but he was more than twice my hero's age, and had long
taken the measure of such objections as Ernest tried to put before him.  I
do not suppose he believed in the actual objective truth of the stories
about Christ's Resurrection and Ascension any more than Ernest did, but
he knew that this was a small matter, and that the real issue lay much
deeper than this.

Mr Hughes was a man who had been in authority for many years, and he
brushed Ernest on one side as if he had been a fly.  He did it so well
that my hero never ventured to tackle him again, and confined his
conversation with him for the future to such matters as what he had
better do when he got out of prison; and here Mr Hughes was ever ready to
listen to him with sympathy and kindness.



