

As soon as Ernest found that he had no money to look to upon leaving
prison he saw that his dreams about emigrating and farming must come to
an end, for he knew that he was incapable of working at the plough or
with the axe for long together himself.  And now it seemed he should have
no money to pay any one else for doing so.  It was this that resolved him
to part once and for all with his parents.  If he had been going abroad
he could have kept up relations with them, for they would have been too
far off to interfere with him.

He knew his father and mother would object to being cut; they would wish
to appear kind and forgiving; they would also dislike having no further
power to plague him; but he knew also very well that so long as he and
they ran in harness together they would be always pulling one way and he
another.  He wanted to drop the gentleman and go down into the ranks,
beginning on the lowest rung of the ladder, where no one would know of
his disgrace or mind it if he did know; his father and mother on the
other hand would wish him to clutch on to the fag-end of gentility at a
starvation salary and with no prospect of advancement.  Ernest had seen
enough in Ashpit Place to know that a tailor, if he did not drink and
attended to his business, could earn more money than a clerk or a curate,
while much less expense by way of show was required of him.  The tailor
also had more liberty, and a better chance of rising.  Ernest resolved at
once, as he had fallen so far, to fall still lower--promptly, gracefully
and with the idea of rising again, rather than cling to the skirts of a
respectability which would permit him to exist on sufferance only, and
make him pay an utterly extortionate price for an article which he could
do better without.

He arrived at this result more quickly than he might otherwise have done
through remembering something he had once heard his aunt say about
"kissing the soil."  This had impressed him and stuck by him perhaps by
reason of its brevity; when later on he came to know the story of
Hercules and Antaeus, he found it one of the very few ancient fables
which had a hold over him--his chiefest debt to classical literature.  His
aunt had wanted him to learn carpentering, as a means of kissing the soil
should his Hercules ever throw him.  It was too late for this now--or he
thought it was--but the mode of carrying out his aunt's idea was a
detail; there were a hundred ways of kissing the soil besides becoming a
carpenter.

He had told me this during our interview, and I had encouraged him to the
utmost of my power.  He showed so much more good sense than I had given
him credit for that I became comparatively easy about him, and determined
to let him play his own game, being always, however, ready to hand in
case things went too far wrong.  It was not simply because he disliked
his father and mother that he wanted to have no more to do with them; if
it had been only this he would have put up with them; but a warning voice
within told him distinctly enough that if he was clean cut away from them
he might still have a chance of success, whereas if they had anything
whatever to do with him, or even knew where he was, they would hamper him
and in the end ruin him.  Absolute independence he believed to be his
only chance of very life itself.

Over and above this--if this were not enough--Ernest had a faith in his
own destiny such as most young men, I suppose, feel, but the grounds of
which were not apparent to any one but himself.  Rightly or wrongly, in a
quiet way he believed he possessed a strength which, if he were only free
to use it in his own way, might do great things some day.  He did not
know when, nor where, nor how his opportunity was to come, but he never
doubted that it would come in spite of all that had happened, and above
all else he cherished the hope that he might know how to seize it if it
came, for whatever it was it would be something that no one else could do
so well as he could.  People said there were no dragons and giants for
adventurous men to fight with nowadays; it was beginning to dawn upon him
that there were just as many now as at any past time.

Monstrous as such a faith may seem in one who was qualifying himself for
a high mission by a term of imprisonment, he could no more help it than
he could help breathing; it was innate in him, and it was even more with
a view to this than for other reasons that he wished to sever the
connection between himself and his parents; for he knew that if ever the
day came in which it should appear that before him too there was a race
set in which it might be an honour to have run among the foremost, his
father and mother would be the first to let him and hinder him in running
it.  They had been the first to say that he ought to run such a race;
they would also be the first to trip him up if he took them at their
word, and then afterwards upbraid him for not having won.  Achievement of
any kind would be impossible for him unless he was free from those who
would be for ever dragging him back into the conventional.  The
conventional had been tried already and had been found wanting.

He had an opportunity now, if he chose to take it, of escaping once for
all from those who at once tormented him and would hold him earthward
should a chance of soaring open before him.  He should never have had it
but for his imprisonment; but for this the force of habit and routine
would have been too strong for him; he should hardly have had it if he
had not lost all his money; the gap would not have been so wide but that
he might have been inclined to throw a plank across it.  He rejoiced now,
therefore, over his loss of money as well as over his imprisonment, which
had made it more easy for him to follow his truest and most lasting
interests.

At times he wavered, when he thought of how his mother, who in her way,
as he thought, had loved him, would weep and think sadly over him, or how
perhaps she might even fall ill and die, and how the blame would rest
with him.  At these times his resolution was near breaking, but when he
found I applauded his design, the voice within, which bade him see his
father's and mother's faces no more, grew louder and more persistent.  If
he could not cut himself adrift from those who he knew would hamper him,
when so small an effort was wanted, his dream of a destiny was idle; what
was the prospect of a hundred pounds from his father in comparison with
jeopardy to this?  He still felt deeply the pain his disgrace had
inflicted upon his father and mother, but he was getting stronger, and
reflected that as he had run his chance with them for parents, so they
must run theirs with him for a son.

He had nearly settled down to this conclusion when he received a letter
from his father which made his decision final.  If the prison rules had
been interpreted strictly, he would not have been allowed to have this
letter for another three months, as he had already heard from me, but the
governor took a lenient view, and considered the letter from me to be a
business communication hardly coming under the category of a letter from
friends.  Theobald's letter therefore was given to his son.  It ran as
follows:--

   "My dear Ernest, My object in writing is not to upbraid you with the
   disgrace and shame you have inflicted upon your mother and myself, to
   say nothing of your brother Joey, and your sister.  Suffer of course
   we must, but we know to whom to look in our affliction, and are filled
   with anxiety rather on your behalf than our own.  Your mother is
   wonderful.  She is pretty well in health, and desires me to send you
   her love.

   "Have you considered your prospects on leaving prison?  I understand
   from Mr Overton that you have lost the legacy which your grandfather
   left you, together with all the interest that accrued during your
   minority, in the course of speculation upon the Stock Exchange!  If
   you have indeed been guilty of such appalling folly it is difficult to
   see what you can turn your hand to, and I suppose you will try to find
   a clerkship in an office.  Your salary will doubtless be low at first,
   but you have made your bed and must not complain if you have to lie
   upon it.  If you take pains to please your employers they will not be
   backward in promoting you.

   "When I first heard from Mr Overton of the unspeakable calamity which
   had befallen your mother and myself, I had resolved not to see you
   again.  I am unwilling, however, to have recourse to a measure which
   would deprive you of your last connecting link with respectable
   people.  Your mother and I will see you as soon as you come out of
   prison; not at Battersby--we do not wish you to come down here at
   present--but somewhere else, probably in London.  You need not shrink
   from seeing us; we shall not reproach you.  We will then decide about
   your future.

   "At present our impression is that you will find a fairer start
   probably in Australia or New Zealand than here, and I am prepared to
   find you 75 or even if necessary so far as 100 pounds to pay your
   passage money.  Once in the colony you must be dependent upon your own
   exertions.

   "May Heaven prosper them and you, and restore you to us years hence a
   respected member of society.--Your affectionate father, T. PONTIFEX."

Then there was a postscript in Christina's writing.

   "My darling, darling boy, pray with me daily and hourly that we may
   yet again become a happy, united, God-fearing family as we were before
   this horrible pain fell upon us.--Your sorrowing but ever loving
   mother, C. P."

This letter did not produce the effect on Ernest that it would have done
before his imprisonment began.  His father and mother thought they could
take him up as they had left him off.  They forgot the rapidity with
which development follows misfortune, if the sufferer is young and of a
sound temperament.  Ernest made no reply to his father's letter, but his
desire for a total break developed into something like a passion.  "There
are orphanages," he exclaimed to himself, "for children who have lost
their parents--oh! why, why, why, are there no harbours of refuge for
grown men who have not yet lost them?"  And he brooded over the bliss of
Melchisedek who had been born an orphan, without father, without mother,
and without descent.



