

We left by the night mail, crossing from Dover.  The night was soft, and
there was a bright moon upon the sea.  "Don't you love the smell of
grease about the engine of a Channel steamer?  Isn't there a lot of hope
in it?" said Ernest to me, for he had been to Normandy one summer as a
boy with his father and mother, and the smell carried him back to days
before those in which he had begun to bruise himself against the great
outside world.  "I always think one of the best parts of going abroad is
the first thud of the piston, and the first gurgling of the water when
the paddle begins to strike it."

It was very dreamy getting out at Calais, and trudging about with luggage
in a foreign town at an hour when we were generally both of us in bed and
fast asleep, but we settled down to sleep as soon as we got into the
railway carriage, and dozed till we had passed Amiens.  Then waking when
the first signs of morning crispness were beginning to show themselves, I
saw that Ernest was already devouring every object we passed with quick
sympathetic curiousness.  There was not a peasant in a blouse driving his
cart betimes along the road to market, not a signalman's wife in her
husband's hat and coat waving a green flag, not a shepherd taking out his
sheep to the dewy pastures, not a bank of opening cowslips as we passed
through the railway cuttings, but he was drinking it all in with an
enjoyment too deep for words.  The name of the engine that drew us was
Mozart, and Ernest liked this too.

We reached Paris by six, and had just time to get across the town and
take a morning express train to Marseilles, but before noon my young
friend was tired out and had resigned himself to a series of sleeps which
were seldom intermitted for more than an hour or so together.  He fought
against this for a time, but in the end consoled himself by saying it was
so nice to have so much pleasure that he could afford to throw a lot of
it away.  Having found a theory on which to justify himself, he slept in
peace.

At Marseilles we rested, and there the excitement of the change proved,
as I had half feared it would, too much for my godson's still enfeebled
state.  For a few days he was really ill, but after this he righted.  For
my own part I reckon being ill as one of the great pleasures of life,
provided one is not too ill and is not obliged to work till one is
better.  I remember being ill once in a foreign hotel myself and how much
I enjoyed it.  To lie there careless of everything, quiet and warm, and
with no weight upon the mind, to hear the clinking of the plates in the
far-off kitchen as the scullion rinsed them and put them by; to watch the
soft shadows come and go upon the ceiling as the sun came out or went
behind a cloud; to listen to the pleasant murmuring of the fountain in
the court below, and the shaking of the bells on the horses' collars and
the clink of their hoofs upon the ground as the flies plagued them; not
only to be a lotus-eater but to know that it was one's duty to be a lotus-
eater.  "Oh," I thought to myself, "if I could only now, having so
forgotten care, drop off to sleep for ever, would not this be a better
piece of fortune than any I can ever hope for?"

Of course it would, but we would not take it though it were offered us.
No matter what evil may befall us, we will mostly abide by it and see it
out.

I could see that Ernest felt much as I had felt myself.  He said little,
but noted everything.  Once only did he frighten me.  He called me to his
bedside just as it was getting dusk and said in a grave, quiet manner
that he should like to speak to me.

"I have been thinking," he said, "that I may perhaps never recover from
this illness, and in case I do not I should like you to know that there
is only one thing which weighs upon me.  I refer," he continued after a
slight pause, "to my conduct towards my father and mother.  I have been
much too good to them.  I treated them much too considerately," on which
he broke into a smile which assured me that there was nothing seriously
amiss with him.

On the walls of his bedroom were a series of French Revolution prints
representing events in the life of Lycurgus.  There was "Grandeur d'ame
de Lycurgue," and "Lycurgue consulte l'oracle," and then there was
"Calciope a la Cour."  Under this was written in French and Spanish:
"Modele de grace et de beaute, la jeune Calciope non moins sage que belle
avait merite l'estime et l'attachement du vertueux Lycurgue.  Vivement
epris de tant de charmes, l'illustre philosophe la conduisait dans le
temple de Junon, ou ils s'unirent par un serment sacre.  Apres cette
auguste ceremonie, Lycurgue s'empressa de conduire sa jeune epouse au
palais de son frere Polydecte, Roi de Lacedemon.  Seigneur, lui dit-il,
la vertueuse Calciope vient de recevoir mes voeux aux pieds des autels,
j'ose vous prier d'approuver cette union.  Le Roi temoigna d'abord
quelque surprise, mais l'estime qu'il avait pour son frere lui inspira
une reponse pleine de beinveillance.  Il s'approcha aussitot de Calciope
qu'il embrassa tendrement, combla ensuite Lycurgue de prevenances et
parut tres satisfait."

He called my attention to this and then said somewhat timidly that he
would rather have married Ellen than Calciope.  I saw he was hardening
and made no hesitation about proposing that in another day or two we
should proceed upon our journey.

I will not weary the reader by taking him with us over beaten ground.  We
stopped at Siena, Cortona, Orvieto, Perugia and many other cities, and
then after a fortnight passed between Rome and Naples went to the
Venetian provinces and visited all those wondrous towns that lie between
the southern slopes of the Alps and the northern ones of the Apennines,
coming back at last by the S. Gothard.  I doubt whether he had enjoyed
the trip more than I did myself, but it was not till we were on the point
of returning that Ernest had recovered strength enough to be called
fairly well, and it was not for many months that he so completely lost
all sense of the wounds which the last four years had inflicted on him as
to feel as though there were a scar and a scar only remaining.

They say that when people have lost an arm or a foot they feel pains in
it now and again for a long while after they have lost it.  One pain
which he had almost forgotten came upon him on his return to England, I
mean the sting of his having been imprisoned.  As long as he was only a
small shop-keeper his imprisonment mattered nothing; nobody knew of it,
and if they had known they would not have cared; now, however, though he
was returning to his old position he was returning to it disgraced, and
the pain from which he had been saved in the first instance by
surroundings so new that he had hardly recognised his own identity in the
middle of them, came on him as from a wound inflicted yesterday.

He thought of the high resolves which he had made in prison about using
his disgrace as a vantage ground of strength rather than trying to make
people forget it.  "That was all very well then," he thought to himself,
"when the grapes were beyond my reach, but now it is different."  Besides,
who but a prig would set himself high aims, or make high resolves at all?

Some of his old friends, on learning that he had got rid of his supposed
wife and was now comfortably off again, wanted to renew their
acquaintance; he was grateful to them and sometimes tried to meet their
advances half way, but it did not do, and ere long he shrank back into
himself, pretending not to know them.  An infernal demon of honesty
haunted him which made him say to himself: "These men know a great deal,
but do not know all--if they did they would cut me--and therefore I have
no right to their acquaintance."

He thought that everyone except himself was _sans peur et sans reproche_.
Of course they must be, for if they had not been, would they not have
been bound to warn all who had anything to do with them of their
deficiencies?  Well, he could not do this, and he would not have people's
acquaintance under false pretences, so he gave up even hankering after
rehabilitation and fell back upon his old tastes for music and
literature.

Of course he has long since found out how silly all this was, how silly I
mean in theory, for in practice it worked better than it ought to have
done, by keeping him free from _liaisons_ which would have tied his
tongue and made him see success elsewhere than where he came in time to
see it.  He did what he did instinctively and for no other reason than
because it was most natural to him.  So far as he thought at all, he
thought wrong, but what he did was right.  I said something of this kind
to him once not so very long ago, and told him he had always aimed high.
"I never aimed at all," he replied a little indignantly, "and you may be
sure I should have aimed low enough if I had thought I had got the
chance."

I suppose after all that no one whose mind was not, to put it mildly,
abnormal, ever yet aimed very high out of pure malice aforethought.  I
once saw a fly alight on a cup of hot coffee on which the milk had formed
a thin skin; he perceived his extreme danger, and I noted with what ample
strides and almost supermuscan effort he struck across the treacherous
surface and made for the edge of the cup--for the ground was not solid
enough to let him raise himself from it by his wings.  As I watched him I
fancied that so supreme a moment of difficulty and danger might leave him
with an increase of moral and physical power which might even descend in
some measure to his offspring.  But surely he would not have got the
increased moral power if he could have helped it, and he will not
knowingly alight upon another cup of hot coffee.  The more I see the more
sure I am that it does not matter why people do the right thing so long
only as they do it, nor why they may have done the wrong if they have
done it.  The result depends upon the thing done and the motive goes for
nothing.  I have read somewhere, but cannot remember where, that in some
country district there was once a great scarcity of food, during which
the poor suffered acutely; many indeed actually died of starvation, and
all were hard put to it.  In one village, however, there was a poor widow
with a family of young children, who, though she had small visible means
of subsistence, still looked well-fed and comfortable, as also did all
her little ones.  "How," everyone asked, "did they manage to live?"  It
was plain they had a secret, and it was equally plain that it could be no
good one; for there came a hurried, hunted look over the poor woman's
face if anyone alluded to the way in which she and hers throve when
others starved; the family, moreover, were sometimes seen out at unusual
hours of the night, and evidently brought things home, which could hardly
have been honestly come by.  They knew they were under suspicion, and,
being hitherto of excellent name, it made them very unhappy, for it must
be confessed that they believed what they did to be uncanny if not
absolutely wicked; nevertheless, in spite of this they throve, and kept
their strength when all their neighbours were pinched.

At length matters came to a head and the clergyman of the parish cross-
questioned the poor woman so closely that with many tears and a bitter
sense of degradation she confessed the truth; she and her children went
into the hedges and gathered snails, which they made into broth and
ate--could she ever be forgiven?  Was there any hope of salvation for her
either in this world or the next after such unnatural conduct?

So again I have heard of an old dowager countess whose money was all in
Consols; she had had many sons, and in her anxiety to give the younger
ones a good start, wanted a larger income than Consols would give her.
She consulted her solicitor and was advised to sell her Consols and
invest in the London and North-Western Railway, then at about 85.  This
was to her what eating snails was to the poor widow whose story I have
told above.  With shame and grief, as of one doing an unclean thing--but
her boys must have their start--she did as she was advised.  Then for a
long while she could not sleep at night and was haunted by a presage of
disaster.  Yet what happened?  She started her boys, and in a few years
found her capital doubled into the bargain, on which she sold out and
went back again to Consols and died in the full blessedness of
fund-holding.

She thought, indeed, that she was doing a wrong and dangerous thing, but
this had absolutely nothing to do with it.  Suppose she had invested in
the full confidence of a recommendation by some eminent London banker
whose advice was bad, and so had lost all her money, and suppose she had
done this with a light heart and with no conviction of sin--would her
innocence of evil purpose and the excellence of her motive have stood her
in any stead?  Not they.

But to return to my story.  Towneley gave my hero most trouble.  Towneley,
as I have said, knew that Ernest would have money soon, but Ernest did
not of course know that he knew it.  Towneley was rich himself, and was
married now; Ernest would be rich soon, had _bona fide_ intended to be
married already, and would doubtless marry a lawful wife later on.  Such
a man was worth taking pains with, and when Towneley one day met Ernest
in the street, and Ernest tried to avoid him, Towneley would not have it,
but with his usual quick good nature read his thoughts, caught him,
morally speaking, by the scruff of his neck, and turned him laughingly
inside out, telling him he would have no such nonsense.

Towneley was just as much Ernest's idol now as he had ever been, and
Ernest, who was very easily touched, felt more gratefully and warmly than
ever towards him, but there was an unconscious something which was
stronger than Towneley, and made my hero determine to break with him more
determinedly perhaps than with any other living person; he thanked him in
a low hurried voice and pressed his hand, while tears came into his eyes
in spite of all his efforts to repress them.  "If we meet again," he
said, "do not look at me, but if hereafter you hear of me writing things
you do not like, think of me as charitably as you can," and so they
parted.

"Towneley is a good fellow," said I, gravely, "and you should not have
cut him."

"Towneley," he answered, "is not only a good fellow, but he is without
exception the very best man I ever saw in my life--except," he paid me
the compliment of saying, "yourself; Towneley is my notion of everything
which I should most like to be--but there is no real solidarity between
us.  I should be in perpetual fear of losing his good opinion if I said
things he did not like, and I mean to say a great many things," he
continued more merrily, "which Towneley will not like."

A man, as I have said already, can give up father and mother for Christ's
sake tolerably easily for the most part, but it is not so easy to give up
people like Towneley.



