

It almost seemed as though our casual mention of Theobald and Christina
had in some way excited them from a dormant to an active state.  During
the years that had elapsed since they last appeared upon the scene they
had remained at Battersby, and had concentrated their affection upon
their other children.

It had been a bitter pill to Theobald to lose his power of plaguing his
first-born; if the truth were known I believe he had felt this more
acutely than any disgrace which might have been shed upon him by Ernest's
imprisonment.  He had made one or two attempts to reopen negotiations
through me, but I never said anything about them to Ernest, for I knew it
would upset him.  I wrote, however, to Theobald that I had found his son
inexorable, and recommended him for the present, at any rate, to desist
from returning to the subject.  This I thought would be at once what
Ernest would like best and Theobald least.

A few days, however, after Ernest had come into his property, I received
a letter from Theobald enclosing one for Ernest which I could not
withhold.

The letter ran thus:--

   "To my son Ernest,--Although you have more than once rejected my
   overtures I appeal yet again to your better nature.  Your mother, who
   has long been ailing, is, I believe, near her end; she is unable to
   keep anything on her stomach, and Dr Martin holds out but little hopes
   of her recovery.  She has expressed a wish to see you, and says she
   knows you will not refuse to come to her, which, considering her
   condition, I am unwilling to suppose you will.

   "I remit you a Post Office order for your fare, and will pay your
   return journey.

   "If you want clothes to come in, order what you consider suitable, and
   desire that the bill be sent to me; I will pay it immediately, to an
   amount not exceeding eight or nine pounds, and if you will let me know
   what train you will come by, I will send the carriage to meet you.
   Believe me, Your affectionate father, T. PONTIFEX."

Of course there could be no hesitation on Ernest's part.  He could afford
to smile now at his father's offering to pay for his clothes, and his
sending him a Post Office order for the exact price of a second-class
ticket, and he was of course shocked at learning the state his mother was
said to be in, and touched at her desire to see him.  He telegraphed that
he would come down at once.  I saw him a little before he started, and
was pleased to see how well his tailor had done by him.  Towneley himself
could not have been appointed more becomingly.  His portmanteau, his
railway wrapper, everything he had about him, was in keeping.  I thought
he had grown much better-looking than he had been at two or three and
twenty.  His year and a half of peace had effaced all the ill effects of
his previous suffering, and now that he had become actually rich there
was an air of _insouciance_ and good humour upon his face, as of a man
with whom everything was going perfectly right, which would have made a
much plainer man good-looking.  I was proud of him and delighted with
him.  "I am sure," I said to myself, "that whatever else he may do, he
will never marry again."

The journey was a painful one.  As he drew near to the station and caught
sight of each familiar feature, so strong was the force of association
that he felt as though his coming into his aunt's money had been a dream,
and he were again returning to his father's house as he had returned to
it from Cambridge for the vacations.  Do what he would, the old dull
weight of _home-sickness_ began to oppress him, his heart beat fast as he
thought of his approaching meeting with his father and mother, "and I
shall have," he said to himself, "to kiss Charlotte."

Would his father meet him at the station?  Would he greet him as though
nothing had happened, or would he be cold and distant?  How, again, would
he take the news of his son's good fortune?  As the train drew up to the
platform, Ernest's eye ran hurriedly over the few people who were in the
station.  His father's well-known form was not among them, but on the
other side of the palings which divided the station yard from the
platform, he saw the pony carriage, looking, as he thought, rather
shabby, and recognised his father's coachman.  In a few minutes more he
was in the carriage driving towards Battersby.  He could not help smiling
as he saw the coachman give a look of surprise at finding him so much
changed in personal appearance.  The coachman was the more surprised
because when Ernest had last been at home he had been dressed as a
clergyman, and now he was not only a layman, but a layman who was got up
regardless of expense.  The change was so great that it was not till
Ernest actually spoke to him that the coachman knew him.

"How are my father and mother?" he asked hurriedly, as he got into the
carriage.  "The Master's well, sir," was the answer, "but the Missis is
very sadly."  The horse knew that he was going home and pulled hard at
the reins.  The weather was cold and raw--the very ideal of a November
day; in one part of the road the floods were out, and near here they had
to pass through a number of horsemen and dogs, for the hounds had met
that morning at a place near Battersby.  Ernest saw several people whom
he knew, but they either, as is most likely, did not recognise him, or
did not know of his good luck.  When Battersby church tower drew near,
and he saw the Rectory on the top of the hill, its chimneys just showing
above the leafless trees with which it was surrounded, he threw himself
back in the carriage and covered his face with his hands.

It came to an end, as even the worst quarters of an hour do, and in a few
minutes more he was on the steps in front of his father's house.  His
father, hearing the carriage arrive, came a little way down the steps to
meet him.  Like the coachman he saw at a glance that Ernest was appointed
as though money were abundant with him, and that he was looking robust
and full of health and vigour.

This was not what he had bargained for.  He wanted Ernest to return, but
he was to return as any respectable, well-regulated prodigal ought to
return--abject, broken-hearted, asking forgiveness from the tenderest and
most long-suffering father in the whole world.  If he should have shoes
and stockings and whole clothes at all, it should be only because
absolute rags and tatters had been graciously dispensed with, whereas
here he was swaggering in a grey ulster and a blue and white necktie, and
looking better than Theobald had ever seen him in his life.  It was
unprincipled.  Was it for this that he had been generous enough to offer
to provide Ernest with decent clothes in which to come and visit his
mother's death-bed?  Could any advantage be meaner than the one which
Ernest had taken?  Well, he would not go a penny beyond the eight or nine
pounds which he had promised.  It was fortunate he had given a limit.  Why
he, Theobald, had never been able to afford such a portmanteau in his
life.  He was still using an old one which his father had turned over to
him when he went up to Cambridge.  Besides, he had said clothes, not a
portmanteau.

Ernest saw what was passing through his father's mind, and felt that he
ought to have prepared him in some way for what he now saw; but he had
sent his telegram so immediately on receiving his father's letter, and
had followed it so promptly that it would not have been easy to do so
even if he had thought of it.  He put out his hand and said laughingly,
"Oh, it's all paid for--I am afraid you do not know that Mr Overton has
handed over to me Aunt Alethea's money."

Theobald flushed scarlet.  "But why," he said, and these were the first
words that actually crossed his lips--"if the money was not his to keep,
did he not hand it over to my brother John and me?"  He stammered a good
deal and looked sheepish, but he got the words out.

"Because, my dear father," said Ernest still laughing, "my aunt left it
to him in trust for me, not in trust either for you or for my Uncle
John--and it has accumulated till it is now over 70,000 pounds.  But tell
me how is my mother?"

"No, Ernest," said Theobald excitedly, "the matter cannot rest here, I
must know that this is all open and above board."

This had the true Theobald ring and instantly brought the whole train of
ideas which in Ernest's mind were connected with his father.  The
surroundings were the old familiar ones, but the surrounded were changed
almost beyond power of recognition.  He turned sharply on Theobald in a
moment.  I will not repeat the words he used, for they came out before he
had time to consider them, and they might strike some of my readers as
disrespectful; there were not many of them, but they were effectual.
Theobald said nothing, but turned almost of an ashen colour; he never
again spoke to his son in such a way as to make it necessary for him to
repeat what he had said on this occasion.  Ernest quickly recovered his
temper and again asked after his mother.  Theobald was glad enough to
take this opening now, and replied at once in the tone he would have
assumed towards one he most particularly desired to conciliate, that she
was getting rapidly worse in spite of all he had been able to do for her,
and concluded by saying she had been the comfort and mainstay of his life
for more than thirty years, but that he could not wish it prolonged.

The pair then went upstairs to Christina's room, the one in which Ernest
had been born.  His father went before him and prepared her for her son's
approach.  The poor woman raised herself in bed as he came towards her,
and weeping as she flung her arms around him, cried: "Oh, I knew he would
come, I knew, I knew he could come."

Ernest broke down and wept as he had not done for years.

"Oh, my boy, my boy," she said as soon as she could recover her voice.
"Have you never really been near us for all these years?  Ah, you do not
know how we have loved you and mourned over you, papa just as much as I
have.  You know he shows his feelings less, but I can never tell you how
very, very deeply he has felt for you.  Sometimes at night I have thought
I have heard footsteps in the garden, and have got quietly out of bed
lest I should wake him, and gone to the window to look out, but there has
been only dark or the greyness of the morning, and I have gone crying
back to bed again.  Still I think you have been near us though you were
too proud to let us know--and now at last I have you in my arms once
more, my dearest, dearest boy."

How cruel, how infamously unfeeling Ernest thought he had been.

"Mother," he said, "forgive me--the fault was mine, I ought not to have
been so hard; I was wrong, very wrong"; the poor blubbering fellow meant
what he said, and his heart yearned to his mother as he had never thought
that it could yearn again.  "But have you never," she continued, "come
although it was in the dark and we did not know it--oh, let me think that
you have not been so cruel as we have thought you.  Tell me that you came
if only to comfort me and make me happier."

Ernest was ready.  "I had no money to come with, mother, till just
lately."

This was an excuse Christina could understand and make allowance for;
"Oh, then you would have come, and I will take the will for the deed--and
now that I have you safe again, say that you will never, never leave
me--not till--not till--oh, my boy, have they told you I am dying?"  She
wept bitterly, and buried her head in her pillow.



