{"name": "chapter 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20190903025235/http:/thebestnotes.com/booknotes/Little_Women_Alcott/Little_Women_Study_Guide05.html", "summary": "One of the girls favorite books is Pilgrims Progress, a story which was introduced to them by their father. Through the years they have sometimes used the house as a setting for Pilgrims journey and have acted out the story, beginning in the basement and ending in the upstairs. At the top of second floor staircase, they would release their \"burdens\" and let them go tumbling down the steps. Nor are the analogies to real life and modern burdens lost on them. In this chapter the particular burden that each girl has to bear is discussed. The morning after the New Years Eve party begins with all the girls feeling cross. Even Mrs. March seems a little frustrated as she rushes to complete an important letter. Jos urging of everyone to \"shoulder their burdens\" and come home in better moods sets the scene for the author to provide a little insight into the girls motivations. Megs burden is that she remembers when the family was financially well off, and she misses having pretty things and nice clothes. She works as a governess for a number of children who, she feels, do not appreciate her or make it worth bothering to look pretty. However, at the Kings home, she daily sees all the things that she is having to do without, and, we are told, it sometimes makes her a little bitter. Jos burden is the childless Aunt March with whom she spends her days. The elderly woman had offered to adopt one of the girls when trouble came to the family, and was for some time offended at being turned down. However, Jo suited her, and was thus taken on as a companion. One of the attractions to Aunt Marchs house is the large library that had belonged to Uncle March. Aunt March, however, usually wants Jo to read books of historical and political essays that the teenage girl finds impossibly dull. Beths burden is one of such extreme shyness that she is unable to attend school. She amuses herself with domestic chores, home-study and caring for her collection of dolls. She seems to be very fragile and utterly selfless, but she does cry in private over her longing for music lessons. She plays the ancient tuneless instrument they have, but loves music and hopes that some day she will have a fine piano. Amys burden is primarily one of vanity, somewhat like Meg, but perhaps a little more self-centered. She thinks her nose is too flat, and has to wear her cousins hand-me-down clothes which-to her artistic sensibilities-are tasteless and in all the wrong colors for her. That evening each girl recounts her day, airing all of her complaints. Jo accidentally gave herself an opportunity to read a more interesting book to Aunt March when she laughed aloud over a funny section in \"Vicar Wakefield.\" The Kings seemed to have been engaged in domestic quarreling when Meg arrived. Amy bemoans a carnelian ring that a girl in school was showing off. Beths experience of the day is positive; she had gone to the fish market for her Hannah and had seen a poor woman who was offering to clean the store for food for her children. The store owner refused her, but Mr. Laurence was also there and he purchased a slab of fish for her. Marmee finishes off the chapter and the day by giving the girls a little sermon about appreciating the blessings they have and by pointing out the lessons in each girls adventure.", "analysis": ""}