{"name": "Chapter 9", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210508135841/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/hound-of-the-baskervilles/summary/chapter-9", "summary": "The next morning, Watson looks out Barrymore's secret window. He sees that this window gives the best view of the moor. Watson mentions Barrymore's late night activities to Sir Henry, who isn't surprised. In fact, Sir Henry has also heard Barrymore going around late at night. They decide to stay up that night and follow Barrymore. Sir Henry prepares to go out for a walk on the moor, and Watson gets ready to go with him. Sir Henry's like, three's company, man. Don't crowd me, I've got business on the moor. Watson is embarrassed to be a third wheel, since it's clear that Sir Henry's trying to go on a date. But Holmes did insist that Watson shouldn't let Sir Henry leave the house on his own. So Watson follows secretly, some distance behind him. He sees Sir Henry meeting with Beryl Stapleton. As Watson keeps a lookout, he sees the two lovebirds jump apart. He watches as Stapleton comes running up, enraged.. Stapleton gets all up in Sir Henry's face and then drags Beryl away. Watson appears from his hiding place on top of a nearby hill. Sir Henry's annoyed at Watson's spying. But he's more shocked at Stapleton's bizarre behavior. Why would Stapleton go nuts about Sir Henry proposing to Beryl? That afternoon, Stapleton comes to Baskerville Hall to apologize for his behavior. He invites Sir Henry and Watson to dinner at Merripit House to make up for it. Stapleton explains why he flipped out at the idea of Beryl and Sir Henry getting together. Apparently, he's just a lonely guy who's come to depend on his sister's company to keep him from getting too isolated. He hadn't noticed that Beryl and Sir Henry were growing close, and he was taken by surprise to hear of their potential engagement. He has no real objection, but he asks Sir Henry to give him three months to get used to the idea. Sir Henry agrees, and so he and Beryl are now engaged... to be engaged. Sir Henry and Watson now turn their attention back to Barrymore. Two nights later, they catch him again standing at the window with his lamp. Barrymore claims that it isn't his place to say why he's holding a candle to the window. As Barrymore speaks, they spot another light out on the moors. When Barrymore moves his candle, the other light also moves. A signal. Sir Henry fires Barrymore on the spot and accuses him of plotting against him. Suddenly, Mrs. Barrymore appears: she swears that they are not planning to harm Sir Henry. Barrymore tries to calm her, but she insists on explaining: the signal is for her brother. Mrs. Barrymore's brother is none other than--Selden, the insane escaped prisoner. Mrs. Barrymore explains that, even after everything that Selden's done, when he turned up at their doorstep shivering and alone, she couldn't leave him to die out on the moors. Sir Henry forgives Barrymore for standing by his wife, and rehires him as butler. He sends the Barrymores off to bed, and promises they'll talk over things in the morning. After the Barrymores leave, Watson and Sir Henry look out the window. They can still see Selden's candle burning out on the moor. Watson guesses that he's hiding about a mile or two away. Sir Henry and Watson decide to go out and capture Selden, since a psychotic murderer could be a danger to the community. Ya think? Watson brings his gun, and they set off in the direction of the light. Suddenly, they hear that low, moaning howl that Watson heard on the moor that afternoon with Stapleton. Sir Henry sounds frightened when he asks Watson what the local people say about that sound. Watson tries to play it off as no big deal, but finally he has to admit: it's the howl of the Hound of the Baskervilles. Sir Henry starts to sound very superstitious about this Hound business. They spot Selden just as he seems to realize that he's been found. He takes off across the moor. Sir Henry and Watson chase after him, but he's had too much of a head start. As they're standing on the moor, Watson sees a tall figure of another man outlined against the moon. A split second later, the man is gone.", "analysis": ""}