{"name": "Chapter 12", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210508135841/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/hound-of-the-baskervilles/summary/chapter-12", "summary": "Surprise! The mysterious man on the hill is none other than Holmes. Watson gets upset when he realizes that Holmes has been deliberately keeping him in the dark. And what about all those reports, which he so carefully wrote up and sent off to London? Holmes tries to make nice. He says he trusts Watson completely. But he also worried that Watson wouldn't have been able to resist making contact with Holmes on the moors. And Holmes has been getting the reports--he arranged to have them delivered back to him on the moors from London. Holmes is fascinated by Watson's account of his conversation with Laura Lyons. Holmes knows that Stapleton and Laura Lyons have been hooking up. Holmes drops another bombshell: Beryl is actually Mrs. Stapleton. She's his wife, not his sister! Stapleton is the one who followed Sir Henry in London, and Beryl's the one who sent that warning to Sir Henry at his hotel. Holmes knows that Stapleton's pose as an unmarried man helped him enlist Laura in his plotting. And Laura's desperate for divorce money now because she believes that she can marry him. Holmes is almost ready to charge Stapleton with murder. But he needs Watson to wait at Baskerville Hall with Sir Henry for at least another day or two. Just as Holmes says this, they hear a horrible scream over the moors, followed by the growling of a dog. Holmes fears that they may be too late. At the side of a cliff, they find a body with a crushed skull. It's Sir Henry Baskerville. Besides feeling guilty that they were on the moors and still failed to save Sir Henry, Holmes is deeply frustrated. Even though Holmes and Watson are both sure that Stapleton is involved with the Hound murders, there's no definite proof linking him to the Baskerville deaths. Holmes goes over to the body to carry it to the hall. But suddenly, he starts dancing around and shaking Watson's hand. It's not Sir Henry at all! The body has a beard! In fact, the body belongs to Selden. Watson remembers that Sir Henry gave some of his old clothes to Barrymore; Barrymore probably passed them on to Selden. Stapleton's dog has obviously been trained to react to Sir Henry's smell, which lead him to attack Selden in Sir Henry's clothes. They see someone smoking and strolling towards them: it's Stapleton. Stapleton turns pale when he sees the body, since he realizes that it's not Sir Henry. Stapleton claims he invited Sir Henry to walk over to Merripit House and then got worried when he never turned up. Stapleton asks suspiciously if anybody heard the sounds of a dog, since the moors are supposed to be haunted. Neither Holmes nor Watson gives any sign that they might know why Stapleton's so interested in this mysterious dog. Watson claims to believe that Selden died from madness and stress, which drove him over a cliff. Holmes also pretends that he plans to go back to London the next day, since this has \"not been a satisfactory case\" .", "analysis": ""}