{"name": "Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210508135841/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/hound-of-the-baskervilles/summary/chapter-10", "summary": "As the chapter title promises us, this is--wait for it--a section of Watson's diary from his time at Baskerville Hall. Shocking, we know. Barrymore and Sir Henry get into it the next morning. Turns out Barrymore's angry that Watson and Sir Henry went to hunt down Selden. Barrymore begs the two men to let Selden go until they can get him on a boat to South America. Watson and Sir Henry agree to leave Selden alone. Barrymore's so grateful that he wants to do something for Sir Henry in return. There's something about Sir Charles' death that Barrymore's been keeping secret. The morning of Sir Charles' death, Barrymore happened to notice him receiving a letter from a nearby town called Coombe Tracey. The letter was written in a woman's handwriting. A few weeks ago, long after Sir Charles' mysterious death, Barrymore was cleaning out the ashes of the fireplace in Sir Charles' study. He found the charred pieces of that letter. He could still read the final lines: \"Please, please, as you are a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate at ten o'clock\" . The letter was signed \"L.L.\" Barrymore hasn't wanted to reveal this because he wanted to protect Sir Charles' rep. But now that Sir Henry has been so kind, Barrymore wants to help him in return. The next day, Watson goes out walking on the moors. As he's heading back to Baskerville Hall, Dr. Mortimer drives past him in a cart. Dr. Mortimer tells Watson that there is a woman with the initials \"L.L.\" living in Coombe Tracey: Laura Lyons, the disgraced, disowned daughter of Mr. Frankland. Apparently, she eloped against her father's will with an artist named Lyons, who then left her. After dinner that evening, Watson asks Barrymore if Selden's still around. Barrymore says he last left out food for him three days ago, but hasn't seen him since. Barrymore also mentions that there's someone else out on the moor. Selden has mentioned this other man to Barrymore--the man doesn't seem to be a convict. Selden told Barrymore that this other man is living in the prehistoric ruins, and that a kid from the village brings him food regularly. The moors seem to be just the thing if you need to hide but need to be close enough to a take-out place that delivers.", "analysis": ""}