{"name": "Chapter VI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212012313/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/northangerabbey/section4/", "summary": "This chapter consists primarily of a discussion between Catherine and Isabella. The two have arranged to meet one morning, and Catherine arrives late. She has been up all night reading the Gothic novel The Mysteries of Udolpho, which Isabella had recommended to her. Catherine breathlessly tells Isabella how much she enjoys the novel. She is particularly eager to discover what lies behind the black veil in the novel; she is certain it is a skeleton. Isabella lists nearly a dozen other Gothic novels the pair can read once Catherine has finished Udolpho. The subject turns to Miss Andrews, a friend of Isabella's. Isabella makes a point of informing Catherine that she considers Miss Andrews to be one of the loveliest girls she has ever met, and often threatens not to dance with young men who say otherwise. The impression left on both Catherine and the reader is that Miss Andrews is probably not a very pretty girl, and that Isabella thinks well of herself for saying otherwise. Isabella tells Catherine she would make the same claim if anyone said anything negative about her, since Isabella believes Catherine to be \"just the kind of girl to be a great favorite with the men. The topic then turns to men, and Isabella hints that she would be attracted to a man of fair complexion and light eyes. Isabella notices two men eyeing the girls, and complains to Catherine about this scandalous behavior. The two men leave, and Isabella proposes they go for a walk. When Catherine points out that this walk would cause them to overtake the two men, Isabella sniffs that she wouldn't give them the satisfaction, and so, the narrator tells us, \"to show the independence of Miss Thorpe, and he resolution of humbling , they set off immediately as fast as they could walk, in pursuit of the two young men.", "analysis": "The important passage in Chapter V is the narrator's direct defense of novel- reading. At the time in England when Austen was writing, novels had a negative connotation for many people, particularly people belonging to the higher classes. The horrific events featured in Gothic novels, and the lurid details of books such as Daniel Defoe's Moll Flanders and Samuel Richardson's Pamela caused the novel, as a form, to gain a poor reputation. Novels were considered a diversion for the lower class. By the late 1790s, this opinion was beginning to change, but novelists, especially female novelists, were still scorned. When Austen began Northanger Abbey, the most famous woman author was Anne Radcliffe, writer of the Gothic horror novels people so disparaged. Here the narrator issues a call to arms, asking us to ignore the snide opinions of the reviewers, and listing the merits of the novel"}