{"name": "Chapter XVI", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210212012313/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/northangerabbey/section15/", "summary": "Henry asks the Morlands for Catherine's hand in marriage. They are surprised, but they quickly give their consent to the marriage. However, in order to be proper, they refuse to allow the marriage until the General has given his own consent. Henry and Catherine also want the General's consent, but they fear that it will be some time before he will break down and agree to the union. Fortunately, in a few months Eleanor becomes engaged and then married to a wealthy noble. This puts the General in a good mood, and when Eleanor and her husband ask the General to allow Henry's marriage, the General agrees--but only after doing some research and discovering that the Morlands are not at all as poor as John Thorpe had claimed they were. The General sends a letter to Mr. Morland giving his assent, and Henry and Catherine are married.", "analysis": "General Tilney and Catherine clash frequently over the course of the novel. Catherine almost always finds the General grumpy and disagreeable, even if he is not a killer. She also dislikes the way he treats his children. It is possible to argue that the climax of the novel occurs when the General sends Catherine away. There is a sense of finality as Catherine exchanges good-byes with Eleanor and leaves without saying goodbye to Henry. We might suspect that this sense of finality is false. The narrator confirms the falsity in Chapter XVI, saying: \"The anxiety. of Henry and Catherine. can hardly extend, I fear, to the bosom of my readers, who will see in the tell-tale compression of the pages. that we are all hastening together to perfect felicity\"). If we read Catherine's dismissal as the climax of the novel, everything that takes place thereafter is falling action. Henry's proposal is quickly tendered to Catherine when he arrives in Fullerton, and we do not get to read the exchange between Catherine and Henry as they get engaged; the narrator sums up the transaction in a few lines. The tone of the last two chapters suggests that the marriage of Henry and Catherine is a foregone conclusion, a loose end that the author needs to tie up. The narrator makes the frank statement that Henry did not become attracted to Catherine until after he realized she was attracted to him, a circumstance \"dreadfully derogatory of an heroine's dignity. In short, the marriage is not nearly as important as Catherine's personal progression. The marriage seems almost a happy ending tacked on to placate the reader. The true journey of the novel is Catherine's coming of age"}