{"name": "Chapter XIX", "summary": "Chapter XIX. Night falls. Alan and David arrive at the house of James of the Glens, where members of the Stewart clan are busy hiding weapons by digging them into the moss, in anticipation of a raid by King George's forces seeking the culprit of Campbell's murder. James is angry and worried because he thinks that the Appin Stewarts will be blamed. As head of the remaining clan in Scotland, he himself may be blamed. He fears what might happen to his family if he is arrested and charged. James gives Alan and David a sword and pistols, and David a new set of clothes to help him evade capture. Neither Alan nor David has much money, as Alan has given his money belt with the Appin rents to another messenger to take to France. James wants Alan and David to leave quickly, as if they are blamed for the murder, King George's forces will also blame James for harboring them. James feels he has no choice but to \"paper\"  Alan and David, in order to make it appear that he is not a co-conspirator in the murder. James says that if the soldiers come looking for Alan and David, he will have to give them a description of David. Alan is shocked that James would help David to a new set of clothes only to betray him by describing them to his pursuers. But James says he would only describe David's old, now discarded clothes. David indignantly says he cannot understand why the true culprit should not be \"papered,\" rather than himself and Alan, two innocent men. But Alan and James are horrified by David's suggestion, as such an action would endanger the member of the Cameron clan who, they appear to believe, did the murder. David is bewildered at what he thinks is illogical reasoning. David reluctantly agrees to be \"papered,\" telling James that he would risk himself to be helpful to any friend of Alan. James's wife is overcome with gratitude to David. Alan and David leave James of the Glens's house and continue on their flight through \"the heather\"", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter19-24"}