{"name": "Chapter XV", "summary": "Chapter XV. David wades across the creek to the mainland, called the Ross of Mull, and aims for a house from which he had seen smoke rising during his time on the island. An old man is sitting outside the house, and tells David that his shipmates have come safely ashore and eaten a meal in his house the day before. Alan is one of them, and he has told the old man to expect \"the lad with the silver button\" - David. Alan has left a message for David to follow him to his own country, near Torosay. The old man and his wife feed David well and give him a bed for the night. Next day, David leaves with a good impression of these \"wild Highlanders. As he walks through the countryside, he is struck by the poverty of the Highlanders. As they have been forbidden by law since the Jacobite rebellion to wear their Highland dress of tartan, they have improvised with whatever clothes they can lay hands on. That evening, David has to give a householder five shillings in return for a bed for the night and to be guided to Torosay the next day. The following morning, the man takes David to a \"rich\" man in order to get change for one of David's guineas. The first man, David's guide, gets drunk and refuses to start out until the next day. Along the road, the man refuses to go any further unless David gives him more money. Not two miles further, the man again wants more money before he will go further. David gets angry and moves to strike the man, who pulls a knife on him. David deflects the knife, knocks the man down, and continues on his way alone. David overtakes a blind man who claims to be a catechist, or religious instructor. David notices that he is illegally carrying a pistol in his coat. He keeps edging closer to David, who is suspicious of him. David tells him  that he is carrying a pistol, too, and threatens to shoot him if he does not leave him alone. The man walks off. David reaches Torosay and speaks to an innkeeper, who tells him that the blind man is a well-known robber and murderer", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter13-18"}