{"name": "Chapter VI", "summary": "Chapter VI. While Ebenezer and Hoseason talk business in an upstairs room, Ebenezer sends David downstairs to amuse himself. David walks to the beach and chats to some of the sailors, who are a rough bunch of men. Then he talks to the landlord of the inn, who calls Ebenezer a wicked old man. He says that Jennet Clouston is not the only person who has been driven out of her home by Ebenezer. He also says that there is a rumor that Ebenezer killed David's father to get the house of Shaws. The landlord adds that David's father was the eldest son. David is stunned by this news of his good fortune: he is the heir to the estate. Ebenezer and Hoseason emerge from their meeting. Hoseason invites David on board the Covenant, saying he will set him ashore at the town pier, near Rankeillor's house. He whispers in David's ear that Ebenezer \"means mischief\" towards him. David has always wanted to see the inside of a ship, and is convinced by Hoseason's warning that he is an ally, so steps aboard the Covenant. Immediately, the ship casts off. David sees Ebenezer in a separate boat heading for the town. David cries out, and Ebenezer turns to look at him, his face full of \"cruelty and terror. At that moment, David is knocked unconscious. Analysis of Chapters I-VI. In Kidnapped, Stevenson often uses foreshadowing, an element introduced into the story that predicts future events, to create a sense of suspense. The first major example of foreshadowing occurs when David asks passers-by directions to the house of Shaws, and they give an overwhelmingly negative impression of the place and its laird, Ebenezer Balfour. These negative responses reach a mini-climax in the melodramatic curse of Jennet Clouston, which shocks David in its violence. Such warnings are, of course, a typical element of gothic novels and the horror and suspense genres: the innocent stranger, when approaching the place of evil, is advised against going there by local inhabitants. Such foreshadowing sets up an expectation in the reader that something bad is going to happen to the innocent character in that place, and make the reader want to find out exactly what. Another example of foreshadowing comes in Chapter IV. David feels that he is like a character in an old ballad, \"of a poor lad that was a rightful heir and a wicked kinsman that tried to keep him from his own. David's intuition summarizes the story of Kidnapped. David's comment is also an example of a character transcending the usual limitations of his role and standing outside his situation, looking at it from a privileged viewpoint. In this instance, he takes on the role of a particularly prescient reader, who knows what will happen to a character in advance. However, David's prescience in this instance does not prevent him from falling into Ebenezer's traps: the first time, he narrowly escapes death through luck when a lightning strike illuminates his dangerous position in the stair-tower; and the second time, he fails to escape when he is tricked aboard the Covenant and kidnapped. The reader is entitled to ask whether David is unusually naive. In David's defense, he is only sixteen; he has lived a sheltered life among well-meaning people and is not used to dealing with evil-natured people; and it is reasonable for him to expect a relative  to be kindly disposed towards him. In addition, David is an orphan, and it is natural for him to desire to find a parent-figure to stand in the place of the father he has just lost. It is his tragedy that the person best placed to take on the paternal role - Ebenezer - is, in fact, trying to do away with him. David's immaturity  shows in the dangerous pride that blinds him as a result of foiling Ebenezer's plot to have him fall to his death from the stairs. I saw myself in fancy smell out his secrets one after another, and grow to be that man's king and ruler,\" reflects David in Chapter V. In the light of what follows, there is much irony in this, as what actually happens is the opposite. David may have momentarily got the better of Ebenezer, but he does not know that he is about to be kidnapped and sold into slavery on Ebenezer's orders. He makes the mistake of submitting once again to Ebenezer's direction in leaving the house before Ebenezer has explained his story. David's mistaken thoughts about gaining control over his uncle show his naivety, as well as highlighting the dangers of pride, which frequently comes before a fall. In a deft psychological touch by Stevenson, David falls into the kidnapping trap for two convincingly realistic reasons. The first is that, while Ebenezer is something of a storybook villain - a ragged, mean and miserly old man living in a run-down house - Captain Hoseason is a respectable-seeming man with polite and hospitable manners. To David, he must seem a welcome contrast to Ebenezer, to such an extent that he is eager to assume that he is a good man. The second reason is that Hoseason quietly warns David that Ebenezer \"means mischief,\" and invites him aboard the Covenant in order to tell him more. Thus Hoseason has all the appearance of being an ally for David against a common enemy, Ebenezer. However, David makes a serious mistake in leaving Hoseason and Ebenezer alone in conversation while going off to look at the ship. Overcome by the heat in Hoseason's room, David is drawn instead to an essentially childish activity, which helps to blind him to the fact that his life and liberty are at risk. The reader, in another example of foreshadowing, has been warned of the fate that awaits David on board the Covenant by hearing Ransome's account of the brutalities of the crew and the wound that he received from Mr. Shuan. The name of the ship, the Covenant, merits some discussion. A covenant is a one-way agreement or promise. Hoseason and the crew of the Covenant keep, and break, certain promises. In tricking David into coming aboard the ship, Hoseason breaks an unspoken covenant that was traditionally held dear in Scotland  - that of hospitality to the stranger. Hoseason offers David \"a bowl\" of food or drink, tobacco, or anything he wishes, but he dishonors this covenant because his real motive is to lure David into his power. Hoseason also breaks the implicit covenant of common humanity that should prevent him from doing harm to David, who is little more than a boy. But neither of these spiritual covenants have any power over Hoseason because he has signed a worldly covenant with Ebenezer: to sell David into white slavery in the Carolinas. This is the one covenant that he intends to keep. It is governed by greed, not by humanity. In the light of the slavery plot, it is noteworthy that Hoseason offers David various gifts from the Carolinas, such as Indian featherwork and tobacco. With these gifts, he is symbolically buying David's liberty - and his innocence. Hoseason here takes on something of the flavor of the devil in a morality play, who tempts man with promises of worldly goods in exchange for his soul. The name of Ransome, too, has symbolic resonance. The cabin boy has ransomed  his innocence for the dubious rewards of his job on the Covenant", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter1-6"}