{"name": "Chapter IX", "summary": "Chapter IX. The Covenant runs into a boat. There is one survivor, who is brought aboard. The man is a Scot dressed in fine French clothes. In conversation with Hoseason, the man reveals that he is a Jacobite, or supporter of the Stewart/Stuart claim to the English throne. The Jacobites were Catholics. The man says that he fought against the English in the Jacobite Rising of 1745 , and that he would be in danger if he were found by any of the \"red-coated gentry\". While Hoseason is a Protestant and thus a supporter of the Hanoverian monarchy, he is willing to negotiate with the man to put him safely ashore in return for payment. The man explains that the money he is carrying is not his. He has collected it from poor tenant farmers to support their chieftain, the head of the Stewart clan, who is in exile in France. The chieftain's estate has been confiscated by King George's army, in common with the lands of many Jacobite clan chiefs. The man asks Hoseason to put him ashore in France, but Hoseason says he cannot. Hoseason agrees for a fee to put the man ashore in Scotland. Although the man is a Jacobite and David has been brought up a Whig, David finds the man interesting. David overhears Hoseason and Riach plotting to kill the man and steal his money-belt. Their problem is that the all the weapons are in the round-house, where the man is. They ask David to pick up some weapons when he next goes into the round-house, promising to help him in return when they get to Carolina. David returns to the round-house and tells the man that this is a ship full of murderers and that he will be the next one to be killed. The man introduces himself as Alan Breck Stewart, a member of the Stewart clan. Alan and David agree to fight together against Hoseason and his men. Alan will guard the main door to the round-house with his sword, and David will guard the rear door and skylight with the pistols", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter7-12"}