{"name": "Act III, scenes i-ii", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210131091930/https://www.sparknotes.com/shakespeare/richardii/section8/", "summary": "At Bristol Castle in southwestern England, a short distance south of Berkeley Castle, Henry Bolingbroke and his men have apprehended Bushy and Greene, who remain loyal to King Richard. Bolingbroke accuses them of having \"misled a prince\"--that is, of having given Richard deliberately bad advice--and recites a list of charges against them: he says that they have stirred up trouble between the king and his queen and that their advice was the reason that Richard \"misinterpret\" Bolingbroke and subsequently banished him . He thus condemns them to be executed. Bushy and Greene are defiant but resigned; Northumberland leads them away to die. Having dispatched this piece of business, Bolingbroke sends greetings to Queen Isabel via the Duke of York, at whose house she is staying, and gathers up his men to fight some rebellious Welsh before heading to the main battle. Meanwhile, King Richard has landed on the coast of Wales, at \"Barkloughly\" Castle , accompanied by the Duke of Aumerle, the Bishop of Carlisle, and some soldiers. Richard greets the earth and air of England in poetic terms. Aumerle points out that, while they delay, Bolingbroke grows stronger in power. Richard responds, in powerful language, that since he is the rightful king, no rebel stands a chance; God is on their side, and they will easily sweep Bolingbroke out of England. Lord Salisbury enters, and, grieving, delivers terrible news to Richard: only the day before, the army of twelve thousand men of Wales, believing Richard to be dead, dispersed from where they had been waiting for him and fled to Bolingbroke. Richard is now without an army. Richard momentarily succumbs to despair, but then recovers his royal self-assurance. Lord Scroope then enters to give Richard the news that, as Bolingbroke made his way through England, all the common people acknowledged him as lord and joined his forces--men, women and children alike. Richard asks Scroope what has happened to his allies--Bagot, Bushy, Greene, and the Earl of Wiltshire. Whe Scroope tells him that they have \"made peace with Bolingbroke\" , Richard curses and damns them in ferocious terms--but then Scroope explains that he means they have been executed. Richard gives a long, eloquent, and despairing monologue, but the Bishop of Carlisle tells him to recover hope: giving in to fear and despair, he say, will do the enemy's work for him. Richard agrees, and declares that he will ride against Bolingbroke despite his losses. But Scroope has yet more bad news: the Duke of York has defected to Bolingbroke, too, and all the King's castles in the north and his allies in the south are in Bolingbroke's possession or on his side. Richard, hearing this and realizing that he has no hope left, announces his final intention to give in to despair and declares that he will go to Flint Castle, in northeastern Wales, to \"pine away\" .", "analysis": "ii - Commentary Act III, scene i, in which Bushy and Greene are executed, is brief but serves two important purposes. First, it shows us the escalation of events that is building towards the inevitable outcome of the war: King Richard's capitulation to Bolingbroke at Flint Castle in Act III, scene iii. Richard's supporters have defected from, him one by one--or have been executed. From here, there is no turning back. Second, the way in which Bolingbroke justifies his execution of Richard's two friends points to an important issue surrounding Bolingbroke's invasion of England--the issue of hypocrisy, and the importance of that which is never stated aloud. Note that Bolingbroke arrests and executes Bushy and Greene in the name of the king. He continues to claim loyalty to the king and refers to him only in terms of respect. \"You have misled,\" he says to the men, \"... a royal king, / A happy gentlemen in blood and lineaments, / By you unhappied and disfigured clean\" . He implies that Richard is a good kind who has been led astray, and that he  is actually attempting to protect the king by disposing of his corrupt and wicked advisors. However, everyone involved--Bolingbroke, his followers, Bushy and Greene, and the play's readers--know that Bolingbroke's intentions are not nearly so pure: his real motivation for executing Bushy and Greene is to weaken Richard so that Bolingbroke himself can take the crown. As in the scenes of political challenge in Act I, scene i, and of duel and banishment in Act I, scene iii, the real political maneuverings here are never openly acknowledged. Instead, they are masked by a wall of words. Act III, scene ii, which shows us Richard's return from Ireland and his discovery that he has lost England in his absence, is one of the most crucial scenes in the play. It marks a transformation for Richard: from here on in, the king who has spoken so carelessly and rudely, and who has ignored the words of so many of his advisors, will metamorphose into a brilliant and effective poet, often considered one of Shakespeare's most eloquent characters. From here until the end of the play Richard's poetry will become increasingly exalted, and his wordplay obviously superior to that of anyone around him. At the same time, however, he will become increasingly self-absorbed and abstracted from the realities around him. Richard's speeches in this scene address one of the play's central themes: What is a king? Is he divinely anointed and invulnerable, or merely a human being like any other? At the beginning of the scene, Richard is secure in his divine power as King--the same power that John of Gaunt respected in Act I, scene ii, when he refused to rise against him. Richard tells Aumerle, \"Not all the water in the rough rude sea / Can wash the balm off from an anointed king; / The breath of worldly men cannot depose / The deputy elected by the Lord\" . This is a thoroughly medieval way of thinking about kingship--the king as a direct deputy of God, immortal and invulnerable. But, as Richard learns that he has already lost his kingdom, his rhetoric changes rapidly: \"Our lands, our lives, and all, are Bolingbroke's... / hrow away respect, / Tradition, form, and ceremonious duty; / For you have but mistook me all this while. / I live with bread like you, feel want, / Taste grief, need friends\" ."}