{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 34", "summary": "Chapter 34: By Christmas everything is settled. Jane has left the school to a substitute, and promises to visit and teach, as she sees that some of the students do like her. Mr. St. John asks Jane what she will do now, and she replies that she is going to get the house ready for Diana and Mary's return by cleaning it thoroughly and buying some new things. He says that this will not keep her busy long and she will have to do more after, and she wonders why he is trying to stir up restlessness in her. St. John arrives first on the day all are to come home. He does not speak much to Jane or say anything pleasurable about what she has done with the house. Jane realizes that he would not make a good husband, and that it is a good thing that he and Miss Oliver did not marry. Jane relates that he does not treat her like a sister as he said he would, but that the distance between them has grown. Diana and Mary arrive home, and all are happy to see each other. They compliment Jane on what she had done to the home. A few days later when they are all studying in the library, St. John tells Jane that he wants her to stop learning German and to learn Hindustani instead. He says that it is the language he is learning for his missionary work, and that it would be a help to him to remember how it was when he started learning the language. She complies, but soon feels that she is doing only what he wants and burying a part of herself. Jane often thinks of Mr. Rochester and even writes to the solicitor to see if he knows anything about him. When he writes back that he does not, Jane writes to Mrs. Fairfax. When she does not receive a reply, she writes again, thinking perhaps her letter was lost, but again she gets no reply. One day St. John tells Jane that she will take a walk with him. St. John asks Jane to come to India with him, and tells her that God had intended her to be a missionary's wife. Jane makes many excuses, but St. John has an answer for all of them, continuing to try to convince her. After a few thoughts, Jane tells him that she will go with him, but as his sister, not his wife. He replies that this is impossible, and that she must marry him. She continues to refuse, saying that they do not love each other, and he replies that she is not refusing him, but God. He tells her that he will be going away for a fortnight to bid farewell to friends and that she should think about it. Later in the evening, when Jane asks if he forgives her, he replies that he had not been offended", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020200836/https://www.novelguide.com/jane-eyre/summaries/chap33-34"}