{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 20", "summary": "Chapter 20: In the middle of the night Jane hears a shrill cry from the end of the hall. It is coming from the third story, and she can hear someone yelling 'Help,' and calling for Rochester. She hears someone running and the noise stopping, but soon all of the guests are awake and wondering what is going on. Rochester returns from the end of the hall and tells everyone that one of the servants had had a bad dream. All go back to bed except Jane, who dresses and waits in case she should be called. A while later there is a tap at the door and Rochester asks her to come with a sponge and some smelling salts. He takes her to Mason, whose arm is bleeding, and tells her to stay with him, wipe his blood, and use the smelling salts to keep him awake while he runs for the surgeon. He warns each of them not to talk to the other at all. It seems like a long time, and Jane is scared that someone will come out of the third story for them, but finally Rochester returns. When the surgeon unwraps Mason's arm it is seen that there are bite marks there. Mason says that she had bit him, and Rochester says that he had told him to be careful and not to see her alone. The surgeon patches up Mason and they leave Thornfield. Jane and Rochester are then walking out to get some fresh air until the others awaken. Jane wonders to Rochester why he keeps Grace Poole there, as she thinks it is she that causes the trouble. He tells Jane not to worry about her. Rochester asks Jane to suppose hypothetically that there is a boy who causes a capital error, the results of which had been bad, and that he takes unusual measures to rid himself of the error. When the boy meets a new friend, is he justified in overleaping this obstacle. Should the man risk the world's opinion to attach himself to this other. Jane answers that it should not be the world's opinion that he is worried about, but that he should look higher than his equals for solace. The guests start rising, and Jane and Rochester leave the garden in different directions", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020200836/https://www.novelguide.com/jane-eyre/summaries/chap19-20"}