{"name": "Chapter 32", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227010035/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/typee/section9/", "summary": "After everyone starts badgering Tommo about getting tattooed, he feels alone and melancholy once again. His leg injury also painfully returns. He now has been with the Typees for about three months. One day, while in this unhappy frame of mind, he returns home to find Marheyo and some other men examining a package that normally is tied to the inside roof. Tommo previously wondered what was in that package. Now he sees that it holds three shrunken human heads, shriveled and preserved. Two of the heads are native, but one is European. The men quickly rewrap the packet and Kory-Kory starts promptly offering excuses. Tommo knows what he saw however. He again starts considering his fate, since if the Typees killed that white man they might kill him. Furthermore, Tommo wonders whether the head actually belongs to Toby, but he did not look at it long enough to know whether it was Toby's. About a week after seeing the heads, another fight with the Happars breaks out. Tommo remains in the village as the warriors all rush off. Sometime later, some injured Typees return carrying the bodies of several slain Happars. These bodies are deposited at Ti by the royal Mehevi. The other Typees surround the bodies and everyone is in an uproar. Tommo feels excited to see what will happen, but suddenly Kory-Kory touches his arm and indicates that they are going home. Tommo gestures that he does not want to go. Another fearsome looking chief, Mow- Mow, who lost one eye in a battle, angrily indicates that Tommo must leave. Kory-Kory and Tommo go. Back in the village, Tommo keeps trying to find out what is happening, but Kory-Kory watches him closely and he is not allowed to know. The next day everyone is in a festive mood. They walk and dress up in fine clothing, as they did for the Feast of the Calabashes. They all head towards Ti, but Tommo must stay home with Kory-Kory despite his efforts to do otherwise. Later in the day, he observes that everyone has returned home explaining that the feast was not for them. He then decides that, as he had heard earlier, it is the custom for the chiefs to eat the bodies of the slain enemies, not for everyone to do so, and this likely is what they are doing now. Tommo has to wait until the middle of the next day to visit the Ti. He finds nothing out of order, but sees a vessel in the center of the square. He manages to shift the lid of the vessel enough to get a glance. Inside, he sees a partially eaten body. The chiefs start wailing \"taboo,\" but Tommo knows what he saw. Now that he is sure that the Typees are cannibals, he thinks more about escape", "analysis": ""}