{"name": "Chapter 11", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210227010035/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/typee/section3/", "summary": "When Tommo wakes, it is broad day and a group of young girls are sitting around him, almost making him uncomfortable in their familiarity. Mehevi soon appears. Intricate tattoos cover him and he wears fine native gear, such as a necklace of boar tusks. Mehevi eagerly jumps into conversation about French people and other subjects, which Tommo manages to handle despite his limited language skills. When Mehevi notices the swelling on Tommo's leg, he summons a local healer. This healer abuses the injury with a wooden hammer, before placing some healing herbs on it. Mehevi then appoints a man from the house, Kory-Kory, to be the narrator's servant and he leaves. Kory-Kory is about twenty-five years old, moderately tattooed, and has a bizarre hairstyle with two large tufts of hair growing out of an otherwise shaven head. Kory-Kory's father, Marheyo, also lives in the house as does his mother, Tinor, a hardworking woman who is an expert at preparing \"poee-poee\", or a breadfruit dish. Some other young men and women also live there, but most notable is Fayaway, a beautiful young woman who captures the narrator's heart. The narrator finds Fayaway to be the loveliest women in Typee, with long brown hair, olive skin, and blue eyes. He sees her as a virtual child of Eden.", "analysis": "Toby and the narrator, who can now be called Tommo even though that is not his true name, finally have come into the heart of the valley. Their descent took much physical effort and their physical struggle has symbolic significance as well. In getting from the boat, to the mountain, and into the valley, the men have moved from European civilization into a Polynesian world. Since the Polynesian valley is a virtual Paradise, this move requires not simply physical steps but also a psychological preparation to enter a culture that exists in a purer state than European civilization. As such, the motif of childhood and regression continues as Toby and Tommo make their descent. Many critics have found their scaling down the lush ravine to contain an especially symbolic effect, comparing the act of descent to that of re-entering a mother's womb. This ravine itself physically resembles female genitalia; by carefully climbing down it, the men enter the womb of the Typee valley. The idea of being at the original point of birth  exists on a general spectrum--as the valley is Paradise, Tommo and Toby must return to the theoretical womb of humanity, to what humans were first meant to be before they contracted the complications of civilization. Aside from the symbolic meaning of the descent, the scene is also a great one from an adventure book. Their amazing actions would fascinate readers in far off lands. They are swinging from vine to vine and some of the vines occasionally slip, leaving them dangerously dangling over a precipice. They see crystalline cataracts and jump off a cliff onto a tree that will break their fall. The difficulties of their descent intensifies the suspense of their actions. As they go down, the crucial questions still remain--Typee or Happar. The suspense of this question continues all the way until chief Mehevi himself asks it of Tommo. Tommo instinctively changes his mind and answers \"Typee\" and it is a good thing that he does. Instead of meeting an unknown fate for supplying the wrong answer, he is immediately offered open hospitality by a group of friendly Typees. The suspense of the Happar-Typee question has been resolved, but much puzzlement still remains. What will happen to Tommo and Toby now that they are with the Typees. And why are the Typees acting with such hospitality when they are supposed to be brutes. A great many questions still remain unanswered and these further propel the suspense of the plot, even after the remarkably suspenseful descent that led Tommo and Toby to the village in the first place. The characteristics of the natives that Tommo and Toby meet all continue the metaphor of paradise. The first natives that Tommo and Toby see are a young boy and girl--perhaps the most classic form of Paradise, two young, almost naked bodies, nearly in the form of Adam and Eve. The loveliness of Fayaway continues to perpetuate the idea of a perfectly formed female figure. Tommo dwells heavily on Fayaway's physical person, with her blue eyes, dark tresses, and olive skin. Fayaway shall represent the most innocent and pure of all the Typees. She is the virtual child of Eden whose relationship with Tommo will draw him closely into the paradise of the Typee valley. Mehevi, as well, is a classic figure from a nearby perfect world. Mehevi embodies the \"noble savage. He is a native, what Europeans could call \"savage,\" but he possesses an innate form of nobility. Although he lacks the trappings of civilization, the high quality of his personality is evident. Mehevi's dignified leadership in this valley of Paradise embodies true humanism and grace, even though Europeans broadly categorize all natives, including the noble Mehevi, simply as barbarians"}