Enter two Gentlemen at seuerall Doores.

1. Whether away so fast?
2. O, God saue ye:
Eu'n to the Hall, to heare what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham

1. Ile saue you
That labour Sir. All's now done but the Ceremony
Of bringing backe the Prisoner

2. Were you there ?
1. Yes indeed was I

2. Pray speake what ha's happen'd

1. You may guesse quickly what

2. Is he found guilty?
1. Yes truely is he,
    And condemn'd vpon't

    2. I am sorry fort

    1. So are a number more

    2. But pray how past it?
    1. Ile tell you in a little. The great Duke
    Came to the Bar; where, to his accusations
    He pleaded still not guilty, and alleadged
    Many sharpe reasons to defeat the Law.
    The Kings Atturney on the contrary,
    Vrg'd on the Examinations, proofes, confessions
    Of diuers witnesses, which the Duke desir'd
    To him brought viua voce to his face;
    At which appear'd against him, his Surueyor
    Sir Gilbert Pecke his Chancellour, and Iohn Car,
    Confessor to him, with that Diuell Monke,
    Hopkins, that made this mischiefe

    2. That was hee
    That fed him with his Prophecies

    1. The same,
    All these accus'd him strongly, which he faine
    Would haue flung from him; but indeed he could not;
    And so his Peeres vpon this euidence,
    Haue found him guilty of high Treason. Much
    He spoke, and learnedly for life: But all
    Was either pittied in him, or forgotten

    2. After all this, how did he beare himselfe?
    1. When he was brought agen to th' Bar, to heare
    His Knell rung out, his Iudgement, he was stir'd
    With such an Agony, he sweat extreamly,
    And somthing spoke in choller, ill, and hasty:
    But he fell to himselfe againe, and sweetly,
    In all the rest shew'd a most Noble patience

    2. I doe not thinke he feares death

    1. Sure he does not,
    He neuer was so womanish, the cause
    He may a little grieue at

    2. Certainly,
    The Cardinall is the end of this

    1. Tis likely,
    By all coniectures: First Kildares Attendure;
Then Deputy of Ireland, who remou'd
Earle Surrey, was sent thither, and in hast too,
      Least he should helpe his Father

      2. That tricke of State
      Was a deepe enuious one,
      1. At his returne,
      No doubt he will requite it; this is noted
      (And generally) who euer the King fauours,
      The Cardnall instantly will finde imployment,
      And farre enough from Court too

      2. All the Commons
      Hate him perniciously, and o' my Conscience
      Wish him ten faddom deepe: This Duke as much
      They loue and doate on: call him bounteous Buckingham,
      The Mirror of all courtesie.
      Enter Buckingham from his Arraignment, Tipstaues before him,
      the Axe with
      the edge towards him, Halberds on each side, accompanied with
      Sir Thomas
      Louell, Sir Nicholas Vaux, Sir Walter Sands, and common people,
      &c.

      1. Stay there Sir,
      And see the noble ruin'd man you speake of

      2. Let's stand close and behold him

      Buck. All good people,
      You that thus farre haue come to pitty me;
Heare what I say, and then goe home and lose me.
I haue this day receiu'd a Traitors iudgement,
  And by that name must dye; yet Heauen beare witnes,
  And if I haue a Conscience, let it sincke me,
  Euen as the Axe falls, if I be not faithfull.
  The Law I beare no mallice for my death,
  T'has done vpon the premises, but Iustice:
  But those that sought it, I could wish more Christians:
  (Be what they will) I heartily forgiue 'em;
  Yet let 'em looke they glory not in mischiefe;
  Nor build their euils on the graues of great men;
  For then, my guiltlesse blood must cry against 'em.
  For further life in this world I ne're hope,
  Nor will I sue, although the King haue mercies
  More then I dare make faults.
  You few that lou'd me,
  And dare be bold to weepe for Buckingham,
  His Noble Friends and Fellowes; whom to leaue
  Is only bitter to him, only dying:
  Goe with me like good Angels to my end,
  And as the long diuorce of Steele fals on me,
  Make of your Prayers one sweet Sacrifice,
  And lift my Soule to Heauen.
  Lead on a Gods name

  Louell. I doe beseech your Grace, for charity
  If euer any malice in your heart
  Were hid against me, now to forgiue me frankly

  Buck. Sir Thomas Louell, I as free forgiue you
  As I would be forgiuen: I forgiue all.
  There cannot be those numberlesse offences
  Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with:
  No blacke Enuy shall make my Graue.
  Commend mee to his Grace:
  And if he speake of Buckingham; pray tell him,
  You met him halfe in Heauen: my vowes and prayers
  Yet are the Kings; and till my Soule forsake,
  Shall cry for blessings on him. May he liue
  Longer then I haue time to tell his yeares;
  Euer belou'd and louing, may his Rule be;
  And when old Time shall lead him to his end,
  Goodnesse and he, fill vp one Monument

  Lou. To th' water side I must conduct your Grace;
  Then giue my Charge vp to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
  Who vndertakes you to your end

  Vaux. Prepare there,
  The Duke is comming: See the Barge be ready;
And fit it with such furniture as suites
The Greatnesse of his Person

Buck. Nay, Sir Nicholas,
    Let it alone; my State now will but mocke me.
    When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable,
    And Duke of Buckingham: now, poore Edward Bohun;
Yet I am richer then my base Accusers,
    That neuer knew what Truth meant: I now seale it;
And with that bloud will make 'em one day groane for't.
My noble Father Henry of Buckingham,
   Who first rais'd head against Vsurping Richard,
   Flying for succour to his Seruant Banister,
   Being distrest; was by that wretch betraid,
   And without Tryall, fell; Gods peace be with him.
   Henry the Seauenth succeeding, truly pittying
   My Fathers losse; like a most Royall Prince
   Restor'd me to my Honours: and out of ruines
   Made my Name once more Noble. Now his Sonne,
   Henry the Eight, Life, Honour, Name and all
   That made me happy; at one stroake ha's taken
   For euer from the World. I had my Tryall,
   And must needs say a Noble one; which makes me
   A little happier then my wretched Father:
   Yet thus farre we are one in Fortunes; both
   Fell by our Seruants, by those Men we lou'd most:
   A most vnnaturall and faithlesse Seruice.
   Heauen ha's an end in all: yet, you that heare me,
   This from a dying man receiue as certaine:
   Where you are liberall of your loues and Councels,
   Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends,
   And giue your hearts to; when they once perceiue
   The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
   Like water from ye, neuer found againe
   But where they meane to sinke ye: all good people
   Pray for me, I must now forsake ye; the last houre
   Of my long weary life is come vpon me:
   Farewell; and when you would say somthing that is sad,
   Speake how I fell.
   I haue done; and God forgiue me.

   Exeunt. Duke and Traine.

   1. O, this is full of pitty; Sir, it cals
   I feare, too many curses on their heads
   That were the Authors

   2. If the Duke be guiltlesse,
   'Tis full of woe: yet I can giue you inckling
   Of an ensuing euill, if it fall,
   Greater then this

   1. Good Angels keepe it from vs:
   What may it be? you doe not doubt my faith Sir?
   2. This Secret is so weighty, 'twill require
   A strong faith to conceale it

   1. Let me haue it:
   I doe not talke much

   2. I am confident;
   You shall Sir: Did you not of late dayes heare
   A buzzing of a Separation
   Betweene the King and Katherine?
   1. Yes, but it held not;
   For when the King once heard it, out of anger
   He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight
   To stop the rumor; and allay those tongues
   That durst disperse it

   2. But that slander Sir,
   Is found a truth now: for it growes agen
   Fresher then e're it was; and held for certaine
   The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinall,
   Or some about him neere, haue out of malice
   To the good Queene, possest him with a scruple
   That will vndoe her: To confirme this too,
   Cardinall Campeius is arriu'd, and lately,
   As all thinke for this busines

   1. Tis the Cardinall;
   And meerely to reuenge him on the Emperour,
   For not bestowing on him at his asking,
   The Archbishopricke of Toledo, this is purpos'd

   2. I thinke
   You haue hit the marke; but is't not cruell,
   That she should feele the smart of this: the Cardinall
   Will haue his will, and she must fall

   1. 'Tis wofull.
   Wee are too open heere to argue this:
   Let's thinke in priuate more.

   Exeunt.


