Enter Anne Bullen, and an old Lady.

An. Not for that neither; here's the pang that pinches.
His Highnesse, hauing liu'd so long with her, and she
So good a Lady, that no Tongue could euer
Pronounce dishonour of her; by my life,
          She neuer knew harme-doing: Oh, now after
          So many courses of the Sun enthroaned,
          Still growing in a Maiesty and pompe, the which
          To leaue, a thousand fold more bitter, then
          'Tis sweet at first t' acquire. After this Processe.
          To giue her the auaunt, it is a pitty
          Would moue a Monster

          Old La. Hearts of most hard temper
          Melt and lament for her

          An. Oh Gods will, much better
          She ne're had knowne pompe; though't be temporall,
          Yet if that quarrell. Fortune, do diuorce
          It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance, panging
          As soule and bodies seuering

          Old L. Alas poore Lady,
          Shee's a stranger now againe

          An. So much the more
          Must pitty drop vpon her; verily
          I sweare, tis better to be lowly borne,
          And range with humble liuers in Content,
          Then to be perk'd vp in a glistring griefe,
          And weare a golden sorrow

          Old L. Our content
          Is our best hauing

          Anne. By my troth, and Maidenhead,
          I would not be a Queene

          Old.L. Beshrew me, I would,
          And venture Maidenhead for't, and so would you
          For all this spice of your Hipocrisie:
          You that haue so faire parts of Woman on you,
          Haue (too) a Womans heart, which euer yet
          Affected Eminence, Wealth, Soueraignty;
          Which, to say sooth, are Blessings; and which guifts
          (Sauing your mincing) the capacity
          Of your soft Chiuerell Conscience, would receiue,
          If you might please to stretch it

          Anne. Nay, good troth

          Old L. Yes troth, & troth; you would not be a Queen?
          Anne. No, not for all the riches vnder Heauen

          Old.L. Tis strange; a threepence bow'd would hire me
          Old as I am, to Queene it: but I pray you,
          What thinke you of a Dutchesse? Haue you limbs
          To beare that load of Title?
          An. No in truth

          Old.L. Then you are weakly made; plucke off a little,
          I would not be a young Count in your way,
          For more then blushing comes to: If your backe
          Cannot vouchsafe this burthen, tis too weake
          Euer to get a Boy

          An. How you doe talke;
          I sweare againe, I would not be a Queene,
          For all the world

          Old.L. In faith, for little England
          You'ld venture an emballing: I my selfe
          Would for Carnaruanshire, although there long'd
          No more to th' Crowne but that: Lo, who comes here?
          Enter Lord Chamberlaine.

          L.Cham. Good morrow Ladies; what wer't worth to know
          The secret of your conference?
          An. My good Lord,
          Not your demand; it values not your asking:
          Our Mistris Sorrowes we were pittying

          Cham. It was a gentle businesse, and becomming
          The action of good women, there is hope
          All will be well

          An. Now I pray God, Amen

          Cham. You beare a gentle minde, & heau'nly blessings
          Follow such Creatures. That you may, faire Lady
          Perceiue I speake sincerely, and high notes
          Tane of your many vertues; the Kings Maiesty
          Commends his good opinion of you, to you; and
          Doe's purpose honour to you no lesse flowing,
          Then Marchionesse of Pembrooke; to which Title,
          A Thousand pound a yeare, Annuall support,
          Out of his Grace, he addes

          An. I doe not know
          What kinde of my obedience, I should tender;
          More then my All, is Nothing: Nor my Prayers
          Are not words duely hallowed; nor my Wishes
          More worth, then empty vanities: yet Prayers & Wishes
          Are all I can returne. 'Beseech your Lordship,
          Vouchsafe to speake my thankes, and my obedience,
          As from a blushing Handmaid, to his Highnesse;
Whose health and Royalty I pray for

Cham. Lady;
I shall not faile t' approue the faire conceit
The King hath of you. I haue perus'd her well,
    Beauty and Honour in her are so mingled,
    That they haue caught the King: and who knowes yet
    But from this Lady, may proceed a Iemme,
    To lighten all this Ile. I'le to the King,
    And say I spoke with you.

    Exit Lord Chamberlaine.

    An. My honour'd Lord

    Old.L. Why this it is: See, see,
    I haue beene begging sixteene yeares in Court
    (Am yet a Courtier beggerly) nor could
    Come pat betwixt too early, and too late
    For any suit of pounds: and you, (oh fate)
    A very fresh Fish heere; fye, fye, fye vpon
    This compel'd fortune: haue your mouth fild vp,
    Before you open it

    An. This is strange to me

    Old L. How tasts it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no:
There was a Lady once (tis an old Story)
    That would not be a Queene, that would she not
    For all the mud in Egypt; haue you heard it?
    An. Come you are pleasant

    Old.L. With your Theame, I could
    O're-mount the Larke: The Marchionesse of Pembrooke?
    A thousand pounds a yeare, for pure respect?
    No other obligation? by my Life,
    That promises mo thousands: Honours traine
    Is longer then his fore-skirt; by this time
    I know your backe will beare a Dutchesse. Say,
    Are you not stronger then you were?
    An. Good Lady,
    Make your selfe mirth with your particular fancy,
    And leaue me out on't. Would I had no being
    If this salute my blood a iot; it faints me
    To thinke what followes.
    The Queene is comfortlesse, and wee forgetfull
    In our long absence: pray doe not deliuer,
    What heere y'haue heard to her

    Old L. What doe you thinke me -

    Exeunt.


