Enter Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, a Page with a Torch before
him, met
by Sir Thomas Louell.

Gard. It's one a clocke Boy, is't not

Boy. It hath strooke

Gard. These should be houres for necessities,
    Not for delights: Times to repayre our Nature
    With comforting repose, and not for vs
    To waste these times. Good houre of night Sir Thomas:
    Whether so late?
    Lou. Came you from the King, my Lord?
    Gar. I did Sir Thomas, and left him at Primero
    With the Duke of Suffolke

    Lou. I must to him too
    Before he go to bed. Ile take my leaue

    Gard. Not yet Sir Thomas Louell: what's the matter?
    It seemes you are in hast: and if there be
    No great offence belongs too't, giue your Friend
    Some touch of your late businesse: Affaires that walke
    (As they say Spirits do) at midnight, haue
    In them a wilder Nature, then the businesse
    That seekes dispatch by day

    Lou. My Lord, I loue you;
    And durst commend a secret to your eare
    Much waightier then this worke. The Queens in Labor
    They say in great Extremity, and fear'd
    Shee'l with the Labour, end

    Gard. The fruite she goes with
    I pray for heartily, that it may finde
    Good time, and liue: but for the Stocke Sir Thomas,
    I wish it grubb'd vp now

    Lou. Me thinkes I could
    Cry the Amen, and yet my Conscience sayes
    Shee's a good Creature, and sweet-Ladie do's
    Deserue our better wishes

    Gard. But Sir, Sir,
    Heare me Sir Thomas, y'are a Gentleman
    Of mine owne way. I know you Wise, Religious,
    And let me tell you, it will ne're be well,
    'Twill not Sir Thomas Louell, tak't of me,
    Till Cranmer, Cromwel, her two hands, and shee
    Sleepe in their Graues

    Louell. Now Sir, you speake of two
    The most remark'd i'th' Kingdome: as for Cromwell,
    Beside that of the Iewell-House, is made Master
    O'th' Rolles, and the Kings Secretary. Further Sir,
    Stands in the gap and Trade of moe Preferments,
    With which the Lime will loade him. Th' Archbyshop
    Is the Kings hand, and tongue, and who dare speak
    One syllable against him?
    Gard. Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
    There are that Dare, and I my selfe haue ventur'd
    To speake my minde of him: and indeed this day,
    Sir (I may tell it you) I thinke I haue
    Incenst the Lords o'th' Councell, that he is
(For so I know he is, they know he is)
    A most Arch-Heretique, a Pestilence
    That does infect the Land: with which, they moued
    Haue broken with the King, who hath so farre
    Giuen eare to our Complaint, of his great Grace,
    And Princely Care, fore-seeing those fell Mischiefes,
    Our Reasons layd before him, hath commanded
    To morrow Morning to the Councell Boord
    He be conuented. He's a ranke weed Sir Thomas,
    And we must root him out. From your Affaires
    I hinder you too long: Good night, Sir Thomas.

    Exit Gardiner and Page.

    Lou. Many good nights, my Lord, I rest your seruant.
    Enter King and Suffolke.

    King. Charles, I will play no more to night,
    My mindes not on't, you are too hard for me

    Suff. Sir, I did neuer win of you before

    King. But little Charles,
    Nor shall not when my Fancies on my play.
    Now Louel, from the Queene what is the Newes

    Lou. I could not personally deliuer to her
    What you commanded me, but by her woman,
    I sent your Message, who return'd her thankes
    In the great'st humblenesse, and desir'd your Highnesse
    Most heartily to pray for her

    King. What say'st thou? Ha?
    To pray for her? What is she crying out?
    Lou. So said her woman, and that her suffrance made
    Almost each pang, a death

    King. Alas good Lady

    Suf. God safely quit her of her Burthen, and
    With gentle Trauaile, to the gladding of
    Your Highnesse with an Heire

    King. 'Tis midnight Charles,
    Prythee to bed, and in thy Prayres remember
    Th' estate of my poore Queene. Leaue me alone,
    For I must thinke of that, which company
    Would not be friendly too

    Suf. I wish your Highnesse
    A quiet night, and my good Mistris will
    Remember in my Prayers

    King. Charles good night.

    Exit Suffolke.

    Well Sir, what followes?
    Enter Sir Anthony Denny.

    Den. Sir, I haue brought my Lord the Arch-byshop,
    As you commanded me

    King. Ha? Canterbury?
    Den. I my good Lord

    King. 'Tis true: where is he Denny?
    Den. He attends your Highnesse pleasure

    King. Bring him to Vs

    Lou. This is about that, which the Byshop spake,
    I am happily come hither.
    Enter Cranmer and Denny.

    King. Auoyd the Gallery.

    Louel seemes to stay.

    Ha? I haue said. Be gone.
    What?

    Exeunt. Louell and Denny.

    Cran. I am fearefull: Wherefore frownes he thus?
    'Tis his Aspect of Terror. All's not well

    King. How now my Lord?
    You do desire to know wherefore
    I sent for you

    Cran. It is my dutie
    T' attend your Highnesse pleasure

    King. Pray you arise
    My good and gracious Lord of Canterburie:
    Come, you and I must walke a turne together:
    I haue Newes to tell you.
    Come, come, giue me your hand.
    Ah my good Lord, I greeue at what I speake,
    And am right sorrie to repeat what followes.
    I haue, and most vnwillingly of late
    Heard many greeuous, I do say my Lord
    Greeuous complaints of you; which being consider'd,
    Haue mou'd Vs, and our Councell, that you shall
    This Morning come before vs, where I know
    You cannot with such freedome purge your selfe,
    But that till further Triall, in those Charges
    Which will require your Answer, you must take
    Your patience to you, and be well contented
    To make your house our Towre: you, a Brother of vs
    It fits we thus proceed, or else no witnesse
    Would come against you

    Cran. I humbly thanke your Highnesse,
    And am right glad to catch this good occasion
    Most throughly to be winnowed, where my Chaffe
    And Corne shall flye asunder. For I know
    There's none stands vnder more calumnious tongues,
    Then I my selfe, poore man

    King. Stand vp, good Canterbury,
    Thy Truth, and thy Integrity is rooted
    In vs thy Friend. Giue me thy hand, stand vp,
    Prythee let's walke. Now by my Holydame,
    What manner of man are you? My Lord, I look'd
    You would haue giuen me your Petition, that
    I should haue tane some paines, to bring together
    Your selfe, and your Accusers, and to haue heard you
    Without indurance further

    Cran. Most dread Liege,
    The good I stand on, is my Truth and Honestie:
    If they shall faile, I with mine Enemies
    Will triumph o're my person, which I waigh not,
    Being of those Vertues vacant. I feare nothing
    What can be said against me

    King. Know you not
    How your state stands i'th' world, with the whole world?
    Your Enemies are many, and not small; their practises
    Must beare the same proportion, and not euer
    The Iustice and the Truth o'th' question carries
    The dew o'th' Verdict with it; at what ease
    Might corrupt mindes procure, Knaues as corrupt
    To sweare against you: Such things haue bene done.
    You are Potently oppos'd, and with a Malice
    Of as great Size. Weene you of better lucke,
    I meane in periur'd Witnesse, then your Master,
    Whose Minister you are, whiles heere he liu'd
    Vpon this naughty Earth? Go too, go too,
    You take a Precepit for no leape of danger,
    And woe your owne destruction

    Cran. God, and your Maiesty
    Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
    The trap is laid for me

    King. Be of good cheere,
    They shall no more preuaile, then we giue way too:
    Keepe comfort to you, and this Morning see
    You do appeare before them. If they shall chance
    In charging you with matters, to commit you:
    The best perswasions to the contrary
    Faile not to vse, and with what vehemencie
    Th' occasion shall instruct you. If intreaties
    Will render you no remedy, this Ring
    Deliuer them, and your Appeale to vs
    There make before them. Looke, the goodman weeps:
    He's honest on mine Honor. Gods blest Mother,
    I sweare he is true-hearted, and a soule
    None better in my Kingdome. Get you gone,
    And do as I haue bid you.

    Exit Cranmer.

    He ha's strangled his Language in his teares.
    Enter Olde Lady.

    Gent. within. Come backe: what meane you?
    Lady. Ile not come backe, the tydings that I bring
    Will make my boldnesse, manners. Now good Angels
    Fly o're thy Royall head, and shade thy person
    Vnder their blessed wings

    King. Now by thy lookes
    I gesse thy Message. Is the Queene deliuer'd?
    Say I, and of a boy

    Lady. I, I my Liege,
    And of a louely Boy: the God of heauen
    Both now, and euer blesse her: 'Tis a Gyrle
    Promises Boyes heereafter. Sir, your Queen
    Desires your Visitation, and to be
    Acquainted with this stranger; 'tis as like you,
    As Cherry, is to Cherry

    King. Louell

    Lou. Sir

    King. Giue her an hundred Markes.
    Ile to the Queene.

    Exit King.

    Lady. An hundred Markes? By this light, Ile ha more.
    An ordinary Groome is for such payment.
    I will haue more, or scold it out of him.
    Said I for this, the Gyrle was like to him? Ile
    Haue more, or else vnsay't: and now, while 'tis hot,
    Ile put it to the issue.

    Exit Ladie.


