L.Ch. Is't possible the spels of France should iuggle
Men into such strange mysteries?
L.San. New customes,
    Though they be neuer so ridiculous,
    (Nay let 'em be vnmanly) yet are follow'd

    L.Ch. As farre as I see, all the good our English
    Haue got by the late Voyage, is but meerely
    A fit or two o'th' face, (but they are shrewd ones)
    For when they hold 'em, you would sweare directly
    Their very noses had been Councellours
    To Pepin or Clotharius, they keepe State so

    L.San. They haue all new legs,
    And lame ones; one would take it,
    That neuer see 'em pace before, the Spauen
    A Spring-halt rain'd among 'em

    L.Ch. Death my Lord,
    Their cloathes are after such a Pagan cut too't,
    That sure th'haue worne out Christendome: how now?
    What newes, Sir Thomas Louell?
    Enter Sir Thomas Louell.

    Louell. Faith my Lord,
    I heare of none but the new Proclamation,
    That's clapt vpon the Court Gate

    L.Cham. What is't for?
    Lou. The reformation of our trauel'd Gallants,
    That fill the Court with quarrels, talke, and Taylors

    L.Cham. I'm glad 'tis there;
    Now I would pray our Monsieurs
    To thinke an English Courtier may be wise,
    And neuer see the Louure

    Lou. They must either
    (For so run the Conditions) leaue those remnants
    Of Foole and Feather, that they got in France,
    With all their honourable points of ignorance
    Pertaining thereunto; as Fights and Fire-workes,
    Abusing better men then they can be
    Out of a forreigne wisedome, renouncing cleane
    The faith they haue in Tennis and tall Stockings,
    Short blistred Breeches, and those types of Trauell;
And vnderstand againe like honest men,
    Or pack to their old Playfellowes; there, I take it,
    They may Cum Priuilegio, wee away
    The lag end of their lewdnesse, and be laugh'd at

    L.San. Tis time to giue 'em Physicke, their diseases
    Are growne so catching

    L.Cham. What a losse our Ladies
    Will haue of these trim vanities?
    Louell. I marry,
    There will be woe indeed Lords, the slye whorsons
    Haue got a speeding tricke to lay downe Ladies.
    A French Song, and a Fiddle, ha's no Fellow

    L.San. The Diuell fiddle 'em,
    I am glad they are going,
    For sure there's no conuerting of 'em: now
    An honest Country Lord as I am, beaten
    A long time out of play, may bring his plaine song,
    And haue an houre of hearing, and by'r Lady
    Held currant Musicke too

    L.Cham. Well said Lord Sands,
    Your Colts tooth is not cast yet?
    L.San. No my Lord,
    Nor shall not while I haue a stumpe

    L.Cham. Sir Thomas,
    Whither were you a going?
    Lou. To the Cardinals;
    Your Lordship is a guest too

    L.Cham. O, 'tis true;
    This night he makes a Supper, and a great one,
    To many Lords and Ladies; there will be
    The Beauty of this Kingdome Ile assure you

    Lou. That Churchman
    Beares a bounteous minde indeed,
    A hand as fruitfull as the Land that feeds vs,
    His dewes fall euery where

    L.Cham. No doubt hee's Noble;
    He had a blacke mouth that said other of him

    L.San. He may my Lord,
    Ha's wherewithall in him;
Sparing would shew a worse sinne, then ill Doctrine,
        Men of his way, should be most liberall,
        They are set heere for examples

        L.Cham. True, they are so;
        But few now giue so great ones:
        My Barge stayes;
        Your Lordship shall along: Come, good Sir Thomas,
        We shall be late else, which I would not be,
        For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guilford
        This night to be Comptrollers

        L.San. I am your Lordships.

        Exeunt.


Hoboies. A small Table vnder a State for the Cardinall, a longer
Table for
the Guests. Then Enter Anne Bullen, and diuers other Ladies, &
Gentlemen,
    as Guests at one Doore; at an other Doore enter Sir Henry
    Guilford.

    S.Hen.Guilf. Ladyes,
    A generall welcome from his Grace
    Salutes ye all; This Night he dedicates
    To faire content, and you: None heere he hopes
    In all this Noble Beuy, has brought with her
    One care abroad: hee would haue all as merry:
    As first, good Company, good wine, good welcome,
    Can make good people.
    Enter L[ord]. Chamberlaine L[ord]. Sands, and Louell.

    O my Lord, y'are tardy;
    The very thought of this faire Company,
    Clapt wings to me

    Cham. You are young Sir Harry Guilford

    San. Sir Thomas Louell, had the Cardinall
    But halfe my Lay-thoughts in him, some of these
    Should finde a running Banket, ere they rested,
    I thinke would better please 'em: by my life,
    They are a sweet society of faire ones

    Lou. O that your Lordship were but now Confessor,
    To one or two of these

    San. I would I were,
    They should finde easie pennance

    Lou. Faith how easie?
    San. As easie as a downe bed would affoord it

    Cham. Sweet Ladies will it please you sit; Sir Harry
    Place you that side, Ile take the charge of this:
    His Grace is entring. Nay, you must not freeze,
    Two women plac'd together, makes cold weather:
    My Lord Sands, you are one will keepe 'em waking:
    Pray sit betweene these Ladies

    San. By my faith,
    And thanke your Lordship: by your leaue sweet Ladies,
    If I chance to talke a little wilde, forgiue me:
    I had it from my Father

    An.Bul. Was he mad Sir?
    San. O very mad, exceeding mad, in loue too;
    But he would bite none, iust as I doe now,
    He would Kisse you Twenty with a breath

    Cham. Well said my Lord:
    So now y'are fairely seated: Gentlemen,
    The pennance lyes on you; if these faire Ladies
    Passe away frowning

    San. For my little Cure,
    Let me alone.

    Hoboyes. Enter Cardinall Wolsey, and takes his State.

    Card. Y'are welcome my faire Guests; that noble Lady
    Or Gentleman that is not freely merry
    Is not my Friend. This to confirme my welcome,
    And to you all good health

    San. Your Grace is Noble,
    Let me haue such a Bowle may hold my thankes,
    And saue me so much talking

    Card. My Lord Sands,
    I am beholding to you: cheere your neighbours:
    Ladies you are not merry; Gentlemen,
    Whose fault is this?
    San. The red wine first must rise
    In their faire cheekes my Lord, then wee shall haue 'em,
    Talke vs to silence

    An.B. You are a merry Gamster
    My Lord Sands

    San. Yes, if I make my play:
    Heer's to your Ladiship, and pledge it Madam:
    For tis to such a thing

    An.B. You cannot shew me.

    Drum and Trumpet, Chambers dischargd.

    San. I told your Grace, they would talke anon

    Card. What's that?
    Cham. Looke out there, some of ye

    Card. What warlike voyce,
    And to what end is this? Nay, Ladies, feare not;
By all the lawes of Warre y'are priuiledg'd.
Enter a Seruant.

Cham. How now, what is't?
Seru. A noble troupe of Strangers,
    For so they seeme; th' haue left their Barge and landed,
    And hither make, as great Embassadors
    From forraigne Princes

    Card. Good Lord Chamberlaine,
    Go, giue 'em welcome; you can speake the French tongue
    And pray receiue 'em Nobly, and conduct 'em
    Into our presence, where this heauen of beauty
    Shall shine at full vpon them. Some attend him.

    All rise, and Tables remou'd.

    You haue now a broken Banket, but wee'l mend it.
    A good digestion to you all; and once more
    I showre a welcome on yee: welcome all.

    Hoboyes. Enter King and others as Maskers, habited like
    Shepheards,
    vsher'd by the Lord Chamberlaine. They passe directly before the
    Cardinall
    and gracefully salute him.

    A noble Company: what are their pleasures?
    Cham. Because they speak no English, thus they praid
    To tell your Grace: That hauing heard by fame
    Of this so Noble and so faire assembly,
    This night to meet heere they could doe no lesse,
    (Out of the great respect they beare to beauty)
    But leaue their Flockes, and vnder your faire Conduct
    Craue leaue to view these Ladies, and entreat
    An houre of Reuels with 'em

    Card. Say, Lord Chamberlaine,
    They haue done my poore house grace:
    For which I pay 'em a thousand thankes,
    And pray 'em take their pleasures.

    Choose Ladies, King and An Bullen.

    King. The fairest hand I euer touch'd: O Beauty,
    Till now I neuer knew thee.

    Musicke, Dance.

    Card. My Lord

    Cham. Your Grace

    Card. Pray tell 'em thus much from me:
    There should be one amongst 'em by his person
    More worthy this place then my selfe, to whom
    (If I but knew him) with my loue and duty
    I would surrender it.

    Whisper.

    Cham. I will my Lord

    Card. What say they?
    Cham. Such a one, they all confesse
    There is indeed, which they would haue your Grace
    Find out, and he will take it

    Card. Let me see then,
    By all your good leaues Gentlemen; heere Ile make
    My royall choyce

    Kin. Ye haue found him Cardinall,
    You hold a faire Assembly; you doe well Lord:
    You are a Churchman, or Ile tell you Cardinall,
    I should iudge now vnhappily

    Card. I am glad
    Your Grace is growne so pleasant

    Kin. My Lord Chamberlaine,
    Prethee come hither, what faire Ladie's that?
    Cham. An't please your Grace,
    Sir Thomas Bullens Daughter, the Viscount Rochford,
    One of her Highnesse women

    Kin. By Heauen she is a dainty one. Sweet heart,
    I were vnmannerly to take you out,
    And not to kisse you. A health Gentlemen,
    Let it goe round

    Card. Sir Thomas Louell, is the Banket ready
    I'th' Priuy Chamber?
    Lou. Yes, my Lord

    Card. Your Grace
    I feare, with dancing is a little heated

    Kin. I feare too much

    Card. There's fresher ayre my Lord,
    In the next Chamber

    Kin. Lead in your Ladies eu'ry one: Sweet Partner,
    I must not yet forsake you: Let's be merry,
    Good my Lord Cardinall: I haue halfe a dozen healths,
    To drinke to these faire Ladies, and a measure
    To lead 'em once againe, and then let's dreame
    Who's best in fauour. Let the Musicke knock it.

    Exeunt. with Trumpets.


