{"name": "Chapter Forty-One: In Which the Squirrel Falls - in Which the Adder Flies", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210507123624/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/man-in-the-iron-mask/summary/chapter-forty-one-in-which-the-squirrel-falls-in-which-the-adder-flies", "summary": "It is two o'clock in the afternoon and the King is anxious about D'Artagnan's whereabouts. The King questions Colbert, who has no idea where the captain is. Eventually D'Artagnan himself walks into the room. He is in a bad mood. Somebody has ordered the Musketeers to search Fouquet's home. D'Artagnan is adamant that only the King has the authority to issue commands to the Musketeers. Colbert replies that he acted for the good of the King. D'Artagnan continues to berate Colbert. The King hesitates, unsure of what to do . D'Artagnan pretends he is about to leave. But the King wants details of the arrest. D'Artagnan relates the full story, sparing no detail and admitting his unwillingness to arrest the former minister. D'Artagnan further admits that Fouquet would never attempt escape while D'Artagnan was his guard, but that D'Artagnan would deliberately do a poor job guarding Fouquet. Understandably, the King is not pleased. The King calls Colbert back into the room and has him shake hands with D'Artagnan, who is surprised to see Colbert's face change into that of a noble and intelligent man. D'Artagnan and Colbert leave the room together. D'Artagnan chides his companion for his actions towards Fouquet. Colbert explains himself by saying that Fouquet has been holding him back from greatness. D'Artagnan asks Colbert to intercede with the King on Fouquet's account, but Colbert points out that the King has his own grudges against the man. The King calls for D'Artagnan to select twenty of his men as a guard for Fouquet, who is destined for the Bastille. As for D'Artagnan, the King orders him to take possession of Belle-Isle, using as many troops as necessary. Colbert tells D'Artagnan that such a deed is worth a marshal's baton, but then points out that it will come at the cost of his two friends' lives. D'Artagnan is determined not to hurt his friends. He assembles his men and hits the road.", "analysis": ""}