
  And a heart at leisure from itself
  To soothe and sympathize.--Miss Waring


Recovery had fairly set in, and 'better' was the universal bulletin,
eating and drinking the prevailing remedy.

Henry Ward had quickly thrown off his illness.  The sense that all
depended on him, acted as a stimulus to his energies; he was anxious to
be up and doing, and in a few days was down-stairs, looking over his
father's papers, and making arrangements.  He was eager and confident,
declaring that his sisters should never want a home while he lived;
and, when he first entered his brother's room, his effusion of
affection overwhelmed Leonard in his exceeding weakness, and the
thought of which during the rest of the day often brought tears to his
eyes.

Very grateful to Dr. May, Henry declared himself anxious to abide by
his advice; and discussed with him all his plans.  There had been no
will, but the house and land of course were Henry's.  The other
property gave about L2000 to each of the family; and Averil had about
as much again from the old aunt, from whom she had taken her peculiar
name.  The home of all should, of course, still be their present one;
Averil would teach her sisters, and superintend the house, and Leonard
continue at the school, where he had a fair chance of obtaining the
Randall scholarship in the course of a year or two. 'And if not,' said
Henry, 'he may still not lose his University education.  My father was
proud of Leonard; and if he would have sent him there, why should not
I?'

And when Dr. May thought how his own elder sons had insisted on greater
advantages of education for their juniors than they had themselves
enjoyed, he felt especially fatherly towards the young surgeon.  On
only one point was he dissatisfied, and that he could not press.  He
thought the establishment at Bankside too expensive, and counselled
Henry to remove into the town, and let the house; but this was rejected
on the argument of the uncertainty of finding a tenant, and the
inexpediency of appearing less prosperous; and considering that Mr. and
Mrs. Ward had themselves made the place, Dr. May thought his proposal
hard-hearted.  He went about impressing every one with his confidence
in Henry Ward, and fought successfully at the Board of Guardians to
have him considered as a continuation of his father, instead of
appointing a new union doctor; and he watched with paternal solicitude
that the young man's first return to his practice should be neither too
soon for his own health or his patients' fears; giving him no
exhortation more earnest, nor more thankfully accepted, than that he
was to let no scruple prevent his applying to himself in the slightest
difficulty; calling him in to pauper patients, and privately consulting
in cases which could not be visited gratis.  The patronage of Henry
Ward was one of the hobbies that Dr. May specially loved, and he
cantered off upon it with vehemence such as he had hardly displayed for
years.

Aubrey recovered with the tardiness of a weakly constitution, and was
long in even arriving at a drive in the brougham; for Dr. May had set
up a brougham.  As long as Hector Ernescliffe's home was at
Stoneborough, driving the Doctor had been his privilege, and the old
gig had been held together by diligent repairs; but when Maplewood
claimed him, and Adams was laid aside by rheumatism, Flora would no
longer be silenced, and preached respectability and necessity.  Dr. May
did not admit the plea, unless Adams were to sit inside and drive out
of window; but then he was told of the impropriety of his daughters
going out to dinner in gigs, and the expense of flies. When Flora
talked of propriety in that voice, the family might protest and
grumble, but were always reduced to obedience; and thus Blanche's
wedding had been the occasion of Ethel being put into a hoop, and the
Doctor into a brougham.  He was better off under the tyranny than she
was, in spite of the solitude he had bewailed. Young Adams was not the
companion his father had been, and was no loss; and he owned that he
now got through a great deal of reading, and at times a great deal of
sleep; and mourned for nothing but his moon and stars--so romantic a
regret, that Dr. Spencer advised him not to mention it.

After Aubrey's first drives, Dr. Spencer declared that the best way of
invigorating him would be to send him for a month to the sea-side,
while the house could be thoroughly purified before Gertrude's return.
Dr. Spencer and Mary would take care of Dr. May; and Ethel had begun to
look forward to a tete-a-tete with Aubrey by the sea, which they had
neither of them ever seen, when her anticipations were somewhat dashed
by her father's exclaiming, that it would be the best thing for Leonard
Ward to go with them.  She said something about his not being well
enough to travel so soon.

'Oh, yes, he will,' said Dr. May; 'he only wants stimulus to get on
fast enough.  I declare I'll ask Henry about it; I'm just going to meet
him at the hospital.'

And before another word could be said, he let himself out at the back
door of the garden, in which they had been meeting Richard, who was now
allowed to come thus far, though both for Daisy's sake and his flock's,
he had hitherto submitted to a rigorous quarantine; and the entire
immunity of Cocksmoor from the malady was constantly adduced by each
doctor as a convincing proof of his own theory.

'Well, I do hope that will go off!' exclaimed Ethel, as soon as her
father was out of hearing.  'It will be a terrible upset to all one's
peace and comfort with Aubrey!'

'Indeed--what harm will the poor boy do?' asked Richard.

'Make Aubrey into the mere shame-faced, sister-hating, commonplace
creature that the collective boy thinks it due to himself to be in
society,' said Ethel, 'and me from an enjoying sister, into an elderly,
care-taking, despised spinster--a burden to myself and the boys.'

'But why, Ethel, can't you enjoy yourself!'

'My dear Richard, just imagine turning loose a lot of boys and girls,
with no keeper, to enjoy themselves in some wild sea place!  No, no:
the only way to give the arrangement any shade of propriety, will be to
be elderly, infuse as much vinegar as possible into my countenance,
wear my spectacles, and walk at a staid pace up and down the parade,
while my two sons disport themselves on the rocks.'

'If you really think it would not be proper,' said Richard, rather
alarmed, 'I could run after my father.'

'Stuff, Richard; papa must have his way; and if it is to do the boy
good, I can sacrifice a crab--I mean myself--not a crustacean.  I am
not going to be such a selfish wretch as to make objections.'

'But if it would not be the correct thing?  Or could not you get some
one to stay with you?'

'I can make it the correct thing.  It is only to abstain from the fun I
had hoped for.  I meant to have been a girl, and now I must be a woman,
that's all; and I dare say Aubrey will be the happier for it--boys
always are.'

'If you don't like it, I wish you would let me speak to papa.'

'Richard, have you these five years been the safety-valve for my
murmurs without knowing what they amount to?'

'I thought no one complained unless to get a thing remedied.'

'Exactly so.  That is man!  And experience never shows man that woman's
growls relieve her soul, and that she dreads nothing more than their
being acted on!  All I wish is, that this scheme may die a natural
death; but I should be miserable, and deserved to be so, if I raised a
finger to hinder it.  What, must you go?  Rule Daisy's lines if she
writes to Meta, please.'

'I did so.  I have been trying to make her write straighter.'

'Of course you have.  I expect I shall find her organ of order grown to
a huge bump when she comes home.  Oh! when will our poor remnants be
once more a united family? and when shall I get into Cocksmoor school
again?'

When Dr. May came home, his plan was in full bloom.  Henry had
gratefully accepted it, and answered for his brother being able to
travel by the next Monday; and Dr. May wanted Ethel to walk with him to
Bankside, and propose it there--talking it over with the sister, and
making it her own invitation.  Ethel saw her fate, and complied, her
father talking eagerly all the way.

'You see, Ethel, it is quite as much for his spirits as his health that
I wish it.  He is just the age that our Norman was.'

That was the key to a great deal.  Ethel knew that her father had never
admitted any of the many excuses for the neglect of Norman's suffering
for the three months after his mother's death; but though it thrilled
her all over, she was not prepared to believe that any one, far less
any Ward, could be of the same sensitive materials as Norman.  To avoid
answering, she went more than half-way, by saying, 'Don't you think I
might ask those poor girls to come with him?'

'By no manner of means,' said the Doctor, stopping short.  'It is just
what I want, to get him away from his sister.  She minds nothing else;
and if it were not for Mary, I don't know what the little ones would
do; and as to Henry, he is very good and patient; but it is the way to
prevent him from forming domestic tastes to have no mistress to his
house.  He will get into mischief, or marry, if she does not mind what
she is about.'

'That must come to an end when Leonard is well, and goes back to
school.'

'And that won't be till after the holidays.  No, some break there must
be.  When he is gone, Mary can put her into the way of doing things;
she is anxious to do right; and we shall see them do very well.  But
this poor boy--you know he has been always living at home, while the
others were away; he was very fond of his mother, and the first coming
out of his room was more than he could bear.  I must have him taken
from home till he is well again, and able to turn to other things.'

And before Ethel's eyes came a vision of poor Mrs. Ward leaning on her
son's arm, on Saturday afternoon walks, each looking fond and proud of
the other.  She felt her own hardness of heart, and warmed to the
desire of giving comfort.

Bankside was basking in summer sunshine, with small patches of shade
round its young shrubs and trees, and a baking heat on the little porch.

The maid believed Miss Ward was in the garden.  Mr. Leonard had been
taken out to-day; and the Doctor moving on, they found themselves in
the cool pretty drawing-room, rather overcrowded with furniture and
decoration, fresh and tasteful, but too much of it, and a contrast to
the Mays' mixture of the shabby and the curious, in the room that was
so decidedly for use, and not for show.

What arrested the attention was, however, the very sweetest singing
Ethel had ever heard.  The song was low and sad, but so intensely
sweet, that Dr. May held up his hand to silence all sound, and stood
with restrained breath and moistened eyes.  Ethel, far less sensitive
to music, was nevertheless touched as she had never before been by
sound; and the more, as she looked through the window and saw in the
shade of a walnut-tree, a sofa, at the foot of which sat Averil Ward in
her deep mourning, her back to the window, so that only her young
figure and the braids of her fair hair were to be seen; and beyond,
something prostrate, covered with wrappers.  The sweet notes ended, Dr.
May drew a deep sigh, wiped his spectacles, and went on; Ethel hung
back, not to startle the invalid by the sight of a stranger; but as
Averil rose, she saw him raising himself, with a brightening smile on
his pale face, to hold out his hand to the Doctor.  In another minute
Averil had come to her, shaken hands, and seated herself where she
could best command a view of her brother.

'I am glad to see him out of doors,' said Ethel.

'Henry was bent on it; but I think the air and the glare of everything
is too much for him; he is so tired and oppressed.'

'I am sure he must like your singing,' said Ethel.

'It is almost the only thing that answers,' said Averil, her eyes
wistfully turning to the sofa; 'he can't read, and doesn't like being
read to.'

'It is very difficult to manage a boy's recovery,' said Ethel.  'They
don't know how to be ill.'

'It is not that,' replied the sister, as if she fancied censure
implied, 'but his spirits.  Every new room he goes into seems to beat
him down; and he lies and broods.  If he could only talk!'

'I know that so well!' said Ethel.  But to Averil the May troubles were
of old date, involved in the mists of childhood.  And Ethel seeing that
her words were not taken as sympathy, continued, 'Do not the little
girls amuse him?'

'Oh no! they are too much for him; and I am obliged to keep them in the
nursery.  Poor little things!  I don't know what we should do if your
sister Mary were not so kind.'

'Mary is very glad,' began Ethel, confusedly.  Then rushing into her
subject: 'Next week, I am to take Aubrey to the seaside; and we thought
if Leonard would join us, the change might be good for him.'

'Thank you,' Averil answered, playing with her heavy jet watch-guard.
'You are very good; but I am sure he could not move so soon.'

'Ave,' called Leonard at that moment; and Ethel, perceiving that she
likewise was to advance, came forth in time to hear, 'O, Ave! I am to
go to the sea next week, with Aubrey May and his sister.  Won't it--'

Then becoming aware of the visitor, he stopped short, threw his feet
off the sofa, and stood up to receive her.

'I can't let you come if you do like that,' she said, shaking his long
thin hand; and he let himself down again, not, however, resuming his
recumbent posture, and giving a slight but effective frown to silence
his sister's entreaties that he would do so.  He sat, leaning back as
though exceedingly feeble, scarcely speaking, but his eyes eloquent
with eagerness.  And very fine eyes they were!  Ethel remembered her
own weariness, some twelve or fourteen years back, of the raptures of
her baby-loving sisters about those eyes; and now in the absence of the
florid colouring of health, she was the more struck by the beauty of
the deep liquid brown, of the blue tinge of the white, and of the
lustrous light that resided in them, but far more by their power of
expression, sometimes so soft and melancholy, at other moments earnest,
pleading, and almost flashing with eagerness.  It was a good mouth too,
perhaps a little inclined to sternness of mould about the jaw and chin;
but that might have been partly from the absence of all softening
roundness, aging the countenance for the time, just as illness had
shrunk the usually sturdy figure.

'Has Ethel told you of our plan?' asked Dr. May of the sister.

'Yes,' she hesitated, in evident confusion and distress.  'You are all
very kind, but we must see what Henry says.'

'I have spoken to Henry!  He answers for our patching Leonard up for
next week; and I have great faith in Dr. Neptune.'

Leonard's looks were as bright as Averil's were disturbed.

'Thank you, thank you very much! but can he possibly be well enough for
the journey?'

Leonard's eyes said 'I shall.'

'A week will do great things,' said Dr. May, 'and it is a very easy
journey--only four hours' railway, and a ten miles' drive.'

Averil's face was full of consternation; and Leonard leant forward with
hope dancing in his eyes.

'You know the place,' continued Dr. May, 'Coombe Hole.  Quite fresh,
and unhackneyed.  It is just where Devon and Dorset meet.  I am not
sure in which county; but there's a fine beach, and beautiful country.
The Riverses found it out, and have been there every autumn; besides
sending their poor little girl and her governess down when London gets
too hot.  Flora has written to the woman of the lodgings she always
has, and will lend them the maid she sends with little Margaret; so
they will be in clover.'

'Is it not a very long way!' said Averil, thinking how long those ten
yards of lawn had seemed.

'Not as things go,' said Dr. May.  'You want Dr. Spencer to reproach
you with being a Stoneborough fungus.  There are places in Wales nearer
by the map, but without railway privilege; and as to a great gay place,
they would all be sick of it.'

'Do you feel equal to it? as if you should like it, Leonard?' asked his
sister, in a trembling would-be grateful voice.

'Of all things,' was the answer.

Ethel thought the poor girl had suffered constraint enough, and that it
was time to release the boy from his polite durance, so she rose to
take leave, and again Leonard pulled himself upright to shake hands.

'Indeed,' said Ethel, when Averil had followed them into the
drawing-room, 'I am sorry for you.  It would go very hard with me to
make Aubrey over to any one! but if you do trust him with me, I must
come and hear all you wish me to do for him.'

'I cannot think that he will be able or glad to go when it comes to the
point,' said Averil, with a shaken tone.

Dr. May was nearer than she thought, and spoke peremptorily.  'Take
care what you are about!  You are not to worry him with discussions. If
he can go, he will; if not, he will stay at home; but pros and cons are
prohibited.  Do you hear, Averil!'

'Yes; very well.'

'Papa you really are very cruel to that poor girl,' were Ethel's first
words outside.

'Am I?  I wouldn't be for worlds, Ethel.  But somehow she always puts
me in a rage.  I wish I knew she was not worrying her brother at this
moment!'

No, Averil was on the staircase, struggling, choking with the first
tears she had shed.  All this fortnight of unceasing vigilance and
exertion, her eyes had been dry, for want of time to realize, for want
of time to weep, and now she was ashamed that hurt feeling rather than
grief had opened the fountain.  She could not believe that it was not a
cruel act of kindness, to carry one so weak as Leonard away from home
to the care of a stranger.  She apprehended all manner of ill
consequences; and then nursing him, and regarding his progress as her
own work, had been the sedative to her grief, which would come on her
'like an armed man,' in the dreariness of his absence.  Above all, she
felt herself ill requited by his manifest eagerness to leave her who
had nursed him so devotedly--her, his own sister--for the stiff, plain
Miss May whom he hardly knew.  The blow from the favourite companion
brother, so passionately watched and tended, seemed to knock her down;
and Dr. May, with medical harshness, forbidding her the one last hope
of persuading him out of the wild fancy, filled up the measure.

Oh, those tears!  How they would swell up at each throb of the wounded
heart, at each dismal foreboding of the desponding spirit. But she had
no time for them!  Leonard must not be left alone, with no one to cover
him up with his wrappers.

The tears were strangled, the eyes indignantly dried.  She ran out at
the garden door.  The sofa was empty!  Had Henry come home and helped
him in?  She hurried on to the window; Leonard was alone in the
drawing-room, resting breathlessly on an ottoman within the window.

'Dear Leonard!  Why didn't you wait for me!'

'I thought I'd try what I could do.  You see I am much stronger than we
thought.'  And he smiled cheerfully, as he helped himself by the
furniture to another sofa.  'I say, Ave, do just give me the map--the
one in Bradshaw will do.  I want to find this place.'

'I don't think there is a Bradshaw,' said Averil, reluctantly.

'Oh yes, there is--behind the candlestick, on the study chimney-piece.'

'Very well--' There were more tears to be gulped down--and perhaps they
kept her from finding the book.

'Where's the Bradshaw?'

'I didn't see it.'

'I tell you I know it was there.  The left-hand candlestick, close to
the letter-weight.  I'll get it myself.'

He was heaving himself up, when Averil prevented him by hastening to a
more real search, which speedily produced the book.

Eagerly Leonard unfolded the map, making her steady it for his shaking
hand, and tracing the black toothed lines.

'There's Bridport--ten miles from there.  Can you see the name, Ave?'

'No, it is not marked.'

'Never mind.  I see where it is; and I can see it is a capital place;
just in that little jag, with famous bathing.  I wonder if they will
stay long enough for me to learn to swim?'

'You are a good way from that as yet,' said poor Averil, her heart
sinking lower and lower.

'Oh, I shall be well at once when I get away from here!'

'I hope so.'

'Why, Ave!' he cried, now first struck with her tone, 'don't you know I
shall?'

'I don't know,' she said, from the soreness of her heart; 'but I can't
tell how to trust you with strangers.'

'Strangers!  You ungrateful child!' exclaimed Leonard, indignantly.
'Why, what have they been doing for you all this time?'

'I am sure Miss May, at least, never came near us till to-day.'

'I'm very glad of it!  I'm sick of everything and everybody I have
seen!'

Everybody!  That was the climax!  Averil just held her tongue; but she
rushed to her own room, and wept bitterly and angrily.  Sick of her
after all her devotion!  Leonard, the being she loved best in the world!

And Leonard, distressed and hurt at the reception of his natural
expression of the weariness of seven weeks' sickness and sorrow, felt
above all the want of his mother's ever-ready sympathy and soothing,
and as if the whole world, here, there, and everywhere, would be an
equally dreary waste.  His moment of bright anticipation passed into
heavy despondency, and turning his head from the light, he dropped
asleep with a tear on his cheek.

When he awoke it was at the sound of movements in the room, slow and
cautious, out of regard to his slumbers--and voices, likewise low--at
least one was low, the other that whisper of the inaudibility of which
Averil could not be disabused.  He lay looking for a few moments
through his eyelashes, before exerting himself to move. Averil, her
face still showing signs of recent tears, sat in a low chair, a book in
her lap, talking to her brother Henry.

Henry was of less robust frame than Leonard promised to be, and though
on a smaller scale, was more symmetrically made, and had more regular
features than either his brother or sister, but his eyes were merely
quick lively black beads, without anything of the clear depths
possessed by the others.  His hair too was jet black, whereas theirs
was a pale nut brown; and his whiskers, long and curling, so nearly met
under his chin, as to betray a strong desire that the hirsute movement
should extend to the medical profession.  Always point-device in
apparel, the dust on his boot did not prevent its perfect make from
being apparent; and the entire sit of his black suit would have enabled
a cursory glance to decide that it never came out of the same shop as
Dr. May's.

'O, Henry!' were the words that he first heard distinctly.

'It will be much better for every one--himself and you included.'

'Yes, if--'

'If--nonsense.  I tell you he will be quite well enough.  See how well
I am now, how fast I got on as soon as I took to tonics.--Ha, Leonard,
old fellow! what, awake?  What do you say to this plan of old May's?'

'It is very kind of him; and I should be very glad if I am well enough;
but next week is very soon,' said Leonard, waking in the depression in
which he had gone to sleep.

'Oh, next week!  That is as good as next year in a matter like this, as
May agreed with me, here, let us have your pulse.  You have let him get
low, Averil.  A basin of good soup will put more heart into you, and
you will feel ready for anything.'

'I have got on to-day, said Leonard, briskly raising himself, as though
the cheerful voice had been cordial in itself.

'Of course you have, now that you have something to look forward to;
and you will be in excellent hands; the very thing I wanted for you,
though I could not see how to manage it.  I am going to dress.  I shall
tell them to send in dinner; and if I am not down, I shall be in the
nursery.  You won't come in to dinner, Leonard?'

'No, said Leonard, with a shudder.

'I shall send you in some gravy soup, that you may thank me for.  Ave
never would order anything but boiled chickens for you, and forgets
that other people ever want to eat.  There will be a chance of making a
housekeeper of her now.'

How selfish, thought Averil, to want to get rid of poor Leonard, that I
may attend to his dinners.  Yet Henry had spoken in perfect good-humour.

Henry came down with a little sister in each hand. They were his
especial darlings; and with a touch of fatherly fondness, he tried to
compensate to them for their sequestration from the drawing-room, the
consequence of Averil not having established her authority enough to
keep their spirits from growing too riotous for Leonard's weakness.
Indeed, their chatter was Henry's sole enlivenment, for Averil was
constantly making excursions to ask what her patient would eat, and
watch its success; and but for his pleasure in the little girls popping
about him, he would have had a meal as dull as it was unsettled.  As
soon as the strawberries were eaten, he walked out through the window
with them clinging to him, and Averil returned to her post.

'Some music, Ave,' said Leonard, with an instinctive dread of her
conversation.

She knew her voice was past singing, and began one of her most renowned
instrumental pieces, which she could play as mechanically as a
musical-box.

'Not that jingling airified thing!' cried Leonard, 'I want something
quiet and refreshing.  There's an evening hymn that the Mays have.'

'The Mays know nothing of music,' said Averil.

'Stay, this is it:' and he whistled a few bars.

'That old thing!  Of course I know that.  We had it every Sunday at
Brighton.'

She began it, but her eyes were full of tears, partly because she hated
herself for the irritation she had betrayed.  She was a sound, good,
honest-hearted girl; but among all the good things she had learned at
Brighton, had not been numbered the art of ruling her own spirit.



