
  Ah! I mind me now of thronging faces,
    Mocking eyed, and eager, as for sport;
  Hundreds looking up, and in high places
    Men arrayed for judgment and a court.

  And I heard, or seemed to hear, one seeking
    Answer back from one he doomed to die,
  Pitifully, sadly, sternly speaking
    Unto one--and oh! that one, twas I.--Rev. G. E. Monsell


The 'Blewer Murder' was the case of the Assize week; and the court was
so crowded that, but for the favour of the sheriff, Mr. and Mrs.
Rivers, with Tom and Gertrude, could hardly have obtained seats.  No
others of the family could endure to behold the scene, except from
necessity; and indeed Ethel and Mary had taken charge of the sisters at
home, for Henry could not remain at a distance from his brother, though
unable to bear the sight of the proceedings; he remained in a house at
hand.

Nearly the whole population of Stoneborough, Whitford, and Blewer was
striving to press into court, but before the day's work began, Edward
Anderson had piloted Mrs. Pugh to a commodious place, under the escort
of his brother Harvey, who was collecting materials for an article on
criminal jurisprudence.

Some of those who, like the widow and little Gertrude, had been wild to
be present, felt their hearts fail them when the last previous case had
been disposed of; and there was a brief pause of grave and solemn
suspense and silent breathless expectation within the court, unbroken,
except by increased sounds of crowding in all the avenues without.

Every one, except the mere loungers, who craved nothing but excitement,
looked awed and anxious; and the impression was deepened by the
perception that the same feeling, though restrained, affected the judge
himself, and was visible in the anxious attention with which he looked
at the papers before him, and the stern sadness that had come over the
features naturally full of kindness and benevolence.

The prisoner appeared in the dock.  He had become paler, and perhaps
thinner, for his square determined jaw, and the resolute mould of his
lips, were more than usually remarkable, and were noted in the
physiognomical brain of Harvey Anderson; as well as the keen light of
his full dark hazel eye, the breadth of his brow, with his shining
light brown hair brushed back from it; the strong build of his frame,
and the determined force, apparent even in the perfect quiescence of
his attitude.

Leonard Axworthy Ward was arraigned for the wilful murder of Francis
Axworthy, and asked whether he pleaded Guilty or Not Guilty.

His voice was earnest, distinct, and firm, and his eyes were raised
upwards, as though he were making the plea of 'Not Guilty' not to man
alone, but to the Judge of all the earth.

The officer of the court informed him of his right to challenge any of
the jury, as they were called over by name; and as each came to be
sworn, he looked full and steadily at each face, more than one of which
was known to him by sight, as if he were committing his cause into
their hands.  He declined to challenge; and then crossing his arms on
his breast, cast down his eyes, and thus retained them through the
greater part of the trial.

The jurymen were then sworn in, and charged with the issue; and the
counsel for the prosecution opened the case, speaking more as if in
pity than indignation, as he sketched the history, which it was his
painful duty to establish.  He described how Mr. Axworthy, having spent
the more active years of his life in foreign trade, had finally
returned to pass his old age among his relatives; and had taken to
assist him in his business a great-nephew, and latterly another youth
in the same degree of relation, the son of his late niece--the
prisoner, who on leaving school had been taken into his uncle's office,
lodged in the house, and became one of the family.  It would, however,
be shown by witnesses that the situation had been extremely irksome to
the young man; and that he had not been in it many months before he had
expressed his intention of absconding, provided he could obtain the
means of making his way in one of the colonies. Then followed a summary
of the deductions resulting from the evidence about to be adduced, and
which carried upon its face the inference that the absence of the
cousin, the remoteness of the room, the sight of a large sum of money,
and the helplessness of the old man, had proved temptations too strong
for a fiery and impatient youth, long fretted by the restraints of his
situation, and had conducted him to violence, robbery, and flight.  It
was a case that could not be regarded without great regret and
compassion; but the gentlemen of the jury must bear in mind in their
investigation, that pity must not be permitted to distort the facts,
which he feared were only too obvious.

The speech was infinitely more telling from its fair and commiserating
tone towards the prisoner; and the impression that it carried, not that
he was to be persecuted by having the crime fastened on him, but that
truth must be sought out at all hazards.

'Even he is sorry for Leonard!  I don't hate him as I thought I
should,' whispered Gertrude May, to her elder sister. The first witness
was, as before, the young maid-servant, Anne Ellis, who described her
first discovery of the body; and on farther interrogation, the
situation of the room, distant from those of the servants, and out of
hearing--also her master's ordinary condition of feebleness.  She had
observed nothing in the room, or on the table, but knew the window was
open, since she had run to it, and screamed for help, upon which Master
Hardy had come to her aid.

Leonard's counsel then elicited from her how low the window was, and
how easily it could be entered from without.

James Hardy corroborated all this, giving a more minute account of the
state of the room; and telling of his going to call the young
gentlemen, and finding the open passage window and empty bed-room. The
passage window would naturally be closed at night; and there was no
reason to suppose that Mr. Ward would be absent.  The bag shown to him
was one that had originally been made for the keeping of cash, but
latterly had been used for samples of grain, and he had last seen it in
the office.

The counsel for the prisoner inquired what had been on the table at
Hardy's first entrance; but to this the witness could not swear, except
that the lamp was burning, and that there were no signs of disorder,
nor was the dress of the deceased disarranged.  He had seen his master
put receipts, and make memorandums, in a large, black, silver-clasped
pocket-book, but had never handled it, and could not swear to it; he
had seen nothing like it since his master's death. He was further asked
how long the prisoner had been at the mill, his duties there, and the
amount of trust reposed in him; to which last the answer was, that
about a month since, Mr. Axworthy had exclaimed that if ever he wanted
a thing to be done, he must set Ward about it. Saving this speech, made
in irritation at some omission on Sam's part, nothing was adduced to
show that Leonard was likely to have been employed without his cousin's
knowledge; though Hardy volunteered the addition that Mr. Ward was
always respectful and attentive, and that his uncle had lately thought
much more of him than at first.

Rebekah Giles gave her account of the scene in the sitting-room.  She
had been in the service of the deceased for the last four years, and
before in that of his sister-in-law, Mr. Samuel's mother.  She had
herself closed the passage window at seven o'clock in the evening, as
usual.  She had several times previously found it partly open in the
morning, after having thus shut it over-night; but never before, Mr.
Ward's bed unslept in.  Her last interview with Mr. Axworthy was then
narrated, with his words--an imprecation against rifle practice, as an
excuse for idle young rascals to be always out of the way.  Then
followed her communication to the prisoner at half-past nine, when she
saw him go into the parlour, in his volunteer uniform, rifle in hand,
heard him turn the lock of the sitting-room door, and then herself
retired to bed.

Cross-examination did not do much with her, only showing that, when she
brought in the supper, one window had been open, and the blinds, common
calico ones, drawn down, thus rendering it possible for a person to
lurk unseen in the court, and enter by the window.  Her master had
assigned no reason for sending for Mr. Ward.  She did not know whether
Mr. Axworthy had any memorandum-book; she had seen none on the table,
nor found any when she undressed the body, though his purse, watch, and
seals were on his person.

Mr. Rankin's medical evidence came next, both as to the cause of death,
the probable instrument, and the nature of the stains on the desk and
rifle.

When cross-examined, he declared that he had looked at the volunteer
uniform without finding any mark of blood, but from the nature of the
injury it was not likely that there would be any.  He had attended Mr.
Axworthy for several years, and had been visiting him professionally
during a fit of the gout in the last fortnight of June, when he had
observed that the prisoner was very attentive to his uncle.  Mr.
Axworthy was always unwilling to be waited on, but was unusually
tolerant of this nephew's exertions on his behalf, and had seemed of
late to place much reliance on him.

Doctor Richard May was the next witness called.  The sound of that name
caused the first visible change in the prisoner's demeanour, if that
could be called change, which was only a slight relaxation of the firm
closing of the lips, and one sparkle of the dark eyes, ere they were
again bent down as before, though not without a quiver of the lids.

Dr. May had brought tone, look, and manner to the grave impartiality
which even the most sensitive man is drilled into assuming in public;
but he durst not cast one glance in the direction of the prisoner.

In answer to the counsel for the prosecution, he stated that he was at
the Vintry Mill at seven o'clock on the morning of the 6th of July, not
professionally, but as taking interest in the Ward family. He had seen
the body of the deceased, and considered death to have been occasioned
by fracture of the skull, from a blow with a blunt heavy instrument.
The superintendent had shown him a rifle, which he considered, from the
marks on it, as well as from the appearance of the body, to have
produced the injury.  The rifle was the one shown to him; it was the
property of Leonard Ward.  He recognized it by the crest and cipher H.
E.  It had belonged to his son-in-law, Hector Ernescliffe, by whom it
had been given to Leonard Ward.

Poor Doctor!  That was a cruel piece of evidence; and his son and
daughters opposite wondered how he could utter it in that steady
matter-of-fact way; but they knew him to be sustained by hopes of the
cross-examination; and he soon had the opportunity of declaring that he
had known Leonard Ward from infancy, without being aware of any
imputation against him; but had always seen him highly principled and
trustworthy, truthful and honourable, kind-hearted and humane--the last
person to injure the infirm or aged.

Perhaps the good Doctor, less afraid of the sound of his own voice, and
not so much in awe as some of the other witnesses, here in his
eagerness overstepped the bounds of prudence.  His words indeed brought
a tremulous flicker of grateful emotion over the prisoner's face; but
by carrying the inquiry into the region of character and opinion, he
opened the door to a dangerous re-examination by the Crown lawyer, who
required the exact meaning of his unqualified commendation, especially
in the matter of humanity, demanding whether he had never known of any
act of violence on the prisoner's part. The colour flushed suddenly
into Leonard's face, though he moved neither eye nor lip; but his
counsel appealed to the judge, and the pursuit of this branch of the
subject was quashed as irrelevant; but the Doctor went down in very low
spirits, feeling that his evidence had been damaging, and his hopes of
any ray of light becoming fainter.

After this, the village policeman repeated the former statements, as to
the state of the various rooms, the desk, locked and untouched, the
rifle, boat, &c., further explaining that the distance from the mill to
Blewer Station, by the road was an hour and half's walk, by the fields,
not more than half an hour's.

The station-master proved the prisoner's arrival at midnight, his
demand of a day-ticket, his being without luggage, and in a black suit;
and the London policeman proved the finding of the money on his person,
and repeated his own explanation of it.

The money was all in sovereigns, except one five and one ten-pound
note, and Edward Hazlitt, the clerk of the Whitford Bank, was called to
prove the having given the latter in change to Mr. Axworthy for a
fifty-pound cheque, on the 10th of May last.

This same clerk had been at the volunteer drill on the evening of the
5th of July, had there seen the prisoner, had parted with him at dusk,
towards nine o'clock, making an engagement with him to meet on Blewer
Heath for some private practice at seven o'clock on Monday evening.
Thought Mr. Axworthy did sometimes employ young Ward on his
commissions; Mr. Axworthy had once sent him into Whitford to pay in a
large sum, and another time with an order to be cashed. The dates of
these transactions were shown in the books; and Hazlitt added, on
further interrogation, that Samuel Axworthy could not have been aware
of the sum being sent to the bank, since he had shortly after come and
desired to see the account, which had been laid before him as
confidential manager, when he had shown surprise and annoyance at the
recent deposit, asking through whom it had been made.  Not ten days
subsequently, an order for nearly the entire amount had been cashed,
signed by the deceased, but filled up in Samuel's handwriting.

This had taken place in April; and another witness, a baker, proved the
having paid the five-pound note to old Mr. Axworthy himself on the 2nd
of May.

Samuel Axworthy himself was next called.  His florid face wore
something of the puffed, stupefied look it had had at the inquest, but
his words were ready, and always to the point.  He identified the bag
in which the money had been found, giving an account of it similar to
Hardy's, and adding that he had last seen it lying by his cousin's
desk.  His uncle had no account with any London bank, all transactions
had of late passed through his own hands, and he had never known the
prisoner employed in any business of importance--he could not have been
kept in ignorance of it if it had previously been the case.  The
deceased had a black shagreen pocket-book, with a silver clasp, which
he occasionally used, but the witness had never known him give it out
of his own hand, nor take a receipt in it.  Had not seen it on the
morning of the 6th, nor subsequently. Could not account for the sum
found on the person of the prisoner, whose salary was L50 per annum,
and who had no private resources, except the interest of L2000, which,
he being a minor, was not in his own hands. Deceased was fond of
amassing sovereigns, and would often keep them for a longtime in the
drawer of his desk, as much as from L50 to L100.  There was none there
when the desk was opened on the 6th of July, though there had certainly
been gold there two days previously. It was kept locked.  It had a
small Bramah key, which his uncle wore on his watch-chain, in his
waistcoat pocket.  The drawer was locked when he saw it on the morning
of the 6th.

The Doctor, who had joined his children, gave a deep respiration, and
relaxed the clenching of his hand, as this witness went down.

Then it came to the turn of Aubrey Spencer May.  The long waiting,
after his nerves had been wound up, had been a severe ordeal, and his
delicacy of constitution and home breeding had rendered him peculiarly
susceptible.  With his resemblance to his father in form and
expression, it was like seeing the Doctor denuded of that shell of
endurance with which he had contrived to conceal his feelings. The boy
was indeed braced to resolution, bat the resolution was equally visible
with the agitation in the awe-stricken brow, varying colour, tightened
breath, and involuntary shiver, as he took the oath.  Again Leonard
looked up with one of his clear bright glances, and perhaps a shade of
anxiety; but Aubrey, for his own comfort, was too short-sighted for
meeting of eyes from that distance.

Seeing his agitation, and reckoning on his evidence, the counsel gave
him time, by minutely asking if his double Christian name were
correctly given, his age, and if he were not the son of Dr. May.

'You were the prisoner's school-fellow, I believe?'

'No,' faltered Aubrey.

'But you live near him?'

'We are friends,' said Aubrey, with sudden firmness and precision; and
from the utterance of that emphatic _are_, his spirit returned.

'Did you often see him?'

'On most Sundays, after church.'

'Did you ever hear him say he had any thoughts of the means of leaving
the mill privately?'

'Something like it,' said Aubrey, turning very red.

'Can you tell me the words?'

'He said if things went on, that I was not to be surprised if I heard
non est inventus,' said Aubrey, speaking as if rapidity would conceal
the meaning of the words, but taken aback by being made to repeat and
translate them to the jury.

'And did he mention any way of escaping?'

'He said the window and cedar-tree were made for it, and that he often
went out that way to bathe,' said Aubrey.

'When did this conversation take place?'

'On Sunday, the 22nd of June,' said Aubrey, in despair, as the Crown
lawyer thanked him, and sat down.

He felt himself betrayed into having made their talk wear the air of
deliberate purpose, and having said not one word of what Mr. Bramshaw
had hailed as hopeful.  However, the defending barrister rose up to ask
him what he meant by having answered 'Something like it.'

'Because,' said Aubrey, promptly, 'though we did make the scheme, we
were neither of us in earnest.'

'How do you know the prisoner was not in earnest?'

'We often made plans of what we should like to do.'

'And had you any reason for thinking this one of such plans!'

'Yes,' said Aubrey; 'for he talked of getting gold enough to build up
the market-cross, or else of going to see the Feejee Islands.

'Then you understood the prisoner not to express a deliberate purpose,
so much as a vague design.'

'Just so,' said Aubrey.  'A design that depended on how things went on
at the mill.'  And being desired to explain his words, he added, that
Leonard had said he could not bear the sight of Sam Axworthy's tyranny
over the old man, and was resolved not to stay, if he were made a party
to any of the dishonest tricks of the trade.

'In that case, did he say where he would have gone?'

'First to New Zealand, to my brother, the Reverend Norman May.'

Leonard's counsel was satisfied with the colour the conversation had
now assumed; but the perils of re-examination were not over yet, for
the adverse lawyer requested to know whence the funds were to have come
for this adventurous voyage.

'We laughed a little about that, and he said he should have to try how
far his quarter's salary would go towards a passage in the steerage.'

'If your friend expressed so strong a distaste to his employers and
their business, what induced him to enter it?'

Leonard's counsel again objected to this inquiry, and it was not
permitted.  Aubrey was dismissed, and, flushed and giddy, was met by
his brother Tom, who almost took him in his arms as he emerged from the
passage.

'O, Tom! what have I done?'

'Famously, provided there's no miller in the jury.  Come,' as he felt
the weight on his arm, 'Flora says I am to take you down and make you
take something.'

'No, no, no, I can't!  I must go back.'

'I tell you there's nothing going on.  Every one is breathing and
baiting.'  And he got him safe to a pastrycook's, and administered
brandy cherries, which Aubrey bolted whole like pills, only entreating
to return, and wanting to know how he thought the case going.

'Excellently.  Hazlitt's evidence and yours ought to carry him through.
And Anderson says they have made so much out of the witnesses for the
prosecution, that they need call none for the defence; and so the enemy
will be balked of their reply, and we shall have the last word.  I vow
I have missed my vocation.  I know I was born for a barrister!'

'Now may we come back?' said the boy, overwhelmed by his brother's
cheeriness; and they squeezed into court again, Tom inserting Aubrey
into his own former seat, and standing behind him on half a foot at the
angle of the passage.  They were in time for the opening of the
defence, and to hear Leonard described as a youth of spirit and
promise, of a disposition that had won him general affection and
esteem, and recommended to universal sympathy by the bereavement which
was recent in the memory of his fellow-townsmen; and there was a glance
at the mourning which the boy still wore.

'They had heard indeed that he was quick-tempered and impulsive; but
the gentlemen of the jury were some of them fathers, and he put it to
them whether a ready and generous spirit of indignation in a lad were
compatible with cowardly designs against helpless old age; whether one
whose recreations were natural science and manly exercise, showed
tokens of vicious tendencies; above all, whether a youth, whose
friendship they had seen so touchingly claimed by a son of one of the
most highly respected gentlemen in the county, were evincing the
propensities that lead to the perpetration of deeds of darkness.'

Tom patted Aubrey on the shoulder; and Aubrey, though muttering
'humbug,' was by some degrees less wretched.

'Men did not change their nature on a sudden,' the counsel continued;
'and where was the probability that a youth of character entirely
unblemished, and of a disposition particularly humane and generous,
should at once rush into a crime of the deep and deadly description, to
which a long course of dissipation, leading to perplexity, distress,
and despair, would be the only inducement?'

He then went on to speak of Leonard's position at the mill, as junior
clerk.  He had been there for six months, without a flaw being
detected, either in his integrity, his diligence, or his regularity;
indeed, it was evident that he had been gradually acquiring a greater
degree of esteem and confidence than he had at first enjoyed, and had
been latterly more employed by his uncle.  That a young man of superior
education should find the daily drudgery tedious and distasteful, and
that one of sensitive honour should be startled at the ordinary, he
might almost say proverbial, customs of the miller's trade, was
surprising to no one; and that he should unbosom himself to a friend of
his own age, and indulge together with him in romantic visions of
adventure, was, to all who remembered their own boyhood, an
illustration of the freshness and ingenuousness of the character that
thus unfolded itself.  Where there were day-dreams, there was no room
for plots of crime.

Then ensued a species of apology for the necessity of entering into
particulars that did not redound to the credit of a gentleman, who had
appeared before the court under such distressing circumstances as Mr.
Samuel Axworthy; but it was needful that the condition of the family
should be well understood, in order to comprehend the unhappy train of
events which had conducted the prisoner into his present situation.  He
then went through what had been traceable through the evidence--that
Samuel Axworthy was a man of expensive habits, and accustomed to drain
his uncle's resources to supply his own needs; showing how the sum,
which had been intrusted to the prisoner, to be paid into the local
bank, had been drawn out by the elder nephew as soon as he became aware
of the deposit; and how, shortly after, the prisoner had expressed to
Aubrey May his indignation at the tyranny exercised on his uncle.

'By and by, another sum is amassed,' continued Leonard's advocate. 'How
dispose of it?  The local bank is evidently no security from the
rapacity of the elder nephew.  Once aware of its existence, he knows
how to use means for compelling its surrender; and the feeble old man
can no longer call his hard-earned gains his own except on sufferance.
The only means of guarding it is to lodge it secretly in a distant
bank, without the suspicion of his nephew Samuel; but the invalid is
too infirm to leave his apartment; his fingers, crippled by gout,
refuse even to guide the pen.  He can only watch for an opportunity,
and this is at length afforded by the absence of the elder nephew for
two days at the county races.  This will afford time for a trustworthy
and intelligent messenger to convey the sum to town, deposit it in
Messrs, Drummond's bank, and return unobserved. When, therefore, supper
is brought in, Mr. Axworthy sends for the lad on whom he has learnt to
depend, and shows much disappointment at his absence.  Where is he?  Is
he engaged with low companions in the haunts of vice, that are the
declivity towards crime?  Is he gaming, or betting, or drinking?  No.
He has obeyed the summons of his country; he is a zealous volunteer,
and is eagerly using a weapon presented to him by a highly respected
gentleman of large fortune in a neighbouring county; nay, so far is he
from any sinister purpose, that he is making an appointment with a
fellow-rifleman for the ensuing Monday.  On his return at dark, he
receives a pressing summons to his uncle's room, and hastens to obey it
without pausing to lay aside his rifle.  The commission is explained,
and well understanding the painfulness of the cause, he discreetly asks
no questions, but prepares to execute it.  The sum of L124 12s. is
taken from the drawer of the desk, the odd money assigned to travelling
expenses, the L120 placed in a bag brought in from the office for the
purpose, bearing the initials of the owner, and a receipt in a private
pocket-book was signed by him for the amount, and left open on the
table for the ink to dry.

'Who that has ever been young, can doubt the zest and elevation of
receiving for the first time a confidential mission?  Who can doubt
that even the favourite weapon would be forgotten where it stood, and
that it would only be accordant to accredited rules that the window
should be preferable to the door?  Had it not already figured in the
visions of adventure in the Sunday evening's walk? was it not a
favourite mode of exit in the mornings, when bathing and fishing were
more attractive than the pillow!  Moreover, the moonlight disclosed
what appeared like a figure in the court-yard, and there was reason at
the time to suppose it a person likely to observe and report upon the
expedition.  The opening of the front door might likewise attract
notice; and if the cousin should, as was possible, return that night,
the direct road was the way to meet him.  The hour was too early for
the train which was to be met, but a lighted candle would reveal the
vigil, and moonlight on the meadows was attractive at eighteen.
Gentlemen of soberer and maturer years might be incredulous, but surely
it was not so strange or unusual for a lad, who indulged in visions of
adventure, to find a moonlight walk by the river-side more inviting
than a bed-room.

'Shortly after, perhaps as soon as the light was extinguished, the
murder must have been committed.  The very presence of that light had
been guardianship to the helpless old man below.  When it was quenched,
nothing remained astir, the way from without was open, the weapon stood
only too ready to hand, the memorandum-book gave promise of booty and
was secured, though nothing else was apparently touched. It was this
very book that contained the signature that would have exonerated the
prisoner, and to which he fearlessly appealed upon his arrest at the
Paddington Station, before, for his additional misfortune, he had time
to discharge himself of his commission, and establish his innocence by
the deposit of the money at the bank.  He has thus for a while become
the victim of a web of suspicious circumstances.  But look at these
very circumstances more closely, and they will be found perfectly
consistent with the prisoner's statement, never varying, be it
remembered, from the explanation given to the policeman in first
surprise and horror of the tidings of the crime.

'It might have been perhaps thought that there was another alternative
between entire innocence and a deliberate purpose of robbery and
murder-namely, that reproof from the old man had provoked a blow, and
that the means of flight had been hastily seized upon in the moment of
confusion and alarm.  This might have been a plausible line of defence,
and secure of a favourable hearing; but I beg to state that the
prisoner has distinctly refused any such defence, and my instructions
are to contend for his perfect innocence.  A nature such as we have
already traced is, as we cannot but perceive, revolted by the bare idea
of violence to the aged and infirm, and recoils as strongly from the
one accusation as from the other.

'The prisoner made his statement at the first moment, and has adhered
to it in every detail, without confusion or self-contradiction.  It
does not attempt to explain all the circumstances, but they all tally
exactly with his story; he is unable to show by whom the crime could
have been committed, nor is he bound in law or justice so to do; nay,
his own story shows the absolute impossibility of his being able to
explain what took place in his absence.  But mark how completely the
established facts corroborate his narrative.  Observe first the
position in which the body was found, the head on the desk, the stain
of blood corresponding with the wound, the dress undisturbed, all
manifestly untouched since the fatal stroke was dealt.  Could this have
been the case, had the key of the drawer of gold been taken from the
waistcoat pocket, the chain from about the neck of the deceased, and
both replaced after the removal of the money and relocking the drawer!
Can any one doubt that the drawer was opened, the money taken out, and
the lock secured, while Mr. Axworthy was alive and consenting?  Again,
what robber would convey away the spoil in a bag bearing the initials
of the owner, and that not caught up in haste, but fetched in for the
purpose from the office?  Or would so tell-tale a weapon as the rifle
have been left conspicuously close at hand?  There was no guilty
precipitation, for the uniform had been taken off and folded up, and
with a whole night before him, it would have been easy to reach a more
distant station, where his person would not have been recognized.  Why,
too, if this were the beginning of a flight and exile, should no
preparation have been made for passing a single night from home? why
should a day-ticket have been asked for?  No, the prisoner's own
straightforward, unvarnished statement is the only consistent
interpretation of the facts, otherwise conflicting and incomprehensible.

'That a murder has been committed is unhappily too certain.  I make no
attempt to unravel the mystery.  I confine myself to the far more
grateful task of demonstrating, that to fasten the imputation on the
accused, would be to overlook a complication of inconsistencies, all
explained by his own account of himself, but utterly inexplicable on
the hypothesis of his guilt.

'Circumstantial evidence is universally acknowledged to be perilous
ground for a conviction; and I never saw a case in which it was more
manifestly delusive than in the present, bearing at first an imposing
and formidable aspect, but on examination, confuted in every detail.
Most assuredly,' continued the counsel, his voice becoming doubly
earnest, 'while there is even the possibility of innocence, it becomes
incumbent on you, gentlemen of the jury, to consider well the fearful
consequences of a decision in a matter of life or death--a decision for
which there can be no reversal.  The facts that have come to light are
manifestly incomplete.  Another link in the chain has yet to be added;
and when it shall come forth, how will it be if it should establish the
guiltlessness of the prisoner too late?  Too late, when a young life of
high promise, and linked by close family ties, and by bonds of ardent
friendship with so many, has been quenched in shame and disgrace, for a
crime to which he may be an utter stranger.

'The extinction of the light in that upper window was the sign for
darkness and horror to descend on the mill!  Here is the light of life
still burning, but a breath of yours can extinguish it in utter gloom,
and then who may rekindle it!  Nay, the revelation of events that would
make the transactions of that fatal night clear as the noonday, would
never avail to rekindle the lamp, that may yet, I trust, shine forth to
the world--the clearer, it may be, from the unmerited imputations,
which it has been my part to combat, and of which his entire life is a
confutation.'

Mrs. Pugh was sobbing under her veil; Gertrude felt the cause won. Tom
noiselessly clapped the orator behind his brother's back, and nodded
his approval to his father.  Even Leonard lifted up his face, and shot
across a look, as if he felt deliverance near after the weary day, that
seemed to have been a lifetime already, though the sunbeams were only
beginning to fall high and yellow on the ceiling, through the heated
stifling atmosphere, heavy with anxiety and suspense.  Doctor May was
thinking of the meeting after the acquittal, of the telegram to
Stoneborough, of the sister's revival, and of Ethel's greeting.

Still the judge had to sum up; and all eyes turned on him, knowing that
the fate of the accused would probably depend on the colouring that the
facts adduced would assume in his hands.  Flora, who met him in
society, was struck by the grave and melancholy bracing, as it were, of
the countenance, that she had seen as kindly and bright as her
father's; and the deep, full voice, sad rather than stern, the very
tone of which conveyed to every mind how heavy was the responsibility
of justice and impartiality.  In effect, the very force of the
persuasions made for the defence, unanswered by the prosecution,
rendered it needful for him to give full weight to the evidence for the
other side; namely, the prisoner's evident impatience of his position,
and premeditated flight, the coincidence of the times, the being the
last person seen to enter the room, and with the very weapon that had
been the instrument of the crime; the probability that the deceased had
himself opened the drawer, the open window, the flight, and the missing
sum being found on his person, the allegation that the receipt would be
found in the pocket-book, unsupported by any testimony as to the
practice of the deceased; the strangeness of leaving the premises so
much too early for the train, and, by his own account, leaving a person
prowling in the court, close to his uncle's window.  No opinion was
given; but there was something that gave a sense that the judge felt it
a crushing weight of evidence.  Yet so minutely was every point
examined, so carefully was every indication weighed which could tend to
establish the prisoner's innocence, that to those among his audience
who believed that innocence indubitable, it seemed as if his arguments
proved it, even more triumphantly than the pleading of the counsel, as,
vibrating between hope and fear, anxiety and gratitude, they followed
him from point to point of the unhappy incident, hanging upon every
word, as though each were decisive.

When at length he ceased, and the jury retired, the breathless
stillness continued.  With some, indeed, there was the relaxation of
long-strained attention, eyes unbent, and heads turned, but Flora had
to pass her arm round her little sister, to steady the child's nervous
trembling; Aubrey sat rigid and upright, the throbs of his heart
well-nigh audible; and Dr. May leant forward, and covered his eyes with
his hand; Tom, who alone dared glance to the dock, saw that Leonard too
had retired.  Those were the most terrible minutes they had ever spent
in their lives; but they were minutes of hope--of hope of relief from a
burthen, becoming more intolerable with every second's delay ere the
rebound.

Long as it seemed to them, it was not in reality more than a quarter of
an hour before the jury returned, and with slow grave movements, and
serious countenances, resumed their places. Leonard was already in his;
his cheek paler, his fingers locked together, and his eyes scanning
each as they came forward, and one by one their names were called over.
His head was erect, and his bearing had something undaunted, though
intensely anxious.

The question was put by the clerk of the court, 'How find you? Guilty
or Not guilty?'

Firmly, though sadly, the foreman rose, and his answer was, 'We find
the prisoner guilty; but we earnestly recommend him to mercy.'

Whether Tom felt or not that Aubrey was in a dead faint, and rested
against him as a senseless weight, he paid no visible attention to
aught but one face, on which his eyes were riveted as though nothing
would ever detach them--and that face was not the prisoner's.

Others saw Leonard's face raised upwards, and a deep red flush spread
over brow and cheek, though neither lip nor eye wavered.

Then came the question whether the prisoner had anything to say,
wherefore judgment should not be passed upon him.

Leonard made a step forward, and his clear steady tone did not shake
for a moment as he spoke.  'No.  I see that appearances are so much
against me, that man can hardly decide otherwise.  I have known from
the first that nothing could show my innocence but the finding of the
receipt.  In the absence of that one testimony, I feel that I have had
a fair trial, and that all has been done for me that could be done; and
I thank you for it, my Lord, and you, Gentlemen,' as he bent his head;
then added, 'I should like to say one thing more.  My Lord, you would
not let the question be asked, how I brought all this upon myself.  I
wish to say it myself, for it is that which makes my sentence just in
the sight of God.  It is true that, though I never lifted my hand
against my poor uncle, I did in a moment of passion fling a stone at my
brother, which, but for God's mercy, might indeed have made me a
murderer.  It was for this, and other like outbreaks, that I was sent
to the mill; and it may be just that for it I should die--though indeed
I never hurt my uncle.'

Perhaps there was something in the tone of that one word, indeed,
which, by recalling his extreme youth, touched all hearts more than
even the manly tone of his answer, and his confession.  There was a
universal weeping and sobbing throughout the court; Mrs. Pugh was on
the verge of hysterics, and obliged to be supported away; and Gertrude
was choking between the agony of contagious feeling and dread of
Flora's displeasure; and all the time Leonard stood calm, with his
brave head and lofty bearing, wound up for the awful moment of the
sentence.

The weeping was hushed, when the crier of the court made proclamation,
commanding all persons on pain of imprisonment to be silent.  Then the
judge placed on his head the black cap, and it was with trembling hands
that he did so; the blood had entirely left his face, and his lips were
purple with the struggle to contend with and suppress his emotion.  He
paused, as though he were girding himself up to the most terrible of
duties, and when he spoke his voice was hollow, as he began:

'Leonard Axworthy Ward, you have been found guilty of a crime that
would have appeared impossible in one removed from temptation by birth
and education such as yours have been.  What the steps may have been
that led to such guilt, must lie between your own conscience and that
God whose justice you have acknowledged.  To Him you have evidently
been taught to look; and may you use the short time that still remains
to you, in seeking His forgiveness by sincere repentance.  I will
forward the recommendation to mercy, but it is my duty to warn you that
there are no such palliating circumstances in the evidence, as to
warrant any expectation of a remission of the sentence.

And therewith followed the customary form of sentence, ending with the
solemn 'And may God Almighty have mercy on your soul!'

Full and open, and never quailing, had the dark eyes been fixed upon
the judge all the time; and at those last words, the head bent low, and
the lips moved for 'Amen.'

Then Tom, relieved to find instant occupation for his father, drew his
attention to Aubrey's state; and the boy between Tom and George Rivers
was, as best they could, carried through the narrow outlets, and laid
down in a room, opened to them by the sheriff, where his father and
Flora attended him, while Tom flew for remedies; and Gertrude sobbed
and wept as she had never done in her life.

It was some time before the swoon yielded, or Dr. May could leave his
son, and then he was bent on at once going to the prisoner; but he was
so shaken and tremulous, that Tom insisted on giving him his arm, and
held an umbrella over him in the driving rain.

'Father,' he said, as soon as they were in the street, 'I can swear who
did it.'

Dr. May just hindered himself from uttering the name, but Tom answered
as if it had been spoken.

'Yes.  I saw the face of fiendish barbarity that once was over me, when
I was a miserable little school-boy!  He did it; and he has the
receipt.'

Dr. May squeezed his arm.  'I have not betrayed the secret, have I!'

'You knew that he knew it!'

'Not knew--suspected--generosity.'

'I saw him!  I saw him cast those imploring earnest eyes of his on the
scoundrel as he spoke of the receipt--and the villain try to make
himself of stone.  Well, if I have one wish in life, it is to see that
fellow come to the fate he deserves.  I'll never lose sight of him;
I'll dog him like a bloodhound!'

And what good will that do, when--Tom, Tom, we must move Heaven and
earth for petitions.  I'll take them up myself, and get George Rivers
to take me to the Home Secretary.  Never fear, while there's justice in
Heaven.'

'Here's Henry!' exclaimed Tom, withholding his father, who had almost
ran against the brother, as they encountered round a corner.

He was pale and bewildered, and hardly seemed to hear the Doctor's
hasty asseverations that he would get a reprieve.

'He sent me to meet you,' said Henry.  'He wants you to go home--to Ave
I mean.  He says that is what he wants most--for you to go to her now,
and to come to him to-morrow, or when you can; and he wants to hear how
Aubrey is,' continued Henry, as if dreamily repeating a lesson.

'He saw then--?'

'Yes, and that seems to trouble him most.'

Dr. May was past speaking, and Tom was obliged to answer for him--that
Aubrey was pretty well again, and had desired his dearest, dearest
love; then asked how Leonard was.

'Calm and firm as ever,' said Henry, half choked.  'Nothing seems to
upset him, but speaking of--of you and Aubrey, Dr. May--and poor Ave.
But--but they'll be together before long.'

'No such thing,' said Dr. May.  'You will see that certainty cures,
when suspense kills; and for him, I'll never believe but that all will
be right yet.  Are you going home?'

'I shall try to be with--with the dear unhappy boy as long as I can,
and then I'll come home.'

Dr. May grasped Henry's hand, gave a promise of coming, and a message
of love to the prisoner, tried to say something more, but broke down,
and let Tom lead him away.



