
    And Bishop Gawain as he rose,
  Said, 'Wilton, grieve not for thy woes,
         Disgrace and trouble;
  For He who honour best bestows,
         Can give thee double.'--Marmion


Dr. May had written to Portland, entreating that no communication might
be made to Leonard Ward before his arrival; and the good physician's
affection for the prisoner had been so much observed, that no one would
have felt it fair to anticipate him.  Indeed, he presented himself at
the prison gates only two hours after the arrival of the documents,
when no one but the governor was aware of their contents.

Leonard was as usual at his business in the schoolmaster's department;
and thither a summons was sent for him, while Dr. May and the governor
alone awaited his arrival.  Tom's visit was still very recent; and
Leonard entered with anxious eyes, brow drawn together, and compressed
lips, as though braced to meet another blow; and the unusual room, the
presence of the governor instead of the warder, and Dr. May's
irrepressible emotion, so confirmed the impression, that his face at
once assumed a resolute look of painful expectation.

'My boy,' said Dr. May, clasping both his hands in his own, 'you have
borne much of ill.  Can you bear to hear good news?'

'Am I to be sent out to Australia already?' said Leonard--for a
shortening of the eight years before his ticket-of-leave was the sole
hope that had presented itself.

'Sent out, yes; out to go wherever you please, Leonard.  The right is
come round.  The truth is out.  You are a free man!  Do you know what
that is?  It is a pardon.  Your pardon.  All that can be done to right
you, my boy--but it is as good as a reversal of the sentence.'

The Doctor had spoken this with pauses; going on, as Leonard, instead
of answering, stood like one in a dream, and at last said with
difficulty, 'Who did it then?'

'It was as you always believed.'

'Has he told?' said Leonard, drawing his brows together with the effort
to understand.

'No, Leonard.  The vengeance he had brought on himself did not give
space for repentance; but the pocket-book, with your receipt, was upon
him, and your innocence is established.'

'And let me congratulate you,' added the governor, shaking hands with
him; 'and add, that all I have known of you has been as complete an
exculpation as any discovery can be.'

Leonard's hand was passive, his cheek had become white, his forehead
still knit.  'Axworthy!' he said, still as in a trance.

'Yes.  Hurt in a brawl at Paris.  He was brought to the Hotel Dieu; and
my son Tom was called to see him.'

'Sam Axworthy! repeated Leonard, putting his hand over his eyes, as if
one sensation overpowered everything else; and thus he stood for some
seconds, to the perplexity of both.

They showed him the papers: he gazed, but without comprehension; and
then putting the bag, provided by Tom, into his hand, they sent him,
moving in a sort of mechanical obedience, into the room of one of the
officials to change his dress.

Dr. May poured out to the governor and chaplain, who by this time had
joined them, the history of Leonard's generous behaviour at the time of
the trial, and listened in return to their account of the growing
impression he had created--a belief, almost reluctant, that instead of
being their prime specimen, he could only be in their hands by mistake.
He was too sincere not to have confessed had he been really guilty; and
in the long run, such behaviour as his would have been impossible in
one unrepentant.  He had been the more believed from the absence of
complaint, demonstration, or assertion; and the constant endeavour to
avoid notice, coupled with the quiet thorough execution of whatever was
set before him with all his might.

This was a theme to occupy the Doctor for a long time; but at last he
grew eager for Leonard's return, and went to hasten him.  He started
up, still in the convict garb, the bag untouched.

'I beg your pardon,' he said, when his friend's exclamation had
reminded him of what had been desired of him; and in a few minutes he
reappeared in the ordinary dress of a gentleman, but the change did not
seem to have made him realize his freedom--there was the same
submissive manner, the same conventional gesture of respect in reply to
the chaplain's warm congratulation.

'Come, Leonard, I am always missing the boat, but I don't want to do so
now.  We must get home to-night.  Have you anything to take with you?'

'My Bible and Prayer-Book.  They are my own, sir;' as he turned to the
governor.  'May I go to my cell for them?'

Again they tarried long for him, and became afraid that he had fallen
into another reverie; but going to fetch him, found that the delay was
caused by the farewells of all who had come in his way.  The tidings of
his full justification had spread, and each official was eager to wish
him good speed, and thank him for the aid of his example and support.
The schoolmaster, who had of late treated him as a friend, kept close
to him, rejoicing in his liberation, but expecting to miss him sorely;
and such of the convicts as were within reach, were not without their
share in the general exultation.  He had never galled them by his
superiority; and though Brown, the clerk, had been his only friend, he
had done many an act of kindness; and when writing letters for the
unlearned, had spoken many a wholesome simple word that had gone home
to the heart.  His hand was as ready for a parting grasp from a
fellow-prisoner as from a warder; and his thought and voice were
recalled to leave messages for men out of reach; his eyes moistened at
the kindly felicitations; but when he was past the oft-trodden
precincts of the inner court and long galleries, the passiveness
returned, and he received the last good-byes of the governor and
superior officers, as if only half alive to their import.  And thus,
silent, calm, and grave, his composure like that of a man walking in
his sleep, did Leonard Ward pass the arched gateway, enter on the outer
world, and end his three and a half years of penal servitude.

'I'm less like an angel than he is like St. Peter,' thought Dr. May, as
he watched the fixed dreamy gaze, 'but this is like "yet wist he not
that it was true, but thought he saw a vision."  When will he realize
liberty, and enjoy it?  I shall do him a greater kindness by leaving
him to himself.'

And in spite of his impatience, Dr. May refrained from disturbing that
open-eyed trance all the way down the long hill, trusting to the crowd
in the steamer for rousing him to perceive that he was no longer among
russet coats and blue shirts; but he stood motionless, gazing, or at
least his face turned, towards the Dorset coast, uttering no word,
making no movement, save when summoned by his guide--then obeying as
implicitly as though it were his jailor.

So they came to the pier; and so they walked the length of Weymouth,
paced the platform, and took their places in the train.  Just as they
had shot beyond the town, and come into the little wooded valleys
beyond, Leonard turned round, and with the first sparkle in his eye,
exclaimed, 'Trees!  Oh, noble trees and hedges!' then turned again to
look in enchantment at the passing groups--far from noble, though
bright with autumn tints--that alternated with the chalk downs.

Dr. May was pleased at this revival, and entertained at the start and
glance of inquiring alarm from an old gentleman in the other corner.
Presently, in the darkness of a cutting, again Leonard spoke: 'Where
are you taking me, Dr. May?'

'Home, of course.'

Whatever the word might imply to the poor lad, he was satisfied, and
again became absorbed in the sight of fields, trees, and hedgerows;
while Dr. May watched the tokens of secret dismay in their
fellow-traveller, who had no doubt understood 'home' to mean his
private asylum.  Indeed, though the steady full dark eyes showed no
aberration, there was a strange deep cave between the lid and the
eyebrow, which gave a haggard look; the spare, worn, grave features had
an expression--not indeed weak, nor wandering, but half bewildered,
half absorbed, moreover, in spite of Tom's minute selection of apparel,
it had been too hasty a toilette for the garments to look perfectly
natural; and the cropped head was so suspicious, that it was no wonder
that at the first station, the old gentleman gathered up his umbrella,
with intense courtesy squeezed gingerly to the door, carefully avoiding
any stumble over perilous toes, and made his escape--entering another
carriage, whence he no doubt signed cautions against the lunatic and
his keeper, since no one again invaded their privacy.

Perhaps this incident most fully revealed to the Doctor, how unlike
other people his charge was, how much changed from the handsome
spirited lad on whom the trouble had fallen; and he looked again and
again at the profile turned to the window, as fixed and set as though
it had been carved.

'Ah, patience is an exhausting virtue!' said he to himself.  'Verily it
is bearing--bearing up under the full weight; and the long bent spring
is the slower in rebounding in proportion to its inherent strength.
Poor lad, what protracted endurance it has been!  There is health and
force in his face; no line of sin, nor sickness, nor worldly care, such
as it makes one's heart ache to see aging young faces; yet how utterly
unlike the face of one and-twenty!  I had rather see it sadder than so
strangely settled and sedate!  Shall I speak to him again?  Not yet:
those green hill-sides, those fields and cattle, must refresh him
better than my clavers, after his grim stony mount of purgatory.  I
wish it were a brighter day to greet him, instead of this gray damp
fog.'

The said fog prevented any semblance of sunset; but through the gray
moonlit haze, Leonard kept his face to the window, pertinaciously
clearing openings in the bedewed glass, as though the varying outline
of the horizon had a fascination for him.  At last, after ten minutes
of glaring gas at a junction had by contrast rendered the mist
impenetrable, and reduced the view to brightened clouds of steam, and
to white telegraphic posts, erecting themselves every moment, with
their wires changing their perspective in incessant monotony, he ceased
his gaze, and sat upright in his place, with the same strange rigid
somnambulist air.

Dr. May resolved to rouse him.

'Well, Leonard,' he said, 'this has been a very long fever; but we are
well through it at last--with the young doctor from Paris to our aid.'

Probably Leonard only heard the voice, not the words, for he passed his
hand over his face, and looked up to the Doctor, saying dreamily, 'Let
me see!  Is it all true?' and then, with a grave wistful look, 'It was
not I who did that thing, then?'

'My dear!' exclaimed the Doctor, starting forward, and catching hold of
his hand, 'have they brought you to this?'

'I always meant to ask you, if I ever saw you alone again,' said
Leonard.

'But you don't mean that you have imagined it!'

'Not constantly--not when any one was with me,' said Leonard, roused by
Dr. May's evident dismay; and drawn on by his face of anxious inquiry.
'At Milbank, I generally thought I remembered it just as they described
it in court, and that it was some miserable ruinous delusion that
hindered my confessing; but the odd thing was, that the moment any one
opened my door, I forgot all about it, resolutions and all, and was
myself again.'

'Then surely--surely you left that horror with the solitude?'

'Yes, till lately; but when it did come back, I could not be sure what
was recollection of fact, and what of my own fancy;' and he drew his
brows together in painful effort.  'Did I know who did it, or did I
only guess?'

'You came to a right conclusion, and would not let me act on it.'

'And I really did write the receipt, and not dream it?'

'That receipt has been in my hand.  It was what has brought you here.'
And now to hearing ears, Dr. May went over the narrative; and Leonard
stood up under the little lamp in the roof of the carriage to read the
papers.

'I recollect--I understand,' he said, presently, and sat down, grave
and meditative--no longer dreamy, but going over events, which had at
last acquired assurance to his memory from external circumstances.
Presently his fingers were clasped together over his face, his head
bent, and then he looked up, and said, 'Do they know it--my sister and
brother?'

'No.  We would not write till you were free.  You must date the first
letter from Stoneborough.'

The thought had brought a bitter pang.  'One half year sooner--' and he
leant back in his seat, with fingers tightly pressed together, and
trembling with emotion.

'Nay, Leonard; may not the dear child be the first to rejoice in the
fulfilment of her own sweet note of comfort?  They could not harm the
innocent.'

'Not innocent,' he said, 'not innocent of causing all the discord that
has ended in their exile, and the dear child's death.'

'Then this is what has preyed on you, and changed you so much more of
late,' said Dr. May.

'When I knew that I was indeed guilty of _her_ death,' said Leonard, in
a calm full conviction of too long standing to be accompanied with
agitation, though permanently bowing him down.

'And you never spoke of this: not to the chaplain?'

'I never could.  It would have implied all the rest that he could not
believe.  And it would not have changed the fact.'

'The aspect of it may change, Leonard.  You know yourself how many
immediate causes combined, of which you cannot accuse yourself--your
brother's wrongheadedness, and all the rest.  And,' added the Doctor,
recovering himself, 'you do see it in other aspects, I know.  Think of
the spirit set free to be near you--free from the world that has gone
so hard with you!'

'I can't keep that thought long; I'm not worthy of it.'

Again he was silent; but presently said, as with a sudden thought, 'You
would have told me if there were any news of Ave.'

'No, there has been no letter since her last inclosure for you,' and
then Dr. May gave the details from the papers on the doings of Henry's
division of the army.

'Will Henry let me be with them?' said Leonard, musingly.

'They will come home, depend upon it.  You must wait till you hear.'

Leonard thought a little while, then said, 'Where did you say I was to
go, Dr. May?'

'Where, indeed?  Home, Leonard--home.  Ethel is waiting for us.  To the
High Street.'

Leonard looked up again with his bewildered face, then said, 'I know
what you do with me will be right, but--'

'Had you rather not?' said the Doctor, startled.

'Rather!' and the Doctor, to his exceeding joy, saw the fingers over
his eyes moist with the tears they tried to hide; 'I only meant--' he
added, with an effort, 'you must think and judge--I can't
think--whether I ought.'

'If you ask me that,' said Dr. May, earnestly, 'all I have to say is,
that I don't know what palace is worthy of you.'

There was not much said after that; and the Doctor fell asleep, waking
only at the halts at stations to ask where he was.

At last came 'Blewer!' and as the light shone on the clock, Leonard
said, 'A quarter past twelve!  It is the very train I went by!  Is it a
dream?'

Ten minutes more, and 'Stoneborough' was the cry.  Hastily springing
out, shuffling the tickets into the porter's hand, and grappling
Leonard's arm as if he feared an escape, Dr. May hurried him into the
empty streets, and strode on in silence.

The pull at the door-bell was answered instantly by Ethel herself. She
held out her hand, and grasped that which Leonard had almost withheld,
shrinking as from too sudden a vision; and then she ardently exchanged
kisses with her father.

'Where's Tom?  Gone to bed?' said Dr. May, stepping into the bright
drawing-room.

'No,' said Ethel, demurely; 'he is gone--he is gone to America.'

The Doctor gave a prodigious start, and looked at her again.

'He went this afternoon.' she said.  'There is some matter about the
'Diseases of Climate' that he must settle before the book is published;
and he thought he could best be spared now.  He has left messages that
I will give you by and by; but you must both be famished.'

Her looks indicated that all was right, and both turned to welcome the
guest, who stood where the first impulse had left him, in the hall, not
moving forward, till he was invited in to the fire, and the meal
already spread.  He then obeyed, and took the place pointed out; while
the Doctor nervously expatiated on the cold, damp, and changes of
train; and Ethel, in the active bashfulness of hidden agitation, made
tea, cut bread, carved chicken, and waited on them with double
assiduity, as Leonard, though eating as a man who had fasted since
early morning, was passive as a little child, merely accepting what was
offered to him, and not even passing his cup till she held out her hand
for it.

She did not even dare to look at him; she could not bear that he should
see her do so; it was enough to know that he was free--that he was
there--that it was over.  She did not want to see how it had changed
him; and, half to set him at ease, half to work off her own excitement,
she talked to her father, and told him of the little events of his
absence till the meal was over; and, at half-past one, good nights were
exchanged with Leonard, and the Doctor saw him to his room, then
returned to his daughter on her own threshold.

'That's a thing to have lived for,' he said.

Ethel locked her hands together, and looked up.

'And now, how about this other denouement?  I might have guessed that
the wind sat in that quarter.'

'But you're not to guess it, papa.  It is really and truly about the
'Diseases of Climate'.'

'Swamp fevers, eh! and agues!'

The 'if you can help it,' was a great comfort now; Ethel could venture
on saying, 'Of course that has something to do with it; but he really
does make the book his object; and please--please don't give any hint
that you suspect anything else.'

'I suppose you are in his confidence; and I must ask no questions.'

'I hated not telling you, and letting you tease him; but he trusted me
just enough not to make me dare to say a word; though I never was sure
there was a word to say.  Now do just once own, papa, that Tom is the
romantic one after all, to have done as he did in the height of the
trouble.'

'Well in his place so should I,' said the Doctor, with the perverseness
of not satisfying expectations of amazement.

'_You_ would,' said Ethel; 'but Tom! would you have thought it of Tom?'

'Tom has more in him than shows through his spectacles,' answered Dr.
May.  'So!  That's the key to his restless fit.  Poor fellow!  How did
it go with him?  They have not been carrying it on all this time,
surely!'

'Oh, no, no, papa!  She cut him to the heart, poor boy! thought he was
laughing at her--told him it had all been irony.  He has no notion
whether she will ever forgive him.'

'A very good lesson, Master Doctor Thomas,' said Dr. May, with a
twinkle in his eye; 'and turn out as it will, it has done him
good--tided him over a dangerous time of life.  Well, you must tell me
all about it to-morrow; I'm too sleepy to know what I'm talking of.'

The sleepiness that always finished off the Doctor's senses at the
right moment, was a great preservative of his freshness and vigour; but
Ethel was far from sharing it, and was very glad when the clock sounded
a legitimate hour for getting up, and dressing by candle-light, briefly
answering Gertrude's eager questions on the arrival. It was a pouring
wet morning, and she forbade Daisy to go to church--indeed, it would
have been too bad for herself on any morning but this--any but this, as
she repeated, smiling at her own spring of thankfulness, as she
fortified herself with a weight of waterproof, and came forth in the
darkness of 7.45, on a grim November day.

A few steps before her, pacing on, umbrellaless, was a figure which
made her hurry to overtake him.

'O, Leonard! after your journey, and in this rain!'

He made a gesture of courtesy, but moved as if to follow, not join her.
Did he not know whether he were within the pale of humanity?

'Here is half an umbrella.  Won't you hold it for me?' she said; and as
he followed his instinct of obedience, she put it into his hand, and
took his arm, thinking that this familiarity would best restore him to
a sense of his regained position; and, moreover, feeling glad and
triumphant to be thus leaning, and to have that strong arm to contend
with the driving blast that came howling round the corner of Minster
Street, and fighting for their shelter.  They were both out of breath
when they paused to recover in the deep porch of the Minster.

'Is Dr. May come home?'

'Yes--and--'

Ethel signed, and Mr. Wilmot held out an earnest hand, with, 'This is
well.  I am glad to see you.'

'Thank you, sir,' said Leonard, heartily; 'and for all--'

'This is your new beginning of life, Leonard.  God bless you in it.'

As Mr. Wilmot passed on, Ethel for the first time ventured to look up
into the eyes--and saw their hollow setting, their loss of sparkle, but
their added steadfastness and resolution.  She could not help repeating
the long-treasured lines: 'And, Leonard,


                         "--grieve not for thy woes,
                    Disgrace and trouble;
                    For He who honour best bestows,
                       Shall give thee double."'


'I've never ceased to be glad you read Marmion with me,' he hastily
said, as they turned into church on hearing a clattering of choristers
behind them.

Clara might have had such sensations when she bound the spurs on her
knight's heels, yet even she could hardly have had so pure, unselfish,
and exquisite a joy as Ethel's, in receiving the pupil who had been in
a far different school from hers.

The gray dawn through the gloom, the depths of shadow in the twilight
church, softening and rendering all more solemn and mysterious, were
more in accordance than bright and beamy sunshine with her subdued
grave thankfulness; and there was something suitable in the fewness of
the congregation that had gathered in the Lady Chapel--so few, that
there was no room for shyness, either in, or for, him who was again
taking his place there, with steady composed demeanour, its stillness
concealing so much.

Ethel had reckoned on the verse--'That He might hear the mournings of
such as are in captivity, and deliver the children appointed unto
death.'  But she had not reckoned on its falling on her ears in the
deep full-toned melodious bass, that came in, giving body to the young
notes of the choristers--a voice so altered and mellowed since she last
had heard it, that it made her look across in doubt, and recognize in
the uplifted face, that here indeed the freed captive was at home, and
lifted above himself.

When the clause, in the Litany, for all prisoners and captives brought
to her the thrill that she had only to look up to see the fulfilment of
many and many a prayer for one captive, for once she did not hear the
response, only saw the bent head, as though there were thoughts went
too deep to find voice.  And again, there was the special thanksgiving
that Mr. Wilmot could not refrain from introducing for one to whom a
great mercy had been vouchsafed. If Ethel had had to swim home, she
would not but have been there!

Charles Cheviot addressed them as they came out of church: 'Good
morning--Mr. Ward, I hope to do myself the honour of calling on you--I
shall see you again, Ethel.

And off he went over the glazy stones to his own house, Ethel knowing
that this cordial salutation and intended call were meant to be
honourable amends for his suspicions; but Leonard, unconscious of the
import, and scarcely knowing indeed that he was addressed, made his
mechanical gesture of respect, and looked up, down, and round, absorbed
in the scene.  'How exactly the same it all looks,' he said; 'the
cloister gate, and the Swan, and the postman in the very same
waterproof cape.'

'Do you not feel like being just awake?'

'No; it is more like being a ghost, or somebody else.'

Then the wind drove them on too fast for speech, till as they crossed
the High Street, Ethel pointed through the plane-trees to two round
black eyes, and a shining black nose, at the dining-room window.

'My Mab, my poor little Mab!--You have kept her all this time!  I was
afraid to ask for her.  I could not hope it.'

'I could not get my spoilt child, Gertrude, to bed without taking Mab,
that she might see the meeting.'

Perhaps it served Daisy right that the meeting did not answer her
expectations.  Mab and her master had both grown older; she smelt round
him long before she was sure of him, and then their content in one
another was less shown by fervent rapture, than by the quiet hand
smoothing her silken coat; and, in return, by her wistful eye, nestling
gesture, gently waving tail.

And Leonard!  How was it with him?  It was not easy to tell in his
absolute passiveness.  He seemed to have neither will nor impulse to
speak, move, or act, though whatever was desired of him, he did with
the implicit obedience that no one could bear to see.  They put books
near him, but he did not voluntarily touch one: they asked if he would
write to his sister, and he took the pen in his hand, but did not
accomplish a commencement.  Ethel asked him if he were tired, or had a
headache.

'Thank you, no,' he said; 'I'll write,' and made a dip in the ink.

'I did not mean to tease you,' she said; 'the mail is not going just
yet, and there is no need for haste.  I was only afraid something was
wrong.'

'Thank you,' he said, submissively; 'I will--when I can think; but it
is all too strange.  I have not seen a lady, nor a room like this,
since July three years.'

After that Ethel let him alone, satisfied that peace was the best means
of recovering the exhaustion of his long-suffering.

The difficulty was that this was no house for quiet, especially the day
after the master's return: the door-bell kept on ringing, and each time
he looked startled and nervous, though assured that it was only
patients.  But at twelve o'clock in rushed Mr. Cheviot's little
brother, with a note from Mary, lamenting that it was too wet for
herself, but saying that Charles was coming in the afternoon, and that
he intended to have a dinner-party of old Stoneborough scholars to
welcome Leonard back.

Meanwhile, Martin Cheviot, wanting to see, and not to stare, and to
unite cordiality and unconsciousness, made an awkward mixture of all,
and did not know how to get away; and before he had accomplished it,
Mr. Edward Anderson was announced.  He heartily shook hands with
Leonard, eagerly welcomed him, and talked volubly, and his last
communication was, 'If it clears, you will see Matilda this afternoon.'

'I did not know she was here.'

'Yes; she and Harvey are come to Mrs. Ledwich's, to stay over Sunday;'
and there was a laugh in the corner of his eye, that convinced Ethel
that the torrents of rain would be no protection.

'Papa,' said she, darting out to meet her father in the hall, 'you must
take Leonard out in your brougham this afternoon, if you don't want him
driven distracted.  If he is in the house, ropes won't hold Mrs. Harvey
Anderson from him!'

So Dr. May invited his guest to share his drive; and the excitement
began to seem unreal when the Doctor returned alone.

'I dropped him at Cocksmoor,' he said.  'It was Richard's notion that
he would be quieter there--able to get out, and go to church, without
being stared at.'

'Did he like it?' asked Gertrude, disappointed.

'If one told him to chop off his finger, he would do it, and never show
whether he liked it.  Richard asked him, and he said, "Thank you."  I
never could get an opening to show him that we did not want to suppress
him; I never saw spirit so quenched.'

Charles Cheviot thought it was a mistake to do what gave the appearance
of suppression--he said that it was due to Leonard to welcome him as
heartily as possible, and not to encourage false shame, where there was
no disgrace; so he set his wife to fill up her cards for his
dinner-party, and included in it Mr. and Mrs. Harvey Anderson, for the
sake of their warm interest in the liberated prisoner.

'However, Leonard was out of the scrape,' as the Doctor expressed it,
for he had one of his severe sore throats, and was laid up at
Cocksmoor.  Richard was dismayed by his passive obedience--a novelty to
the gentle eldest, who had all his life been submitting, and now was
puzzled by his guest's unfailing acquiescence without a token of
preference or independence: and comically amazed at the implicit
fulfilment of his recommendation to keep the throat in bed--a wise
suggestion, but one that the whole house of May, in their own persons,
would have scouted.  Nothing short of the highest authority ever kept
them there.

The semblance of illness was perhaps a good starting-point for a return
to the ways of the world; and on the day week of his going to
Cocksmoor, Ethel found him by the fire, beginning his letters to his
brother and sister, and looking brighter and more cheery, but so devoid
of voice, that speech could not be expected of him.

She had just looked in again after some parish visiting, when a quick
soldierly step was heard, and in walked Aubrey.

'No; I'm not come to you, Ethel; I'm only come to this fellow;' and he
ardently grasped his hand.  'I've got leave till Monday, and I shall
stay here and see nobody else.--What, a sore throat?  Couldn't you get
wrapped up enough between the two doctors?'

Leonard's eyes lighted as he muttered his hoarse 'Thank you,' and Ethel
lingered for a little desultory talk to her brother, contrasting the
changes that the three years had made in the two friends.  Aubrey,
drilled out of his home scholarly dreaminess by military and practical
discipline, had exchanged his native languor for prompt upright
alertness of bearing and speech; his eye had grown more steady, his
mouth had lost its vague pensive expression, and was rendered sterner
by the dark moustache; definite thought, purpose, and action, had
moulded his whole countenance and person into hopeful manhood, instead
of visionary boyhood.  The other face, naturally the most full of fire
and resolution, looked strangely different in its serious unsmiling
gravity, the deeply worn stamp of patient endurance and utter
isolation.  There was much of rest and calm, and even of content--but
withal a quenched look, as if the lustre of youth and hope had been
extinguished, and the soul had been so driven in upon itself, that
there was no opening to receive external sympathy--a settled
expression, all the stranger on a face with the clear smoothness of
early youth.  One thing at least was unchanged--the firm friendship and
affection--that kept the two constantly casting glances over one
another, to assure themselves of the presence before them.

Ethel left them together; and her father, who made out that he should
save time by going to Cocksmoor Church on Sunday morning, reported that
the boys seemed very happy together in their own way; but that Richard
reported himself to have been at the sole expense of conversation in
the evening--the only time such an event could ever have occurred!

Aubrey returned home late on the Sunday evening; and Leonard set off to
walk part of the way with him in the dusk, but ended by coming the
whole distance, for the twilight opened their lips in this renewal of
old habits.

'It is all right to be walking together again,' said Aubrey, warmly;
'though it is not like those spring days.'

'I've thought of them every Sunday.'

'And what are you going to do now, old fellow?'

'I don't know.'

'I hear Bramshaw is going to offer you to come into his office.  Now,
don't do that, Leonard, whatever you do!'

'I don't know.'

'You are to have all your property back, you know, and you could do
much better for yourself than that.'

'I can't tell till I have heard from my brother.'

'But, Leonard, promise me now--you'll not go out and make a Yankee of
yourself.'

'I can't tell; I shall do what he wishes.'

Aubrey presently found that Leonard seemed to have no capacity to think
or speak of the future or the past.  He set Aubrey off on his own
concerns, and listened with interest, asking questions that showed him
perfectly alive to what regarded his friend, but the passive inaction
of will and spirits still continued, and made him almost a
disappointment.

On Monday morning there was a squabble between the young engineer and
the Daisy, who was a profound believer in the scientific object of
Tom's journey, and greatly resented the far too obvious construction
thereof.

'You must read lots of bad novels at Chatham, Aubrey; it is like the
fag end of the most trumpery of them all!'

'You haven't gone far enough in your mathematics, you see, Daisy. You
think one and one--'

'Make two.  So I say.'

'I've gone into the higher branches.'

'I didn't think you were so simple and commonplace.  It would be so
stupid to think he must--just because he could not help making this
discovery.'

'All for want of the higher branches of mathematics!  One plus
one--equals one.'

'One minus common sense, plus folly, plus romance, minus anything to
do.  Your equation is worthy of Mrs. Harvey Anderson.  I gave her a
good dose of the 'Diseases of Climate!''

Aubrey was looking at Ethel all the time Gertrude was triumphing; and
finally he said, 'I've no absolute faith in disinterested philanthropy
to a younger brother--whatever I had before I went to the Tyrol.'

'What has that to do with it?' asked Gertrude.  'Everybody was cut up,
and wanted a change--and you more than all.  I do believe the
possibility of a love affair absolutely drives people mad: and now they
must needs saddle it upon poor Tom--just the one of the family who is
not so stupid, but has plenty of other things to think about.'

'So you think it a stupid pastime?'

'Of course it is.  Why, just look.  Hasn't everybody in the family
turned stupid, and of no use, as soon at they went and fell in love!
Only good old Ethel here has too much sense, and that's what makes her
such a dear old gurgoyle.  And Harry--he is twice the fun after he
comes home, before he gets his fit of love.  And all the story books
that begin pleasantly, the instant that love gets in, they are just
alike--so stupid!  And now, if you haven't done it yourself, you want
to lug poor innocent Tom in for it.'

'When your time comes, may I be there to see!'

He retreated from her evident designs of clapper-clawing him; and she
turned round to Ethel with, 'Now, isn't it stupid, Ethel!'

'Very stupid to think all the zest of life resides in one particular
feeling,' said Ethel; 'but more stupid to talk of what you know nothing
about.'

Aubrey put in his head for a hurried farewell, and, 'Telegraph to me
when Mrs. Thomas May comes home.'

'If Mrs. Thomas May comes home, I'll--'

'Give her that chair cover,' said Ethel; and her idle needlewoman,
having been eight months working one corner of it, went off into fits
of laughter, regarding its completion as an equally monstrous feat with
an act of cannibalism on the impossible Mrs. Thomas May.

How different were these young things, with their rhodomontade and
exuberant animation and spirits, from him in whom all the sparkle and
aspiration of life seemed extinguished!



