<CHAPTER>
LETTER XV  MR. VILLARS TO EVELINA

Berry Hill, April 16.


IN the belief and hope that my Evelina would, ere now, have bid adieu
to London, I had intended to have deferred writing, till I heard
of her return to Howard Grove; but the letter I have this moment
received, with intelligence of Madame Duval's arrival in England,
demands an immediate answer.


Her journey hither equally grieves and alarms me. How much did I
pity my child, when I read of a discovery at once so unexpected
and unwished! I have long dreaded this meeting and its consequence;
to claim you seems naturally to follow acknowledging you. I am well
acquainted with her disposition, and have for many years foreseen
the contest which now threatens us.


Cruel as are the circumstances of this affair, you must not, my
love, suffer it to depress your spirits: remember, that while life
is lent me, I will devote it to your service; and, for future time,
I will make such provisions as shall seem to me most conducive to
your future happiness. Secure of my protection, and relying on my
tenderness, let no apprehensions of Madame Duval disturb your peace:
conduct yourself towards her with all the respect and deference due
to so near a relation, remembering always, that the failure of duty
on her part, can by no means justify any neglect on your's. Indeed,
the more forcibly you are struck with improprieties and misconduct
in another, the greater should be your observance and diligence
to avoid even the shadow of similar errors. Be careful, therefore,
that no remissness of attention, no indifference of obliging, make
known to her the independence I assure you of; but when she fixes
the time for her leaving England, trust to me the task of refusing
your attending her: disagreeable to myself, I own, it will be; yet
to you it would be improper, if not impossible.


In regard to her opinion of me, I am more sorry than surprised at
her determined blindness; the palliation which she feels the want of,
for her own conduct, leads her to seek for failings in all who were
concerned in those unhapppy transactions which she has so much reason
to lament. And this, as it is the cause, so we must in some measure
consider it as the excuse of her inveteracy.


How grateful to me are your wishes to return to Berry Hill! Your
lengthened stay in London, and the dissipation in which I find you
are involved, fill me with uneasiness. I mean not, however, that I
would have you sequester yourself from the party to which you belong,
since Mrs. Mirvan might thence infer a reproof which your youth and
her kindness would render inexcusable. I will not, therefore, enlarge
upon this subject; but content myself with telling you, that I shall
heartily rejoice when I hear of your safe arrival at Howard Grove,
for which place I hope you will be preparing at the time you receive
this letter.


I cannot too much thank you, my best Evelina, for the minuteness of
your communications. Continue to me this indulgence, for I should be
miserable if in ignorance of your proceedings.


How new to you is the scene of life in which you are
engaged!-balls-plays-operas-ridottos!-Ah, my child! At your return
hither, how will you bear the change? My heart trembles for your
future tranquility.-Yet I will hope every thing from the unsullied
whiteness of your soul, and the native liveliness of your disposition.


I am sure I need not say, how much more I was pleased with the
mistakes of your inexperience at the private ball, than with the
attempted adoption of more fashionable manners at the ridotto. But
your confusion and mortifications were such as to entirely silence
all reproofs on my part.


I hope you will see no more of Sir Clement Willoughby, whose
conversation and boldness are extremely disgustful to me. I was
gratified by the good nature of Lord Orville, upon your making use
of his name; but I hope you will never again put it to such a trial.


Heaven bless thee, my dear child! And grant that neither misfortune
nor vice may ever rob thee of that gaiety of heart, which, resulting
from innocence, while it constitutes your own, contributes also to
the felicity of all who know you!  ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
