<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXV EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, April 25.

NO, my dear Sir, no: the work of seventeen years remains such as
it was, ever unworthy your time and your labour; but not more so
now-at least I hope not,-than before that fortnight which has so much
alarmed you.

 And yet I must confess, that I am not half so happy here at present
 as I was
ere I went to town: but the change is in the place, not in me. Captain
Mirvan and Madame Duval have ruined Howard Grove. The harmony that
reigned here is disturbed, our schemes are broken, our way of life is
altered, and our comfort is destroyed. But do not suppose London to
be the source of these evils; for, had our excursion been any where
else, so disagreeable an addition to our household must have caused
the same change at our return.

 I was sure you would be displeased with Sir Clement Willoughby,  and
therefore I am by no means surprised at what you say of him; but
for Lord Orville-I must own I had greatly feared that my weak and
imperfect account would not have procured him the good opinion which
he so well deserves, and which I am delighted to find you seem to
have of him. O, Sir, could I have done justice to the merit of which
I believe him posessed;-could I have painted him to you such as he
appeared to me;-then, indeed, you would have had some idea of the
claim which he has to your approbation!

 After the last letter which I wrote in town, nothing more passed
 previous to
our journey hither, except a very violent quarrel between Captain
Mirvan and Madame Duval. As the Captain intended to travel on
horseback, he had settled that we four females should make use of
his coach. Madame Duval did not come to Queen Ann Street till the
carriage had waited some time at the door; and then, attended by
Monsieur Du Bois, she made her appearance.

 The Captain, impatient to be gone, would not suffer them to enter
 the house,
but insisted that we should immediately get into the coach. We obeyed;
but were no sooner seated, than Madame Duval said, "Come, Monsieur
Du Bois, these girls can make very good room for you; sit closer,
children."

 Mrs. Mirvan looked quite confounded; and M. Du Bois, after making some
apologies about crowding us, actually got into the coach, on the side
with Miss Mirvan and me. But no sooner was he seated, than the Captain,
who had observed this transaction very quietly, walked up to the
coach door, saying, "What, neither with your leave, nor by your leave?"

 M. Du Bois seemed rather shocked, and began to make abundance of
 excuses: but
the Captain neither understood nor regarded him, and, very roughly,
said, "Look'ee, Monseer, this here may be a French fashion for aught I
know,-but give and take is fair in all nations; and so now, d'ye see,
I'll make bold to show you an English one."

And then, seizing his wrist, he made him jump out of the coach.

 M. Du Bois instantly put his hand upon his sword, and threatened to
resent this indignity. The Captain, holding up his stick, bid him draw
at his peril. Mrs. Mirvan, greatly alarmed, got out of the coach, and,
standing between them, intreated her husband to re-enter the house.

 "None of your clack!" cried he angrily; "what the D-l, do you
 suppose I
can't manage a Frenchman?"

 Meantime, Madame Duval called out to M. Du Bois, "Eh, laissez-le,
 mon ami, ne
le corrigez pas; c'est une villaine bete qui n'en vaut pas la peine."

"Monsieur le Capitaine," cried M. Du Bois, "voulez-vous bien ne
demander pardon?"

 "O ho, you demand pardon, do you?" said the Captain," I thought as
 much; I
thought you'd come to;-so you have lost your relish for an English
salutation, have you?" strutting up to him with looks of defiance.

 A crowd was now gathering, and Mrs. Mirvan again besought her husband
 to go
into the house.

 "Why, what a plague is the woman afraid of?-Did you ever know
 a Frenchman
that could not take an affront?-I warrant Monseer knows what he is
about;-don't you Monseer?"

 M. Du Bois, not understanding him, only said, "plait-il, Monsieur?"

 "No, nor dish me neither," answered the Captain; "but, be that as
 it may,
what signifies our parleying here? If you've any thing to propose,
speak at once; if not, why let us go on our journey without more ado."

 "Parbleu, je n'entends rien, moi!" cried M. Du Bois, shrugging up his
shoulders, and looking very dismal.

 Mrs. Mirvan then advanced to him, and said in French, that she was
 sure the
Captain had not any intention to affront him, and begged he would
desist from a dispute which could only be productive of mutual
misunderstanding, as neither of them knew the language of the other.

 This sensible remonstrance had the desired effect; and M. Du Bois,
 making a
bow to every one except the Captain, very wisely gave up the point,
and took leave.

 We then hoped to proceed quietly on our journey; but the turbulent
 Captain
would not yet permit us. He approached Madame Duval with an exulting
air, and said, "Why, how's this, Madame? what, has your champion
deserted you? why, I thought you told me, that you old gentlewomen
had it all your own way among them French sparks?"

 "As to that, Sir," answered she, "it's not of no consequence what you
thought; for a person who can behave in such a low way, may think
what he pleases for me, for I sha'n't mind."

 "Why then, Mistress, since you must needs make so free," cried he,
 "please to
tell me the reason you took the liberty for to ask any of your
followers into my coach without my leave? Answer me to that."

 "Why, then, pray, Sir," returned she, "tell me the reaon why you
 took the
liberty to treat the gentleman in such an unpolite way, as to take
and pull him neck and heels out? I'm sure he hadn't done nothing to
affront you, nor nobody else; and I don't know what great hurt he
would have done you, by just sitting still in the coach; he would
not have eat it."

 "What, do you think, then, that my horses have nothing to do but
 to carry
about your snivelling Frenchmen? If you do, Madam, I must make bold
to tell you, you are out, for I'll see 'em hang'd first."

 "More brute you, then! For they've never carried nobody half so good."

 "Why, look'ee, Madam, if you must needs provoke me, I'll tell you
 a piece of
my mind; you must know, I can see as far into a millstone as another
man; and so, if you thought for to fob me off with another one of your
smirking French puppies for a son-in-law, why you'll find yourself
in a hobble, that's all."

"Sir, you're a-but I won't say what;-but I protest I hadn't no such
a thought, no more hadn't Monsieur Du Bois."

 "My dear," said Mrs. Mirvan, "we shall be very late."

 "Well, well," answered he, "get away then; off with you as fast as
 you can,
it's high time. As to Molly, she's fine lady enough in all conscience;
I want none of your French chaps to make her worse."

 And so saying he mounted his horse and we drove off. And I could
 not but
think, with regret, of the different feelings we experienced upon
leaving London, to what had belonged to our entering it.

 During the journey Madame Duval was so very violent against the
 Captain, that
she obliged Mrs. Mirvan to tell her, that, when in her presence,
she must beg her to choose some other subject of discourse.

 We had a most affectionate reception from Lady Howard, whose
 kindness and
hospitality cannot fail of making every body happy who is disposed
so to be.

 Adieu, my dearest Sir. I hope, though I have hitherto neglected
 to mention
it, that you have always remembered me to whoever has made any inquiry
concerning me.


</CHAPTER>
