<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXXI LADY HOWARD TO SIR JOHN BELMONT, BART

Howard Grove, May 5.


Sir,

YOU will, doubtless, be surprised at receiving a letter from one who
had for so short a period the honour of your acquaintance, and that
at so great a distance of time; but the motive which has induced me to
take this liberty is of so delicate a nature, that were I to commence
making apologies for my officiousness, I fear my letter would be too
long for your patience.


You have, probably, already conjectured the subject upon which I
mean to treat. My regard for Mr. Evelyn, and his amiable daughter,
was well known to you: nor can I ever cease to be interested in
whatever belongs to their memory or family.


I must own myself somewhat distressed in what manner to introduce the
purport of my writing; yet as I think that, in affairs of this kind,
frankness is the first requisite to a good understanding between
the parties concerned, I will neither torment you nor myself with
punctilious ceremonies, but proceed instantly and openly to the
business which occasions my giving you this trouble.


I presume, Sir, it would be superfluous to tell you, that your child
resides still in Dorsetshire, and is still under the protection
of the Reverend Mr.  Villars, in whose house she was born: for,
though no enquiries concerning her have reached his ears, or mine,
I can never suppose it possible you have forborne to make them. It
only remains, therefore, to tell you, that your daughter is now
grown up; that she has been educated with the utmost care, and the
utmost success; and that she is now a most deserving, accomplished,
and amiable young woman.


Whatever may be your view for her future destination in life, it seems
time to declare it. She is greatly admired, and, I doubt not, will
be very much sought after: it is proper, therefore, that her future
expectations, and your pleasure concerning her, should be made known.


Believe me, Sir, she merits your utmost attention and regard. You
could not see and know her, and remain unmoved by those sensations of
affection which belong to so near and tender a relationship. She is
the lovely resemblance of her lovely mother;-pardon, Sir, the liberty
I take in mentioning that unfortunate lady; but I think it behoves
me, upon this occasion, to shew the esteem I felt for her: allow me,
therefore, to say, and be not offended at my freedom, that the memory
of that excellent lady has but too long remained under the aspersions
of calumny; surely it is time to vindicate her fame;-and how can that
be done in a manner more eligible, more grateful to her friends, or
more honourable to yourself, than by openly receiving as your child,
the daughter of the late Lady Belmont?


The venerable man who has had the care of her education, deserves
your warmest acknowledgments, for the unremitting pains he has taken,
and the attention he has shewn in the discharge of his trust. Indeed
she has been peculiarly fortunate in meeting with such a friend and
guardian; a more worthy man, or one whose character seems nearer to
perfection, does not exist.


Permit me to assure you, Sir, she will amply repay whatever regard and
favour you may hereafter shew her, by the comfort and happiness you
cannot fail to find in her affection and duty. To be owned properly
by you is the first wish of her heart; and, I am sure, that to merit
your approbation will be the first study of her life.


I fear that you will think this address impertinent; but I must rest
upon the goodness of my intention to plead my excuse.  I am, Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant, M. HOWARD.


</CHAPTER>
