<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXXII EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, Kent, May 10.


OUR house has been enlivened to-day by the arrival of a London visitor;
and the necessity I have been under of concealing the uneasiness of
my mind, has made me exert myself so effectually, that I even think
it is really diminished; or, at least, my thoughts are not so totally,
so very anxiously, occupied by one subject only as they lately were.


I was strolling this morning with Miss Mirvan, down a lane about
a mile from the Grove, when we heard the trampling of horses; and,
fearing the narrowness of the passage, we were turning hastily back,
but stopped upon hearing a voice call out, "Pray, Ladies, don't be
frightened, for I will walk my horse." We turned again, and then saw
Sir Clement Willoughby. He dismounted; and approaching us with the
reins in his hand, presently recollected us.  "Good Heaven," cried
he, with his usual quickness, "do I see Miss Anville ?-and you too,
Miss Mirvan?"


He immediately ordered his servant to take charge of his horse; and
then, advancing to us, took a hand of each, which he pressed to his
lips, and said a thousand fine things concerning his good fortune,
our improved looks, and the charms of the country, when inhabited
by such rural deities. "The town, Ladies, has languished since your
absence;-or, at least, I have so much languished myself, as to be
absolutely insensible to all it had to offer. One refreshing breeze,
such as I now enjoy, awakens me to new vigour, life, and spirit. But I
never before had the good luck to see the country in such perfection."


"Has not almost every body left town, Sir?" said Miss Mirvan.


"I am ashamed to answer you, Madam,-but indeed it is as full as ever,
and will continue so till after the birth-day. However, you Ladies
were so little seen, that there are but few who know what it has
lost. For my own part, I felt it too sensibly, to be able to endure
the place any longer."


"Is there any body remaining there, that we were acquainted
with?" cried I.


"O yes, Ma'am." And then he named two or three persons we have seen
when with him; but he did not mention Lord Orville, and I would not
ask him, lest he should think me curious. Perhaps, if he stays here
some time, he may speak of him by accident.


He was proceeding in this complimentary style, when we were met by
the Captain; who no sooner perceived Sir Clement, than he hastened
up to him, gave him a hearty shake of the hand, a cordial slap on the
back, and some other equally gentle tokens of satisfaction, assuring
him of his great joy at his visit, and declaring he was as glad to
see him as if he had been a messenger who brought news that a French
ship was sunk. Sir Clement, on the other side, expressed himself with
equal warmth; and protested he had been so eager to pay his respects
to Captain Mirvan, that he had left London in its full lustre, and a
thousand engagements unanswered, merely to give himself that pleasure.


"We shall have rare sport," said the Captain; "for, do you know, the
old French-woman is among us? 'Fore George, I have scarce made any
use of her yet, by reason I have had nobody with me that could enjoy a
joke: howsomever, it shall go hard but we'll have some diversion now."


Sir Clement very much approved of the proposal; and we then went into
the house, where he had a very grave reception from Mrs. Mirvan, who
is by no means pleased with his visit, and a look of much discontent
from Madame Duval, who said to me in a low voice, "I'd as soon have
seen Old Nick as that man, for he's the most impertinentest person
in the world, and isn't never of my side."


The Captain is now actually occupied in contriving some scheme, which,
he says, is to pay the old Dowager off; and so eager and delighted is
he at the idea, that he can scarcely restrain his raptures sufficiently
to conceal his design even from herself. I wish, however, since I do
not dare put Madame Duval upon her guard, that he had the delicacy
not to acquaint me with his intention.


</CHAPTER>
