<CHAPTER>
LETTER XLVI EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Holborn, June 17th.

YESTERDAY Mr. Smith carried his point of making a party for Vauxhall,
consisting of Madame Duval, M. Du Bois, all the Branghtons, Mr. Brown,
himself,-and me!-for I find all endeavours vain to escape any thing
which these people desire I should not.

There were twenty disputes previous to our setting out; first, as to
the time of our going: Mr. Branghton, his son, and young Brown, were
for six o'clock; and all the ladies and Mr. Smith were for eight;-the
latter, however, conquered.

Then, as to the way we should go; some were for a boat, others for
a coach, and Mr. Branghton himself was for walking; but the boat
at length was decided upon. Indeed this was the only part of the
expedition that was agreeable to me; for the Thames was delightfully
pleasant.

The garden is very pretty, but too formal; I should have been better
pleased, had it consisted less of straight walks, where

        Grove nods at grove, each alley has its brother.

The trees, the numerous lights, and the company in the circle round
the orchestra make a most brilliant and gay appearance; and had I been
with a party less disagreeable to me, I should have thought it a place
formed for animation and pleasure. There was a concert; in the course
of which a hautbois concerto was so charmingly played, that I could
have thought myself upon enchanted ground, had I had spirits more
gentle to associate with. The hautbois in the open air is heavenly.

Mr. Smith endeavoured to attach himself to me, with such officious
assiduity and impertinent freedom, that he quite sickened me. Indeed
M. Du Bois was the only man of the party to whom, voluntarily, I
ever addressed myself. He is civil and respectful, and I have found
nobody else so since I left Howard Grove. His English is very bad;
but I prefer it to speaking French myself, which I dare not venture
to do. I converse with him frequently, both to disengage myself from
others, and to oblige Madame Duval, who is always pleased when he is
attended to.

As we were walking about the orchestra, I heard a bell ring; and,
in a moment, Mr. Smith, flying up to me, caught my hand, and, with a
motion too quick to be resisted, ran away with me many yards before I
had breath to ask his meaning, though I struggled as well as I could,
to get from him. At last, however, I insisted upon stopping: "Stopping,
Ma'am!" cried he, "why we must run on or we shall lose the cascade!"

And then again he hurried me away, mixing with a crowd of people,
all running with so much velocity, that I could not imagine what had
raised such an alarm. We were soon followed by the rest of the party;
and my surprise and ignorance proved a source of diversion to them
all, which was not exhausted the whole evening. Young Branghton,
in particular, laughed till he could hardly stand.

The scene of the cascade I thought extremely pretty, and the general
effect striking and lively.

But this was not the only surprise which was to divert them at my
expense; for they led me about the garden purposely to enjoy my first
sight of various other deceptions.

About ten o'clock, Mr. Smith having chosen a box in a very conpicuous
place, we all went to supper. Much fault was found with every thing
that was ordered, though not a morsel of any thing was left; and the
dearness of the provisions, with conjectures upon what profit was
made by them, supplied discourse during the whole meal.

When wine and cyder were brought, Mr. Smith said, "Now let's enjoy
ourselves; now is the time, or never. Well, Ma'am, and how do you
like Vauxhall?"

"Like it!" cried young Branghton; "why, how can she help liking
it? she has never seen such a place before, that I'll answer for."

"For my part," said Miss Branghton, "I like it because it is not
vulgar."

"This must have been a fine treat for you, Miss," said Mr. Branghton;
"why, I suppose you was never so happy in all your life before?"

I endeavoured to express my satisfaction with some pleasure; yet,
I believe, they were much amazed at my coldness.

"Miss ought to stay in town till the last night," said young Branghton;
"and then, it's my belief, she'd say something to it! Why, Lord,
it's the best night of any; there's always a riot,-and there the folks
run about,-and then there's such squealing and squalling!-and, there,
all the lamps are broke,-and the women run skimper scamper.-I declare
I would not take five guineas to miss the last night!"

I was very glad when they all grew tired of sitting, and called for
the waiter to pay the bill. The Miss Branghtons said they would walk
on while the gentlemen settled the account, and asked me to accompany
them; which, however, I declined.

"You girls may do as you please," said Madame Duval; "but as to me,
I promise you, I sha'n't go nowhere without the gentlemen."

"No more, I suppose, will my cousin," said Miss Branghton, looking
reproachfully towards Mr. Smith.

This reflection, which I feared would flatter his vanity, made me most
unfortunately request Madame Duval's permission to attend them. She
granted it; and away we went, having promised to meet in the room.

To the room, therefore, I would immediately have gone: but the sisters
agreed that they would first have a little pleasure; and they tittered
and talked so loud, that they attracted universal notice.

"Lord, Polly," said the eldest, "suppose we were to take a turn in
the dark walks!"

"Aye, do," answered she; "and then we'll hide ourselves, and then
Mr. Brown will think we are lost."

I remonstrated very warmly against this plan, telling them it would
endanger our missing the rest of the party all the evening.

"O dear," cried Miss Branghton, "I thought how uneasy Miss would be
without a beau!"

This impertinence I did not think worth answering; and, quite by
compulsion, I followed them down a long alley, in which there was
hardly any light.

By the time we came near the end, a large party of gentlemen,
apparently very riotous, and who were hallooing, leaning on one
another, and laughing immoderately, seemed to rush suddenly from
behind some trees, and meeting us face to face, put their arms at
their sides, and formed a kind of circle, which first stopped our
proceeding, and then our retreating, for we were presently entirely
enclosed. The Miss Branghtons screamed aloud, and I was frightened
exceedingly; our screams were answered with bursts of laughter, and
for some minutes we were kept prisoners, till at last one of them,
rudely seizing hold of me, said I was a pretty little creature.

Terrified to death, I struggled with such vehemence to disengage
myself from him, that I succeeded, in spite of his efforts to detain
me; and immediately, and with a swiftness which fear only could have
given me, I flew rather than ran up the walk, hoping to secure my
safety by returning to the lights and company we had so foolishly
left: but before I could possibly accomplish my purpose, I was met
by another party of men, one of whom placed himself so directly in
my way, calling out, "Whither so fast, my love?"-that I could only
have proceeded by running into his arms.

In a moment both my hands, by different persons, were caught hold of,
and one of them, in a most familiar manner, desired, when I ran next,
to accompany me in a race; while the rest of the party stood still
and laughed.

I was almost distracted with terror, and so breathless with running,
that I could not speak; till another, advancing, said, I was as
handsome as an angel, and desired to be of the party. I then just
articulated, "For Heaven's sake, gentlemen, let me pass!"

Another then rushing suddenly forward, exclaimed, "Heaven and
earth! What voice is that?-"

"The voice of the prettiest little actress I have seen this age,"
answered one of my persecutors.

"No,-no,-no-" I panted out, "I am no actress-pray let me go,-pray
let me pass-"

"By all that's sacred," cried the same voice, which I then knew for
Sir Clement Willoughby's, "'tis herself!"

"Sir Clement Willoughby!" cried I. "O, Sir, assist-assist me-or I
shall die with terror!"

"Gentlemen," cried he, disengaging them all from me in an instant,
"pray leave this lady to me."

Loud laughs proceeded from every mouth, and two or three said
Willoughby has all the luck! But one of them, in a passionate manner,
vowed he would not give me up, for that he had the first right to me,
and would support it.

"You are mistaken," said Sir Clement, "this lady is-I will explain
myself to you another time; but, I assure you, you are all mistaken."

And then taking my willing hand, he led me off, amidst the loud
acclamations, laughter, and gross merriment of his impertinent
companions.

As soon as we had escaped from them, Sir Clement, with a voice of
surprise, exclaimed, "My dearest creature, what wonder, what strange
revolution, has brought you to such a place as this?"

Ashamed of my situation, and extremely mortified to be thus recognized
by him, I was for some time silent; and when he repeated his question,
only stammered out, "I have,-I hardly know how,-lost from my party-"

He caught my hand, and eagerly pressing it, in a passionate voice said,
"O that I had sooner met with thee!"

Surprised at a freedom so unexpected, I angrily broke from him, saying,
"Is this the protection you give me, Sir Clement?"

And then I saw, what the perturbation of my mind had prevented my
sooner noticing, that he had led me, though I know not how, into
another of the dark alleys, instead of the place whither I meant to go.

"Good God!" I cried, "where am I?-What way are you going?"

"Where," answered he, "we shall be least observed!"

Astonished at this speech, I stopped short, and declared I would go
no further.

"And why not, my angel?" again endeavouring to take my hand.

My heart beat with resentment; I pushed him away from me with all my
strength, and demanded how he dared treat me with such insolence?

"Insolence!" repeated he.

"Yes, Sir Clement, insolence; from you, who know me, I had a claim
for protection,-not to such treatment as this."

"By Heaven," cried he, with warmth, "you distract me;-why, tell
me,-why do I see you here?-Is this a place for Miss Anville?-these
dark walks!-no party!  no companion!-by all that's good I can scarce
believe my senses!"

Extremely offended at this speech, I turned angrily from him: and,
not deigning to make any answer, walked on towards that part of the
garden whence I perceived the lights and company.

He followed me; but we were both some time silent.

"So you will not explain to me your situation?" said he, at length.

"No, Sir," answered I, disdainfully.

"Nor yet-suffer me to make my own interpretation?-"

I could not bear this strange manner of speaking; it made my very
soul shudder,-and I burst into tears.

He flew to me, and actually flung himself at my feet, as if
regardless who might see him, saying, "O, Miss Anville,-loveliest of
women,-forgive my,-my,-I beseech you forgive me;-if I have offended-if
I have hurt you-I could kill myself at the thought!-"

"No matter, Sir, no matter," cried I; "if I can but find my friends,-I
will never speak to-never see you again!"

"Good God!-good Heaven! My dearest life, what is it I have done?-what
is it I have said?-"

"You best know, Sir, what and why: but don't hold me here,-let me be
gone; and do you!"

"Not till you forgive me!-I cannot part with you in anger."

"For shame, for shame, Sir!" cried I, indignantly, "do you suppose I
am to be thus compelled?-do you take advantage of the absence of my
friends to affront me?"

"No, Madam," cried he, rising: "I would sooner forfeit my life than
act so mean a part. But you have flung me into amazement unspeakable,
and you will not condescend to listen to my request of giving me
some explanation."

"The manner, Sir," said I, "in which you spoke that request, made,
and will make, me scorn to answer it."

"Scorn!-I will own to you, I expected not such displeasure from
Miss Anville."

"Perhaps, Sir, if you had, you would less voluntarily have merited it."

"My dearest life, surely it must be known to you, that the man does
not breathe who adores you so passionately, so fervently, so tenderly
as I do!-Why, then, will you delight in perplexing me?-in keeping me
in suspense?-in torturing me with doubt?"

"I, Sir, delight in perplexing you!-you are much mistaken.-Your
suspense, your doubts, your perplexities,-are of your own creating;
and believe me, Sir, they may offend, but they can never delight
me:-but as you have yourself raised, you must yourself satisfy them."

"Good God!-that such haughtiness and such sweetness can inhabit the
same mansion!"

I made no answer; but quickening my pace I walked on silently and
sullenly, till this most impetuous of men, snatching my hand, which he
grasped with violence, besought me to forgive him with such earnestness
of supplication, that, merely to escape his importunities, I was forced
to speak, and in some measure to grant the pardon he requested; though
it was accorded with a very ill grace: but, indeed, I knew not how
to resist the humility of his intreaties: yet never shall I recollect
the occasion he gave me of displeasure, without feeling it renewed.

We now soon arrived in the midst of the general crowd; and, my own
safety being then insured, I grew extremely uneasy for the Miss
Branghtons, whose danger, however imprudently incurred by their own
folly, I too well knew how to tremble for. To this consideration all
my pride of heart yielded, and I determined to seek my party with the
utmost speed; though not without a sigh did I recollect the fruitless
attempt I had made after the opera, of concealing from this man my
unfortunate connections, which I was now obliged to make known.

I hastened, therefore, to the room, with a view of sending young
Branghton to the aid of his sisters. In a very short time I perceived
Madame Duval, and the rest, looking at one of the paintings.

I must own to you honestly, my dear Sir, that an involuntary repugnance
seized me at presenting such a set to Sir Clement,-he who had been used
to see me in parties so different!-My pace slackened as I approached
them,-but they presently perceived me.

"Ah, Mademoiselle!" cried M. Du Bois, "Que je suis charm-e; de vous
voir!"

"Pray, Miss," cried Mr. Brown, "where's Miss Polly?"

"Why, Miss, you've been a long while gone," said Mr. Branghton;
"we thought you'd been lost. But what have you done with your cousins?"

I hesitated,-for Sir Clement regarded me with a look of wonder.

"Pardi," cried Madame Duval, "I shan't let you leave me again in
a hurry. Why, here we've been in such a fright!-and all the while,
I suppose, you've been thinking nothing about the matter."

"Well," said young Branghton," as long as Miss is come back, I don't
mind; for as to Bid and Poll, they can take care of themselves. But
the best joke is, Mr. Smith is gone all about a looking for you."

These speeches were made almost in a breath: but when, at last,
they waited for an answer, I told them, that, in walking up one of
the long alleys, we had been frightened and separated.

"The long alleys!" repeated Mr. Branghton, "and pray, what had you
to do in the long alleys? why, to be sure, you must all of you have
had a mind to be affronted!"

This speech was not more impertinent to me, than surprising to Sir
Clement, who regarded all the party with evident astonishment. However,
I told young Branghton, no time ought to be lost, for that his sisters
might require his immediate protection.

"But how will they get it?" cried this brutal brother: "if they've
a mind to behave in such a manner as that, they ought to protect
themselves; and so they may for me."

"Well," said the simple Mr. Brown, "whether you go or not, I think
I may as well see after Miss Polly."

The father then interfering, insisted that his son should accompany
him; and away they went.

It was now that Madame Duval first perceived Sir Clement; to whom,
turning with a look of great displeasure, she angrily said, "Ma foi,
so you are comed here, of all the people in the world!-I wonder, child,
you would let such a-such a person as that keep company with you."

"I am very sorry, Madam," said Sir Clement, in a tone of surprise,
"if I had been so unfortunate as to offend you; but I believe you
will not regret the honour I now have of attending Miss Anville,
when you hear that I have been so happy as to do her some service."

Just as Madame Duval, with her usual Ma foi, was beginning to
reply, the attention of Sir Clement was wholly drawn from her, by
the appearance of Mr.  Smith, who, coming suddenly behind me, and
freely putting his hands of my shoulders, cried, "O ho, my little
runaway, have I found you at last? I have been scampering all over
the gardens for you, for I was determined to find you, if you were
above ground.-But how could you be so cruel as to leave us?"

I turned round to him, and looked with a degree of contempt that I
hoped would have quieted him: but he had not the sense to understand
me; and, attempting to take my hand, he added, "Such a demure-looking
lady as you are, who'd have thought of your leading one such a
dance?-Come, now, don't be so coy; only think what a trouble I have
had in running after you!"

"The trouble, Sir," said I, "was of your own choice,-not mine." And
I walked round to the other side of Madame Duval.

Perhaps I was too proud;-but I could not endure that Sir Clement,
whose eyes followed him with looks of the most surprised curiosity,
should witness his unwelcome familiarity.

Upon my removal he came up to me, and, in a low voice, said, "You
are not, then, with the Mirvans?"

"No, Sir."

"And pray,-may I ask you,-have you left them long?"

"No, Sir."

"How unfortunate I am!-but yesterday I sent to acquaint the Captain
I should reach the Grove by to-morrow noon! However, I shall get away
as fast as possible. Shall you be long in town?"

"I believe not, Sir."

"And then, when you leave it-which way-will you allow me to ask,
which way you shall travel?"

"Indeed,-I don't know."

"Not know!-But do you return to the Mirvans any more?"

"I-I can't tell, Sir."

And then I addressed myself to Madame Duval, with such a pretended
earnestness, that he was obliged to be silent.

As he cannot but observe the great change in my situation, which
he knows not how to account for, there is something in all these
questions, and this unrestrained curiosity, that I did not expect
from a man who, when he pleases, can be so well-bred as Sir Clement
Willoughby. He seems disposed to think that the alteration in my
companions authorises an alteration in his manners. It is true, he
has always treated me with uncommon freedom, but never before with
so disrespectful an abruptness. This observation, which he has given
me cause to make, of his changing with the tide, has sunk him more
in my opinion than any other part of his conduct.

Yet I could almost have laughed when I looked at Mr. Smith, who no
sooner saw me addressed by Sir Clement, than, retreating aloof from
the company, he seemed to lose at once all his happy self-sufficiency
and conceit; looking now at the baronet, now at himself; surveying,
with sorrowful eyes, his dress; struck with his air, his gestures,
his easy gaiety, he gazed at him with envious admiration, and seemed
himself, with conscious inferiority, to shrink into nothing.

Soon after, Mr. Brown, running up to us, called out, "La, what,
i'n't Miss Polly come yet?"

"Come," said Mr. Branghton; "why, I thought you went to fetch her
yourself, didn't you?"

"Yes, but I couldn't find her;-yet I daresay I've been over half
the garden."

"Half? but why did not you go over it all?"

"Why, so I will: but only I thought I'd just come and see if she was
here first."

"But where's Tom?"

"Why, I don't know; for he would not stay with me, all as ever I
could say: for we met some young gentlemen of his acquaintance,
and so he bid me go and look by myself; for he said, says he, I can
divert myself better another way, says he."

This account being given, away again went this silly young man;
and Mr.  Branghton, extremely incensed, said he would go and see
after them himself.

"So, now", cried Madame Duval, "he's gone too! why, at this rate,
we shall have to wait for one or other of them all night!"

Observing that Sir Clement seemed disposed to renew his enquiries,
I turned towards one of the paintings, and, pretending to be very much
occupied in looking at it, asked M. Du Bois some questions concerning
the figures.

"O! Mon Dieu!" cried Madame Duval, "don't ask him; your best way is
to ask Mr. Smith, for he's been here the oftenest. Come, Mr. Smith,
I dare say you can tell us all about them."

"Why, yes, Ma'am, yes," said Mr. Smith: who, brightening up at this
application, advanced towards us with an air of assumed importance,
which, however, sat very uneasily upon him, and begged to know what he
should explain first: "For I have attended," said he, "to all these
paintings, and know every thing in them perfectly well; for I am
rather fond of pictures, Ma'am;  and, really, I must say, I think, a
pretty pictures is a-a very-is really a very-is something very pretty-"

"So do I too," said Madame Duval; "but pray now, Sir, tell us who
that is meant for," pointing to a figure of Neptune.

"That!-why, that, Ma'am, is,-Lord bless me, I can't think how I
come to be so stupid, but really I have forgot his name;-and yet,
I know it as well as my own too:-however, he's a General, Ma'am,
they are all Generals."

I saw Sir Clement bite his lips; and, indeed, so did I mine.

"Well," said Madame Duval, "it's the oddest dress for a general ever
I see!"

"He seems so capital a figure," said Sir Clement, to Mr. Smith,
"that I imagine he must be Generalissimo of the whole army."

"Yes, Sir, yes," answered Mr. Smith, respectfully bowing, and highly
delighted at being thus referred to, "you are perfectly right;-but I
cannot for my life think of his name;-perhaps, Sir, you may remember
it?"

"No, really," replied Sir Clement, "my acquaintance among the generals
is not so extensive."

The ironical tone of voice in which Sir Clement spoke entirely
disconcerted Mr. Smith; who again retiring to an humble distance,
seemed sensibly mortified at the failure of his attempt to recover
his consequence.

Soon after, Mr. Branghton returned with his youngest daughter, who
he had rescued from a party of insolent young men; but he had not
yet been able to find the eldest. Miss Polly was really frightened,
and declared she would never go into the dark walks again. Her father,
leaving her with us, went in quest of her sister.

While she was relating her adventures, to which nobody listened more
attentively than Sir Clement, we saw Mr. Brown enter the room. "O,
la!" cried Miss Polly, "let me hide myself, and don't tell him
I'm come."

She then placed herself behind Madame Duval, in such a manner that
she could not be seen.

"So Miss Polly is not come yet!" said the simple swain: "well,
I can't think where she can be! I've been looking, and looking,
and looking all about, and can't find her all I can do."

"Well, but, Mr. Brown," said Mr. Smith, "sha'n't you go and look for
the lady again?"

"Yes, Sir," said he, sitting down; "but I must rest me a little bit
first. You can't think how tired I am."

"O fie, Mr. Brown, fie," cried Mr. Smith, winking at us, "tired of
looking for a lady! Go, go, for shame!"

"So I will, Sir, presently; but you'd be tired too, if you had walked
so far: besides, I think she's gone out of the garden, or else I must
have seen something or other of her."

A he, he he! of the tittering Polly, now betrayed her, and so ended
this ingenious little artifice.

At last appeared Mr. Branghton and Miss Biddy, who, with a face of
mixed anger and confusion, addressing herself to me, said, "So, Miss,
so you ran away from me! Well, see if I don't do as much by you some
day or other! But I thought how it would be; you'd no mind to leave
the gentlemen, though you run away from me."

I was so much surprised at this attack, that I could not answer her
for very amazement; and she proceeded to tell us how ill she had
been used, and that two young men had been making her walk up and
down the dark walks by absolute force, and as fast as ever they could
tear her along; and many other particulars, which I will not tire you
with relating. In conclusion, looking at Mr. Smith, she said, "But to
be sure, thought I, at least all the company will be looking for me;
so I little expected to find you all here, talking as comfortably as
ever you can. However, I know I may thank my cousin for it!"

"If you mean me, Madam," said I, very much shocked, "I am quite
ignorant in what manner I can have been accessary to your distress."

"Why, by running away so. If you'd stayed with us, I'll answer for
it Mr.  Smith and M. Du Bois would have come to look for us; but I
suppose they could not leave your ladyship."

The folly and unreasonableness of this speech would admit of no
answer. But what a scene was this for Sir Clement! his surprise was
evident; and I must acknowledge my confusion was equally great.

We had now to wait for young Branghton, who did not appear for some
time; and during this interval it was with difficulty that I avoided
Sir Clement, who was on the rack of curiosity, and dying to speak
to me.

When, at last, the hopeful youth returned, a long and frightful quarrel
ensued between him and his father, in which his sisters occasionally
joined, concerning his neglect; and he defended himself only by a
brutal mirth, which he indulged at their expense.

Every one now seemed inclined to depart,-when, as usual, a dispute
arose upon the way of our going, whether in a coach or a boat. After
much debating, it was determined that we should make two parties,
one by the water and the other by land; for Madame Duval declared
she would not, upon any account, go into a boat at night.

Sir Clement then said, that if she had no carriage in waiting, he
should be happy to see her and me safe home, as his was in readiness.

Fury started into her eyes, and passion inflamed every feature, as she
answered, "Pardi, no-you may take care of yourself, if you please; but
as to me, I promise you I sha'n't trust myself with no such person."

He pretended not to comprehend her meaning; yet, to waive a discussion,
acquiesced in her refusal. The coach-party fixed upon, consisted of
Madame Duval, M. Du Bois, Miss Branghton, and myself.

I now began to rejoice, in private, that at least our lodgings
would be neither seen nor known by Sir Clement. We soon met with a
hackney-coach, into which he handed me, and then took leave.

Madame Duval having already given the coachman her direction, he
mounted the box, and we were just driving off, when Sir Clement
exclaimed, "By Heaven, this is the very coach I had in waiting for
myself!"

"This coach, your honour!" said the man; "no, that it i'n't."

Sir Clement, however, swore that it was; and presently, the man,
begging his pardon, said he had really forgotten that he was engaged.

I have no doubt but that this scheme occurred to him at the moment,
and that he made some sign to the coachman, which induced him to
support it; for there is not the least probability that the accident
really happened, as it is most likely his own chariot was in waiting.

The man then opened the coach-door, and Sir Clement, advancing to
it, said "I don't believe there is another carriage to be had, or
I would not incommode you; but, as it may be disagreeable to you to
wait here any longer, I beg you will not get out, for you shall be
set down before I am carried home, if you will be so good as to make
a little room."

And so saying, in he jumped, and seated himself between M. Du Bois
and me, while our astonishment at the whole transaction was too great
for speech. He then ordered the coachman to drive on, according to
the directions he had already received.

For the first ten minutes no one uttered a word; and then, Madame
Duval, no longer able to contain herself, exclaimed, "Ma foi, if this
isn't one of the most impudentest things ever I see!"

Sir Clement, regardless of this rebuke, attended only to me; however I
answered nothing he said, when I could possibly avoid so doing. Miss
Branghton made several attempts to attract his notice, but in vain,
for he would not take the trouble of paying her any regard.

Madame Duval, during the rest of the ride, addressed herself to M. Du
Bois in French, and in that language exclaimed, with great vehemence,
against boldness and assurance.

I was extremely glad when I thought our journey must be nearly at an
end, for my situation was very uneasy to me, as Sir Clement perpetually
endeavoured to take my hand. I looked out of the coach-window, to see
if we were near home: Sir Clement, stooping over me, did the same;
and then, in a voice of infinite wonder, called out, "Where the d-l
is the man driving to?-Why we are in Broad Street, St. Giles's!"

"O, he's very right," cried Madame Duval, "so never trouble your
head about that; for I sha'n't go by no directions of your's, I
promise you."

When, at last, we stopped at an hosier's in High Holborn,-Sir Clement
said nothing, but his eyes, I saw, were very busily employed in
viewing the place, and the situation of the house. The coach, he
said, belong to him, and therefore he insisted upon paying for it;
and then he took leave. M. Du Bois walked home with Miss Branghton,
and Madame Duval and I retired to our apartments.

How disagreeable an evening's adventure! not one of the party seemed
satisfied, except Sir Clement, who was in high spirits: but Madame
Duval was enraged at meeting with him; Mr. Branghton, angry with his
children; the frolic of the Miss Branghtons had exceeded their plan,
and ended in their own distress; their  brother was provoked that there
had been no riot; Mr. Brown was tired, and Mr. Smith mortified. As to
myself, I must acknowledge, nothing could be more disagreeable to me,
than being seen by Sir Clement Willoughby with a party at once so
vulgar in themselves, and so familiar to me.

And you, too, my dear Sir, will, I know, be sorry that I have met him;
however, there is no apprehension of his visiting here, as Madame
Duval is far too angry to admit him.


</CHAPTER>
