<CHAPTER>
 LETTER LXI. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Bristol Hotwells, August 28th.


YOU will be again surprised, my dear Maria, at seeing whence I date my
letter: but I have been very ill, and Mr. Villars was so much alarmed,
that he not only insisted upon my accompanying Mrs. Selwyn hither,
but earnestly desired she would hasten her intended journey.

We travelled very slowly, and I did not find myself so much fatigued
as I expected. We are situated upon a most delightful spot; the
prospect is beautiful, the air pure, and the weather very favourable
to invalids. I am already better, and I doubt not but I shall soon
be well; as well, in regard to mere health, as I wish to be.

I cannot express the reluctance with which I parted from my revered
Mr. Villars: it was not like that parting which, last April, preceded
my journey to Howard Grove, when, all expectation and hope, though I
wept, I rejoiced, and, though I sincerely grieved to leave him, I yet
wished to be gone: the sorrow I now felt was unmixed with any livelier
sensation; expectation was vanished, and hope I had none! All that I
held most dear upon earth I quitted; and that upon an errand, to the
success of which I was totally indifferent, the re-establishment of my
health. Had it been to have seen my sweet Maria, or her dear mother,
I should not have repined.

Mrs. Selwyn is very kind and attentive to me. She is extremely clever:
her understanding, indeed, may be called masculine: but, unfortunately,
her manners deserve the same epithet; for, in studying to acquire
the knowledge of the other sex, she has lost all the softness of
her own. In regard to myself, however, as I have neither courage nor
inclination to argue with her, I have never been personally hurt at her
want of gentleness; a virtue which, nevertheless, seems so essential
a part of the female character, that I find myself more awkward, and
less at ease, with a woman who wants it, than I do with a man. She is
not a favourite with Mr. Villars, who has often been disgusted at her
unmerciful propensity to satire: but his anxiety that I should try
the effect of the Bristol waters, overcame his dislike of committing
me to her care. Mrs. Clinton is also here; so that I shall be as well
attended as his utmost partiality could desire.

I will continue to write to you, my dear Miss Mirvan, with as much
constancy as if I had no other correspondent; though, during my
absence from Berry Hill, my letters may, perhaps, be shortened on
account of the minuteness of the journal which I must write to my
beloved Mr. Villars: but you, who know his expectations, and how
many ties bind me to fulfil them, will I am sure, rather excuse any
omission to yourself, than any negligence to him.
</CHAPTER>

