<CHAPTER>
 LETTER LXIX. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Sept. 30th.


OH, Sir, what a strange incident have I to recite! what a field of
conjecture to open!

Yesterday evening we all went to an assembly. Lord Orville presented
tickets to the whole family; and did me the honour, to the no small
surprise of all here, I believe, to dance with me. But every day
abounds in fresh instances of his condescending politeness; and he
now takes every opportunity of calling me his friend and his sister.

Lord Merton offered a ticket to Lady Louisa; but she was so much
incensed against him, that she refused it with the utmost disdain:
neither could he prevail upon her to dance with him; she sat still the
whole evening, and deigned not to look at or speak to him. To me her
behaviour is almost the same: for she is cold, distant, and haughty,
and her eyes express the greatest contempt. But for Lord Orville,
how miserable would my residence here make me!

We were joined in the ball-room by Mr. Coverley, Mr. Lovel, and Lord
Merton, who looked as if he was doing penance, and sat all the evening
next to Lady Louisa, vainly endeavouring to appease her anger.

Lord Orville began the minuets: he danced with a young lady who
seemed to engage the general attention, as she had not been seen here
before. She is pretty, and looks mild and good-humoured.

"Pray, Mr. Lovel," said Lady Louisa, "who is that?"

"Miss Belmont," answered he, "the young heiress: she came to the
Wells yesterday."

Struck with the name, I involuntarily repeated it; but nobody heard me.

"What is her family?" said Mrs. Beaumont.

"Have you not heard of her, Ma'am?" cried he; "she is only daughter
and heiress of Sir John Belmont."

Good Heaven, how did I start! the name struck my ear like a
thunderbolt. Mrs.  Selwyn, who immediately looked at me, said,
"Be calm, my dear, and we will learn the truth of all this."

Till then I had never imagined her to be acquainted with my story;
but she has since told me, that she knew my unhappy mother, and was
well informed of the whole affair.

She asked Mr. Lovel a multitude of questions; and I gathered from
his answers, that this young lady was just come from abroad with Sir
John Belmont, who was now in London; that she was under the care of
his sister, Mrs. Paterson; and that she would inherit a considerable
estate.

I cannot express the strange feelings with which I was agitated during
this recital. What, my dearest Sir, can it possibly mean? Did you ever
hear of any after-marriage?-or must I suppose, that, while the lawful
child is rejected, another is adopted?-I know not what to think! I
am bewildered with a contrariety of ideas!

When we came home, Mrs. Selwyn passed more than an hour in my room
conversing upon this subject. She says, that I ought instantly to
go to town, find out my father, and have the affair cleared up. She
assures me I have too strong a resemblance to my dear, though unknown,
mother, to allow of the least hesitation in my being owned, when once
I am seen. For my part, I have no wish but to act by your direction.

I cannot give any account of the evening; so disturbed, so occupied
am I by this subject, that I can think of no other. I have entreated
Mrs. Selwyn to observe the strictest secrecy, and she has promised
that she will. Indeed, she has too much sense to be idly communicative.

Lord Orville took notice of my being absent and silent; but I ventured
not to intrust him with the cause. Fortunately, he was not of the
party at the time Mr. Lovel made the discovery.

Mrs. Selwyn says, that if you approve my going to town, she will
herself accompany me. I had a thousand times rather ask the protection
of Mrs.  Mirvan, but, after this offer that will not be possible.

Adieu, my dearest Sir. I am sure you will write immediately, and I
shall be all impatience till your letter arrives.
</CHAPTER>

