<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXVII. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 
 Clifton, Oct. 7th.


YOU will see, my dear Sir, that I was mistaken in supposing I should
write no more from this place, where my residence now seems more
uncertain than ever.

This morning, during breakfast, Lord Orville took an opportunity to
beg me, in a low voice, to allow him a moment's conversation before
I left Clifton; "May I hope," added he, "that you will stroll into
the garden after breakfast?"

I made no answer, but I believe my looks gave no denial; for, indeed,
I much wished to be satisfied concerning the letter. The moment,
therefore, that I could quit the parlour, I ran up stairs for my
calash; but, before I reached my room, Mrs. Selwyn called after me,
"If you are going to walk, Miss Anville, be so good as to bid Jenny
bring down my hat, and I'll accompany you."

Very much disconcerted, I turned into the drawing-room, without making
any answer, and there I hoped to wait unseen, till she had otherwise
disposed of herself. But, in a few minutes, the door opened, and Sir
Clement Willoughby entered.

Starting at the sight of him, in rising hastily, I let drop the letter
which I had brought for Lord Orville's inspection, and, before I could
recover it, Sir Clement, springing forward, had it in his hand. He
was just presenting it to me, and, at the same time, enquiring after
my health, when the signature caught his eye, and he read aloud,
"Orville."

I endeavoured, eagerly, to snatch it from him, but he would not permit
me; and, holding it fast, in a passionate manner exclaimed, "Good God,
Miss Anville, is it possible you can value such a letter as this?"

The question surprised and confounded me, and I was too much ashamed to
answer him; but, finding he made an attempt to secure it, I prevented
him, and vehemently demanded him to return it.


"Tell me first," said he, holding it above my reach, "tell me if you
have since received any more letters from the same person?"


"No, indeed," cried I, "never!"


"And will you also, sweetest of women, promise that you never will
receive any more? Say that, and you will make me the happiest of men."


"Sir Clement," cried I, greatly confused, "pray give me the letter."


"And will you not first satisfy my doubts?-will you not relieve me
from the torture of the most distracting suspense?-tell me but that
the detested Orville has written to you no more!"


"Sir Clement," cried I, angrily, "you have no right to make any
conditions,-so pray give me the letter directly."


"Why such solicitude about this hateful letter? can it possibly
deserve your eagerness? tell me, with truth, with sincerity tell me,
does it really merit the least anxiety?"


"No matter, Sir," cried I, in great perplexity, "the letter is mine,
and therefore-"


"I must conclude, then," said he, "that the letter deserves your
utmost contempt,-but that the name of Orville is sufficient to make
you prize it."


"Sir Clement," cried I, colouring, "you are quite-you are very much-the
letter is not-"


"O, Miss Anville," cried he, "you blush!-you stammer!-Great Heaven! it
is then all as I feared!"


"I know not," cried I, half-frightened, "what you mean; but I beseech
you to give me the letter, and to compose yourself."


"The letter," cried he, gnashing his teeth, "you shall never see
more! You ought to have burnt it the moment you had read it!" And in
an instant he tore it into a thousand pieces.


Alarmed at a fury so indecently outrageous, I would have run out of
the room; but he caught hold of my gown, and cried, "Not yet, not yet
must you go! I am but half-mad yet, and you must stay to finish your
work. Tell me, therefore, does Orville know your fatal partiality?-Say
yes," added he, trembling with passion, "and I will fly you for ever!"


"For Heaven's sake, Sir Clement," cried I, "release me!-if you do not,
you will force me to call for help."


"Call then," cried he, "inexorable and most unfeeling girl; call,
if you please, and bid all the world witness your triumph;-but could
ten worlds obey your call, I would not part from you till you had
answered me. Tell me, then, does Orville know you love him?"


At any other time, an enquiry so gross would have given me
inexpressible confusion; but now, the wildness of his manner terrified
me, and I only said, "Whatever you wish to know, Sir Clement, I will
tell you another time; but, for the present, I entreat you to let
me go!"


"Enough," cried he, "I understand you!-the art of Orville has
prevailed;-cold, inanimate, phlegmatic as he is, you have rendered
him the most envied of men!-One thing more, and I have done:-Will he
marry you?"


What a question! my cheeks glowed with indignation, and I felt too
proud to make any answer.


"I see, I see how it is," cried he, after a short pause, "and I
find I am undone for ever!" Then, letting loose my gown, he put his
hand to his forehead, and walked up and down the room in a hasty and
agitated manner.


Though now at liberty to go, I had not the courage to leave him:
for his evident distress excited all my compassion. And this was our
situation, when Lady Louisa, Mr Coverley, and Mrs. Beaumont entered
the room.


"Sir Clement Willoughby," said the latter, "I beg your pardon for
making you wait so long, but-"


She had not time for another word; Sir Clement, too much disordered to
know or care what he did, snatched up his hat, and, brushing hastily
past her, flew down stairs, and out of the house.


And with him went my sincerest pity, though I earnestly hope I shall
see him no more. But what, my dear Sir, am I to conclude from his
strange speeches concerning the letter? Does it not seem as if he was
himself the author of it? How else should he be so well acquainted
with the contempt it merits?  Neither do I know another human being
who could serve any interest by such a deception. I remember, too,
that just as I had given my own letter to the maid, Sir Clement came
into the shop: probably he prevailed upon her, by some bribery, to
give it to him; and afterwards, by the same means, to deliver to me an
answer of his own writing. Indeed I can in no other manner account for
this affair. Oh, Sir Clement, were you not yourself unhappy, I know not
how I could pardon an artifice that has caused me so much uneasiness!


His abrupt departure occasioned a kind of general consternation.


"Very extraordinary behavior this!" cried Mrs. Beaumont.


"Egad," said Mr. Coverley, "the baronet has a mind to tip us a touch
of the heroics this morning!"


"I declare," cried Miss Louisa, "I never saw any thing so monstrous
in my life! it's quite abominable;-I fancy the man's mad;-I'm sure
he has given me a shocking fright!"


Soon after, Mrs. Selwyn came up stairs with Lord Merton. The former,
advancing hastily to me, said, "Miss Anville, have you an almanack?"


"Me?-no, Madam."


"Who has one, then?"


"Egad," cried Mr. Coverley, "I never bought one in my life; it would
make me quite melancholy to have such a time-keeper in my pocket. I
would as soon walk all day before an hour-glass."


"You are in the right," said Mrs. Selwyn, "not to watch time, lest
you should be betrayed, unawares, into reflecting how you employ it."


"Egad, Ma'am," cried he, "if Time thought no more of me than I do of
Time, I believe I should bid defiance, for one while, to old age and
wrinkles; for deuce take me, if ever I think about it at all."


"Pray, Mr. Coverley," said Mrs. Selwyn, "why do you think it necessary
to tell me this so often?"


"Often!" repeated he; "Egad, Madam, I don't know why I said it now;-but
I'm sure I can't recollect that ever I owned as much before."


"Owned it before!" cried she, "why, my dear Sir, you own it all day
long; for every word, every look, every action proclaims it."


I now not if he understood the full severity of her satire, but he
only turned off with a laugh: and she then applied to Mr. Lovel,
and asked if  he had an almanack?


Mr. Lovel, who always looks alarmed when she addresses him, with
some hesitation answered, "I assure you, Ma'am, I have no manner of
antipathy to an almanack,-none in the least,-I assure you;-I dare
say I have four or five."


"Four or five!-pray, may I ask what use you make of so many?"


"Use!-really, Ma'am, as to that,-I don't make any particular use of
them; but one must have them, to tell one the day of the month:-I'm
sure, else I should never keep it in my head."


"And does your time pass so smoothly unmarked, that, without an
almanack, you could not distinguish one day from another?"


"Really, Ma'am," cried he, colouring, "I don't see anything so
very particular in having a few almanacks; other people have them,
I believe, as well as me."


"Don't be offended," cried she, "I have but made a little
digression. All I want to know is, the state of the moon;-for if it
is at the full, I shall be saved a world of conjectures, and know at
once to what cause to attribute the inconsistencies I have witnessed
this morning. In the first place, I heard Lord Orville excuse himself
from going out, because he had business of importance to transact at
home;-yet have I seen him sauntering alone in the garden this half
hour. Miss Anville, on the other hand, I invited to walk out with
me; and, after seeking her every where round the house, I find her
quietly seated in the drawing-room. And, but a few minutes since,
Sir Clement Willoughby, with even more than his usual politeness,
told me he was come to spend the morning here;-when, just now,
I met him flying down stairs, as if pursued by the Furies; and far
from repeating his compliments, or making any excuse, he did not even
answer a question I asked him, but rushed past me, with the rapidity
of a thief from a bailiff!"


"I protest," said Mrs. Beaumont, "I can't think what he meant; such
rudeness, from a man of any family, is quite incomprehensible."


"My Lord," cried Lady Louisa to Lord Merton, "do you know he did the
same by me?-I was just going to ask him what was the matter; but he
ran past me so quick, that I declare he quite dazzled my eyes. You
can't think, my Lord, how he frightened me; I dare say I look as
pale-don't I look very pale, my Lord?"


"Your Ladyship," said Mr. Lovel, "so well becomes the lilies, that
the roses might blush to see themselves so excelled."


"Pray, Mr. Lovel," said Mrs. Selwyn," if the roses should blush,
how would you find it out?"


"Egad," cried Mr. Coverley, "I suppose they must blush, as the saying
is, like a blue dog,-for they are red already."


"Prithee, Jack," said Lord Merton, "don't you pretend to talk about
blushes, that never knew what they were in your life."


"My Lord," said Mrs. Selwyn, "if experience alone can justify
mentioning them, what an admirable treatise upon the subject may we
not expect from your Lordship!"


"O, pray, Ma'am," answered he, "stick to Jack Coverley,-he's your only
man; for my part, I confess I have a mortal aversion to arguments."


"O, fie, my Lord," cried Mrs. Selwyn, "a senator of the nation! a
member of the noblest parliament in the world!-and yet neglect the
art of oratory!"


"Why, faith, my Lord," said Mr. Lovel, "I think, in general, your House
is not much addicted to study; we of the Lower House have indubitably
most application; and, if I did not speak before a superior power
(bowing to Lord Merton) I should presume to add, we have likewise
the most able speakers."


"Mr. Lovel," said Mrs. Selwyn, "you deserve immortality for that
discovery!  But for this observation, and the confession of Lord
Merton, I protest that I should have supposed that a peer of the realm,
and an able logician, were synonymous terms."


Lord Merton, turning upon his heel, asked Lady Louisa if she would
take the air before dinner?


"Really," answered she, "I don't know;-I'm afraid it's monstrous
hot; besides (putting her hand to her forehead) I an't half well;
it's quite horrid to have such weak nerves!-the least thing in the
world discomposes me: I declare, that man's oddness has given me such
a shock,-I don't know when I shall recover from it. But I'm a sad,
weak creature;-don't you think I am, my Lord?"


"O, by no means," answered he, "your Ladyship is merely delicate,-and
devil take me if ever I had the least passion for an Amazon."


"I have the honour to be quite of your Lordship's opinion," said
Mr. Lovel, looking maliciously at Mrs. Selwyn; "for I have an
insuperable aversion to strength, either of body or mind, in a female."


"Faith, and so have I," said Mr. Coverley; "for egad, I'd as soon
see a woman chop wood, as hear her chop logic."


"So would every man in his senses," said Lord Merton, "for a
woman wants nothing to recommend her but beauty and good-nature; in
everything else she is either impertinent or unnatural. For my part,
deuce take me if ever I wish to hear a word of sense from a woman as
long as I live!"


"It has always been agreed," said Mrs. Selwyn, looking round her with
the utmost contempt, "that no man ought to be connected with a woman
whose understanding is superior to his own. Now I very much fear,
that to accommodate all this good company, according to such a rule,
would be utterly impracticable, unless we should choose subjects from
Swift's hospital of idiots."


How many enemies, my dear Sir, does this unbounded severity
excite! Lord Merton, however, only whistled; Mr. Coverley sang; and
Mr. Lovel, after biting his lips, said "'Pon honour, that lady-if
she was not a lady-I should be half tempted to observe,-that there
is something,-in such severity,-that is rather, I must say,-rather
oddish."


Just then a servant brought Lady Louisa a note upon a waiter, which
is a ceremony always used to her Ladyship; and I took the opportunity
of this interruption to the conversation to steal out of the room.


I went immediately to the parlour, which I found quite empty; for I
did not dare walk in the garden, after what Mrs. Selwyn had said.

In a few minutes a servant announced Mr. Macartney; saying, as he
entered the room, that he would acquaint Lord Orville he was there.


Mr. Macartney rejoiced much at finding me alone. He told me he had
taken the liberty to enquire for Lord Orville, by way of pretext for
coming to the house.


I then very eagerly enquired if he had seen his father.


"I have, Madam," said he, "and the generous compassion you have shown
made me hasten to acquaint you, that, upon reading my unhappy mother's
letter, he did not hesitate to acknowledge me."


"Good God," cried I, with no little emotion, "how similar are our
circumstances! And did he receive you kindly?"


"I could not, Madam, expect that he would; the cruel, transaction,
which obliged me to fly to Paris, was recent in his memory."


"And,-have you seen the young lady?"


"No, Madam," said he, mournfully, "I was forbid her sight."


"Forbid her sight!-and why?"


"Partly, perhaps, from prudence,-and partly from the remains of a
resentment which will not easily subside. I only requested leave
to acquaint her with my relationship, and to be allowed to call her
sister;-but it was denied me!  'You have no sister,' said Sir John,
'you must forget her existence.' Hard and vain command!"


"You have-you have a sister!" cried I, from an impulse of pity, which
I could not repress; "a sister who is most warmly interested in your
welfare, and who only wants opportunity to manifest her friendship
and regard."


"Gracious Heaven!" cried he, "what does Miss Anville mean?"


"Anville," said I, "is not my real name; Sir John Belmont is my
father,-he is your's,-and I am your sister!-You see, therefore, the
claim we mutually have to each other's regard; we are not merely bound
by the ties of friendship, but by those of blood. I feel for you,
already, all the affection of a sister; I felt it, indeed, before
I knew I was one.-Why, my dear brother, do you not speak?-do you
hesitate to acknowledge me?"


"I am so lost in astonishment," cried he, "that I know not if I
hear right!"-


"I have, then, found a brother," cried I, holding out my hand,
"and he will not own me!"


"Own you!-Oh, Madam," cried he, accepting my offered hand, "is it
indeed possible you can own me? -a poor, wretched adventurer! who so
lately had no support but from your generosity?-whom your benevolence
snatched from utter destruction?-Can you,-Oh, Madam, can you, indeed,
and without a blush, condescend to own such an outcast for a brother?"


"Oh, forbear, forbear," cried I, "is this language proper for a
sister? are we not reciprocally bound to each other?-Will you not
suffer me to expect from you all the good offices in your power?-But
tell me, where is our father at present?"


"At the Hot-Wells, Madam; he arrived there yesterday morning."


I would have proceeded with further questions, but the entrance of
Lord Orville prevented me. The moment he saw us, he started, and
would have retreated; but, drawing my hand from Mr. Macartney's,
I begged him to come in.


For a few moments we were all silent, and, I believe, all in equal
confusion.  Mr. Macartney, however, recollecting himself said "I hope
your Lordship will forgive the liberty I have taken in making use of
your name."


Lord Orville, rather coldly, bowed, but said nothing.


Again we were all silent, and then Mr. Macartney took leave.


"I fancy," said Lord Orville, when he was gone, "I have shortened Mr.
Macartney's visit?"


"No, my Lord, not at all."


"I had presumed," said he, with some hesitation, "I should have seen
Miss Anville in the garden;-but I knew not she was so much better
engaged."


Before I could answer, a servant came to tell me the chaise was ready,
and that Mrs. Selwyn was enquiring for me.


"I will wait on her immediately," cried I, and away I was running;
but Lord Orville, stopping me, said, with great emotion, "Is it thus,
Miss Anville, you leave me?"


"My Lord," cried I, "how can I help it?-perhaps, soon, some better
opportunity may offer-"


"Good Heaven!" cried he, "do you take me for a Stoic! what better
opportunity may I hope for?-is not the chaise come?-are you not
going? have you even deigned to tell me whither?"


"My journey, my Lord, will now be deferred. Mr. Macartney has brought
me intelligence which renders it at present unnecessary."


"Mr. Macartney," said he, gravely, "seems to have great influence;-yet
he is a very young counsellor."


"Is it possible, my Lord, Mr. Macartney can give you the least
uneasiness?"


"My dearest Miss Anville," said he, taking my hand, "I see, and I
adore the purity of your mind, superior as it is to all little arts,
and all apprehensions of suspicion; and I should do myself, as well as
you, injustice, if I were capable of harbouring the smallest doubts of
that goodness which makes you mine forever: nevertheless, pardon me,
if I own myself surprised,-nay, alarmed, at these frequent meetings
with so young a man as Mr. Macartney."


"My Lord," cried I, eager to clear myself, "Mr. Macartney is my
brother."


"Your brother! you amaze me!-What strange mystery, then, makes his
relationship a secret?"


Just then Mrs. Selwyn opened the door. "O, you are here!" cried she:
"Pray, is my Lord so kind as to assist you in preparing for your
journey, or in retarding it?"


"I should be most happy," said Lord Orville, smiling, "if it were in
my power to do the latter."


I then acquainted her with Mr. Macartney's communication.


She immediately ordered the chaise away: and then took me into her
own room, to consider what should be done.


A few minutes sufficed to determine her; and she wrote the following
note.


         "To Sir John Belmont, Bart."


        "MRS. SELWYN presents her compliments to Sir John Belmont;
        and, if he is at leisure, will be glad to wait on him this
        morning, upon business of importance."




She then ordered her man to enquire at the pump-room for a direction;
and went herself to Mrs. Beaumont to apologize for deferring her
journey.


An answer was presently returned, that Sir John would be glad to
see her.


She would have had me immediately accompany her to the Hot-Wells; but
I entreated her to spare me the distress of so abrupt an introduction,
and to pave the way for my reception. She consented rather reluctantly,
and, attended only by her servant, walked to the Wells.


She was not absent two hours; yet so miserably did time seem to
linger, that I thought a thousand accidents had happened, and feared
she would never return.  I passed the whole time in my own room,
for I was too much agitated even to converse with Lord Orville.


The instant that, from my window, I saw her returning, I flew down
stairs, and met her in the garden.


We both walked to the arbour.


Her looks, in which both disappointment and anger were expressed,
presently announced to me the failure of her embassy. Finding that
she did not speak, I asked her, in a faltering voice, whether or not
I had a father?


"You have not, my dear!" said she abruptly.


"Very well, Madam," said I, with tolerable calmness, "let the chaise
then be ordered again;-I will go to Berry Hill;-and there, I trust,
I shall still find one!"


It was some time ere she could give, or I could hear, the account of
her visit; and then she related it in a hasty manner; yet, I believe
I can recollect every word.


"I found Sir John alone. He received me with the utmost politeness. I
did not keep him a moment in suspense as to the purport of my
visit. But I had no sooner made it known, than, with a supercilious
smile, he said, 'And have you, Madam, been prevailed upon to revive
that ridiculous old story?'  Ridiculous, I told him, was a term which
he would find no one else do him the favour to make use of, in speaking
of the horrible actions belonging to the old story he made so light of;
'actions' continued I, 'which would dye still deeper the black annals
of Nero or Caligula.' He attempted in vain to rally; for I pursued him
with all the severity in my power, and ceased not painting the enormity
of his crime till I stung him to the quick, and, in a voice of passion
and impatience, he said, 'No more, Madam,-this is not a subject upon
which I need a monitor.' 'Make then,' cried I, 'the only reparation
in your power.-Your daughter is now at Clifton; send for her hither;
and, in the face of the world, proclaim the legitimacy of her birth,
and clear the reputation of your injured wife.' 'Madam,' said he,
'you are much mistaken, if you suppose I waited for the honour of this
visit before I did what little justice now depends upon me, to the
memory of that unfortunate woman: her daughter has been my care from
her infancy; I have taken her into my house; she bears my name; and
she will be my sole heiress.' For some time this assertion appeared
so absurd, that I only laughed at it: but, at last, he assured me,
I had myself been imposed upon; for that very woman who attended
Lady Belmont in her last illness, conveyed the child to him while
he was in London, before she was a year old. 'Unwilling,' he added,
'at that time to confirm the rumour of my being married, I sent the
woman with the child to France: as soon as she was old enough, I put
her into a convent, where she has been properly educated, and now
I have taken her home. I have acknowledged her for my lawful child,
and paid, at length, to the memory of her unhappy mother a tribute
of fame, which has made me wish to hide myself hereafter from all
the world.' This whole story sounded so improbable, that I did not
scruple to tell him I discredited every word. He then rung his bell;
and, enquiring if his hair-dresser was come, said he was sorry to
leave me; but that, if I would favour him with my company to-morrow,
he would do himself the honour of introducing Miss Belmont to me,
instead of troubling me to introduce her to him. I rose in great
indignation; and assuring him I would make his conduct as public as
it was infamous-I left the house."


Good Heaven, how strange the recital! how incomprehensible an
affair! The Miss Belmont then who is actually at Bristol, passes
for the daughter of my unhappy mother!-passes, in short, for your
Evelina! Who she can be, or what this tale can mean, I have not
any idea.


Mrs. Selwyn soon after left me to my own reflections. Indeed they were
not very pleasant. Quietly as I had borne her relation, the moment
I was alone I felt most bitterly both the disgrace and sorrow of a
rejection so cruelly inexplicable.


I know not how long I might have continued in this situation, had
I not been awakened from my melancholy reverie by the voice of Lord
Orville. "May I come in," cried he, "or shall I interrupt you?"


I was silent, and he seated himself next me.


"I fear," he continued, "Miss Anville will think I persecute her:
yet so much as I have to say, and so much as I wish to hear, with so
few opportunities for either, she cannot wonder-and I hope she will
not be offended-that I seize with such avidity every moment in my
power to converse with her. You are grave," added he, taking my hand;
"I hope the pleasure it gives to me, will not be a subject of pain to
you? -You are silent!-Something, I am sure, has afflicted you:-would
to Heaven I were able to console you!-Would to Heaven I were worthy
to participate in your sorrows!"


My heart was too full to bear this kindness, and I could only answer by
my tears. "Good Heaven," cried he, "how you alarm me!-My love, my sweet
Miss Anville, deny me no longer to be the sharer of your griefs!-tell
me, at least, that you have not withdrawn your esteem!-that you do
not repent the goodness you have shown me!-that you still think me
the same grateful Orville, whose heart you have deigned to accept!"


"Oh, my Lord," cried I, "your generosity overpowers me!" And I wept
like an infant. For now, that all my hopes of being acknowledged
seemed finally crushed, I felt the nobleness of his disinterested
regard so forcibly, that I could scarce breathe under the weight of
gratitude which oppressed me.


He seemed greatly shocked; and, in terms the most flattering, the
most respectfully tender, he at once soothed my distress, and urged
me to tell him its cause.


"My Lord," said I, when I was able to speak, "you little know what
an outcast you have honoured with your choice!-a child of bounty,-an
orphan from infancy,-dependant, even for subsistence, dependent, upon
the kindness of compassion!-Rejected by my natural friends,-disowned
for ever by my nearest relation,-Oh, my Lord, so circumstanced,
can I deserve the distinction with which you honour me? No, no,
I feel the inequality too painfully;-you must leave me, my Lord;
you must suffer me to return to obscurity; and there, in the bosom
of my first, best, my only friend,-I will pour forth all the grief
of my heart!-while you, my Lord, must seek elsewhere-"


I could not proceed; my whole soul recoiled against the charge I
would have given, and my voice refused to utter it.


"Never," cried he, warmly, "my heart is your's, and I swear to you an
attachment eternal!-You prepare me, indeed, for a tale of horror, and
I am almost breathless with expectation;-but so firm is my conviction,
that, whatever are your misfortunes, to have merited them is not of the
number, that I feel myself more strongly, more invincibly devoted to
you than ever!-Tell me but where I may find this noble friend, whose
virtues you have already taught me to reverence,-and I will fly to
obtain his consent and intercession, that henceforward our fates my be
indissolubly united;-and then shall it be the sole study of my life to
endeavor to soften your past,-and guard you from future misfortunes!"


I had just raised my eyes to answer this most generous of men, when
the first object they met was Mrs. Selwyn.


"So, my dear," cried she, "what, still courting the rural shades!-I
thought ere now you would have been satiated with this retired seat,
and I have been seeking you all over the house. But I find the
only way to meet with you,-is to enquire for Lord Orville. However,
don't let me disturb your meditation; you are possibly planning some
pastoral dialogue."


And, with this provoking speech, she walked on.


In the greatest confusion I was quitting the arbour, when Lord Orville
said, "Permit me to follow Mrs. Selwyn;-it is time to put an end to
all impertinent conjectures; will you allow me to speak to her openly?"


I assented in silence, and he left me.


I then went to my own room, where I continued till I was summoned to
dinner; after which, Mrs. Selwyn invited me to hers.


The moment she had shut the door, "Your Ladyship'" said she, "will,
I hope, be seated."


"Ma'am!" cried I, staring.


"O the sweet innocent! So you don't know what I mean?-but, my dear,
my sole view is to accustom you a little to your dignity elect, lest,
when you are addressed by your title, you should look another way, from
an apprehension of listening to a discourse not meant for you to hear."


Having, in this manner, diverted herself with my confusion, till her
raillery was almost exhausted, she congratulated me very seriously
upon the partiality of Lord Orville, and painted to me, in the
strongest terms, his disinterested desire of being married to me
immediately. She had told him, she said, my whole story, and yet
he was willing, nay eager, that our union should take place of any
further application to my family. "Now, my dear," continued she,
"I advise you by all means to marry him directly; nothing can be
more precarious than our success with Sir John; and the young men of
this age are not to be trusted with too much time for deliberation,
where their interests are concerned."


"Good God, Madam," cried I, "do you think I would hurry Lord Orville?"


"Well, do as you will," said she, "luckily you have an excellent
subject for Quixotism;-otherwise this delay might prove your ruin;
but Lord Orville is almost as romantic as if he had been born and
bred at Berry Hill."


She then proposed, as no better expedient seemed likely to be
suggested, that I should accompany her at once in her visit to the
Hot-Wells to-morrow morning.


The very idea made me tremble; yet she represented so strongly the
necessity of pursuing this unhappy affair with spirit, or giving it
totally up, that, wanting her force of argument, I was almost obliged
to yield to her proposal.


In the evening we all walked in the garden; and Lord Orville, who
never quitted my side, told me he had been listening to a tale, which
though it had removed the perplexities that had so long tormented him,
had penetrated him with sorrow and compassion. I acquainted him with
Mrs. Selwyn's plan for to-morrow, and confessed the extreme terror
it gave me. He then, in a manner almost unanswerable, besought me
to leave to him the conduct of the affair, by consenting to be his
before an interview took place.


I could not but acknowledge my sense of his generosity; but I told him
I was wholly dependent upon you; and that I was certain your opinion
would be the same as mine; which was, that it would be highly improper
I should dispose of myself for ever, so very near the time which must
finally decide by whose authority I ought to be guided. The subject of
this dreaded meeting, with the thousand conjectures and apprehensions
to which it gives birth, employed all our conversation then, as it
has all my thoughts since.


Heaven only knows how I shall support myself, when the long
expected-the wished-yet terrible moment arrives, that will prostrate
me at the feet of the nearest, the most reverenced of all relations,
whom my heart yearns to know, and longs to love!
</CHAPTER>

