<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXXI. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 
 Clifton, Oct. 12th.


 THIS morning, early, I received the following letter from Sir Clement
Willoughby:


         "To Miss Anville.


          "I HAVE this moment received intelligence that preparations
          are actually making for your marriage with Lord Orville.


          "Imagine not that I write with the imbecile idea of
          rendering those
        preparations abortive. No, I am not so mad. My sole view is
        to explain the motive of my conduct in a particular instance,
        and to obviate the accusation of treachery which may be laid
        to my charge.


          "My unguarded behaviour, when I last saw you, has, probably,
          already
        acquainted you, that the letter I then saw you reading was
        written by myself. For your further satisfaction, let me have
        the honour of informing you, that the letter you had designed
        for Lord Orville, had fallen into my hands.


          "However I may have been urged on by a passion the most
          violent that
        ever warmed the heart of man, I can by no means calmly submit
        to be stigmatized for an action seemingly so dishonourable;
        and it is for this reason that I trouble you with this
        justification.


          "Lord Orville,-the happy Orville, whom you are so ready to
        bless,-had made me believe he loved you not;-nay, that he
        held you in contempt.


          "Such were my thoughts of his sentiments of you, when I got
        possession of the letter you meant to send him. I pretend
        not to vindicate either the means I used to obtain it, or
        the action of breaking the seal; but I was impelled, by an
        impetuous curiosity, to discover the terms upon which you
        wrote to him.


          "The letter, however, was wholly unintelligible to me,
          and the
        perusal of it only added to my perplexity.


          "A tame suspense I was not born to endure, and I determined
          to clear
        my doubts at all hazards and events.


          "I answered it, therefore, in Orville's name.


          "The views which I am now going to acknowledge, must,
          infallibly,
        incur your displeasure;-yet I scorn all palliation.


          "Briefly, then, I concealed your letter to prevent a
          discovery of
        your capacity; and I wrote you an answer, which I hoped would
        prevent your wishing for any other.


          "I am well aware of every thing which can be said upon
          this subject.
        Lord Orville will, possibly, think himself ill-used; but I am
        extremely indifferent as to his opinion; nor do I now write
        by way of offering any apology to him, but merely to make
        known to yourself the reasons by which I have been governed.


          "I intend to set off next week for the Continent. Should his
        Lordship have any commands for me in the mean time, I shall
        be glad to receive them. I say not this by way of defiance,-I
        should blush to be suspected of so doing through an indirect
        channel; but simply that, if you show him this letter, he
        may know I dare defend, as well as excuse, my conduct.
          "CLEMENT WILLOUGHBY."




 What a strange letter! how proud and how piqued does its writer
 appear! To
what alternate meanness and rashness do the passions lead, when reason
and self-denial do not oppose them! Sir Clement is conscious he has
acted dishonourably; yet the same unbridled vehemence, which urged
him to gratify a blameable curiosity, will sooner prompt him to risk
his life, than, confess his misconduct. The rudeness of his manner of
writing to me, springs, from the same cause: the proof which he has
received of my indifference to him, has stung him to the soul, and he
has neither the delicacy nor forbearance to disguise his displeasure.


 I determined not to show this letter to Lord Orville, and thought
 it most
prudent to let Sir Clement know I should not. I therefore wrote the
following note:


          "To Sir Clement Willoughby.


         "SIR,


         "The letter you have been pleased to address to me, is
         so little
        calculated to afford Lord Orville any satisfaction, that you
        may depend upon my carefully keeping it from his sight. I will
        bear you no resentment for what is past; but I most earnestly
        intreat, nay implore, that you will not write again, while in
        your present frame of mind, by any channel, direct or indirect.


         "I hope you will have much pleasure in your promised
         expedition; and
        I beg leave to assure you of my good wishes."




Not knowing by what name to sign, I was obliged to send it without any.


The preparations which Sir Clement mentions, go on just as if your
consent were arrived: it is in vain that I expostulate; Lord Orville
says, should any objections be raised, all shall be given up; but
that, as his hopes forbid him to expect any, he must proceed as if
already assured of your concurrence.


We have had, this afternoon, a most interesting conversation, in
which we have traced our sentiments of each other from our first
acquaintance. I have made him confess how ill he thought of me upon
my foolish giddiness at Mrs.  Stanley's ball; but he flatters me
with assurances, that every succeeding time he saw me, I appeared to
something less and less disadvantage.


When I expressed my amazement that he could honour with his choice a
girl who seemed so infinitely, in every respect, beneath his alliance,
he frankly owned, that he had fully intended making more minute
inquiries into my family and connections; particularly concerning
those people he saw me with at Marybone, before he acknowledged his
prepossession in my favour: but seeing me again, put him quite off
his guard; and, "divesting him of prudence, left him nothing but
love." These were his words; and yet, he has repeatedly assured me,
that his partiality has known no bounds from the time of my residing
at Clifton.  * * * * * *


Mr. Macartney has just been with me, on an embassy from my father. He
has sent me his kindest love and assurances of favour; and desired
to know if I am happy in the prospect of changing my situation,
and if there is any thing I can name which he can do for me. And, at
the same time, Mr. Macartney delivered to me a draught on my father's
banker for a thousand pounds, which he insisted that I should receive
entirely for my own use, and expend in equipping myself properly for
the new rank of life to which I seem destined.


I am sure I need not say how much I was penetrated by this goodness:
I wrote my thanks, and acknowledged, frankly, that if I could see
him restored to tranquillity, my heart would be without a wish.

</CHAPTER>

