<CHAPTER>
LETTER I LADY HOWARD TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, Kent.
 
CAN any thing, my good Sir, be more painful to a friendly mind, than
a necessity of communicating disagreeable intelligence? Indeed it is
sometimes difficult to determine, whether the relator or the receiver
of evil tidings is most to be pitied.


I have just had a letter from Madame Duval; she is totally at a loss
in what manner to behave; she seems desirous to repair the wrongs she
has done, yet wishes the world to believe her blameless. She would
fain cast upon another the odium of those misfortunes for which she
alone is answerable. Her letter is violent, sometimes abusive, and
that of you!-you, to whom she is under obligations which are greater
even than her faults, but to whose advice she wickedly imputes all the
sufferings of her much injured daughter, the late Lady Belmont. The
chief purport of her writing I will acquaint you with; the letter
itself is not worthy your notice.


She tells me that she has, for many years past, been in continual
expectation of making a journey to England, which prevented her
writing for information concerning this melancholy subject, by giving
her hopes of making personal inquiries; but family occurrences have
still detained her in France, which country she now sees no prospect
of quitting. She has, therefore, lately used her utmost endeavors
to obtain a faithful account of whatever related to her ill-advised
daughter; the result of which giving her some reason to apprehend,
that, upon her death-bed, she bequeathed an infant orphan to the world,
she most graciously says, that if you, with whom she understands the
child is placed, will procure authentic proofs of its relationship to
her, you may sent it to Paris, where she will properly provide for it.


This woman is, undoubtedly, at length, self-convicted of her most
unnatural behaviour; it is evident, from her writing, that she is
still as vulgar and illiterate as when her first husband, Mr. Evelyn,
had the weakness to marry her; nor does she at all apologize for
addressing herself to me, though I was only once in her company.


Her letter has excited in my daughter Mirvan, a strong desire to be
informed of the motives which induced Madame Duval to abandon the
unfortunate Lady Belmont, at a time when a mother's protection was
peculiarly necessary for her peace and her reputation. Notwithstanding
I was personally acquainted with all the parties concerned in that
affair, the subject always appeared of too delicate a nature to be
spoken of with the principals; I cannot, therefore, satisfy Mrs. Mirvan
otherwise than by applying to you.


By saying that you may send the child, Madame Duval aims at conferring,
where she most owes obligation. I pretend not to give you advice;
you, to whose generous protection this helpless orphan is indebted
for every thing, are the best and only judge of what she ought to
do; but I am much concerned at the trouble and uneasiness which this
unworthy woman may occasion you.


My daughter and my grandchild join with me in desiring to be most
kindly remembered to the amiable girl; and they bid me remind you, that
the annual visit to Howard Grove, which we were formerly promised,
has been discontinued for more than four years.  I am, dear Sir,
with great regard, Your most obedient friend and servant, M. HOWARD.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER II MR. VILLARS TO LADY HOWARD

Berry Hill, Dorsetshire.


YOUR Ladyship did but too well foresee the perplexity and uneasiness
of which Madame Duval's letter has been productive. However, I ought
rather to be thankful that I have so many years remained unmolested,
than repine at my present embarrassment; since it proves, at least,
that this wretched woman is at length awakened to remorse.


In regard to my answer, I must humbly request your Ladyship to write
to this effect: "That I would not, upon any account, intentionally
offend Madame Duval; but that I have weighty, nay unanswerable
reasons for detaining her grand-daughter at present in England;
the principal of which is, that it was the earnest desire of one
to whose will she owes implicit duty. Madame Duval may be assured,
that she meets with the utmost attention and tenderness; that her
education, however short of my wishes, almost exceeds my abilities;
and I flatter myself, when the time arrives that she shall pay her
duty to her grand-mother, Madame Duval will find no reason to be
dissatisfied with what has been done for her."


Your Ladyship will not, I am sure, be surprised at this answer. Madame
Duval is by no means a proper companion or guardian for a young woman:
she is at once uneducated and unprincipled; ungentle in temper, and
unamiable in her manners. I have long known that she has persuaded
herself to harbour an aversion for me-Unhappy woman! I can only regard
her as an object of pity!


I dare not hesitate at a request from Mrs. Mirvan; yet, in complying
with it, I shall, for her own sake, be as concise as I possibly can;
since the cruel transactions which preceded the birth of my ward can
afford no entertainment to a mind so humane as her's.


Your Ladyship may probably have heard, that I had the honour to
accompany Mr.  Evelyn, the grandfather of my young charge, when
upon his travels, in the capacity of a tutor. His unhappy marriage,
immediately upon his return to England, with Madame Duval, then a
waiting-girl at a tavern, contrary to the advice and entreaties of
all his friends, among whom I was myself the most urgent, induced
him to abandon his native land, and fix his abode in France.
Thither he was followed by shame and repentance; feelings which
his heart was not framed to support; for, notwithstanding he had
been too weak to resist the allurements of beauty, which nature,
though a niggard to her of every other boon, had with a lavish hand
bestowed on his wife; yet he was a young man of excellent character,
and, till thus unaccountably infatuated, of unblemished conduct. He
survived this ill-judged marriage but two years. Upon his death-bed,
with an unsteady hand, he wrote me the following note:


"My friend, forget your resentment, in favour of your humanity;-a
father, trembling for the welfare of his child, bequeaths her to your
care. O Villars! hear! pity! And relieve me!"


Had my circumstances permitted me, I should have answered these words
by an immediate journey to Paris; but I was obliged to act by the
agency of a friend, who was upon the spot, and present at the opening
of the will.


Mr. Evelyn left to me a legacy of a thousand pounds, and the sole
guardianship of his daughter's person till her eighteenth year;
conjuring me, in the most affecting terms, to take the charge of her
education till she was able to act with propriety for herself; but,
in regard to fortune, he left her wholly dependent on her mother,
to whose tenderness he earnestly recommended her.


Thus, though he would not, to a woman low-bred and illiberal as
Mrs. Evelyn, trust the conduct and morals of his daughter, he
nevertheless thought proper to secure to her the respect and duty
to which, from her own child, were certainly her due; but unhappily,
it never occurred to him that the mother, on her part, could fail in
affection or justice.


Miss Evelyn, Madam, from the second to the eighteenth year of her
life, was brought up under my care, and, except when at school
under my roof. I need not speak to your Ladyship of the virtues
of that excellent young creature.  She loved me as her father; nor
was Mrs. Villars less valued by her; while to me she became so dear,
that her loss was little less afflicting than that which I have since
sustained of Mrs. Villars herself.


At that period of her life we parted; her mother, then married to
Monsieur Duval, sent for her to Paris. How often have I since regretted
that I did not accompany her thither! Protected and supported by me,
the misery and disgrace which awaited her might perhaps have been
avoided. But, to be brief-Madame Duval, at the instigation of her
husband, earnestly, or rather tyrannically, endeavoured to effect a
union between Miss Evelyn and one of his nephews.  And, when she found
her power inadequate to her attempt, enraged at her non-compliance,
she treated her with the grossest unkindness, and threatened her with
poverty and ruin.


Miss Evelyn, to whom wrath and violence had hitherto been strangers,
soon grew weary of such usage; and rashly, and without a witness,
consented to a private marriage with Sir John Belmont, a very
profligate young man, who had but too successfully found means to
insinuate himself into her favour. He promised to conduct her to
England-he did.-O, Madam, you know the rest!-Disappointed of the
fortune he expected, by the inexorable rancour of the Duvals, he
infamously burnt the certificate of their marriage, and denied that
they had ever been united.


She flew to me for protection. With what mixed transports of joy and
anguish did I again see her! By my advice, she endeavoured to procure
proofs of her marriage-but in vain; her credulity had been no match
for his art.


Every body believed her innocent, from the guiltless tenor of her
unspotted youth, and from the known libertinism of her barbarous
betrayer. Yet her sufferings were too acute for her slender frame;
and the same moment that gave birth to her infant, put an end at once
to the sorrows and the life of its mother.


The rage of Madame Duval at her elopement, abated not while this
injured victim of cruelty yet drew breath. She probably intended, in
time, to have pardoned her; but time was not allowed. When she was
informed of her death, I have been told, that the agonies of grief
and remorse, with which she was seized, occasioned her a severe fit
of illness. But, from the time of her recovery to the date of her
letter to your Ladyship, I had never heard that she manifested any
desire to be made acquainted with the circumstances which attended
the death of Lady Belmont, and the birth of her helpless child.


That child, Madam, shall never, while life is lent me, know the loss
she has sustained. I have cherished, succoured, and supported her,
from her earliest infancy to her sixteenth year; and so amply has she
repaid my care and affection, that my fondest wish is now circumscribed
by the desire of bestowing her on one who may be sensible of her worth,
and then sinking to eternal rest in her arms.


Thus it has happened, that the education of the father, daughter,
and grand-daughter, has devolved on me. What infinite misery have the
two first caused me! Should the fate of the dear survivor be equally
adverse, how wretched will be the end of my cares-the end of my days!


Even had Madame Duval merited the charge she claims, I fear my
fortitude would have been unequal to such a parting; but being such
as she is, not only my affection, but my humanity, recoils, at the
barbarous idea of deserting the sacred trust reposed in me. Indeed,
I could but ill support her former yearly visits to the respectable
mansion at Howard Grove: pardon me, dear Madam, and do not think me
insensible of the honour which your Ladyship's condescension confers
upon us both; but so deep is the impression which the misfortunes
of her mother have made on my heart, that she does not, even for
a moment, quit my sight without exciting apprehensions and terrors
which almost overpower me. Such, Madam, is my tenderness, and such
my weakness!-But she is the only tie I have upon earth, and I trust
to your Ladyship's goodness not to judge of my feelings with severity.


I beg leave to present my humble respects to Mrs. and Miss Mirvan;
and have the honour to be, Madam, your Ladyship's most obedient and
most humble servant, ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER III  LADY HOWARD TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS


[Written some months after the last]

Howard Grove, March 8.

Dear and Rev. Sir,


YOUR last letter gave me infinite pleasure: after so long and tedious
an illness, how grateful to yourself and to your friends must be your
returning health! You have the hearty wishes of every individual of
this place for its continuance and increase.


Will you not think I take advantage of your acknowledged recovery,
if I once more venture to mention your pupil and Howard Grove
together? Yet you must remember the patience with which we submitted
to your desire of not parting with her during the bad state of your
health, tho' it was with much reluctance we forbore to solicit her
company. My grand-daughter in particular, has scarce been able to
repress her eagerness to again meet the friend of her infancy; and
for my own part, it is very strongly my wish to manifest the regard I
had for the unfortunate Lady Belmont, by proving serviceable to her
child; which seems to me the best respect that can be paid to her
memory. Permit me, therefore, to lay before you a plan which Mrs.
Mirvan and I have formed, in consequence of your restoration to health.


I would not frighten you;-but do you think you could bear to part
with your young companion for two or three months? Mrs. Mirvan
proposes to spend the ensuing spring in London, whither for the
first time, my grandchild will accompany her: Now, my good friend,
it is very earnestly their wish to enlarge and enliven their party by
the addition of your amiable ward, who would share, equally with her
own daughter, the care and attention of Mrs.  Mirvan. Do not start
at this proposal; it is time that she should see something of the
world. When young people are too rigidly sequestered from it, their
lively and romantic imaginations paint it to them as a paradise of
which they have been beguiled; but when they are shown it properly,
and in due time, they see it such as it really is, equally shared by
pain and pleasure, hope and disappointment.


You have nothing to apprehend from her meeting with Sir John Belmont,
as that abandoned man is now abroad, and not expected home this year.


Well, my good Sir, what say you to our scheme? I hope it will meet
with your approbation; but if it should not, be assured I can never
object to any decision of one who is so much respected and esteemed
as Mr. Villars, by His most faithful, humble servant, M. HOWARD.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER IV MR. VILLARS TO LADY HOWARD

Berry Hill, March 12.


I AM grieved, Madam, to appear obstinate, and I blush to incur
the imputation of selfishness. In detaining my young charge thus
long with myself in the country, I consulted not solely my own
inclination. Destined, in all probability, to possess a very moderate
fortune, I wished to contract her views to something within it. The
mind is but too naturally prone to pleasure, but too easily yielded
to dissipation: it has been my study to guard her against their
delusions, by preparing her to expect-and to despise them. But the
time draws on for experience and observation to take the place of
instruction: if I have in some measure, rendered her capable of using
one with discretion, and making the other with improvement, I shall
rejoice myself with the assurance of having largely contributed to her
welfare. She is now of an age that happiness is eager to attend,-let
her then enjoy it! I commit her to the protection of your Ladyship,
and only hope she may be found worthy half the goodness I am satisfied
she will meet with at your hospitable mansion.


Thus far, Madam, I cheerfully submit to your desire. In confiding my
ward to the care of Lady Howard, I can feel no uneasiness from her
absence, but what will arise from the loss of her company, since I
shall be as well convinced of her safety as if she were under my own
roof.-But can your Ladyship be serious in proposing to introduce her
to the gaieties of a London life?  Permit me to ask, for what end,
or for what purpose? A youthful mind is seldom totally free from
ambition; to curb that, is the first step to contentment, since to
diminish expectation is to increase enjoyment. I apprehend nothing
more than too much raising her hopes and her views, which the natural
vivacity of her disposition would render but too easy to effect.
The town-acquaintance of Mrs. Mirvan are all in the circle of high
life; this artless young creature, with too much beauty to escape
notice, has too much sensibility to be indifferent to it; but she
has too little wealth to be sought with propriety by men of the
fashionable world.


Consider Madam, the peculiar cruelty of her situation. Only child of
a wealthy Baronet, whose person she has never seen, whose character
she has reason to abhor, and whose name she is forbidden to claim;
entitled as she is to lawfully inherit his fortune and estate, is
there any probability that he will properly own her? And while he
continues to persevere in disavowing his marriage with Miss Evelyn,
she shall never, at the expense of her mother's honour, receive a
part of her right as the donation of his bounty.


And as to Mr. Evelyn's estate, I have no doubt but that Madame Duval
and her relations will dispose of it among themselves.


It seems, therefore, as if this deserted child, though legally heiress
to two large fortunes, must owe all her rational expectations to
adoption and friendship. Yet her income will be such as may make her
happy, if she is disposed to be so in private life; though it will
by no means allow her to enjoy the luxury of a London fine lady.


Let Miss Mirvan, then, Madam, shine in all the splendour of high life;
but suffer my child still to enjoy the pleasures of humble retirement,
with a mind to which greater views are unknown.


I hope this reasoning will be honoured with your approbation; and
I have yet another motive which has some weight with me: I would
not willingly give offence to any human being; and surely Madame
Duval might accuse me of injustice, if, while I refuse to let her
grand-daughter wait upon her, I consent that she should join a party
of pleasure to London.


In sending her to Howard Grove, not one of these scruples arise;
and therefore Mrs. Clinton, a most worthy woman, formerly her nurse,
and now my housekeeper, shall attend her thither next week.


Though I have always called her by the name of Anville, and reported
in this neighbourhood that her father, my intimate friend, left her to
my guardianship; yet I have thought it necessary she should herself
be acquainted with the melancholy circumstances attending her birth:
for though I am very desirous of guarding her from curiosity and
impertinence, by concealing her name, family, and story, yet I would
not leave it in the power of chance to shock her gentle nature with
a tale of so much sorrow.


You must not, Madam, expect too much from my pupil; she is quite
a little rustic, and knows nothing of the world; and though her
education has been the best I could bestow in this retired place,
to which Dorchester, the nearest town, is seven miles distant, yet
I shall not be surprised if you should discover in her a thousand
deficiencies of which I have never dreamt. She must be very much
altered since she was last at Howard Grove. But I will say nothing
of her; I leave her to your Ladyship's own observations, of which
I beg a faithful relation; and am, Dear Madam, with great respect,
Your obedient and most humble Servant, ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER V MR. VILLARS TO LADY HOWARD

March 18.

Dear Madam,

THIS letter will be delivered to you by my child-the child of my
adoption-my affection! Unblest with one natural friend, she merits
a thousand. I send her to you innocent as an angel, and artless as
purity itself; and I send you with her the heart of your friend, the
only hope he has on earth, the subject of his tenderest thoughts, and
the object of his latest cares. She is one, Madam, for whom alone I
have lately wished to live; and she is one whom to serve I would with
transport die! Restore her but to me all innocence as you receive her,
and the fondest hope of my heart will be amply gratified.  A. VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER VI LADY HOWARD TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove.
 
Dear Rev. Sir,


THE solemn manner in which you have committed your child to my care,
has in some measure damped the pleasure which I receive from the
trust, as it makes me fear that you suffer from your compliance, in
which case I shall very sincerely blame myself for the earnestness
with which I have requested this favour: but remember, my good Sir,
she is within a few days summons; and be assured, I will not detain
her a moment longer than you wish.


You desire my opinion of her.


She is a little angel! I cannot wonder that you sought to monopolize
her: neither ought you, at finding it impossible.


Her face and person answer my most refined ideas of complete beauty:
and this, though a subject of praise less important to you, or, to
me than any other, is yet so striking, it is not possible to pass
it unnoticed. Had I not known from whom she received her education,
I should at first sight of so perfect a face, have been in pain for
her understanding; since it has been long and justly remarked, that
folly has ever sought alliance with beauty.


She has the same gentleness in her manners, the same natural graces
in her motions, that I formerly so much admired in her mother. Her
character seems truly ingenuous and simple; and at the same time
that nature has blessed her with an excellent understanding and great
quickness of parts, she has a certain air of inexperience and innocency
that is extremely interesting.


You have not reason to regret the retirement in which she has lived;
since that politeness which is acquired by an acquaintance with high
life, is in her so well supplied by a natural desire of obliging,
joined to a deportment infinitely engaging.


I observe, with great satisfaction, a growing affection between
this amiable girl and my grand-daughter, whose heart is as free
from selfishness or conceit, as that of her young friend is from
all guile. Their regard may be mutually useful, since much is to be
expected from emulation where nothing is to be feared from envy. I
would have them love each other as sisters, and reciprocally supply
the place of that tender and happy relationship to which neither of
them has a natural claim.


Be satisfied, my good Sir, that your child shall meet with the same
attention as our own. We all join in most hearty wishes for your health
and happiness, and in returning our sincere thanks for the favour you
have conferred on us.  I am, dear Sir, Your most faithful servant,
M. HOWARD.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER VII LADY HOWARD TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, March 26.


BE not alarmed, my worthy friend, at my so speedily troubling you
again; I seldom use the ceremony of waiting for answers, or writing
with any regularity, and I have at present immediate occasion for
begging your patience.


Mrs. Mirvan has just received a letter from her long absent husband,
containing the welcome news of his hoping to reach London by
the beginning of next week. My daughter and the Captain have been
separated almost seven years, and it would therefore be needless to
say what joy, surprise, and consequently confusion, his at present
unexpected return has caused at Howard Grove. Mrs. Mirvan, you cannot
doubt, will go instantly to town to meet him; her daughter is under
a thousand obligations to attend her; I grieve that her mother cannot.


And now, my good Sir, I almost blush to proceed;-but, tell me, may I
ask-will you permit-that your child may accompany them? Do not think
us unreasonable, but consider the many inducements which conspire to
make London the happiest place at present she can be in. The joyful
occasion of the journey; the gaiety of the whole party, opposed to
the dull life she must lead, if left here with a solitary old woman
for her sole companion, while she so well knows the cheerfulness and
felicity enjoyed by the rest of the family,-are circumstances that
seem to merit your consideration. Mrs. Mirvan desires me to assure
you that one week is all she asks, as she is certain that the Captain,
who hates London, will be eager to revisit Howard Grove; and Maria is
so very earnest in wishing to have the company of her friend, that,
if you are inexorable, she will be deprived of half the pleasure she
otherwise hopes to receive.


However, I will not, my good Sir, deceive you into an opinion that
they intend to live in a retired manner, as that cannot be fairly
expected. But you have no reason to be uneasy concerning Madame Duval;
she has not any correspondent in England, and obtains no intelligence
but by common report. She must be a stranger to the name your child
bears; and, even should she hear of this excursion, so short a time
as a week or less spent in town upon so particular an occasion,
though previous to their meeting, cannot be construed into disrespect
to herself.


Mrs. Mirvan desires me to assure you, that if you will oblige her,
her two children shall equally share her time and her attention. She
has sent a commission to a friend in town to take a house for her;
and while she waits for an answer concerning it, I shall for one
from you to our petition.  However, your child is writing herself;
and that, I doubt not, will more avail than all we can possible urge.


My daughter desires her best compliments to you if, she says, you
will grant her request but not else.


Adieu, my dear Sir, we all hope every thing from your goodness.
M. HOWARD.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER VIII EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, March 26.


THIS house seems to be the house of joy; every face wears a smile,
and a laugh is at every body's service. It is quite amusing to walk
about and see the general confusion; a room leading to the garden
is fitting up for Captain Mirvan's study. Lady Howard does not sit a
moment in a place; Miss Mirvan is making caps; every body so busy!-such
flying from room to room!-so many orders given, and retracted, and
given again! nothing but hurry and perturbation.


Well but, my dear Sir, I am desired to make a request to you. I hope
you will not think me an encroacher; Lady Howard insists upon my
writing!-yet I hardly know how to go on; a petition implies a want
and have you left me one? No, indeed.


I am half ashamed of myself for beginning this letter. But these dear
ladies are so pressing-I cannot, for my life, resist wishing for the
pleasures they offer me,-provided you do not disapprove them.


They are to make a very short stay in town. The Captain will meet them
in a day or two. Mrs. Mirvan and her sweet daughter both go; what a
happy party!  Yet, I am not very eager to accompany them: at least
I shall be contented to remain where I am, if you desire that I should.


Assured, my dearest Sir, of your goodness, your bounty, and your
indulgent kindness, ought I to form a wish that has not your
sanction? Decide for me, therefore, without the least apprehension
that I shall be uneasy or discontented. While I am yet in suspense,
perhaps I may hope; but I am most certain that when you have once
determined I shall not repine.


They tell me that London is now in full splendour. Two playhouses
are open,-the Opera-house,-Ranelagh,-and the Pantheon.-You see I have
learned all their names. However, pray don't suppose that I make any
point of going, for I shall hardly sigh, to see them depart without me,
though I shall probably never meet with such another opportunity. And,
indeed, their domestic happiness will be so great,-it is natural to
wish to partake of it.


I believe I am bewitched! I made a resolution, when I began, that
I would not be urgent; but my pen-or rather my thoughts, will not
suffer me to keep it-for I acknowledge, I must acknowledge, I cannot
help wishing for your permission.


I almost repent already that I have made this confession; pray forget
that you have read it, if this journey is displeasing to you. But
I will not write any longer; for the more I think of this affair,
the less indifferent to it I find myself.


Adieu, my most honoured, most reverenced, most beloved father! for
by what other name can I call you? I have no happiness or sorrow,
no hope or fear, but what your kindness bestows, or your displeasure
may cause. You will not, I am sure, send a refusal without reasons
unanswerable, and therefore I shall cheerfully acquiesce. Yet I
hope-I hope you will be able to permit me to go!  I am, with the
utmost affection, gratitude, and duty, your EVELINA -


I cannot to you sign ANVILLE, and what other name may I claim?


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER IX MR. VILLARS TO EVELINA

Berry Hill, March 28.

TO resist the urgency of intreaty, is a power which I have not yet
acquired: I aim not at an authority which deprives you of liberty,
yet I would fain guide myself by a prudence which should save me the
pangs of repentance. Your impatience to fly to a place which your
imagination has painted to you in colors so attractive, surprises me
not; I have only to hope, that the liveliness of your fancy may not
deceive you: to refuse, would be raising it still higher. To see my
Evelina happy, is to see myself without a wish: go, then my child;
and may that Heaven, which alone can direct, preserve and strengthen
you! To that, my love, will I daily offer prayers for your felicity. O
may it guard, watch over you, defend you from danger, save you from
distress, and keep vice as distant from your person as from your heart!
And to me, may it grant, the ultimate blessing of closing these aged
eyes in the arms of one so dear-so deservedly beloved!  ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER X EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS 

Queen Ann Street, London, Saturday, April 2.


THIS moment arrived. Just going to Drury Lane Theatre. The celebrated
Mr.  Garrick performs Ranger. I am quite in ecstasy. So is Miss
Mirvan. How fortunate that he should happen to play! We would not
let Mrs. Mirvan rest till she consented to go. Her chief objection
was to our dress, for we have had no time to Londonize ourselves; but
we teased her into compliance, and so we are to sit in some obscure
place that she may not be seen. As to me, I should be alike unknown
in the most conspicuous or most private part of the house.


I can write no more now. I have hardly time to breathe-only just this,
the houses and streets are not quite so superb as I expected. However,
I have seen nothing yet, so I ought not to judge.


Well; adieu, my dearest Sir, for the present; I could not forbear
writing a few words instantly on my arrival, though I suppose my letter
of thanks for your consent is still on the road.  Saturday Night.


O, my dear Sir, in what raptures am I returned? Well may Mr. Garrick
be so celebrated, so universally admired-I had not any idea of so
great a performer.


Such ease! such vivacity in his manner! such grace in his motions! such
fire and meaning in his eyes!-I could hardly believe he had studied
a written part, for every word seemed to be uttered from the impulse
of the moment.


His action-at once so graceful and so free!-his voice-so clear,
so melodious, yet so wonderfully various in its tones!-Such
animation!-every look speaks!


I would have given the world to have had the whole play acted over
again. And when he danced-O, how I envied Clarinda! I almost wished
to have jumped on the stage and joined them.


I am afraid you will think me mad, so I won't say any more; yet,
I really believe Mr. Garrick would make you mad too if you could see
him. I intend to ask Mrs. Mirvan to go to the play every night while
we stay in town. She is extremely kind to me; and Maria, her charming
daughter, is the sweetest girl in the world.


I shall write to you every evening all that passes in the day, and
that in the same manner as, if I could see, I should tell you.  Sunday.


This morning we went to Portland chapel; and afterwards we walked
in the mall of St. James's Park, which by no means answered my
expectations: it is a long straight walk of dirty gravel, very uneasy
to the feet; and at each end instead of an open prospect, nothing is
to be seen but houses built of brick.  When Mrs. Mirvan pointed out
the Palace to me-I think I was never much more surprised.


However, the walk was very agreeable to us; every body looked gay,
and seemed pleased; and the ladies were so much dressed, that Miss
Mirvan and I could do nothing but look at them. Mrs. Mirvan met
several of her friends. No wonder, for I never saw so many people
assembled together before. I looked about for some of my acquaintance,
but in vain; for I saw not one person that I knew, which is very odd,
for all the world seemed there.


Mrs. Mirvan says we are not to walk in the Park again next Sunday,
even if we should be in town, because there is better company in
Kensington Gardens; but really if you had seen how much every body
was dressed, you would not think that possible.  Monday.


We are to go this evening to a private ball, given by Mrs. Stanley,
a very fashionable lady of Mrs. Mirvan's acquaintance.


We have been a-shopping as Mrs. Mirvan calls it, all this morning,
to buy silks, caps, gauzes, and so forth.


The shops are really very entertaining, especially the mercers; there
seem to be six or seven men belonging to each shop; and every one took
care by bowing and smirking, to be noticed. We were conducted from
one to another, and carried from room to room with so much ceremony,
that at I was almost afraid to go on.


I thought I should never have chosen a silk: for they produced so
many, I knew not which to fix upon; and they recommended them all so
strongly, that I fancy they thought I only wanted persuasion to buy
every thing they showed me. And, indeed, they took so much trouble,
that I was almost ashamed I could not.


At the milliners, the ladies we met were so much dressed, that I should
rather have imagined they were making visits than purchases. But
what most diverted me was, that we were more frequently served
by men than by women; and such men! so finical, so affected! they
seemed to understand every part of a woman's dress better than we
do ourselves; and they recommended caps and ribbands with an air of
so much importance, that I wished to ask them how long they had left
off wearing them.


The dispatch with which they work in these great shops is amazing,
for they have promised me a complete suit of linen against the evening.


I have just had my hair dressed. You can't think how oddly my head
feels; full of powder and black pins, and a great cushion on the top
of it. I believe you would hardly know me, for my face looks quite
different to what it did before my hair was dressed. When I shall
be able to make use of a comb for myself I cannot tell; for my hair
is so much entangled, frizzled they call it, that I fear it will be
very difficult.


I am half afraid of this ball to-night; for, you know, I have never
danced but at school: however, Miss Mirvan says there is nothing in
it. Yet, I wish it was over.


Adieu, my dear Sir, pray excuse the wretched stuff I write; perhaps
I may improve by being in this town, and then my letters will be less
unworthy your reading. Meantime, I am, Your dutiful and affectionate,
though unpolished, EVELINA.


Poor Miss Mirvan cannot wear one of the caps she made, because they
dress her hair too large for them.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XI EVELINA IN CONTINUATION

Queen Ann Street, April 5, Tuesday Morning.


I HAVE a vast deal to say, and shall give all this morning to my pen.


As to my plan of writing every evening the adventures of the day,
I find it impracticable; for the diversions here are so very late,
that if I begin my letters after them, I could not go to bed at all.


We passed a most extraordinary evening. A private ball this was called,
so I expected to have seen about four or five couple; but Lord! my
dear Sir, I believe I saw half the world! Two very large rooms were
full of company; in one were cards for the elderly ladies, and in
the other were the dancers. My mamma Mirvan, for she always calls me
her child, said she would sit with Maria and me till we were provided
with partners, and then join the card-players.


The gentlemen, as they passed and repassed, looked as if they thought
we were quite at their disposal, and only waiting for the honour of
their commands; and they sauntered about, in a careless, indolent
manner, as if with a view to keep us in suspense. I don't speak of
this in regard to Miss Mirvan and myself only, but to the ladies in
general: and I thought it so provoking, that I determined in my own
mind that, far from humouring such airs, I would rather not dance
at all, than with any one who would seem to think me ready to accept
the first partner who would condescend to take me.


Not long after, a young man, who had for some time looked at us with a
kind of negligent impertinence, advanced on tiptoe towards me; he had
a set smile on his face, and his dress was so foppish, that I really
believed he even wished to be stared at; and yet he was very ugly.


Bowing almost to the ground with a sort of swing, and waving his
hand, with the greatest conceit, after a short and silly pause, he
said, "Madam-may I presume?"-and stopt, offering to take my hand. I
drew it back, but could scarce forbear laughing. "Allow me, Madam,"
continued he, affectedly breaking off every half moment, "the honour
and happiness-if I am not so unhappy as to address you too late-to
have the happiness and honour-"


Again he would have taken my hand; but bowing my head, I begged to
be excused, and turned to Miss Mirvan to conceal my laughter. He then
desired to know if I had already engaged myself to some more fortunate
man? I said No, and that I believed I should not dance at all. He would
keep himself he told me, disengaged, in hopes I should relent; and
then, uttering some ridiculous speeches of sorrow and disappointment,
though his face still wore the same invariable smile, he retreated.


It so happened, as we have since recollected, that during this little
dialogue Mrs. Mirvan was conversing with the lady of the house. And
very soon after, another gentleman, who seemed about six-and-twenty
years old, gaily but not foppishly dressed, and indeed extremely
handsome, with an air of mixed politeness and gallantry, desired to
know if I was engaged, or would honour him with my hand. So he was
pleased to say, though I am sure I know not what honour he could
receive from me; but these sort of expressions, I find, are used
as words of course, without any distinction of persons, or study
of propriety.


Well, I bowed, and I am sure I coloured; for indeed I was frightened
at the thoughts of dancing before so many people, all strangers, and,
which was worse, with a stranger: however, that was unavoidable;
for, though I looked round the room several times, I could not see
one person that I knew. And so he took my hand, and led me to join
in the dance.


The minuets were over before we arrived, for we were kept late by
the milliners making us wait for our things.


He seemed very desirous of entering into conversation with me; but
I was seized with such a panic, that I could hardly speak a word,
and nothing but the shame of so soon changing my mind prevented my
returning to my seat, and declining to dance at all.


He appeared to be surprised at my terror, which I believe was but
too apparent: however, he asked no questions, though I fear he must
think it very strange, for I did not choose to tell him it was owing
to my never before dancing but with a school-girl.


His conversation was sensible and spirited; his air, and address
were open and noble; his manners gentle, attentive, and infinitely
engaging; his person is all elegance, and his countenance the most
animated and expressive I have ever seen.


In a short time we were joined by Miss Mirvan, who stood next couple
to us.  But how I was startled when she whispered me that my partner
was a nobleman!  This gave me a new alarm: how will he be provoked,
thought I, when he finds what a simple rustic he has honoured with
his choice! one whose ignorance of the world makes her perpetually
fear doing something wrong!


That he should be so much my superior in every way, quite disconcerted
me; and you will suppose my spirits were not much raised, when I
heard a lady, in passing us, say, "This is the most difficult dance
I ever saw."


"O dear, then" cried Maria to her partner, "with your leave, I'll
sit down till the next."


"So will I too, then," cried I, "for I am sure I can hardly stand."


"But you must speak to your partner first," answered she; for he
had turned aside to talk with some gentlemen. However, I had not
sufficient courage to address him; and so away we all three tript,
and seated ourselves at another end of the room.


But, unfortunately for me, Miss Mirvan soon after suffered herself to
be prevailed upon to attempt the dance; and just as she rose to go,
she cried, "My dear, yonder is your partner, Lord Orville walking
about the room in search of you."


"Don't leave me then, dear girl!" cried I; but she was obliged to
go. And now I was more uneasy than ever; I would have given the world
to have seen Mrs.  Mirvan, and begged of her to make my apologies;
for what, thought I, can I possibly say to him in excuse for running
away? He must either conclude me a fool, or half mad; for any one
brought up in the great world, and accustomed to its ways, can have
no idea of such sort of fears as mine.


My confusion increased when I observed that he was every where seeking
me, with apparent perplexity and surprise; but when, at last, I saw
him move towards the place where I sat, I was ready to sink with
shame and distress. I found it absolutely impossible to keep my seat,
because I could not think of a word to say for myself; and so I rose,
and walked hastily towards the card-room, resolving to stay with
Mrs. Mirvan the rest of the evening, and not to dance at all. But
before I could find her, Lord Orville saw and approached me.


He begged to know if I was not well? You may easily imagine how much
I was embarrassed. I made no answer; but hung my head like a fool,
and looked on my fan.


He then, with an air the most respectfully serious, asked if he had
been so unhappy as to offend me?


"No, indeed!" cried I; and, in hopes of changing the discourse, and
preventing his further inquiries, I desired to know if he had seen
the young lady who had been conversing with me?


No;-but would I honour him with any commands to her?


"O, by no means!"


Was there any other person with whom I wished to speak?


I said no, before I knew I had answered at all.


Should he have the pleasure of bringing me any refreshment?


I bowed, almost involuntarily. And away he flew.


I was quite ashamed of being so troublesome, and so much above
myself as these seeming airs made me appear; but indeed I was too
much confused to think or act with any consistency.


If he had not been as swift as lightning, I don't know whether I
should not have stolen away again; but he returned in a moment. When
I had drank a glass of lemonade, he hoped, he said, that I would
again honour him with my hand, as a new dance was just begun. I had
not the presence of mind to say a single word, and so I let him once
more lead me to the place I had left.


Shocked to find how silly, how childish a part I had acted, my former
fears of dancing before such a company, and with such a partner,
returned more forcibly than ever. I suppose he perceived my uneasiness;
for he entreated me to sit down again if dancing was disagreeable to
me. But I was quite satisfied with the folly I had already shewn; and
therefore declined his offer, though I was really scarce able to stand.


Under such conscious disadvantages, you may easily imagine my dear Sir,
how ill I acquitted myself. But, though I both expected and deserved
to find him very much mortified and displeased at his ill fortune in
the choice he had made; yet, to my very great relief, he appeared to
be even contented, and very much assisted and encouraged me. These
people in high life have too much presence of mind, I believe, to
seem disconcerted, or out of humour, however they may feel: for had
I been the person of the most consequence in the room, I could not
have met with more attention and respect.


When the dance was over, seeing me still very much flurried, he led
me to a seat, saying that he would not suffer me to fatigue myself
from politeness.


And then, if my capacity, or even, if my spirits had been better, in
how animated a conversation I might have been engaged! it was then
I saw that the rank of Lord Orville was his least recommendation,
his understanding and his manners being far more distinguished. His
remarks upon the company in general were so apt, so just, so lively,
I am almost surprised myself that they did not reanimate me; but,
indeed, I was too well convinced of the ridiculous part I had myself
played before so nice an observer, to be able to enjoy his pleasantry:
so self-compassion gave me feeling for others. Yet I had not the
courage to attempt either to defend them or to rally in my turn;
but listened to him in silent embarrassment.


When he found this, he changed the subject, and talked of public
places, and public performers; but he soon discovered that I was
totally ignorant of them.


He then, very ingeniously, turned the discourse to the amusements
and occupations of the country.


It now struck me that he was resolved to try whether or not I was
capable of talking upon any subject. This put so great a restraint
upon my thoughts, that I was unable to go further than a monosyllable,
and not ever so far, when I could possibly avoid it.


We were sitting in this manner, he conversing with all gaiety, I
looking down with all foolishness, when that fop who had first asked
me to dance, with a most ridiculous solemnity approached, and, after
a profound bow or two, said, "I humbly beg pardon, Madam,-and of you
too, my Lord,-for breaking in upon such agreeable conversation-which
must, doubtless, be more delectable-than what I have the honour
to offer-but-"


I interrupted him-I blush for my folly,-with laughing; yet I could not
help it; for, added to the man's stately foppishness, (and he actually
took snuff between every three words) when I looked around at Lord
Orville, I saw such extreme surprise in his face,-the cause of which
appeared so absurd, that I could not for my life preserve my gravity.


I had not laughed before from the time I had left Miss Mirvan, and I
had much better have cried then; Lord Orville actually stared at me;
the beau, I know not his name, looked quite enraged. "Refrain-Madam,"
said he, with an important air, "a few moments refrain!-I have but
a sentence to trouble you with.-May I know to what accident I must
attribute not having the honour of your hand?"


"Accident, Sir!" repeated I, much astonished.


"Yes, accident, Madam;-for surely,-I must take the liberty to
observe-pardon me, Madam,-it ought to be no common one-that should
tempt a lady-so young a one too,-to be guilty of ill-manners."


A confused idea now for the first time entered my head, of something
I had heard of the rules of an assembly; but I was never at one
before,-I have only danced at school,-and so giddy and heedless I
was, that I had not once considered the impropriety of refusing one
partner, and afterwards accepting another. I was thunderstruck at the
recollection: but, while these thoughts were rushing into my head,
Lord Orville with some warmth, said, "This Lady, Sir, is incapable
of meriting such an accusation!"


The creature-for I am very angry with him-made a low bow and with a
grin the most malicious I ever saw, "My Lord," said he, "far be it
from me to accuse the lady, for having the discernment to distinguish
and prefer-the superior attractions of your Lordship."


Again he bowed and walked off.


Was ever any thing so provoking? I was ready to die with shame. "What
a coxcomb!" exclaimed Lord Orville: while I, without knowing what
I did, rose hastily, and moving off, "I can't imagine," cried I,
"where Mrs. Mirvan has hid herself!"


"Give me leave to see," answered he. I bowed and sat down again,
not daring to meet his eyes; for what must he think of me, between
my blunder, and the supposed preference?


He returned in a moment, and told me that Mrs. Mirvan was at cards,
but would be glad to see me; and I went immediately. There was but
one chair vacant; so, to my great relief, Lord Orville presently left
us. I then told Mrs.  Mirvan my disasters; and she good-naturedly
blamed herself for not having better instructed me; but said, she had
taken it for granted that I must know such common customs. However,
the man may, I think, be satisfied with his pretty speech and carry
his resentment no farther.


In a short time Lord Orville returned. I consented, with the best grace
I could, to go down another dance, for I had had time to recollect
myself; and therefore resolved to use some exertion, and, if possible,
to appear less a fool than I had hitherto done; for it occurred to me,
that, insignificant as I was, compared to a man of his rank and figure;
yet, since he had been so unfortunate as to make choice of me for a
partner, why I should endeavour to make the best of it.


The dance, however, was short, and he spoke very little; so I had no
opportunity of putting my resolution in practice. He was satisfied, I
suppose, with his former successless efforts to draw me out or, rather,
I fancied he had been inquiring who I was. This again disconcerted me;
and the spirits I had determined to exert, again failed me. Tired,
ashamed, and mortified, I begged to sit down till we returned home,
which I did soon after. Lord Orville did me the honour to hand me to
the coach, talking all the way of the honour I had done him! O these
fashionable people!


Well, my dear Sir, was it not a strange evening? I could not help
being thus particular, because, to me, every thing is so new. But it
is now time to conclude. I am, with all love and duty, your EVELINA.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XII EVELINA IN CONTINUATION

Tuesday, April 5.


THERE is to be no end to the troubles of last night. I have this
moment, between persuasion and laughter, gathered from Maria the most
curious dialogue that ever I heard. You will at first be startled at
my vanity; but, my dear Sir, have patience!


It must have passed while I was sitting with Mrs. Mirvan, in the
card-room.  Maria was taking some refreshment, and saw Lord Orville
advancing for the same purpose himself; but he did not know her,
though she immediately recollected him. Presently after, a very
gay-looking man, stepping hastily up to him cried, "Why, my Lord,
what have you done with your lovely partner?"


"Nothing!" answered Lord Orville with a smile and a shrug.


"By Jove," cried the man, "she is the most beautiful creature I ever
saw in my life!"


Lord Orville, as he well might, laughed; but answered, "Yes, a pretty
modest-looking girl."


"O my Lord!" cried the madman, "she is an angel!"


"A silent one," returned he.


"Why ay, my Lord, how stands she as to that? She looks all intelligence
and expression."


"A poor weak girl!" answered Lord Orville, shaking his head.


"By Jove," cried the other, "I am glad to hear it!"


At that moment, the same odious creature who had been my former
tormentor, joined them. Addressing Lord Orville with great respect,
he said, "I beg pardon, my Lord,-if I was-as I fear might be the
case-rather too severe in my censure of the lady who is honoured with
your protection-but, my Lord, ill-breeding is apt to provoke a man."


"Ill-breeding!" cried my unknown champion, "impossible! that elegant
face can never be so vile a mask!"


"O Sir, as to that," answered he, "you must allow me to judge;
for though I pay all deference to your opinion-in other things-yet
I hope you will grant-and I appeal to your Lordship also-that I am
not totally despicable as a judge of good or ill-manners."


"I was so wholly ignorant," said Lord Orville, gravely, "of the
provocation you might have had, that I could not but be surprised at
your singular resentment."


"It was far from my intention," answered he, "to offend your lordship;
but, really, for a person who is nobody, to give herself such airs,-I
own I could not command my passion. For, my Lord, though I have made
diligent inquiry-I cannot learn who she is."


"By what I can make out," cried my defender, "she must be a country
parson's daughter."


"He! he! he! very good, 'pon honour!" cried the fop;-"well, so I
could have sworn by her manners."


And then, delighted at his own wit, he laughed, and went away, as I
suppose, to repeat it.


"But what the deuce is all this?" demanded the other.


"Why a very foolish affair," answered Lord Orville; "your Helen
first refused this coxcomb, and then-danced with me. This is all I
can gather of it."


"O, Orville," returned he, "you are a happy man!-But ill-bred? -I
can never believe it! And she looks too sensible to be ignorant."


"Whether ignorant or mischievous, I will not pretend to determine;
but certain it is, she attended to all I could say to her, though I
have really fatigued myself with fruitless endeavours to entertain
her, with the most immovable gravity; but no sooner did Lovel begin
his complaint, than she was seized with a fit of laughing, first
affronting the poor beau, and then enjoying his mortification."


"Ha! ha! ha! why there is some genius in that, my Lord, perhaps
rather-rustic."


Here Maria was called to dance, and so heard no more.


Now, tell me, my dear Sir, did you ever know any thing more
provoking? "A poor weak girl!" "ignorant or mischievous!" What
mortifying words! I am resolved, however, that I will never again be
tempted to go to an assembly. I wish I had been in Dorsetshire.


Well, after this, you will not be surprised that Lord Orville contented
himself with an inquiry after our healths this morning, by his servant,
without troubling himself to call, as Miss Mirvan had told me he would;
but perhaps it may be only a country custom.


I would not live here for the world. I care not how soon we
leave town. London soon grows tiresome. I wish the Captain would
come. Mrs. Mirvan talks of the opera for this evening; however,
I am very indifferent about it.  Wednesday Morning.


Well, my dear Sir, I have been pleased against my will, I could almost
say; for I must own I went out in very ill humour, which I think you
cannot wonder at: but the music and the singing were charming; they
soothed me into a pleasure the most grateful, the best suited to my
present disposition in the world. I hope to persuade Mrs. Mirvan to
go again on Saturday. I wish the opera was every night. It is, of all
entertainments, the sweetest and most delightful. Some of the songs
seemed to melt my very soul. It was what they call a serious opera,
as the comic first singer was ill.


To-night we go to Ranelagh. If any of those three gentlemen who
conversed so freely about me should be there-but I won't think of it.
Thursday Morning.


Well, my dear Sir, we went to Ranelagh. It is a charming place; and
the brilliancy of the lights, on my first entrance, made me almost
think I was in some enchanted castle or fairy palace, for all looked
like magic to me.


The very first person I saw was Lord Orville. I felt so confused!-but
he did not see me. After tea, Mrs. Mirvan being tired, Maria and
I walked round the room alone. Then again we saw him, standing by
the orchestra. We, too, stopt to hear a singer. He bowed to me; I
courtesied, and I am sure I coloured. We soon walked on, not liking
our situation; however, he did not follow us; and when we passed by
the orchestra again, he was gone. Afterwards, in the course of the
evening, we met him several times; but he was always with some party,
and never spoke to us, though whenever he chanced to meet my eyes,
he condescended to bow.


I cannot but be hurt at the opinion he entertains of me. It is true
my own behaviour incurred it-yet he is himself the most agreeable,
and, seemingly, the most amiable man in the world, and therefore it
is that I am grieved to be thought ill of by him: for of whose esteem
ought we to be ambitious, if not of those who most merit our own?-But
it is too late to reflect upon this now. Well I can't help it.-However,
I think I have done with assemblies.


This morning was destined for seeing sights, auctions, curious shops,
and so forth; but my head ached, and I was not in a humour to be
amused, and so I made them go without me, though very unwillingly. They
are all kindness.


And now I am sorry I did not accompany them, for I know not what
to do with myself. I had resolved not to go to the play to-night;
but I believe I shall.  In short, I hardly care whether I do or not.
* * * * *


I thought I had done wrong! Mrs. Mirvan and Maria have been half the
town over, and so entertained!-while I, like a fool, staid at home
to do nothing.  And, at the auction in Pall-mall, who should they
meet but Lord Orville. He sat next to Mrs. Mirvan, and they talked
a great deal together; but she gave me no account of the conversation.


I may never have such another opportunity of seeing London; I am quite
sorry that I was not of the party; but I deserve this mortification,
for having indulged my ill-humour.  Thursday Night.


We are just returned from the play, which was King Lear, and has made
me very sad. We did not see any body we knew.


Well, adieu, it is too late to write more.  Friday.


Captain Mirvan is arrived. I have not spirits to give an account of
his introduction, for he has really shocked me. I do not like him. He
seems to be surly, vulgar, and disagreeable.


Almost the same moment that Maria was presented to him, he began
some rude jests upon the bad shape of her nose, and called her a tall
ill-formed thing.  She bore it with the utmost good-humour; but that
kind and sweet-tempered woman, Mrs. Mirvan, deserved a better lot. I
am amazed she would marry him.


For my own part, I have been so shy, that I have hardly spoken to
him, or he to me. I cannot imagine why the family was so rejoiced
at his return. If he had spent his whole life abroad, I should have
supposed they might rather have been thankful than sorrowful. However,
I hope they do not think so ill of him as I do. At least, I am sure
they have too much prudence to make it known.  Saturday Night.


We have been to the opera, and I am still more pleased than I was
on Tuesday.  I could have thought myself in Paradise, but for the
continual talking of the company around me. We sat in the pit, where
every body was dressed in so high a style, that if I had been less
delighted with the performance, my eyes would have found me sufficient
entertainment from looking at the ladies.


I was very glad I did not sit next the Captain; for he could not bear
the music or singers, and was extremely gross in his observations
of both. When the opera was over, we went into a place called the
coffee-room where ladies, as well as gentlemen, assemble. There are
all sorts of refreshments, and the company walk about, and chat with
the same ease and freedom as in a private room.


On Monday we go to a ridotto, and on Wednesday we return to Howard
Grove. The Captain says he won't stay here to be smoked with filth
any longer; but, having been seven years smoked with a burning sun,
he will retire to the country, and sink into a fair weather chap.
Adieu, my dear Sir.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XIII EVELINA IN CONTINUATION

Tuesday, April 12.  My dear Sir,


WE came home from the ridotto so late, or rather so early that it
was not possible for me to write. Indeed, we did not go -you will be
frightened to hear it-till past eleven o'clock: but no body does. A
terrible reverse of the order of nature! We sleep with the sun,
and wake with the moon.


The room was very magnificent, the lights and decorations were
brilliant, and the company gay and splendid. But I should have told
you, that I made many objections to being of the party, according
to the resolution I had formed.  However, Maria laughed me out of my
scruples, and so once again I went to an assembly.


Miss Mirvan danced a minuet; but I had not the courage to follow
her example.  In our walks I saw Lord Orville. He was quite alone,
but did not observe us.  Yet, as he seemed of no party, I thought
it was not impossible that he might join us; and though I did not
wish much to dance at all-yet, as I was more acquainted with him
than with any other person in the room, I must own I could not help
thinking it would be infinitely more desirable to dance again with him
than with an entire stranger. To be sure, after all that had passed,
it was very ridiculous to suppose it even probable that Lord Orville
would again honour me with his choice; yet I am compelled to confess
my absurdity, by way of explaining what follows.


Miss Mirvan was soon engaged; and presently after a very fashionable
gay looking man, who seemed about thirty years of age, addressed
himself to me, and begged to have the honour of dancing with me. Now
Maria's partner was a gentleman of Mrs. Mirvan's acquaintance; for
she had told us it was highly improper for young women to dance with
strangers at any public assembly.  Indeed it was by no means my wish
so to do: yet I did not like to confine myself from dancing at all;
neither did I dare refuse this gentleman as I had done Mr. Lovel,
and then, if any acquaintance should offer, accept him: and so, all
these reasons combining, induced me to tell him-yet I blush to write
it to you!-that I was already engaged; by which I meant to keep myself
at liberty to a dance, or not, as matters should fall out.


I suppose my consciousness betrayed my artifice, for he looked at me
as if incredulous; and, instead of being satisfied with my answer
and leaving me, according to my expectation, he walked at my side,
and, with the greatest ease imaginable, began a conversation in the
free style which only belongs to old and intimate acquaintance. But,
what was most provoking, he asked me a thousand questions concerning
the partner to whom I was engaged. And at last he said, "Is it really
possible that a man whom you have honoured with your acceptance can
fail to be at hand to profit from your goodness?"


I felt extremely foolish; and begged Mrs. Mirvan to lead to a seat;
which she very obligingly did. The Captain sat next her; and to my
great surprise, this gentleman thought proper to follow, and seat
himself next to me.


"What an insensible!" continued he; "why, Madam, you are missing the
most delightful dance in the world!-The man must be either mad or a
fool-Which do you incline to think him yourself?"


"Neither, Sir," answered I, in some confusion.


He begged my pardon for the freedom of his supposition, saying,
"I really was off my guard, from astonishment that any man can be
so much and so unaccountably his own enemy. But where, Madam, can he
possibly be!-has he left the room!-or has not he been in it?"


"Indeed, Sir," said I peevishly, "I know nothing of him."


"I don't wonder that you are disconcerted, Madam; it is really very
provoking.  The best part of the evening will be absolutely lost. He
deserves not that you should wait for him."


"I do not, Sir," said I, "and I beg you not to-"


"Mortifying, indeed, Madam," interrupted he, "a lady to wait for a
gentleman!-O fie!-careless fellow!-What can detain him?-Will you give
me leave to seek him?"


"If you please, Sir," answered I; quite terrified lest Mrs. Mirvan
should attend to him; for she looked very much surprised at seeing
me enter into conversation with a stranger.


"With all my heart," cried he; "pray, what coat has he on?"


"Indeed I never looked at it."


"Out upon him!" cried he; "What! did he address you in a coat not
worth looking at?-What a shabby wretch!"


How ridiculous! I really could not help laughing, which I fear
encouraged him, for he went on.


"Charming creature!-and can you really bear ill usage with so much
sweetness?  Can you, like patience on a monument, smile in the midst
of disappointment?  For my part, though I am not the offended person,
my indignation is so great, that I long to kick the fellow round
the room!-unless, indeed,-(hesitating and looking earnestly at me,)
unless, indeed,-it is a partner of your own creating?"


I was dreadfully abashed, and could not make an answer.


"But no!" cried he (again, and with warmth,) "It cannot be that you
are so cruel! Softness itself is painted in your eyes.-You could not,
surely, have the barbarity so wantonly to trifle with my misery."


I turned away from this nonsense with real disgust, Mrs. Mirvan saw
my confusion, but was perplexed what to think of it, and I could
not explain to her the cause, lest the Captain should hear me. I
therefore proposed to walk; she consented, and we all rose; but,
would you believe it? this man had the assurance to rise too, and
walk close by my side, as if of my party!


"Now," cried he, "I hope we shall see this ingrate.-Is that
he?"-pointing to an old man who was lame, "or that?" And in this
manner he asked me of whoever was old or ugly in the room. I made
no sort of answer: and when he found that I was resolutely silent,
and walked on as much as I could without observing him, he suddenly
stamped his foot, and cried out in a passion, "Fool! idiot!  booby!"


I turned hastily toward him: "O, Madam," continued he, "forgive my
vehemence; but I am distracted to think there should exist a wretch
who can slight a blessing for which I would forfeit my life!-O that I
could but meet him, I would soon-But I grow angry: pardon me, Madam,
my passions are violent, and your injuries affect me!"


I began to apprehend he was a madman, and stared at him with the
utmost astonishment. "I see you are moved, Madam," said he; "generous
creature!-but don't be alarmed, I am cool again, I am indeed,-upon
my soul I am;-I entreat you, most lovely of mortals! I intreat you
to be easy."


"Indeed, Sir," said I very seriously, "I must insist upon your leaving
me; you are quite a stranger to me, and I am both unused, and averse
to your language and your manners."


This seemed to have some effect on him. He made me a low bow, begged
my pardon, and vowed he would not for the world offend me.


"Then, Sir, you must leave me," cried I. "I am gone, Madam, I am
gone!" with a most tragical air; and he marched away at a quick pace,
out of sight in a moment; but before I had time to congratulate myself,
he was again at my elbow.


"And could you really let me go, and not be sorry?-Can you see me
suffer torments inexpressible, and yet retain all your favour for
that miscreant who flies you?-Ungrateful puppy!-I could bastinado him!"


"For Heaven's sake, my dear," cried Mrs. Mirvan, "who is he talking
of?"


"Indeed-I do not know, Madam," said I; "but I wish he would leave me."


"What's all that there?" cried the Captain.


The man made a low bow, and said, "Only, Sir, a slight objection
which this young lady makes to dancing with me, and which I am
endeavouring to obviate.  I shall think myself greatly honoured if
you will intercede for me."


"That lady, Sir," said the Captain coldly, "is her own mistress." And
he walked sullenly on.


"You, Madam," said the man (who looked delighted, to Mrs. Mirvan),
"You, I hope, will have the goodness to speak for me."


"Sir," answered she gravely, "I have not the pleasure of being
acquainted with you."


"I hope when you have, Ma'am," cried he, undaunted, "you will honour
me with your approbation: but, while I am yet unknown to you, it would
be truly generous in you to countenance me; and I flatter myself,
Madam, that you will not have cause to repent it."


Mrs. Mirvan, with an embarrassed air, replied, "I do not at all mean,
Sir, to doubt your being a gentleman,-but-"


"But what, Madam?-that doubt removed, why a but?"


"Well, Sir," said Mrs. Mirvan (with a good humoured smile), "I will
even treat you with your own plainness, and try what effect that will
have on you: I must therefore tell you, once for all-"


"O pardon me, Madam!" interrupted he, eagerly, "you must not proceed
with those words once for all; no, if I have been too plain, and
though a man, deserve a rebuke, remember, dear ladies that if you copy,
you ought in justice to excuse me."


We both stared at the man's strange behaviour.


"Be nobler than your sex," continued he, turning to me, "honour me
with one dance, and give up the ingrate who has merited so ill your
patience."


Mrs. Mirvan looked with astonishment at us both.


"Who does he speak of, my dear?-you never mentioned-"


"O, Madam!" exclaimed he, "he was not worth mentioning-it is a pity he
was ever though of; but let us forget his existence. One dance is all
I solicit.  Permit me, Madam, the honour of this young lady's hand;
it will be a favour I shall ever most gratefully acknowledge."


"Sir," answered she, "favours and strangers have with me no
connection."


"If you have hitherto," said he, "confined your benevolence to your
intimate friends, suffer me to be the first for whom your charity
is enlarged."


"Well, Sir, I know not what to say to you,-but-"


He stopt her but with so many urgent entreaties that she at last told
me, I must either go down one dance, or avoid his importunities by
returning home.  I hesitated which alternative to chose; but this
impetuous man at length prevailed, and I was obliged to consent to
dance with him.


And thus was my deviation from truth punished; and thus did this
man's determined boldness conquer.


During the dance, before we were too much engaged in it for
conversation, he was extremely provoking about my partner, and tried
every means in his power to make me own that I had deceived him;
which, though I would not so far humble myself as to acknowledge,
was indeed but too obvious.


Lord Orville, I fancy, did not dance at all. He seemed to have a
large acquaintance, and joined several different parties: but you
will easily suppose, I was not much pleased to see him, in a few
minutes after I was gone, walk towards the place I had just left,
and bow to and join Mrs. Mirvan!


How unlucky I thought myself, that I had not longer withstood this
stranger's importunities! The moment we had gone down the dance, I was
hastening away from him; but he stopt me, and said, that I could by no
means return to my party without giving offence, before we had done
our duty of walking up the dance. As I know nothing at all of these
rules and customs I was obliged to submit to his directions; but I
fancy I looked rather uneasy, for he took notice of my inattention,
saying, in his free way, "Whence that anxiety?-Why are those lovely
eyes perpetually averted?"


"I wish you would say no more to me, Sir," cried I peevishly; "you
have already destroyed all my happiness for this evening."


"Good Heaven! What is it I have done?-How have I merited this scorn?"


"You have tormented me to death; you have forced me from my friends,
and intruded yourself upon me, against my will, for a partner."


"Surely, my dear Madam, we ought to be better friends, since
there seems to be something of sympathy in the frankness of our
dispositions.-And yet, were you not an angel-how do you think I could
brooke such contempt?"


"If I have offended you," cried I, "you have but to leave me-and O
how I wish you would!"


"My dear creature," said he, half laughing, "why where could you
be educated?"


"Where I most sincerely wish I now was!"


"How conscious you must be, all beautiful that you are, that those
charming airs serve only to heighten the bloom of your complexion!"


"Your freedom, Sir, where you are more acquainted, may perhaps be
less disagreeable; but to me -"


"You do me justice," cried he, interrupting me, "yes, I do indeed
improve upon acquaintance; you will hereafter be quite charmed
with me."


"Hereafter, Sir, I hope I shall never-"


"O hush!-hush!-have you forgot the situation in which I found you?-Have
you forgot, that when deserted, I pursued you,-when betrayed, I adored
you?-but for me-"


"But for you, Sir, I might perhaps have been happy."


"What then, am I to conclude that, but for me, your partner would
have appeared?-poor fellow!-and did my presence awe him?"


"I wish his presence, Sir, could awe you!"


"His presence!-perhaps then you see him?"


"Perhaps, Sir, I do," cried I, quite wearied of his raillery.


"Where? Where?-for Heaven's sake show me the wretch!"


"Wretch, Sir!"


"O, a very savage!-a sneaking, shame-faced, despicable puppy!"


I know not what bewitched me-but my pride was hurt, and my spirits
were tired, and-in short, I had the folly, looking at Lord Orville,
to repeat, "Despicable, you think?"


His eyes instantly followed mine; "Why, is that the gentleman?"


I made no answer; I could not affirm, and I would not deny:-for I
hoped to be relieved from his teasing by his mistake.


The very moment we had done what he called our duty, I eagerly desired
to return to Mrs. Mirvan.


"To your partner, I presume, Madam?" said he, very gravely.


This quite confounded me. I dreaded lest this mischievous man ignorant
of his rank, should address himself to Lord Orville, and say something
which might expose my artifice. Fool! to involve myself in such
difficulties! I now feared what I had before wished; and therefore,
to avoid Lord Orville, I was obliged myself to propose going down
another dance, though I was ready to sink with shame while I spoke.


"But your partner, Ma'am?" said he, affecting a very solemn air,
"perhaps he may resent my detaining you: if you will give me leave
to ask his consent-"


"Not for the universe."


"Who is he, Madam?"


I wished myself a hundred miles off. He repeated his question,
"What is his name?"


"Nothing-nobody-I don't know-"


He assumed a most important solemnity: "How!-not know?-Give me leave,
my dear Madam, to recommend this caution to you: Never dance in public
with a stranger,-with one whose name you are unacquainted with,-who
may be a mere adventurer,-a man of no character, consider to what
impertinence you may expose yourself."


Was ever anything so ridiculous? I could not help laughing, in spite
of my vexation.


At this instant, Mrs. Mirvan, followed by Lord Orville, walked up to
us. You will easily believe it was not difficult for me to recover
my gravity; but what was my consternation, when this strange man,
destined to be the scourge of my artifice, exclaimed, "Ha! My Lord
Orville!-I protest I did not know your Lordship. What can I say for my
usurpation?-Yet, faith, my Lord, such a prize was not to be neglected."


My shame and confusion were unspeakable. Who could have supposed or
foreseen that this man knew Lord Orville? But falsehood is not more
unjustifiable than unsafe.


Lord Orville-well he might-looked all amazement.


"The philosophic coldness of your Lordship," continued this odious
creature, "every man is not endowed with. I have used my utmost
endeavours to entertain this lady, though I fear without success;
and your lordship will not be a little flattered, if acquainted with
the difficulty which attended my procuring the honour of only one
dance." Then, turning to me, who was sinking with shame, while Lord
Orville stood motionless, and Mrs. Mirvan astonished,-he suddenly
seized my hand, saying, "Think, my Lord, what must be my reluctance
to resign this fair hand to your Lordship!"


In the same instant, Lord Orville took it of him; I coloured violently,
and made an effort to recover it. "You do me too much honour, Sir,"
cried he, (with an air of gallantry, pressing it to his lips before
he let it go;) "however, I shall be happy to profit by it, if this
lady," turning to Mrs.  Mirvan, "will permit me to seek for her party."


To compel him thus to dance, I could not endure; and eagerly called
out, "By no means-not for the world!-I must beg-"


"Will you honour me, Madam, with your commands," cried my tormentor;
"may I seek the lady's party?"


"No, Sir," answered I, turning from him.


"What shall be done, my dear?" said Mrs. Mirvan.


"Nothing, Ma'am;-anything, I mean-"


"But do you dance, or not? you see his Lordship waits."


"I hope not-I beg that-I would not for the world-I am sure I ought
to-to-"


I could not speak; but that confident man, determining to discover
whether or not I had deceived him, said to Lord Orville, who
stood suspended, "My Lord, this affair, which at present seems
perplexed, I will briefly explain:-this lady proposed to me another
dance,-nothing could have made me more happy,-I only wished for your
Lordship's permission; which, if now granted, will, I am persuaded,
set everything right."


I glowed with indignation. "No, Sir-it is your absence, and that alone,
can set everything right."


"For Heaven's sake, my dear," cried Mrs. Mirvan, who could no
longer contain her surprise, "what does all this mean?-were you
pre-engaged?-had Lord Orville-"


"No, Madam," cried I, "only-only I did not know that gentleman,-and
so-and so I thought-I intended-I-"


Overpowered by all that had passed, I had not strength to make my
mortifying explanation;-my spirits quite failed me, and I burst
into tears.


They all seemed shocked and amazed.


"What is the matter, my dearest love?" cried Mrs. Mirvan, with
kindest concern.


"What have I done!" exclaimed my evil genius, and ran officiously
for a glass of water.


However, a hint was sufficient for Lord Orville, who comprehended all
I would have explained. He immediately led me to a seat, and said in
a low voice, "Be not distressed, I beseech you: I shall ever think
my name honoured by your making use of it."


This politeness relieved me. A general murmur had alarmed Miss Mirvan,
who flew instantly to me; while Lord Orville the moment Mrs. Mirvan
had taken the water, led my tormentor away.


"For Heaven's sake, dear Madam," cried I, "let me go home;-indeed I
cannot stay here any longer."


"Let us all go," cried my kind Maria.


"But the Captain, what will he say-I had better go home in a chair."


Mrs. Mirvan consented, and I rose to depart. Lord Orville and that
man both came to me. The first, with an attention I but ill-merited
from him, led me to a chair; while the other followed, pestering me
with apologies. I wished to have made mine to Lord Orville, but was
too much ashamed.


It was about one o'clock. Mrs. Mirvan's servants saw me home.


And now,-what again shall ever tempt me to an assembly? I dread to
hear what you will think of me, my most dear and honoured Sir: you
will need your utmost partiality to receive me without displeasure.


This morning Lord Orville has sent to inquire after our health; and
Sir Clement Willoughby, for that, I find, is the name of my persecutor,
has called; but I would not go down stairs till he was gone.


And now, my dear Sir, I can somewhat account for the strange,
provoking, and ridiculous conduct of this Sir Clement last night;
for Miss Mirvan says he is the very man with whom she heard Lord
Orville conversing at Mrs. Stanley's, when I was spoken of in so
mortifying a manner. He was pleased to say he was glad to hear I was
a fool; and therefore, I suppose, he concluded he might talk as much
nonsense as he pleased to me: however, I am very indifferent as to
his opinion;-but for Lord Orville,-if then he thought me an idiot,
now, I am sure, he must suppose me both bold and presuming. Make use
of his name!-what impertinence-he can never know how it happened,-he
can only imagine it was from an excess of vanity;-well, however,
I shall leave this bad city to-morrow, and never again will I enter it.


The Captain intends to take us to-night to the Fantoccini. I cannot
bear that Captain; I can give you no idea how gross he is. I heartily
rejoice that he was not present at the disagreeable conclusion of
yesterday's adventure, for I am sure he would have contributed to my
confusion; which might, perhaps, have diverted him, as he seldom or
never smiles but at some other person's expense.


And here I conclude my London letters,-and without any regret; for I
am too inexperienced and ignorant to conduct myself with propriety
in this town, where everything is new to me, and many things are
unaccountable and perplexing.


Adieu, my dear Sir; Heaven restore me safely to you! I wish I was to go
immediately to Berry Hill; yet the wish is ungrateful to Mrs. Mirvan,
and therefore I will repress it. I shall write an account of the
Fantoccini from Howard Grove. We have not been to half the public
places that are now open, though I dare say you will think we have
been to all. But they are almost as innumerable as the persons who
fill them.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XIV. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.

Queen Ann Street, April 13.


HOW much will you be surprised, my dearest Sir, at receiving another
letter, from London, of your Evelina's writing! But, believe me, it
was not my fault, neither is it my happiness, that I am still here:
our journey has been postponed by an accident equally unexpected
and disagreeable.


We went last night to see the Fantoccini, where we had infinite
entertainment from the performance of a little comedy in French and
Italian, by puppets, so admirably managed, that they both astonished
and diverted us all, except the Captain, who has a fixed and most
prejudiced hatred of whatever is not English.


When it was over, while we waited for the coach, a tall elderly woman
brushed quickly past us, calling out, "My God, what shall I do?"


"Why, what would you do?" cried the Captain.


"Ma foi, Monsieur," answered she, "I have lost my company, and in
this place I don't know nobody."


There was something foreign in her accent, though it was difficult
to discover whether she was an English or a French woman. She was
very well dressed; and seemed so entirely at a loss what to do,
that Mrs. Mirvan proposed to the Captain to assist her.


"Assist her!" cried he, "ay, with all my heart;-let a link-boy call
her a coach."


There was not one to be had, and it rained very fast.


"Mon Dieu!" exclaimed the stranger, "what shall become of me? Je
suis au desespoir!"


"Dear Sir," cried Miss Mirvan, "pray let us take the poor lady into
our coach.  She is quite alone, and a foreigner-"


"She's never the better for that," answered he: "she may be a woman
of the town, for anything you know."


"She does not appear such," said Mrs. Mirvan; "and indeed she seems
so much distressed, that we shall but follow the golden rule, if we
carry her to her lodgings."


"You are mighty fond of new acquaintance," returned he; "but first
let us know if she be going our way."


Upon inquiry, we found that she lived in Oxford Road; and, after
some disputing, the Captain surlily, and, with a very bad grace,
consented to admit her into his coach; though he soon convinced us,
that he was determined she should not be too much obliged to him,
for he seemed absolutely bent upon quarrelling with her: for which
strange inhospitality I can assign no other reason, than that she
appeared to be a foreigner.


The conversation began, by her telling us, that she had been in England
only two days; that the gentlemen belonging to her were Parisians,
and had left her to see for a hackney-coach, as her own carriage was
abroad; and that she had waited for them till she was quite frightened,
and concluded that they had lost themselves.


"And pray," said the Captain, "why did you go to a public place
without an Englishman?"


"Ma foi, Sir," answered she, "because none of my acquaintance is
in town."


"Why then," said he, "I'll tell you what, your best way is to go out
of it yourself."


"Pardi, Monsieur," returned she, "and so I shall; for, I promise you,
I think the English a parcel of brutes; and I'll go back to France
as fast as I can, for I would not live among none of you."


"Who wants you?" cried the Captain: "do you suppose, Madam French,
we have not enough of other nations to pick our pockets already? I'll
warrant you, there's no need for you for to put in your oar."


"Pick your pockets, Sir! I wish nobody wanted to pick your pockets no
more than I do; and I'll promise you you'd be safe enough. But there's
no nation under the sun can beat the English for ill-politeness:
for my part, I hate the very sight of them; and so I shall only
just visit a person of quality or two of my particular acquaintance,
and then I shall go back again to France."


"Ay, do," cried he; "and then go to the devil together, for that's
the fittest voyage for the French and the quality."


"We'll take care, however," cried the stranger with great vehemence,
"not to admit none of your vulgar unmannered English among us."


"O never fear," returned he, coolly, "we shan't dispute the point
with you; you and the quality may have the devil all to yourselves."


Desirous of changing the subject of a conversation which now became
very alarming, Miss Mirvan called out, "Lord, how slow the man drives!"


"Never mind, Moll," said her father, "I'll warrant you he'll drive
fast enough to-morrow, when you are going to Howard Grove."


"To Howard Grove!" exclaimed the stranger, "why, mon Dieu, do you
know Lady Howard?"


"Why, what if we do?" answered he; "that's nothing to you; she's none
of your quality, I'll promise you."


"Who told you that?" cried she; "you don't know nothing about the
matter!  besides, you're the ill-bredest person ever I see: and as
to your knowing Lady Howard, I don't believe no such a thing; unless,
indeed, you are her steward."


The Captain, swearing terribly, said, with great fury, "You would
much sooner be taken for her wash-woman."


"Her wash-woman, indeed?-Ha, ha, ha, why you han't no eyes; did you
ever see a wash-woman in such a gown as this?-Besides, I'm no such
mean person, for I'm as good as Lady Howard, and as rich too; and
besides, I'm now come to England to visit her."


"You may spare yourself that there trouble," said the Captain,
"she has paupers enough about her already."


"Paupers, Mister!-no more a pauper than yourself, nor so much
neither;-but you are a low, dirty fellow, and I shan't stoop to take
no more notice of you."


"Dirty fellow!" exclaimed the Captain, seizing both her wrists, "hark
you, Mrs. Frog, you'd best hold your tongue; for I must make bold to
tell you, if you don't, that I shall make no ceremony of tripping you
out of the window, and there you may lie in the mud till some of your
Monseers come to help you out of it."


Their increasing passion quite terrified us; and Mrs. Mirvan was
beginning to remonstrate with the Captain, when we were all silenced
by what follows.


"Let me go, villain that you are, let me go, or I'll promise you I'll
get you put to prison for this usage. I'm no common person, I assure
you; and, ma foi, I'll go to Justice Fielding about you; for I'm a
person of fashion, and I'll make you know it, or my name a'n't Duval."


I heard no more: amazed, frightened, and unspeakably shocked, an
involuntary exclamation of Gracious Heaven! escaped me, and, more
dead than alive, I sunk into Mrs. Mirvan's arms. But let me draw a
veil over a scene too cruel for a heart so compassionately tender as
your's; it is sufficient that you know this supposed foreigner proved
to be Madame Duval,-the grandmother of your Evelina!


O, Sir, to discover so near a relation in a woman, who had thus
introduced herself!-what would become of me, were it not for you,
my protector, my friend, and my refuge?


My extreme concern, and Mrs. Mirvan's surprise, immediately betrayed
me. But, I will not shock you with the manner of her acknowledging
me, or the bitterness, the grossness -I cannot otherwise express
myself,-with which she spoke of those unhappy past transactions
you have so pathetically related to me. All the misery of a much
injured parent, dear, though never seen, regretted, though never
known, crowded so forcibly upon my memory, that they rendered this
interview-one only excepted-the most afflicting I can ever know.


When we stopt at her lodgings, she desired me to accompany her into
the house, and said she could easily procure a room for me to sleep
in. Alarmed and trembling, I turned to Mrs. Mirvan. "My daughter,
Madam," said that sweet woman, "cannot so abruptly part with her young
friend; you must allow a little time to wean them from each other."


"Pardon me, Ma'am," answered Madame Duval, (who, from the time of her
being known, somewhat softened her manners) "Miss can't possibly be
so nearly connected to this child as I am."


"No matter for that," cried the Captain, (who espoused my cause to
satisfy his own pique, tho' an awkward apology had passed between them)
"she was sent to us; and so, dy'e see, we don't choose for to part
with her."


I promised to wait upon her at what time she pleased the next day;
and, after a short debate, she desired me to breakfast with her,
and we proceeded to Queen Ann Street.


What an unfortunate adventure! I could not close my eyes the whole
night. A thousand times I wished I had never left Berry Hill: however,
my return thither shall be accelerated to the utmost of my power;
and, once more in that abode of tranquil happiness, I will suffer no
temptation to allure me elsewhere.


Mrs. Mirvan was so kind as to accompany me to Madame Duval's house
this morning. The Captain, too, offered his service; which I declined,
from a fear she should suppose I meant to insult her.


She frowned most terribly upon Mrs. Mirvan; but she received me with
as much tenderness as I believe she is capable of feeling. Indeed,
our meeting seems really to have affected her; for when, overcome by
the variety of emotions which the sight of her occasioned, I almost
fainted in her arms, she burst into tears, and said, "let me not lose
my poor daughter a second time!" This unexpected humanity softened
me extremely; but she very soon excited my warmest indignation, by
the ungrateful mention she made of the best of men, my dear and most
generous benefactor. However, grief and anger mutually gave way to
terror, upon her avowing the intention of her visiting England was
to make me return with her to France. This, she said, was a plan she
had formed from the instant she had heard of my birth; which, she
protested, did not reach her ears till I must have been twelve years
of age; but Monsieur Duval, who she declared was the worst husband
in the world, would not permit her to do any thing she wished: he
had been dead but three months; which had been employed in arranging
certain affairs, that were no sooner settled, than she set off for
England. She was already out of mourning, for she said nobody here
could tell how long she had been a widow.


She must have been married very early in life: what her age is I do
not know; but she really looks to be less than fifty. She dresses
very gaily, paints very high, and the traces of former beauty are
still very visible in her face.


I know not when, or how, this visit would have ended, had not the
Captain called for Mrs. Mirvan, and absolutely insisted upon my
attending her. He is become, very suddenly, so warmly my friend, that
I quite dread his officiousness. Mrs. Mirvan, however, whose principal
study seems to be healing those wounds which her husband inflicts,
appeased Madame Duval's wrath, by a very polite invitation to drink
tea and spend the evening here.  Not without great difficulty was
the Captain prevailed upon to defer his journey some time longer;
but what could be done? It would have been indecent for me to have
quitted town the very instant I discovered that Madame Duval was in it;
and to have staid here solely under her protection-Mrs. Mirvan, thank
Heaven, was too kind for such a thought. That she should follow us to
Howard Grove, I almost equally dreaded. It is therefore determined,
that we remain in London for some days, or a week: though the Captain
has declared that the old French hag, as he is pleased to call her,
shall fare never the better for it.


My only hope is to get safe to Berry Hill; where, counselled and
sheltered by you, I shall have nothing more to fear. Adieu, my ever
dear and most honoured Sir! I shall have no happiness till I am again
with you.


</CHAPTER>
