<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXII. EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS.  
Bristol Hotwells, Sept. 12th.


THE first fortnight that I passed here was so quiet, so serene, that
it gave me reason to expect a settled calm during my stay; but if I
may now judge of the time to come, by the present state of my mind,
the calm will be succeeded by a storm, of which I dread the violence!

This morning, in my way to the pump-room with Mrs. Selwyn, we were
both very much incommoded by three gentlemen, who were sauntering by
the side of the Avon, laughing and talking very loud, and lounging so
disagreeably, that we knew not how to pass them. They all three fixed
their eyes very boldly upon me, alternately looking under my hat,
and whispering one another. Mrs. Selwyn assumed an air of uncommon
sternness, and said, "You will please, gentlemen, either to proceed
yourselves, or to suffer us."

"Oh! Ma'am," cried one of them, "we will suffer you with the greatest
pleasure in life."

"You will suffer us both," answered she, "or I am much mistaken:
you had better, therefore, make way quietly; for I should be sorry
to give my servant the trouble of teaching you better manners."

Her commanding air struck them, yet they all chose to laugh; and one
of them wished the fellow would begin his lesson, that he might have
the pleasure of rolling him into the Avon; while another, advancing to
me with a freedom which made me start, said, "By my soul, I did not
know you!-but I am sure I cannot be mistaken;-had not I the honour
of seeing you once at the Pantheon?"

I then recollected the nobleman, who, at that place, had so much
embarrassed me. I courtsied without speaking. They all bowed, and
making, though in a very easy manner, an apology to Mrs. Selwyn,
they suffered us to pass on, but chose to accompany us.

"And where," continued this Lord, "can you so long have hid
yourself? do you know I have been in search of you this age? I could
neither find you out, nor hear of you: not a creature could inform me
what was become of you. I cannot imagine where you could be immured. I
was at two or three public places every night, in hopes of meeting
you. Pray, did you leave town?"

"Yes, my Lord."

"So early in the season!-what could possibly induce you to go before
the birth-day?"

"I had nothing, my Lord, to do with the birth-day."

"By my soul, all the women who had, may rejoice you were away. Have
you been here any time?"

"Not above a fortnight, my Lord."

"A fortnight!-how unlucky that I did not meet you sooner! but I have
had a run of ill luck ever since I came. How long shall you stay?"

"Indeed, my Lord, I don't know."

"Six weeks, I hope; for I shall wish the place at the devil when
you go."

"Do you, then, flatter yourself, my Lord," said Mrs. Selwyn, who
had hitherto listened in silent contempt, "that you shall see such
a beautiful spot as this, when you visit the dominions of the devil?"

"Ha, ha, ha! Faith, my Lord," said one of his companions, who still
walked with us, though the other had taken leave, "the lady is rather
hard upon you."

"Not at all," answered Mrs. Selwyn; "for as I cannot doubt but his
Lordship's rank and interest will secure him a place there, it would
be reflecting on his understanding, to suppose he should not wish to
enlarge and beautify his dwelling."

Much as I was disgusted with this Lord, I must own Mrs. Selwyn's
severity rather surprised me: but you, who have so often observed
it, will not wonder she took so fair an opportunity of indulging
her humour.

"As to places," returned he, totally unmoved, "I am so indifferent
to them, that the devil take me if I care which way I go! objects,
indeed, I am not so easy about; and, therefore, I expect, that those
angels with whose beauty I am so much enraptured in this world, will
have the goodness to afford me some little consolation in the other."

"What, my Lord!" cried Mrs. Selwyn, "would you wish to degrade the
habitation of your friend, by admitting into it the insipid company
of the upper regions?"

"What do you do with yourself this evening?" said his Lordship,
turning to me.

"I shall be at home, my Lord."

"O, -e;-propos,-where are you?"

"Young ladies, my Lord," said Mrs. Selwyn, "are no where."

"Prithee," whispered his Lordship, "is that queer woman your mother?"

Good Heavens, Sir, what words for such a question!

"No, my Lord."

"Your maiden aunt then?"

"No."

"Whoever she is, I wish she would mind her own affairs: I don't know
what the devil a woman lives for after thirty: she is only in other
folk's way. Shall you be at the assembly?"

"I believe not, my Lord."

"No!-why then, how in the world can you contrive to pass your time?"

"In a manner which your Lordship will think very extraordinary,"
cried Mrs.  Selwyn, "for the young lady reads."

"Ha, ha, ha! Egad, my Lord," cried the facetious companion, "you are
got into bad hands."

"You had better, Ma'am," answered he, "attack Jack Coverley here,
for you will make nothing of me."

"Of you, my Lord," cried she, "Heaven forbid I should ever entertain
so idle an expectation! I only talk, like a silly woman, for the sake
of talking; but I have by no means so low an opinion of your Lordship,
as to suppose you vulnerable to censure."

"Do, pray, Ma'am," cried he, "turn to Jack Coverley; he's the very
man for you;-he'd be a wit himself if he was not too modest."

"Prithee, my Lord, be quiet," returned the other; "if the lady is
contented to bestow all her favours upon you, why should you make
such a point of my going snacks?"

"Don't be apprehensive, gentlemen," said Mrs. Selwyn, drily, "I am not
romantic;-I have not the least design of doing good to either of you."

"Have not you been ill since I saw you?" said his Lordship, again
addressing himself to me.

"Yes, my Lord."

"I thought so; you are paler than you was, and I suppose that's the
reason I did not recollect you sooner."

"Has not your Lordship too much gallantry," cried Mrs. Selwyn,
"to discover a young lady's illness by her looks?"

"The devil a word can I speak for that woman," said he, in a low voice;
"do, prithee, Jack, take her in hand."

"Excuse me, my Lord," answered Mr. Coverley.

"When shall I see you again?" continued his Lordship; "do you go to
the pump-room every morning?"

"No, my Lord."

"Do you ride out?"

"No, my Lord."

Just then we arrived at the pump-room, and an end was put to our
conversation, if it is not an abuse of words to give such a term to
a string of rude questions and free compliments.

He had not opportunity to say much more to me, as Mrs. Selwyn joined
a large party, and I walked home between two ladies. He had, however,
the curiosity to see us to the door.

Mrs. Selwyn was very eager to know how I had made acquaintance with
this nobleman, whose manners so evidently announced the character of
a confirmed libertine. I could give her very little satisfaction, as
I was ignorant even of his name: but, in the afternoon, Mr. Ridgeway,
the apothecary, gave us very ample information.

As his person was easily described, for he is remarkably tall,
Mr. Ridgeway told us he was Lord Merton, a nobleman who is but lately
come to his title, though he has already dissipated more than half his
fortune; a professed admirer of beauty, but a man of most licentious
character; that among men, his companions consisted chiefly of gamblers
and jockeys, and among women he was rarely admitted.

"Well, Miss Anville," said Mrs. Selwyn, "I am glad I was not more
civil to him. You may depend upon me for keeping him at a distance."

"O, Madam," said Mr. Ridgeway, "he may now be admitted any where,
for he is going to reform."

"Has he, under that notion, persuaded any fool to marry him?"

"Not yet, Madam, but a marriage is expected to take place shortly:
it has been some time in agitation; but the friends of the lady
have obliged her to wait till she is of age: however, her brother,
who has chiefly opposed the match, now that she is near being at her
own disposal, is tolerably quiet. She is very pretty, and will have
a large fortune. We expect her at the Wells every day."

"What is her name?" said Mrs. Selwyn.

"Larpent," answered he: "Lady Louisa Larpent, sister of Lord Orville."

"Lord Orville!" repeated I, all amazement.

"Yes, Ma'am; his Lordship is coming with her. I have had certain
information.  They are to be at the Honourable Mrs. Beaumont's. She is
a relation of my Lord's, and has a very fine house upon Clifton Hill."

His Lordship is coming with her! -Good God, what an emotion did those
words give me! How strange, my dear Sir, that, just at this time, he
should visit Bristol! It will be impossible for me to avoid seeing him,
as Mrs. Selwyn is very well acquainted with Mrs. Beaumont. Indeed,
I have had an escape in not being under the same roof with him, for
Mrs. Beaumont invited us to her house immediately upon our arrival;
but the inconvenience of being so distant from the pump-room made
Mrs. Selwyn decline her civility.

Oh that the first meeting were over!-or that I could quit Bristol
without seeing him!-inexpressibly do I dread an interview! Should
the same impertinent freedom be expressed by his looks, which
dictated this cruel letter, I shall not know how to endure either
him or myself. Had I but returned it, I should be easier, because
my sentiments of it would then be known to him; but now, he can only
gather them from my behaviour; and I tremble lest he should mistake my
indignation for confusion!-lest he should misconstrue my reserve into
embarrassment!-for how, my dearest Sir, how shall I be able totally
to divest myself of the respect with which I have been used to think
of him?-the pleasure with which I have been used to see him?

Surely he, as well as I, must recollect the letter at the moment
of our meeting; and he will, probably, mean to gather my thoughts
of it from my looks;-oh that they could but convey to him my real
detestation of impertinence and vanity! then would he see how much
he had mistaken my disposition when he imagined them my due.

There was a time when the very idea that such a man as Lord Merton
should ever be connected with Lord Orville would have both surprised
and shocked me; and even yet I am pleased to hear of his repugnance
to the marriage.

But how strange, that a man of so abandoned a character should be
the choice of a sister of Lord Orville! and how strange, that, almost
at the moment of the union, he should be so importunate in gallantry
to another woman! What a world is this we live in! how corrupt! how
degenerate! well might I be contented to see no more of it! If I
find that the eyes of Lord Orville agree with his pen,-I shall then
think, that of all mankind, the only virtuous individual resides at
Berry Hill.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXIII. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Bristol Hotwells, Sept. 16th.


OH, Sir, Lord Orville is still himself! still what, from the moment
I beheld, I believed him to be-all that is amiable in man! and your
happy Evelina, restored at once to spirits and tranquillity, is no
longer sunk in her own opinion, nor discontented with the world;-no
longer, with dejected eyes, sees the prospect of passing her future
days in sadness, doubt, and suspicion!-with revived courage she
now looks forward, and expects to meet with goodness, even among
mankind:-though still she feels, as strongly as ever, the folly of
hoping, in any second instance, to meet with perfection.

Your conjecture was certainly right; Lord Orville, when he wrote that
letter, could not be in his senses. Oh that intemperance should have
power to degrade so low, a man so noble!

This morning I accompanied Mrs. Selwyn to Clifton Hill, where,
beautifully situated, is the house of Mrs. Beaumont. Most uncomfortable
were my feelings during our walk, which was very slow; for the
agitation of my mind made me more than usually sensible how weak I
still continue. As we entered the house, I summoned all my resolution
to my aid, determined rather to die than give Lord Orville reason to
attribute my weakness to a wrong cause. I was happily relieved from my
perturbation, when I saw Mrs. Beaumont was alone. We sat with her for,
I believe, an hour without interruption; and then we saw a phaeton
drive up to the gate, and a lady and gentleman alight from it.

They entered the parlour with the ease of people who were at home.
The gentleman, I soon saw, was Lord Merton: he came shuffling into
the room with his boots on, and his whip in his hand; and having
made something like a bow to Mrs. Beaumont, he turned towards me. His
surprise was very evident; but he took no manner of notice of me. He
waited, I believe, to discover, first, what chance had brought
me to that house, where he did not look much rejoiced at meeting
me. He seated himself very quietly at the window, without speaking
to any body.

Mean time the lady, who seemed very young, hobbling rather than walking
into the room, made a passing courtsy to Mrs. Beaumont, saying,
"How are you, Ma'am?" and then, without noticing any body else,
with an air of languor she flung herself upon a sofa, protesting,
in a most affected voice, and speaking so softly she could hardly be
heard, that she was fatigued to death. "Really, Ma'am, the roads are
so monstrous dusty,-you can't imagine how troublesome the dust is to
one's eyes!-and the sun, too, is monstrous disagreeable!-I dare say
I shall be so tanned: I shan't be fit to be seen this age. Indeed,
my Lord, I won't go out with you any more, for you don't care where
you take one."

"Upon my honour," said Lord Merton, "I took you the pleasantest ride
in England, the fault was in the sun, not me."

"Your Lordship is in the right," said Mrs. Selwyn, "to transfer the
fault to the sun, because it has so many excellencies to counterbalance
partial inconveniences that a little blame will not injure that in
our estimation."

Lord Merton looked by no means delighted at this attack; which
I believe she would not so readily have made, but to revenge his
neglect of us.

"Did you meet your brother, Lady Louisa?" said Mrs. Beaumont.

"No, Ma'am. Is he rode out this morning?"

I then found, what I had before suspected, that this lady was Lord
Orville's sister: how strange, that such near relations should be so
different to each other! There is, indeed, some resemblance in their
features; but, in their manners, not the least.

"Yes," answered Mrs. Beaumont, "and I believe he wished to see you."

"My Lord drove so monstrous fast," said Lady Louisa, "that perhaps
we passed him. He frightened me out of my senses; I declare my head
is quite giddy. Do you know, Ma'am, we have done nothing but quarrel
all the morning?-You can't think how I've scolded; have not I, my
Lord?" and she smiled expressively at Lord Merton.

"You have been, as you always are," said he, twisting his whip with
his fingers, "all sweetness."

"O fie, my Lord," cried she, "I know you don't think so; I know you
think me very ill-natured;-don't you, my Lord?"

"No, upon my honour;-how can your Ladyship ask such a question? Pray
how goes time? my watch stands."

"It is almost three," answered Mrs. Beaumont.

"Lord, Ma'am, you frighten me!" cried Lady Louisa; and then, turning
to Lord Merton, "why now, you wicked creature you, did you not tell
me it was but one?"

Mrs. Selwyn then rose to take leave; but Mrs. Beaumont asked if she
would look at the shrubbery. "I should like it much," answered she,
"but that I fear to fatigue Miss Anville."

Lady Louisa, then, raising her head from her hand, on which it had
leant, turned round to look at me; and having fully satisfied her
curiosity, without any regard to the confusion it gave me, turned
about, and, again leaning on her hand, took no further notice of me.

I declared myself very able to walk, and begged that I might
accompany them.  "What say you, Lady Louisa," cried Mrs. Beaumont,
"to a stroll in the garden?"

"Me, Ma'am!-I declare I can't stir a step; the heat is so excessive,
it would kill me. I'm half dead with it already; besides, I shall
have no time to dress. Will any body be here to-day, Ma'am?"

"I believe not, unless Lord Merton will favour us with his company."

"With great pleasure, Madam."

"Well, I declare you don't deserve to be asked," cried Lady Louisa,
"you wicked creature you!-I must tell you one thing, Ma'am,-you
can't think how abominable he was! do you know we met Mr. Lovel in
his new phaeton, and my Lord was so cruel as to drive against it?-we
really flew. I declare I could not breathe. Upon my word, my Lord,
I'll never trust myself with you again,-I won't indeed."

We then went into the garden, leaving them to discuss the point at
their leisure.

Do you remember a pretty but affected young lady I mentioned to
have seen, in Lord Orville's party, at the Pantheon? How little did
I then imagine her to be his sister! yet Lady Louisa Larpent is the
very person. I can now account for the piqued manner of her speaking
to Lord Merton that evening, and I can now account for the air of
displeasure with which Lord Orville marked the undue attention of
his future brother-in-law to me.

We had not walked long, ere, at a distance, I perceived Lord Orville,
who seemed just dismounted from his horse, enter the garden. All
my perturbation returned at the sight of him!-yet I endeavoured to
repress every feeling but resentment. As he approached us, he bowed to
the whole party; but I turned away my head to avoid taking any share
in his civility. Addressing himself immediately to Mrs. Beaumont, he
was beginning to enquire after his sister: but, upon seeing my face,
he suddenly exclaimed, "Miss Anville!-" and then he advanced, and made
his compliments to me,-not with an air of vanity or impertinence, nor
yet with a look of consciousness or shame;-but with a countenance open,
manly, and charming!-with a smile that indicated pleasure, and eyes
that sparkled with delight!-on my side was all that consciousness;
for by him, I really believe, the letter was, at that moment,
entirely forgotten.

With what politeness did he address me! with what sweetness did
he look at me!  the very tone of his voice seemed flattering! he
congratulated himself upon his good fortune in meeting with me;-hoped
I should spend some time in Bristol, and enquired, even with anxiety
enquired, if my health was the cause of my journey; in which case
his satisfaction would be converted into apprehension.

Yet, struck as I was with his manner, and charmed to find him such
as he was wont to be, imagine not, my dear Sir, that I forgot the
resentment I owe him, or the cause he has given me of displeasure;
no, my behaviour was such, as I hope, had you seen, you would not
have disapproved: I was grave and distant; I scarce looked at him
when he spoke, or answered him when he was silent.

As he must certainly observe this alteration in my conduct, I think it
could not fail making him both recollect and repent the provocation
he had so causelessly given me; for surely he was not so wholly lost
to reason, as to be now ignorant he had ever offended me.

The moment that, without absolute rudeness, I was able, I turned
entirely from him, and asked Mrs. Selwyn if we should not be late
home? How Lord Orville looked I know not, for I avoided meeting his
eyes; but he did not speak another word as we proceeded to the garden
gate. Indeed, I believe, my abruptness surprised him, for he did not
seem to expect I had so much spirit.  And, to own the truth, convinced
as I was of the propriety, nay, necessity, of showing my displeasure,
I yet almost hated myself for receiving his politeness so ungraciously.

When we were taking leave, my eyes accidentally meeting his, I could
not but observe that his gravity equalled my own; for it had entirely
taken place of the smiles and good humour with which he had met me.

"I am afraid this young lady," said Mrs. Beaumont, "is too weak for
another long walk till she is again rested."

"If the ladies will trust to my driving," said Lord Orville, "and
are not afraid of a phaeton, mine shall be ready in a moment."

"You are very good, my Lord, "said Mrs. Selwyn, "but my will is yet
unsigned, and I don't choose to venture in a phaeton with a young
man while that is the case."

"O," cried Mrs. Beaumont, "you need not be afraid of my Lord Orville,
for he is remarkably careful."

"Well, Miss Anville," answered she, "what say you?"

"Indeed," cried I, "I had much rather walk-." But then, looking at
Lord Orville, I perceived in his face a surprise so serious at my
abrupt refusal, that I could not forbear adding, "for I should be
sorry to occasion so much trouble."

Lord Orville, brightening at these words, came forward, and pressed
his offer in a manner not to be denied;-so the phaeton was ordered! And
indeed, my dear Sir,-I know not how it was;-but, from that moment, my
coldness and reserve insensibly wore away! You must not be angry,-it
was my intention, nay, my endeavour, to support them with firmness:
but when I formed the plan, I thought only of the letter,-not of Lord
Orville!-and how is it possible for resentmen to subsist without
provocation? yet, believe me, my dearest Sir, had he sustained the
part he began to act when he wrote this ever-to-be-regretted letter,
your Evelina would have not forfeited her title to your esteem,
by contentedly submitting to be treated with indignity.

We continued in the garden till the phaeton was ready. When we parted
from Mrs. Beaumont, she repeated her invitation to Mrs. Selwyn to
accept an apartment in her house; but the reason I have already
mentioned made it be again declined.

Lord Orville drove very slow, and so cautiously, that, notwithstanding
the height of the phaeton, fear would have been ridiculous. I supported
no part in the conversation; but Mrs. Selwyn extremely well supplied
the place of two. Lord Orville himself did not speak much; but the
excellent sense and refined good-breeding which accompany every word
he utters, give value and weight to whatever he says.

"I suppose, my Lord," said Mrs. Selwyn, when we stopped at our
lodgings, "you would have been extremely confused had we met any
gentlemen who have the honour of knowing you."

"If I had," answered he, gallantly, "it would have been from mere
compassion at their envy."

"No, my Lord," answered she, "it would have been from mere shame,
that, in an age so daring, you alone should be such a coward as to
forbear to frighten women."

"O," cried he, laughing, "when a man is in a fright for himself,
the ladies cannot but be in security; for you have not had half the
apprehension for the safety of your persons, that I have for that
of my heart." He then alighted, handed us out, took leave, and again
mounting the phaeton, was out of sight in a minute.

"Certainly," said Mrs. Selwyn, when he was gone, "there must have
been some mistake in the birth of that young man; he was, undoubtedly,
designed for the last age; for he is really polite!"

And now, my dear Sir, do not you think, according to the present
situation of affairs, I may give up my resentment, without imprudence
or impropriety? I hope you will not blame me. Indeed, had you, like
me, seen his respectful behaviour, you would have been convinced of
the impracticability of supporting any further indignation.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXIV. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Bristol Hotwells, Sept. 19th.


YESTERDAY morning Mrs. Selwyn received a card from Mrs. Beaumont,
to ask her to dine with her to-day: and another, to the same purpose,
came to me. The invitation was accepted, and we are but just arrived
from Clifton Hill.

We found Mrs. Beaumont alone in the parlour. I will write you
the character of that lady, in the words of our satirical friend
Mrs. Selwyn. "She is an absolute Court Calendar bigot; for, chancing
herself to be born of a noble and ancient family, she thinks proper to
be of opinion, that birth and virtue are one and the same thing. She
has some good qualities; but they rather originate from pride than
principle, as she piques herself upon being too high-born to be
capable of an unworthy action, and thinks it incumbent upon her
to support the dignity of her ancestry. Fortunately for the world
in general, she has taken it into her head, that condescension is
the most distinguishing virtue of high life; so that the same pride
of family which renders others imperious, is with her the motive of
affability. But her civility is too formal to be comfortable, and too
mechanical to be flattering. That she does me the honour of so much
notice, is merely owing to an accident, which, I am sure, is very
painful to her remembrance; for it so happened, that I once did her
some service, in regard to an apartment at Southampton; and I have
since been informed, that, at the time she accepted my assistance,
she thought I was a woman of quality; and I make no doubt but she was
miserable when she discovered me to be a mere country gentlewoman:
however, her nice notions of decorum have made her load me with
favours ever since. But I am not much flattered by her civilities,
as I am convinced I owe them neither to attachment nor gratitude;
but solely to a desire of cancelling an obligation, which she cannot
brook being under, to one whose name is no where to be found in the
Court Calendar."

You well know, my dear Sir, the delight this lady takes in giving
way to her satirical humour.

Mrs. Beaumont received us very graciously, though she some what
distressed me by the questions she asked concerning my family;-such
as, Whether I was related to the Anvilles in the North?-Whether some
of my name did not live in Lincolnshire? and many other inquiries,
which much embarrassed me.

The conversation next turned upon the intended marriage in her
family. She treated the subject with reserve; but it was evident
she disapproved Lady Louisa's choice. She spoke in terms of the
highest esteem of Lord Orville, calling him, in Marmontel's words,
"Un jeune homme comme il y en a peu."

I did not think this conversation very agreeably interrupted by the
entrance of Mr. Lovel. Indeed I am heartily sorry he is now at the
Hot Wells. He made his compliments with the most obsequious respect
to Mrs. Beaumont, but took no sort of notice of any other person.

In a few minutes Lady Louisa Larpent made her appearance. The same
manners prevailed; for, courtsying, with "I hope you are well, Ma'am,"
to Mrs.  Beaumont, she passed straight forward to her seat on the
sofa; where, leaning her head on her hand, she cast her languishing
eyes round the room, with a vacant stare, as if determined, though
she looked, not to see who was in it.

Mr. Lovel, presently approaching her, with reverence the most profound,
hoped her Ladyship was not indisposed.

"Mr. Lovel!" cried she, raising her head, "I declare I did not see you:
have you been here long?"

"By my watch, Madam," said he, "only five minutes,-but by your
Ladyship's absence as many hours."

"O! now I think of it," cried she, "I am very angry with you;-so go
along, do; for I sha'n't speak to you all day."

"Heaven forbid your La'ship's displeasure should last so long! in
such cruel circumstances, a day would seem an age. But in what have
I been so unfortunate as to offend?"

"O, you half killed me the other morning, with terror! I have not yet
recovered from my fright. How could you be so cruel as to drive your
phaeton against my Lord Merton's?"

"'Pon honour, Ma'am, your La'ship does me wrong;-it was all owing
to the horses,-there was no curbing them. I protest I suffered more
than your Ladyship, from the terror of alarming you."

Just then entered Lord Merton; stalking up to Mrs. Beaumont, to
whom alone he bowed, he hoped he had not made her wait; and then,
advancing to Lady Louisa, said, in a careless manner, "How is your
Ladyship this morning?"

"Not well at all," answered she; "I have been dying with the head-ache
ever since I got up."

"Indeed!" cried he, with a countenance wholly unmoved, "I am very
unhappy to hear it. But should not your Ladyship have some advice?"

"I am quite sick of advice," answered she, "Mr. Ridgeway has but just
left me,-but he has done me no good. Nobody here knows what is the
matter with me, yet they all see how indifferent I am."

"Your Ladyship's constitution," said Mr. Lovel, "is infinitely
delicate."

"Indeed it is," cried she, in a low voice, "I am nerve all over!"

"I am glad, however," said Lord Merton, "that you did not take the
air this morning, for Coverley has been driving against me as if he
was mad: he has got two of the finest spirited horses I ever saw."

"Pray my Lord," cried she, "why did not you bring Mr. Coverley with
you? he's a droll creature; I like him monstrously."

"Why, he promised to be here as soon as me. I suppose he'll come
before dinner's over."

In the midst of this trifling conversation Lord Orville made his
appearance. O how different was his address! how superior did he look
and move, to all about him! Having paid his respects to Mrs. Beaumont,
and then to Mrs.  Selwyn, he came up to me, and said, "I hope Miss
Anville has not suffered from the fatigue of Monday morning?" Then,
turning to Lady Louisa, who seemed rather surprised at his speaking
to me, he added, "Give me leave, sister, to introduce Miss Anville
to you."

Lady Louisa, half-rising, said, very coldly, that she should be glad
of the honour of knowing me; and then, abruptly turning to Lord Merton
and Mr.  Lovel, continued, in a half-whisper, her conversation.

For my part, I had risen and courtsied, and now, feeling very foolish,
I seated myself again: first I blushed at the unexpected politeness
of Lord Orville, and immediately afterwards at the contemptuous
failure of it in his sister. How can that young lady see her brother
so universally admired for his manners and deportment, and yet be
so unamiably opposite to him in hers!  but while his mind, enlarged
and noble, rises superior to the little prejudices of rank, hers,
feeble and unsteady, sinks beneath their influence.

Lord Orville, I am sure, was hurt and displeased: he bit his lips, and,
turning from her, addressed himself wholly to me, till we were summoned
to dinner. Do you think I was not grateful for his attention?  yes,
indeed, and every angry idea I had entertained was totally obliterated.

As we were seating ourselves at the table, Mr. Coverley came into the
room; he made a thousand apologies in a breath for being so late,
but said he had been retarded by a little accident, for that he
had overturned his phaeton, and broke it all to pieces. Lady Louisa
screamed at this intelligence, and, looking at Lord Merton, declared
she would never go into a phaeton again.

"O," cried he, "never mind Jack Coverley; for he does not know how
to drive."

"My Lord," cried Mr. Coverley, "I'll drive against you for a thousand
pounds."

"Done!" returned the other; "name your day, and we'll each choose
a judge."

"The sooner the better," cried Mr. Coverley; "to-morrow, if the
carriage can be repaired."

"These enterprises," said Mrs. Selwyn, "are very proper for men
of rank, since 'tis a million to one but both parties will be
incapacitated for any better employment."

"For Heaven's sake," cried Lady Louisa, changing colour, "don't talk
so shockingly! Pray, my Lord, pray, Mr. Coverley, don't alarm me in
this manner."

"Compose yourself, Lady Louisa," said Mrs. Beaumont, "the gentlemen
will think better of the scheme; they are neither of them in earnest."

"The very mention of such a scheme," said Lady Louisa, taking out
her salts, "makes me tremble all over! Indeed, my Lord, you have
frightened me to death!  I sha'n't eat a morsel of dinner."

"Permit me," said Lord Orville, "to propose some other subject for
the present, and we will discuss this matter another time."

"Pray, brother, excuse me; my Lord must give me his word to drop the
project,-for I declare it has made me sick as death."

"To compromise the matter," said Lord Orville, "suppose, if both
parties are unwilling to give up the bet, that, to make the ladies
easy, we change its object to something less dangerous?"

This proposal was so strongly seconded by all the party, that both
Lord Merton and Mr. Coverley were obliged to comply with it; and it was
then agreed that the affair should be finally settled in the afternoon.

"I shall now be entirely out of conceit with phaetons again," said
Mrs. Selwyn, "though Lord Orville had almost reconciled me to them."

"My Lord Orville!" cried the witty Mr. Coverley, "why, my Lord Orville
is as careful,-egad, as careful as an old woman! Why, I'd drive a
one-horse cart against my Lord's phaeton for a hundred guineas!"

This sally occasioned much laughter; for Mr. Coverley, I find, is
regarded as a man of infinite humour.

"Perhaps, Sir," said Mrs. Selwyn, "you have not discovered the reason
my Lord Orville is so careful?"

"Why, no, Ma'am; I must own I never heard any particular reason
for it."

"Why, then, Sir, I'll tell it you; and I believe you will confess it to
be very particular; his Lordship's friends are not yet tired of him."

Lord Orville laughed and bowed. Mr. Coverley, a little confused, turned
to Lord Merton, and said, "No foul play, my Lord! I remember your
Lordship recommended me to the notice of this lady the other morning,
and, egad, I believe you have been doing me the same office to-day."

"Give you joy, Jack!" cried Lord Merton, with a loud laugh.

After this the conversation turned wholly upon eating, a subject
which was discussed with the utmost delight; and, had I not known
they were men of rank and fashion, I should have imagined that Lord
Merton, Mr. Lovel, and Mr.  Coverley, had all been professed cooks;
for they displayed so much knowledge of sauces and made-dishes,
and of the various methods of dressing the same things, that I am
persuaded they must have given much time, and much study, to make
themselves such adepts in this art. It would be very difficult to
determine, whether they were most to be distinguished as gluttons or
epicures; for they were, at once, dainty and voracious, understood the
right and the wrong of every dish, and alike emptied the one and the
other. I should have been quite sick of their remarks, had I not been
entertained by seeing that Lord Orville, who, I am sure, was equally
disgusted, not only read my sentiments, but, by his countenance,
communicated to me his own.

When dinner was over, Mrs. Beaumont recommended the gentlemen to the
care of Lord Orville, and then attended the ladies to the drawing-room.

The conversation, till tea-time, was extremely insipid; Mrs. Selwyn
reserved herself for the gentlemen, Mrs. Beaumont was grave, and Lady
Louisa languid.

But, at tea, every body revived; we were joined by the gentlemen,
and gaiety took the place of dullness.

Since I, as Mr. Lovel says, am Nobody, I seated myself quietly at a
window, and not very near to any body: Lord Merton, Mr. Coverley,
and Mr. Lovel, severally passed me without notice, and surrounded
the chair of Lady Louisa Larpent. I must own, I was rather piqued at
the behaviour of Mr. Lovel, as he had formerly known me. It is true,
I most sincerely despise his foppery; yet I should be grieved to meet
with contempt from any body. But I was by no means sorry to find,
that Lord Merton was determined not to know me before Lady Louisa,
as his neglect relieved me from much embarrassment. As to Mr.
Coverley, his attention or disregard were equally indifferent to
me. Yet, altogether, I feel extremely uncomfortable in finding myself
considered in a light very inferior to the rest of the company.

But when Lord Orville appeared, the scene changed: he came up stairs
last; and, seeing me sit alone, not only spoke to me directly, but
drew a chair next mine, and honoured me with his entire attention.

He enquired very particularly after my health, and hoped I had already
found benefit from the Bristol air. "How little did I imagine,"
added he, "when I had last the pleasure of seeing you in town, that
ill health would in so short a time have brought you hither! I am
ashamed of myself for the satisfaction I feel at seeing you,-yet,
how can I help it?"

He then enquired after the Mirvan family, and spoke of Mrs. Mirvan
in terms of most just praise. "She is gentle and amiable," said he,
"a true feminine character."

"Yes, indeed," answered I: "and her sweet daughter, to say every
thing of her at once, is just the daughter such a mother deserves."

"I am glad of it," said he, "for both their sakes, as such near
relations must always reflect credit or disgrace on each other."

After this he began to speak of the beauties of Clifton; but,
in a few moments, he was interrupted by a call from the company,
to discuss the affair of the wager. Lord Merton and Mr. Coverley,
though they had been discoursing upon the subject some time, could
not fix upon the thing that satisfied them both.

When they asked the assistance of Lord Orville, he proposed that every
body present should vote something; and that the two gentlemen should
draw lots which, from the several votes, should decide the bet.

"We must then begin with the ladies," said Lord Orville; and applied
to Mrs.  Selwyn.

"With all my heart," answered she, with her usual readiness; "and,
since the gentlemen are not allowed to risk their necks, suppose we
decide the bet by their heads?"

"By our heads?" cried Mr. Coverley. "Egad, I don't understand you."

"I will then explain myself more fully. As I doubt not but you are
both excellent classics, suppose, for the good of your own memories,
and the entertainment and surprise of the company, the thousand pounds
should fall to the share of him who can repeat by heart the longest
ode of Horace?"

Nobody could help laughing, the two gentlemen applied to excepted;
who seemed, each of them, rather at a loss in what manner to receive
this unexpected proposal. At length Mr. Coverley, bowing low, said,
"Will your Lordship please to begin?"

"Devil take me if I do!" answered he, turning on his heel, and stalking
to the window.

"Come, gentlemen," said Mrs. Selwyn, "why do you hesitate? I am sure
you cannot be afraid of a weak woman? Besides, if you should chance to
be out, Mr. Lovel, I dare say, will have the goodness to assist you."

The laugh now turned against Mr. Lovel, whose change of countenance
manifested no great pleasure at the transition.

"Me, Madam!" said he, colouring; "no, really I must beg to be excused."

"Why so, Sir?"

"Why so, Ma'am!-Why, really-as to that,-'pon honour, Ma'am, you
are rather-a little severe;-for how is it possible for a man who
is in the house, to study the classics? I assure you, Ma'am, (with
an affected shrug) I find quite business enough for my poor head in
studying politics."

"But, did you study politics at school, and at the university?"

"At the university!" repeated he, with an embarrassed look; "why,
as to that, Ma'am,-no, I can't say I did; but then, what with
riding,-and -and-and so forth,-really, one has not much time, even
at the university, for mere reading."

"But, to be sure, Sir, you have read the classics?"

"O dear, yes, Ma'am!-very often,-but not very-not very lately."

"Which of the Odes do you recommend to these gentlemen to begin with?"

"Which of the Odes!-Really, Ma'am, as to that, I have no very
particular choice;-for, to own the truth, that Horace was never a
very great favourite with me."

"In truth I believe you!" said Mrs. Selwyn, very drily.

Lord Merton, again advancing into the circle, with a nod and a laugh,
said, "Give you joy, Lovel!"

Lord Orville next applied to Mrs. Beaumont for her vote.

"It would very agreeably remind me of past times," said she, "when
bowing was in fashion, if the bet was to depend upon the best made
bow."

"Egad, my Lord," cried Mr. Coverley, "there I should beat you hollow,
for your Lordship never bows at all."

"And pray, Sir, do you?" said Mrs. Selwyn.

"Do I, Ma'am?" cried he; "why, only see!"

"I protest," cried she, "I should have taken that for a shrug, if
you had not told me 'twas a bow."

"My lord," cried Mr. Coverley, "let's practise;" and then, most
ridiculously, they pranced about the room, making bows.

"We must now," said Lord Orville, turning to me, "call upon Miss
Anville."

"O no, my Lord," cried I; "indeed I have nothing to propose." He would
not, however, be refused; but urged me so much to say something, that
at last, not to make him wait any longer, I ventured to propose an
extempore couplet upon some given subject. Mr. Coverley instantly
made me a bow, or, according to Mrs. Selwyn, a shrug, crying,
"Thank you, Ma'am; egad, that's my forte!-why, my Lord, the Fates
seem against you."

Lady Louisa was then applied to; and every body seemed eager to
hear her opinion. "I don't know what to say, I declare," cried she,
affectedly; "can't you pass me?"

"By no means," said Lord Merton.

"Is it possible your Ladyship can make so cruel a request?" said
Mr. Lovel.

"Egad," cried Mr. Coverley, "if your Ladyship does not help us in
this dilemma, we shall be forced to return to our phaetons."

"Oh!" cried Lady Louisa, screaming; "you frightful creature, you,
how can you be so abominable?"

I believe this trifling lasted near half an hour; when at length,
every body being tired, it was given up, and she said she would
consider against another time.

Lord Orville now called upon Mr. Lovel; who, after about ten minutes'
deliberation, proposed, with a most important face, to determine the
wager by who should draw the longest straw!

I had much difficulty to forbear laughing at this unmeaning scheme;
but saw, to my great surprise, not the least change of countenance in
any other person: and, since we came home, Mrs. Selwyn has informed me,
that to draw straws is a fashion of betting by no means uncommon. Good
God! my dear Sir, does it not seem as if money were of no value or
service, since those who possess, squander it away in a manner so
infinitely absurd?

It now only remained for Lord Orville to speak; and the attention of
the company showed the expectations he had raised; yet, I believe, they
by no means prevented his proposal from being heard with amazement;
for it was no other, than that the money should be his due, who,
according to the opinion of the judges, should bring the worthiest
object with whom to share it!

They all stared, without speaking. Indeed, I believe every one, for a
moment at least, experienced something like shame, from having either
proposed or countenanced an extravagance so useless and frivolous. For
my part, I was so much struck and affected by a rebuke so noble to
these spendthrifts, that I felt my eyes filled with tears.

The short silence and momentary reflection into which the company was
surprised, Mr. Coverley was the first to dispel, by saying, "Egad,
my Lord, your Lordship has a most remarkable odd way of taking things."

"Faith," said the incorrigible Lord Merton, "if this scheme takes, I
shall fix upon my Swiss to share with me; for I don't know a worthier
fellow breathing."

After a few more of these attempts at wit, the two gentlemen agreed
that they would settle the affair the next morning.

The conversation then took a different turn; but I did not give it
sufficient attention to write any account of it. Not long after,
Lord Orville, resuming his seat near mine, said, "Why is Miss Anville
so thoughtful?"

"I am sorry, my Lord," said I, "to consider myself among those who
have so justly incurred your censure."

"My censure!-you amaze me!"

"Indeed, my Lord, you have made me quite ashamed of myself for having
given my vote so foolishly, when an opportunity offered, if, like your
Lordship, I had had the sense to use it, of showing some humanity."

"You treat this too seriously," said he, smiling; "and I hardly know
if you do not now mean a rebuke to me."

"To you, my Lord!"

"Nay, who are most deserving of it; those who adapt their conversation
to the company, or those who affect to be superior to it?"

"O, my Lord, who else would do you so little justice?"

"I flatter myself," answered he, "that, in fact, your opinion and
mine, in this point, are the same, though you condescended to comply
with the humour of the company. It is for me, therefore, to apologize
for so unseasonable a gravity, which, but for the particular interest
that I now take in the affairs of Lord Merton, I should not have been
so officious to display."

Such a compliment as this could not fail to reconcile me to myself;
and with revived spirits, I entered into a conversation, which he
supported with me till Mrs. Selwyn's carriage was announced; and we
returned home.

During our ride, Mrs. Selwyn very much surprised me, by asking, if
I thought my health would now permit me to give up my morning walks
to the pump-room, for the purpose of spending a week at Clifton? "for
this poor Mrs. Beaumont," added she, "is so eager to have a discharge
in full of her debt to me, that out of mere compassion, I am induced
to listen to her. Besides, she has always a house full of people;
and, though they are chiefly fools and cox-combs, yet there is some
pleasure in cutting them up."

I begged I might not, by any means, prevent her following her
inclination, as my health was now very well established. And so, my
dear Sir, to-morrow we are to be actually the guests of Mrs. Beaumont.

I am not much delighted at this scheme; for, greatly as I am flattered
by the attention of Lord Orville, it is not very comfortable to
be neglected by every body else. Besides, as I am sure I owe the
particularity of his civility to a generous feeling for my situation,
I cannot expect him to support it so long as a week.

How often do I wish, since I am absent from you, that I was under the
protection of Mrs. Mirvan! It is true, Mrs. Selwyn is very obliging,
and, in every respect, treats me as an equal; but she is contented with
behaving well herself, and does not, with a distinguishing politeness,
raise and support me with others. Yet I mean not to blame her, for I
know she is sincerely my friend; but the fact is, she is herself so
much occupied in conversation, when in company, that she has neither
leisure nor thought to attend to the silent.

Well, I must take my chance! But I knew not, till now, how requisite
are birth and fortune to the attainment of respect and civility.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXV. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Clifton, Sept. 20th.


HERE I am, my dear Sir, under the same roof, and an inmate of the
same house as Lord Orville! Indeed, if this were not the case, my
situation would be very disagreeable, as you will easily believe,
when I tell you the light in which I am generally considered.

"My dear," said Mrs. Selwyn, "did you ever before meet with that
egregious fop, Lovel?"

I very readily satisfied her as to my acquaintance with him.

"O, then," said she, "I am the less surprised at his ill-nature,
since he has already injured you."

I begged her to explain herself; and then she told me, that while
Lord Orville was speaking to me, Lady Louisa said to Mr. Lovel,
"Do you know who that is?"

"Why, Ma'am, no, 'pon honour," answered he, "I can't absolutely say
I do; I only know she is a kind of a toad-eater. She made her first
appearance in that capacity last spring, when she attended Miss Mirvan,
a young lady of Kent."

How cruel is it, my dear Sir, to be thus exposed to the impertinent
suggestions of a man who is determined to do me ill offices! Lady
Louisa may well despise a toad-eater; but, thank Heaven,
her brother has not heard, or does not credit, the mortifying
appellation. Mrs. Selwyn said, she would advise me to pay my court
to this Mr. Lovel; "for," said she, "though he is malicious, he is
fashionable, and may do you some harm in the great world." But I
should disdain myself as much as I do him, were I capable of such
duplicity as to flatter a man whom I scorn and despise.

We were received by Mrs. Beaumont with great civility, and by Lord
Orville with something more. As to Lady Louisa, she scarcely perceived
that we were in the room.

There has been company here all day, part of which I have spent most
happily: for after tea, when the ladies played at cards, Lord Orville,
who does not, and I, who cannot play, were consequently at our own
disposal; and then his Lordship entered into a conversation with me,
which lasted till supper-time.

Almost insensibly, I find the constraint, the reserve, I have been wont
to feel in his presence, wear away; the politeness, the sweetness,
with which he speaks to me, restore all my natural cheerfulness,
and make me almost as easy as he is himself;-and the more so, as,
if I may judge by his looks, I am rather raised, than sunk of late
in his opinion.

I asked him how the bet was, at last, to be decided? He told me that,
to his great satisfaction, the parties had been prevailed upon to
lower the sum from one thousand to one hundred pounds; and that they
had agreed it should be determined by a race between two old women,
one of whom was to be chosen by each side, and both were to be proved
more than eighty years of age, though, in other respects strong and
healthy as possible.

When I expressed my surprise at this extraordinary method of spending
so much money, "I am charmed," said he, "at the novelty of meeting
with one so unhackneyed in the world, as not to be yet influenced
by custom to forget the use of reason: for certain it is, that the
prevalence of fashion makes the greatest absurdities pass uncensured,
and the mind naturally accommodates itself even to the most ridiculous
improprieties, if they occur frequently."

"I should have hoped," said I, "that the humane proposal made yesterday
by your Lordship, would have had more effect."

"O," cried he, laughing, "I was so far from expecting any success,
that I shall think myself very fortunate if I escape the wit of
Mr. Coverley in a lampoon! yet I spoke openly, because I do not wish
to conceal that I am no friend to gaming."

After this, he took up the New Bath Guide, and read it with me till
supper-time. In our way down stairs, Lady Louisa said, "I thought,
brother, you were engaged this evening?"

"Yes, sister," answered he, "and I have been engaged." And he bowed
to me with an air of gallantry that rather confused me.  Sept. 23rd.


Almost insensibly have three days glided on since I wrote last, and so
serenely, that, but for your absence, I could not have formed a wish.
My residence here is much happier than I had dared expect. The
attention with which Lord Orville honours me, is as uniform as it
is flattering, and seems to result from a benevolence of heart that
proves him as much a stranger to caprice as to pride; for, as his
particular civilities arose from a generous resentment at seeing me
neglected, so will they, I trust, continue, as long as I shall, in
any degree, deserve them. I am now not merely easy, but even gay in
his presence: such is the effect of true politeness, that it banishes
all restraint and embarrassment. When we walk out, he condescends
to be my companion, and keeps by my side all the way we go. When we
read, he marks the passages most worthy to be noticed, draws out my
sentiments, and favours me with his own. At table, where he always
sits next to me, he obliges me by a thousand nameless attentions;
while the distinguishing good-breeding with which he treats me,
prevents my repining at the visibly-felt superiority of the rest of
the company. A thousand occasional meetings could not have brought
us to that degree of social freedom, which four days spent under
the same roof have, insensibly, been productive of: and, as my only
friend in this house, Mrs. Selwyn, is too much engrossed in perpetual
conversation to attend much to me, Lord Orville seems to regard me
as a helpless stranger, and, as such, to think me entitled to his
good offices and protection. Indeed, my dear Sir, I have reason to
hope, that the depreciating opinion he formerly entertained of me is
succeeded by one infinitely more partial.-It may be that I flatter
myself; but yet his looks, his attentions, his desire of drawing
me into conversation, and his solicitude to oblige me, all conspire
to make me hope I do not. In short, my dearest Sir, these last four
happy days would repay me for months of sorrow and pain!
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
 LETTER LXVI. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Clifton, Sept. 24th.


THIS morning I came down stairs very early; and supposing that the
family would not assemble for some time, I strolled out, purposing
to take a long walk, in the manner I was wont to do at Berry Hill,
before breakfast: but I had scarce shut the garden-gate, before I
was met by a gentleman, who, immediately bowing to me, I recollected
to be the unhappy Mr. Macartney. Very much surprised, I courtsied,
and stopped till he came up to me. He was still in mourning, but
looked better than when I saw him last, though he had the same air
of melancholy which so much struck me at first sight of him.

Addressing me with the utmost respect, "I am happy, Madam," said he,
"to have met with you so soon. I came to Bristol but yesterday,
and have had no small difficulty in tracing you to Clifton."

"Did you know, then, of my being here?"

"I did, Madam; the sole motive of my journey was to see you. I have
been to Berry Hill, and there I had my intelligence, and, at the same
time, the unwelcome information of your ill health."

"Good God! Sir,-and can you possibly have taken so much trouble?"

"Trouble! O, Madam, could there be any, to return you, the moment I
had the power, my personal acknowledgments for your goodness?"

I then enquired after Madame Duval and the Snow-Hill family. He told
me they were all well, and that Madame Duval proposed soon returning
to Paris. When I congratulated him on looking better, "It is yourself,
Madam," said he, "you should congratulate; for to your humanity alone
it may now be owing that I exist at all." He then told me, that his
affairs were now in a less desperate situation; and that he hoped, by
the assistance of time and reason, to accommodate his mind to a more
cheerful submission to his fate. "The interest you so generously took
in my affliction,"  added he, "assures me you will not be displeased to
hear of my better fortune; I was therefore eager to acquaint you with
it." He then told me that his friend, the moment he had received his
letter, quitted Paris, and flew to give him his personal assistance and
consolation. With a heavy heart, he acknowledged, he accepted it; "but
yet," he added, "I have accepted it; and therefore, as bound equally
by duty and honour, my first step was to hasten to the benefactress
of my distress, and to return" (presenting me something in a paper)
"the only part of my obligations that can be returned; for the rest,
I have nothing but my gratitude to offer, and must always be contented
to consider myself her debtor."

I congratulated him most sincerely upon his dawning prosperity, but
begged he would not deprive me of the pleasure of being his friend;
and declined receiving the money, till his affairs were more settled.

While this point was in agitation, I heard Lord Orville's voice
inquiring of the gardener if he had seen me? I immediately opened the
garden gate; and his Lordship, advancing to me with quickness, said,
"Good God! Miss Anville, have you been out alone? Breakfast has been
ready some time, and I have been round the garden in search of you."

"Your Lordship has been very good," said I; "but I hope you have
not waited."

"Not waited!" repeated he, smiling: "Do you think we could sit down
quietly to breakfast, with the idea that you had run away from us? But
come," (offering to hand me) "if we do not return, they will suppose
I am run away too; and they very naturally may, as they know the
attraction of the magnet that draws me."

"I will come, my Lord," said I, rather embarrassed, "in two
minutes." Then, turning to Mr. Macartney, with yet more embarrassment,
I wished him good morning.

He advanced towards the garden, with the paper still in his hand.

"No, no," cried I, "some other time."

"May I then, Madam, have the honour of seeing you again?"

I did not dare take the liberty of inviting any body to the house
of Mrs.  Beaumont, nor yet had I the presence of mind to make an
excuse; and, therefore, not knowing how to refuse him, I said,
"Perhaps you may be this way again to-morrow morning,-and I believe
I shall walk out before breakfast."

He bowed, and went away; while I, turning again to Lord Orville,
saw his countenance so much altered, that I was frightened at what I
had so hastily said. He did not again offer me his hand; but walked,
silent and slow, by my side. Good Heaven! thought I, what may he not
suppose from this adventure?  May he not, by my desire of meeting
Mr. Macartney to-morrow, imagine it was by design I walked out to
meet him to-day? Tormented by this apprehension, I determined to
avail myself of the freedom which his behaviour, since I came hither,
has encouraged; and, since he would not ask any questions, begin
an explanation myself. I therefore slackened my pace to gain time;
and then said, "Was not your Lordship surprised to see me speaking
with a stranger?"

"A stranger?" repeated he; "is it possible that gentleman can be a
stranger to you?"

"No, my Lord," said I, stammering, "not to me -but only it might
look-he might seem-"

"No, believe me," said he, with a forced smile, "I could never suppose
Miss Anville would make an appointment with a stranger."

"An appointment, my Lord?" repeated I, colouring violently.

"Pardon me, Madam," answered he, "but I thought I had heard one."

I was so much confounded that I could not speak: yet, finding he walked
quietly on, I could not endure he should make his own interpretation
of my silence: and therefore, as soon as I recovered from my surprise,
I said, "Indeed, my Lord, you are much mistaken, Mr. Macartney had
particular business with me-and I could not-I knew not, how to refuse
seeing him;-but indeed, my Lord-I had not,-he had not,-" I stammered
so terribly that I could not go on.

"I am very sorry," said he, gravely, "that I have been so unfortunate
as to distress you; but I should not have followed you had I not
imagined you were merely walked out for the air."

"And so I was!" cried I, eagerly, "indeed, my Lord, I was! My meeting
with Mr.  Macartney was quite accidental; and, if your Lordship thinks
there is any impropriety in my seeing him to-morrow, I am ready to
give up that intention."

"If I think!" said he, in a tone of surprise; "surely Miss Anville
cannot leave the arbitration of a point so delicate to one who is
ignorant of all the circumstances which attend it?"

"If," said I, "it was worth your Lordship's time to hear them,-you
should not be ignorant of the circumstances which attend it."

"The sweetness of Miss Anville's disposition," said he, in a softened
voice, "I have long admired; and the offer of a communication, which
does me so much honour, is too grateful to me not to be eagerly
caught at."

Just then Mrs. Selwyn opened the parlour window, and our conversation
ended. I was rallied upon my passion for solitary walking; but no
questions were asked me.

When breakfast was over, I hoped to have had some opportunity of
speaking with Lord Orville; but Lord Merton and Mr. Coverley came in,
and insisted up his opinion of the spot they had fixed upon for the
old women's race. The ladies declared they would be of the party;
and accordingly we all went.

The race is to be run in Mrs. Beaumont's garden; the two gentlemen
are as anxious, as if their joint lives depended upon it. They
have at length fixed upon objects; but have found great difficulty
in persuading them to practise running, in order to try their
strength. This grand affair is to be decided next Thursday.

When we returned to the house, the entrance of more company still
prevented my having any conversation with Lord Orville. I was
very much chagrined, as I knew he was engaged at the Hotwells in
the afternoon. Seeing, therefore, no probability of speaking to him
before the time of my meeting Mr. Macartney arrived, I determined that,
rather than risk his ill opinion, I would leave Mr. Macartney to his
own suggestions.

Yet, when I reflected upon his peculiar situation, his poverty, his
sadness, and, more than all the rest, the idea I knew he entertained
of what he calls his obligations to me, I could not resolve upon a
breach of promise, which might be attributed to causes, of all the
others the most offensive to one whom misfortune has made extremely
suspicious of slights and contempt.

After the most uneasy consideration, I at length determined upon
writing an excuse, which would, at once, save me from either meeting
or affronting him.  I therefore begged Mrs. Selwyn's leave to send
her man to the Hotwells, which she instantly granted; and then I
wrote the following note:

          "To Mr. Macartney.


         "SIR,

         "As it will not be in my power to walk out to-morrow morning,
         I would
        by no means give you the trouble of coming to Clifton.  I hope,
        however, to have the pleasure of seeing you before you quit
        Bristol.  I am, Sir, your obedient servant, "EVELINA ANVILLE."




I desired the servant to enquire at the pump-room where Mr. Macartney
lived, and returned to the parlour.

As soon as the company dispersed, the ladies retired to dress. I then,
unexpectedly, found myself alone with Lord Orville; who, the moment
I rose to follow Mrs. Selwyn, advanced to me, and said, "Will Miss
Anville pardon my impatience, if I remind her of the promise she was
so good as to make me this morning?"

I stopped, and would have returned to my seat; but before I had time,
the servants came to lay the cloth. He retreated, and went towards
the window; and, while I was considering in what manner to begin,
I could not help asking myself what right I had to communicate the
affairs of Mr. Macartney: and I doubted whether, to clear myself from
one act of imprudence, I had not committed another.

Distressed by this reflection, I thought it best to quit the room,
and give myself some time for consideration before I spoke; and
therefore, only saying I must hasten to dress, I ran up stairs,
rather abruptly I own; and so, I fear, Lord Orville must think. Yet
what could I do? Unused to the situations in which I find myself, and
embarrassed by the slightest difficulties, I seldom, till too late,
discover how I ought to act.

Just as we were all assembled to dinner, Mrs. Selwyn's man, coming
into the parlour, presented to me a letter, and said, "I can't find
out Mr. Macartney, Madam; but the post-office people will let you
know if they hear of him."

I was extremely ashamed of this public message; and, meeting the
eyes of Lord Orville, which were earnestly fixed on me, my confusion
redoubled, and I knew not which way to look. All dinner-time he was
as silent as myself; and the moment it was in my power I left the
table, and went to my own room. Mrs.  Selwyn presently followed me;
and her questions obliged me to own almost all the particulars of
my acquaintance with Mr. Macartney, in order to excuse my writing to
him. She said it was a most romantic affair, and spoke her sentiments
with great severity; declaring that she had no doubt but he was an
adventurer and an impostor.

And now, my dear Sir, I am totally at a loss what I ought to do;  the
more I reflect, the more sensible I am of the utter impropriety, nay,
treachery, of revealing the story, and publishing the misfortunes and
poverty of Mr.  Macartney; who has an undoubted right to my secrecy and
discretion, and whose letter charges me to regard his communication as
sacred.-And yet, the appearance of mystery,-perhaps something worse,
which this affair must have to Lord Orville,-his seriousness,-and
the promise I have made him, are inducements scarce to be resisted
for trusting him with the openness he has reason to expect from me.

I am equally distressed, too, whether or not I should see Mr. Macartney
to-morrow morning.

Oh, Sir, could I now be enlightened by your counsel, from what anxiety
and perplexity should I be relieved!

But now,-I ought not to betray Mr. Macartney, and I will not forfeit
a confidence which would never have been reposed in me, but from
a reliance upon my honour, which I should blush to find myself
unworthy of. Desirous as I am of the good opinion of Lord Orville,
I will endeavour to act as if I was guided by your advice; and,
making it my sole aim to deserve it, leave to time and to fate my
success or disappointment.

Since I have formed this resolution, my mind is more at ease. But I
will not finish my letter till the affair is decided.

Sept. 25th.


I rose very early this morning; and, after a thousand different plans,
not being able to resolve upon giving poor Mr. Macartney leave to
suppose I neglected him, I thought it incumbent upon me to keep my
word, since he had not received my letter; I therefore determined
to make my own apologies, not to stay with him two minutes, and to
excuse myself from meeting him any more.

Yet, uncertain whether I was wrong or right, it was with fear
and trembling that I opened the garden-gate;-judge then, of my
feelings, when the first object I saw was Lord Orville!-he, too,
looked extremely disconcerted, and said, in a hesitating manner,
"Pardon me, Madam,-I did not intend,-I did not imagine you would
have been here so soon-or-or I would not have come."-And then, with
a hasty bow, he passed me, and proceeded to the garden.

I was scarce able to stand, so greatly did I feel myself shocked; but,
upon my saying, almost involuntarily, "Oh, my Lord!"-he turned back,
and, after a short pause, said, "Did you speak to me, Madam?"

I could not immediately answer; I seemed choaked, and was even forced
to support myself by the garden-gate.

Lord Orville, soon recovering his dignity, said, "I know not how
to apologize for being, just now, at this place;-and I cannot,
immediately-if ever -clear myself from the imputation of impertinent
curiosity, to which I fear you will attribute it: however, at
present, I will only intreat your pardon, without detaining you any
longer." Again he bowed, and left me.

For some moments I remained fixed to the same spot, and in the same
position, immoveable, as if I had been transformed to a stone. My first
impulse was to call him back, and instantly tell him the whole affair;
but I checked this desire, though I would have given the world to
have indulged it; something like pride aided what I thought due to
Mr. Macartney, and I determined not only to keep his secret, but to
delay any sort of explanation till Lord Orville should condescend to
request it.

Slowly he walked; and, before he entered the house, he looked back,
but hastily withdrew his eyes, upon finding I observed him.

Indeed, my dear Sir, you cannot easily imagine a situation more
uncomfortable than mine was at that time; to be suspected by Lord
Orville of any clandestine actions wounded my soul; I was too much
discomposed to wait for Mr. Macartney, nor in truth, could I endure to
have the design of my staying so well known. Yet I was so extremely
agitated, that I could hardly move; and I have reason to believe
Lord Orville, from the parlour-window, saw me tottering along; for,
before I had taken five steps, he came out, and, hastening to meet
me, said, "I fear you are not well; pray, allow me (offering his arm)
to assist you."

"No, my Lord," said I, with all the resolution I could assume; yet
I was affected by an attention, at that time so little expected,
and forced to turn away my head to conceal my emotion.

"You must," said he, with earnestness, "indeed you must,-I am sure
you are not well;-refuse me not the honour of assisting you;" and,
almost forcibly, he took my hand, and, drawing it under his arm,
obliged me to lean upon him.  That I submitted was partly the effect of
surprise, at an earnestness so uncommon in Lord Orville, and, partly,
that I did not just then dare trust my voice to make any objection.

  When we came to the house, he led me into the parlour, and to a
  chair, and
begged to know if I would not have a glass of water.

"No, my Lord, I thank you," said I, "I am perfectly recovered;" and,
rising, I walked to the window, where, for some time, I pretended to
be occupied in looking at the garden.

Determined as I was to act honourably by Mr. Macartney, I yet most
anxiously wished to be restored to the good opinion of Lord Orville;
but his silence, and the thoughtfulness of his air, discouraged me
from speaking.

My situation soon grew disagreeable and embarrassing, and I resolved
to return to my chamber till breakfast was ready. To remain longer I
feared might seem asking for his enquiries; and I was sure it would
ill become me to be more eager to speak, than he was to hear.

Just as I reached the door, turning to me hastily, he said, "Are you
going, Miss Anville?"

"I am, my Lord," answered I; yet I stopped.

"Perhaps to return to-but I beg your pardon!" He spoke with a degree
of agitation that made me readily comprehend he meant to the garden;
and I instantly said, "To my own room, my Lord." And again I would have
gone; but, convinced by my answer that I understood him, I believe he
was sorry for the insinuation: he approached me with a very serious
air, though at the same time he forced a smile, and said, "I know
not what evil genius pursues me this morning, but I seem destined to
do or to say something I ought not: I am so much ashamed of myself,
that I can scarce solicit your forgiveness."

"My forgiveness! my Lord?" cried I, abashed, rather than elated by
his condescension; "surely you cannot-you are not serious?"

"Indeed, never more so! yet, if I may be my own interpreter, Miss
Anville's countenance pronounces my pardon."

"I know not, my Lord, how any one can pardon, who never has been
offended."

"You are very good; yet I could expect no less from a sweetness of
disposition which baffles all comparison: you will not think I am an
encroacher, and that I take advantage of your goodness, should I once
more remind you of the promise you vouchsafed me yesterday?"

"No, indeed; on the contrary I shall be very happy to acquit myself
in your Lordship's opinion."

  "Acquittal you need not," said he, leading me again to the window;
  "yet I
own my curiosity is strongly excited."

When I was seated, I found myself much at a loss what to say; yet,
after a short silence, assuming all the courage in my power, "Will you
not, my Lord," said I, "think me trifling and capricious, should I own
I have repented the promise I made, and should I entreat your Lordship
not to insist upon my strict performance of it?"-I spoke so hastily,
that I did not, at the time, consider the impropriety of what I said.

As he was entirely silent, and profoundly attentive, I continued to
speak without interruption.

"If your Lordship, by any other means, knew the circumstances attending
my acquaintance with Mr. Macartney, I am most sure you would yourself
disapprove my relating them. He is a gentleman, and has been very
unfortunate;-but I am not-I think,-at liberty to say more: yet I am
sure, if he knew your Lordship wished to hear any particulars of his
affairs, he would readily consent to my acknowledging them;-shall I,
my Lord, ask his permission?"

"His affairs!" repeated Lord Orville; "by no means, I have not the
least curiosity about them."

"I beg your Lordship's pardon,-but indeed I had understood the
contrary."

"Is it possible, Madam, you could suppose the affairs of an utter
stranger can excite my curiosity?"

The gravity and coldness with which he asked this question very
much abashed me. But Lord Orville is the most delicate of men! and,
presently recollecting himself, he added, "I mean not to speak with
indifference of any friend of yours,-far from it; any such will always
command my good wishes: yet I own I am rather disappointed; and though
I doubt not the justice of your reason, to which I implicitly submit,
you must not wonder, that, when upon the point of being honoured
with your confidence, I should feel the greatest regret at finding
it withdrawn."

Do you think, my dear sir, I did not, at that moment, require all my
resolution to guard me from frankly telling him whatever he wished
to hear?  yet I rejoice that I did not; for, added to the actual wrong
I should have done, Lord Orville himself, when he had heard, would,
I am sure, have blamed me. Fortunately, this thought occurred to me;
an I said, "Your Lordship shall yourself be my judge; the promise
I made, though voluntary, was  rash and inconsiderate; yet, had it
concerned myself, I would not have hesitated in fulfilling it; but
the gentleman, whose affairs I should be obliged to relate-"

"Pardon me," cried he, "for interrupting you; yet allow me to assure
you, I have not the slightest desire to be acquainted with his affairs,
further than what belongs to the motives which induced you yesterday
morning-" He stopped; but there was no occasion to say more.

"That, my Lord," cried I, "I will tell you honestly. Mr. Macartney
had some particular business with me, and I could not take the liberty
to ask him hither."

"And why not?-Mr. Beaumont, I am sure-"

"I could not, my Lord, think of intruding upon Mrs. Beaumont's
complaisance; and so, with the same hasty folly I promised your
Lordship, I much more rashly promised to meet him."

"And did you?"

"No, my Lord," said I, colouring, "I returned before he came."

Again, for some time, we were both silent; yet, unwilling to leave him
to reflections which could not but be to my disadvantage, I summoned
sufficient courage to say, "There is no young creature, my Lord,
who so greatly wants, or so earnestly wishes for, the advice and
assistance of her friends, as I do: I am new to the world, and unused
to acting for myself;-my intentions are never willfully blameable,
yet I err perpetually!-I have hitherto been blessed with the most
affectionate of friends, and, indeed, the ablest of men, to guide
and instruct me upon every occasion:-but he is too distant, now,
to be applied to at the moment I want his aid:-and here,-there is
not a human being whose counsel I can ask."

"Would to Heaven," cried he, with a countenance from which all coldness
and gravity were banished, and succeeded by the mildest benevolence,
"that I were worthy,-and capable,-of supplying the place of such a
friend to Miss Anville!"

"You do me but too much honour," said I, "yet I hope your Lordship's
candour,-perhaps I ought to say indulgence,-will make some allowance,
on account of my inexperience, for behaviour so inconsiderate:-May I,
my Lord, hope that you will?"

 "May I," cried he, "hope that you will pardon the ill-grace with
 which I have
submitted to my disappointment? And that you will permit me (kissing
my hand) thus to seal my peace?"

  "Our peace, my Lord!" said I, with revived spirits.

"This, then," said he, again pressing it to his lips, "for our peace:
and now,-are we not friends?"

Just then the door opened, and I had only time to withdraw my hand,
before the ladies came in to breakfast.

I have been, all day, the happiest of human beings!-to be thus
reconciled to Lord Orville, and yet to adhere to my resolution,-what
could I wish for more?-he too has been very cheerful, and more
attentive, more obliging to me than ever. Yet Heaven forbid I should
again be in a similar situation, for I cannot express how much
uneasiness I have suffered from the fear of incurring his ill opinion.

But what will poor Mr. Macartney think of me? Happy as I am, I much
regret the necessity I have been under of disappointing him.

Adieu, my dearest Sir.
</CHAPTER>

