<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXII EVELINA IN CONTINUATION

Monday Morning, April 18.


MRS. MIRVAN has just communicated to me an anecdote concerning Lord
Orville, which has much surprised, half pleased, and half pained me.

While they were sitting together during the opera, he told her that
he had been greatly concerned at the impertinence which the young
lady under her protection had suffered from Mr. Lovel; but that he
had the pleasure of assuring her, she had no future disturbance to
apprehend from him.

Mrs. Mirvan, with great eagerness, begged he would explain himself;
and said she hoped he had not thought so insignificant an affair
worthy his serious attention.

"There is nothing," answered he, "which requires more immediate notice
than impertinence, for it ever encroaches when it is tolerated." He
then added, that he believed he ought to apologize for the liberty
he had taken in interfering; but that, as he regarded himself in the
light of a party concerned, from having had the honour of dancing
with Miss Anville, he could not possibly reconcile to himself a
patient neutrality.

He then proceeded to tell her, that he had waited upon Mr. Lovel the
morning after the play; that the visit had proved an amicable one,
but the particulars were neither entertaining nor necessary: he only
assured her, Miss Anville might be perfectly easy, since Mr. Lovel
had engaged his honour never more to mention, or even to hint at what
had passed at Mrs. Stanley's assembly.

Mrs. Mirvan expressed her satisfaction at this conclusion, and thanked
him for his polite attention to her young friend.

"It would be needless," said he, "to request that this affair may
never transpire, since Mrs. Mirvan cannot but see the necessity of
keeping it inviolably secret; but I thought it incumbent upon me,
as the young lady is under your protection, to assure both you and
her of Mr.  Lovel's future respect."

Had I known of this visit previous to Lord Orville's making it, what
dreadful uneasiness would it have cost me! Yet that he should so much
interest himself in securing me from offence, gives me, I must own,
an internal pleasure, greater than I can express; for I feared he
had too contemptuous an opinion of me, to take any trouble upon my
account. Though, after all, this interference might rather be to
satisfy his own delicacy, than from thinking well of me.

But how cool, how quiet is true courage! Who, from seeing Lord Orville
at the play, would have imagined his resentment would have hazarded
his life? yet his displeasure was evident, though his real bravery and
his politeness equally guarded him from entering into any discussion
in our presence.

Madame Duval, as I expected, was most terribly angry yesterday:
she scolded me for, I believe, two hours, on account of having
left her; and protested she had been so much surprised at my going,
without giving her time to answer, that she hardly knew whether she
was awake or asleep. But she assured me that if ever I did so again,
she would never more take me into public. And she expressed an equal
degree of displeasure against Sir Clement, because he had not even
spoken to her, and because he was always of the Captain's side in
an argument. The Captain, as bound in honour, warmly defended him,
and then followed a dispute in the usual style.

After dinner, Mrs. Mirvan introduced the subject of our leaving
London. Madame Duval said she would stay a month or two longer. The
Captain told her she was welcome, but that he and his family should
go into the country on Tuesday morning.

A most disagreeable scene followed. Madame Duval insisted upon keeping
me with her; but Mrs. Mirvan said, that as I was actually engaged on
a visit to Lady Howard, who had only consented to my leaving her for
a few days, she could not think of returning without me.

Perhaps, if the Captain had not interfered, the good-breeding and
mildness of Mrs. Mirvan might have had some effect upon Madame Duval;
but he passes no opportunity of provoking her; and therefore made
so many gross and rude speeches, all of which she retorted, that,
in conclusion, she vowed she would sooner go to law in right of her
relationship, than that I should be taken away from her.

I heard this account from Mrs. Mirvan, who was so kindly considerate
as to give me a pretence for quitting the room as soon as this
dispute began, lest Madame Duval should refer to me, and insist on
my obedience.

The final result of the conversation was, that, to soften matters for
the present, Madame Duval should make one in the party to Howard Grove,
whither we are positively to go next Wednesday. And though we are
none of us satisfied with this plan, we know not how to form a better.

Mrs. Mirvan is now writing to Lady Howard, to excuse bringing this
unexpected guest, and prevent the disagreeable surprise which must
otherwise attend her reception. This dear lady seems eternally studying
my happiness and advantage.

To-night we go to the Pantheon, which is the last diversion we shall
partake of in London; for to-morrow-  * * * * *


This moment, my dearest Sir, I have received your kind letter.

If you thought us too dissipated the first week, I almost fear to
know what you will think of us this second;-however, the Pantheon this
evening will probably be the last public place which I shall ever see.

The assurance of your support and protection in regard to Madame Duval,
though what I never doubted, excites my utmost gratitude. How,
indeed, cherished under your roof, the happy object of your
constant indulgence, how could I have borne to become the slave of
her tyrannical humours? -Pardon me that I speak so hardly of her;
but whenever the idea of passing my days with her occurs to me, the
comparison which naturally follows, takes from me all that forbearance
which, I believe, I owe her.

You are already displeased with Sir Clement: to be sure, then, his
behaviour after the opera will not make his peace with you. Indeed
the more I reflect upon it, the more angry I am. I was entirely in
his power, and it was cruel in him to cause me so much terror.

O, my dearest Sir, were I but worthy the prayers and the wishes
you offer for me, the utmost ambition of my heart would be fully
satisfied! but I greatly fear you will find me, now that I am out of
the reach of your assisting prudence, more weak and imperfect than
you could have expected.

I have not now time to write another word, for I must immediately
hasten to dress for the evening.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXIII EVELINA IN CONTINUATION

Queen Ann Street, Tuesday, April 19.


THERE is something to me half melancholy in writing an account of our
last adventures in London. However, as this day is merely appropriated
to packing and preparations for our journey, and as I shall shortly
have no more adventures to write, I think I may as well complete my
town journal at once: and, when you have it all together, I hope,
my dear Sir, you will send me your observations and thoughts upon it
to Howard Grove.

About eight o'clock we went to the Pantheon. I was extremely struck
with the beauty of the building, which greatly surpassed whatever
I could have expected or imagined. Yet it has more the appearance
of a chapel than of a place of diversion; and, though I was quite
charmed with the magnificence of the room, I felt that I could
not be as gay and thoughtless there as at Ranelagh; for there is
something in it which rather inspires awe and solemnity, than mirth
and pleasure. However, perhaps it may only have this effect upon such
a novice as myself.

I should have said, that our party consisted only of Captain, Mrs. and
Miss Mirvan, as Madame Duval spent the day in the city;-which I own
I could not lament.

There was a great deal of company; but the first person we saw was Sir
Clement Willoughby. He addressed us with his usual ease, and joined
us for the whole evening. I felt myself very uneasy in his presence;
for I could not look at him, nor hear him speak, without recollecting
the chariot adventure; but, to my great amazement, I observed that
he looked at me without the least apparent discomposure, though,
certainly, he ought not to think of his behaviour without blushing. I
really wish I had not forgiven him, and then he could not have ventured
to speak to me any more.

There was an exceeding good concert, but too much talking to hear
it well.  Indeed I am quite astonished to find how little music
is attended to in silence; for, though every body seems to admire,
hardly any body listens.

We did not see Lord Orville till we went into the tea-room, which
is large, low, and under ground, and serves merely as a foil to the
apartments above; he then sat next to us. He seemed to belong to a
large party, chiefly of ladies; but, among the gentlemen attending
them, I perceived Mr. Lovel.

I was extremely irresolute whether or not I ought to make any
acknowledgments to Lord Orville for his generous conduct in securing
me from the future impertinence of that man; and I thought, that,
as he had seemed to allow Mrs.  Mirvan to acquaint me, though no one
else, of the measures which he had taken, he might perhaps suppose me
ungrateful if silent: however, I might have spared myself the trouble
of deliberating, as I never once had the shadow of an opportunity of
speaking unheard by Sir Clement. On the contrary, he was so exceedingly
officious and forward, that I could not say a word to any body but
instantly he bent his head forward, with an air of profound attention,
as if I had addressed myself wholly to him; and yet I never once
looked at him, and would not have spoken to him on any account.

Indeed, Mrs. Mirvan herself, though unacquainted with the behaviour of
Sir Clement after the opera, says it is not right for a young woman to
be seen so frequently in public with the same gentleman; and, if our
stay in town was to be lengthened, she would endeavour to represent
to the Captain the impropriety of allowing his constant attendance;
for Sir Clement with all his easiness, could not be so eternally of
our parties, if the Captain was less fond of his company.

At the same table with Lord Orville sat a gentleman,-I call him so
only because he was at the same table,-who, almost from the moment
I was seated, fixed his eyes steadfastly on my face, and never once
removed them to any other object during tea-time, notwithstanding my
dislike of his staring must, I am sure, have been very evident. I was
quite surprised, that a man, whose boldness was so offensive, could
have gained admission into a party of which Lord Orville made one;
for I naturally concluded him to be some low-bred, uneducated man;
and I thought my idea was indubitably confirmed, when I heard him say
to Sir Clement Willoughby, in an audible whisper,-which is a mode of
speech very distressing and disagreeable to bystanders,-"For Heaven's
sake, Willoughby, who is that lovely creature?"

But what was my amazement, when, listening attentively for the answer,
though my head was turned another way, I heard Sir Clement say,
"I am sorry I cannot inform your Lordship, but I am ignorant myself."

Lordship! how extraordinary! that a nobleman, accustomed, in all
probability, to the first rank of company in the kingdom, from his
earliest infancy, can possibly be deficient in good manners, however
faulty in morals and principles! Even Sir Clement Willoughby appeared
modest in comparison with this person.

During tea, a conversation was commenced upon the times, fashions,
and public places, in which the company of both tables joined. It
began by Sir Clement's inquiring of Miss Mirvan and of me, if the
Pantheon had answered our expectations.

We both readily agreed that it had greatly exceeded them.

"Ay, to be sure," said the Captain, "why, you don't suppose they'd
confess they didn't like it, do you? Whatever's the fashion, they
must like, of course;-or else, I'd be bound for it, they'd own,
that there never was such a dull place as this here invented."

"And has, then, this building," said Lord Orville, "no merit that may
serve to lessen your censure? Will not your eye, Sir, speak something
in its favour?"

"Eye!" cried the Lord, (I don't know his name,) "and is there any eye
here, that can find pleasure in looking at dead walls or statues, when
such heavenly living objects as I now see demand all their admiration?"

"O, certainly," said Lord Orville, "the lifeless symmetry of
architecture, however beautiful the design and proportion, no man would
be so mad as to put in competition with the animated charms of nature:
but when, as to-night, the eye may be regaled at the same time, and
in one view, with all the excellence of art, and all the perfection
of nature, I cannot think that either suffer by being seen together."

"I grant, my Lord," said Sir Clement, "that the cool eye of
unimpassioned philosophy may view both with equal attention, and
equal safety; but, where the heart is not so well guarded, it is
apt to interfere, and render, even to the eye, all objects but one
insipid and uninteresting."

"Aye, Aye," cried the Captain, "you may talk what you will of your
eye here, and your eye there, and, for the matter of that, to be sure
you have two,-but we all know they both squint one way."

"Far be it from me," said Lord Orville, "to dispute the magnetic
power of beauty, which irresistibly draws and attracts whatever has
soul and sympathy: and I am happy to acknowledge, that though we
have now no gods to occupy a mansion professedly built for them,
yet we have secured their better halves, for we have goddesses to
whom we all most willingly bow down." And then with a very droll air,
he made a profound reverence to the ladies.

"They'd need to be goddesses with a vengeance," said the Captain,
"for they're mortal dear to look at. Howsomever, I should be glad
to know what you can see in e'er a face among them that's worth
half-a-guinea for a sight."

"Half-a-guinea!" exclaimed that same Lord, "I would give half I am
worth for a sight of only one, provided I make my own choice. And,
prithee, how can money be better employed than in the service of
fine women?"

"If the ladies of his own party can pardon the Captain's speech," said
Sir Clement, "I think he has a fair claim to the forgiveness of all."

"Then you depend very much, as I doubt not but you may," said Lord
Orville, "upon the general sweetness of the sex;-but as to the ladies
of the Captain's party, they may easily pardon, for they cannot
be hurt."

"But they must have a devilish good conceit of themselves, though,"
said the Captain, "to believe all that. Howsomever, whether or no,
I should be glad to be told by some of you, who seem to be knowing
in them things, what kind of diversion can be found in such a place
as this here, for one who has had, long ago, his full of face-hunting?"

Every body laughed, but nobody spoke.

"Why, look you there now," continued the Captain, "you're all at a dead
stand!-not a man among you can answer that there question. Why, then,
I must make bold to conclude, that you all come here for no manner
of purpose but to stare at one another's pretty faces:-though, for
the matter of that, half of 'em are plaguy ugly;-and, as to t'other
half,-I believe it's none of God's manufactory."

"What the ladies may come hither for, Sir," said Mr. Lovel, (stroking
his ruffles, and looking down,) "it would ill become us to determine;
but as to we men, doubtless we can have no other view than to admire
them."

 "If I ben't mistaken," cried the Captain, (looking earnestly in
 his face,)
"you are that same person we saw at Love for Love t'other night;
ben't you?"

 Mr. Lovel bowed.

"Why, then, Gentlemen," continued he, with a loud laugh, "I must tell
you a most excellent good joke;-when all was over, as sure as you're
alive, he asked what the play was! Ha, ha, ha!"

 "Sir," said Mr. Lovel, colouring, "if you were as much used to
 town-life as I
am,-which, I presume, is not precisely the case,-I fancy you would
not find so much diversion from a circumstance so common."

 "Common! What, is it common?" repeated the Captain; "why then,
 'fore George,
such chaps are more fit to be sent to school, and well disciplined with
a cat-o'-nine tails, than to poke their heads into a play-house. Why,
a play is the only thing left, now-a-days, that has a grain of sense
in it; for as to all the rest of your public places, d'ye see, if
they were all put together, I wouldn't give that for 'em!" (snapping
his fingers.) "And now we're talking of them sort of things, there's
your operas,-I should like to know, now, what any of you can find to
say for them."

 Lord Orville, who was most able to have answered, seemed by no means
 to think
the Captain worthy an argument, upon a subject concerning which he
had neither knowledge nor feeling: but, turning to us, he said, "The
ladies are silent, and we seem to have engrossed the conversation to
ourselves, in which we are much more our own enemies than theirs. But,"
addressing himself to Miss Mirvan and me, "I am most desirous to hear
the opinions of these young ladies, to whom all public places must,
as yet, be new."

 We both, and with eagerness, declared that we had received as much,
 if not
more pleasure, at the opera than any where: but we had better have
been silent; for the Captain, quite displeased, said, "What signifies
asking them girls? Do you think they know their own minds yet? Ask
'em after any thing that's called diversion, and you're sure they'll
say it's vastly fine-they are a set of parrots, and speak by rote,
for they all say the same thing: but ask 'em how they like making
puddings and pies, and I'll warrant you'll pose 'em. As to them operas,
I desire I may hear no more of their liking such nonsense; and for
you, Moll" (to his daughter,) "I charge you, as you value my favour,
that you'll never again be so impertinent as to have a taste of your
own before my face. There are fools enough in the world, without
your adding to their number. I'll have no daughter of mine affect
them sort of megrims. It is a shame they a'n't put down; and if I'd
my will, there's not a magistrate in this town but should be knocked
on the head for suffering them. If you've a mind to praise any thing,
why you may praise a play, and welcome, for I like it myself."

 This reproof effectually silenced us both for the rest of the
 evening. Nay,
indeed, for some minutes it seemed to silence every body else; till Mr.
Lovel, not willing to lose an opportunity of returning the Captain's
sarcasm, said, "Why, really Sir, it is but natural to be most pleased
with what is most familiar; and, I think, of all our diversions,
there is not one so much in common between us and the country as a
play. Not a village but has its barns and comedians; and as for the
stage business, why it may be pretty equally done any where; and even
in regard to us, and the canaille, confined as we all are within the
semi-circle of a theatre, there is no place where the distinction is
less obvious."

 While the Captain seemed considering for Mr. Lovel's meaning,
 Lord Orville,
probably with a view to prevent his finding it, changed the subject
to Cox's Museum, and asked what he thought of it?

 "Think!-"said he, "why I think as how it i'n't worth thinking
 about. I like
no such jemcracks. It is only fit, in my mind, for monkeys:-though,
for aught I know, they too might turn up their noses at it."

 "May we ask your Lordship's own opinion?" said Mrs. Mirvan.

 "The mechanism," answered he, "is wonderfully ingenioous: I am sorry
 it is
turned to no better account; but its purport is so frivolous, so
very remote from all aim at instruction or utility, that the sight
of so fine a show leaves a regret on the mind, that so much work,
and so much ingenuity, should not be better bestowed."

 "The truth is," said the Captain, "that in all this huge town,
 so full as it
is of folks of all sorts, there i'n't so much as one public place,
besides the play-house, where a man, that's to say, a man who is a
man, ought not to be ashamed to shew his face. T'other day they got
me to a ridotto: but, I believe, it will be long enough before they
get me to another. I knew no more what to do with myself, than if my
ship's company had been metamorphosed into Frenchman.  Then, again,
there's your famous Ranelagh, that you make such a fuss about;-why
what a dull place is that!-it's the worst of all."

 "Ranelagh dull!"-"Ranelagh dull!-was echoed from mouth to mouth;
 and all
the ladies, as if of one accord, regarded the Captain with looks of
the most ironical contempt.

 "As to Ranelagh," said Mr. Lovell, "most indubitably, though the
 price is
blebian, it is by no means adapted to the plebian taste. It requires
a certain acquaintance with high life, and-and-and something
of-of-something d'un vrai gout, to be really sensible of its
merit. Those whose-whose connections, and so forth, are not among
les gens comme il faut, can feel nothing but ennui at such a place
as Ranelagh."

 "Ranelagh!" cried Lord -, "O, tis the divinest place under heaven,-or,
indeed,-for aught I know-"

"O you creature!" cried a pretty, but affected young lady, patting him
with her fan, "you sha'n't talk so; I know what you are going to say;
but, positively, I won't sit by you, if you're so wicked."

 "And how can one sit by you, and be good?" said he, "when only to
 look at you
is enough to make one wicked-or wish to be so?"

 "Fie, my Lord!" returned she, "you really are insufferable. I don't
 think I
shall speak to you again these seven years."

 "What a metamorphosis," cried Lord Orville," should you make a
 patriarch of
his Lordship."

 "Seven years!" said he, "dear Madam, be contented with telling me
 you will
not speak to me after seven years, and I will endeavour to submit."

"O, very well, my Lord," answered she, "pray date the end of our
speaking to each other as early as you please, I'll promise to agree
to your time."

 "You know, dear Madam," said he, sipping his tea, "you know I only
 live in
your sight."

 "O yes, my Lord, I have long known that. But I begin to fear we
 shall be too
late for Ranelagh this evening."

 "O no, Madame," said Mr. Lovel, looking at his watch, "it is but
 just past
ten."

 "No more!" cried she, "O then we shall do very well."

 All the ladies now started up, and declared they had no time to lose.

 "Why, what the D-l," cried the Captain, leaning forward with both
 his arms
on the table," are you going to Ranelagh at this time of night?"

 The ladies looked at one another, and smiled.

 "To Ranelagh?" cried Lord -, "yes, and I hope you are going too;
 for we
cannot possibly excuse these ladies."

 "I go to Ranelagh?-if I do, I'll be -."

 Everybody now stood up; and the stranger Lord, coming round to me,
 said, "You
go, I hope?"

 "No, my Lord, I believe not."

 "O you cannot, must not be so barbarous." And he took my hand,
 and ran on,
saying such fine speeches, and compliments, that I might almost have
supposed myself a goddess, and him a pagan paying me adoration. As
soon as I possibly could, I drew back my hand; but he frequently,
in the course of conversation, contrived to take it again, though it
was extremely disagreeable to me; and the more so, as I saw that Lord
Orville had his eyes fixed upon us, with a gravity of attention that
made me uneasy.

 And, surely, my dear Sir, it was a great liberty in this lord,
not withstanding his rank, to treat me so freely. As to Sir Clement,
he seemed in misery.

 They all endeavoured to prevail with the Captain to join the
 Ranelagh party;
and this lord told me, in a low voice, that it was tearing his heart
out to go without me.

During this conversation Mr. Lovel came forward, and assuming a look
of surprise, made me a bow, and inquired how I did, protesting upon
his honour, that he had not seen me before, or would have sooner paid
his respects to me.

 Though his politeness was evidently constrained, yet I was very glad
 to be
thus assured of having nothing more to fear from him.

 The Captain, far from listening to their persuasions of accompanying
 them to
Ranelagh, was quite in a passion at the proposal, and vowed he would
sooner go to the Blackhole in Calcutta.

"But," said Lord -, "if the ladies will take their tea at Ranelagh,
you may depend upon our seeing them safe home; for we shall be proud
of the honour of attending them."

 "May be so," said the Captain, "but I'll tell you what, if one
 of these
places ben't enough for them to-night, why to-morrow they shall go
to ne'er a one."

 We instantly declared ourselves ready to go home.

"It is not for yourselves that we petition," said Lord -. "But for us;
if you have any charity, you will not be so cruel as to deny us; we
only beg you to prolong our happiness for a few minutes,-the favour
is but a small one for you to grant, though so great a one for us
to receive."

 "To tell you a piece of my mind," said the Captain, surlily,
 "I think you
might as well not give the girls so much of this palaver; they'll take
it all for gospel. As to Moll, why she's well enough, but nothing
extraordinary; though, perhaps, you may persuade her that her pug
nose is all the fashion; and as to the other, why she's good white
and red to be sure; but what of that?-I'll warrant she'll moulder
away as fast as her neighbours."

 "Is there," cried Lord -, "another man in this place, who, seeing such
objects, could make such a speech?"

 "As to that there," returned the Captain, "I don't know whether
 there be or
no, and, to make free, I don't care; for I sha'n't go for to model
myself by any of these fair-weather chaps, who dare not so much
as say their souls are their own,-and, for aught I know, no more
they ben't. I'm almost as much ashamed of my countrymen as if I was
a Frenchman, and I believe in my heart there i'n't a pin to choose
between them; and, before long, we shall hear the very sailors talking
that lingo, and see never a swabber without a bag and a sword."

 "He, he, he!-well, 'pon honour," cried Mr. Lovel, "you gentlemen of
 the ocean
have a most severe way of judging."

 "Severe! 'fore George, that is impossible; for, to cut the matter
 short, the
men, as they call themselves, are no better than monkeys; and as to
the women, why they are mere dolls. So now you've got my opinion of
this subject; and I so wish you good night."

 The ladies, who were very impatient to be gone, made their courtsies,
 and
tripped away, followed by all the gentlemen of their party, except
the lord before mentioned, and, Lord Orville, who stayed to make
inquiries of Mrs.  Mirvan concerning our leaving town; and then
saying, with his usual politeness, something civil to each of us,
with a very grave air he quitted us.

 Lord - remained some minutes longer, which he spent in making a
 profusion of
compliments to me; by which he prevented my hearing distinctly what
Lord Orville said, to my great vexation, especially as he looked-I
thought so, at least-as if displeased at his particularity of behaviour
to me.

In going to an outward room, to wait for the carriage, I walked, and
could not possibly avoid it, between this nobleman and Sir Clement
Willoughby, and, when the servant said the coach stopped the way,
though the latter offered me his hand, which I should much have
preferred, this same lord, without any ceremony, took mine himself;
and Sir Clement, with a look extremely provoked, conducted Mrs. Mirvan.

 In all ranks and all stations of life, how strangely do characters and
manners differ! Lord Orville, with a politeness which knows no
intermission, and makes no distinction, is as unassuming and modest
as if he had never mixed with the great, and was totally ignorant
of every qualification he possesses; this other lord, though lavish
of compliments and fine speeches, seems to me an entire stranger to
real good-breeding; whoever strikes his fancy, engrosses his whole
attention. He is forward and bold; has an air of haughtiness towards
men, and a look of libertinism towards woman; and his conscious quality
seems to have given him a freedom in his way of speaking to either sex,
that is very little short of rudeness.

 When we returned home, we were all low-spirited. The evening's
 entertainment
had displeased the Captain; and his displeasure, I believe,
disconcerted us all.

 And here I thought to have concluded my letter; but, to my great
 surprise,
just now we had a visit from Lord Orville. He called, he said, to
pay his respects to us before we left town, and made many inquiries
concerning our return; and, when Mrs Mirvan told him we were going
into the country without any view of again quitting it, he expressed
concern in such terms-so polite, so flattering, so serious-that I
could hardly forbear being sorry for myself. Were I to go immediately
to Berry Hill, I am sure I should feel nothing but joy;-but, now we
are joined by this Captain, and Madame Duval, I must own I expect
very little pleasure at Howard Grove.

 Before Lord Orville went, Sir Clement Willoughby called. He was
 more grave
than I had ever seen him; and made several attempts to speak to me in
a low voice, and to assure me that his regret upon the occasion of
our journey was entirely upon my account. But I was not in spirits,
and could not bear to be teased by him. However, he has so well
paid his court to Captain Mirvan, that he gave him a very hearty
invitation to the Grove. At this he brightened,-and just then Lord
Orville took leave.

 No doubt but he was disgusted at this ill-timed, ill-bred partiality;
 for
surely it was very wrong to make an invitation before Lord Orville
in which he was not included! I was so much chagrined, that, as soon
as he went, I left the room; and I shall not go down stairs till Sir
Clement is gone.

Lord Orville cannot but observe his assiduous endeavours to ingratiate
himself into my favour; and does not this extravagant civility
of Captain Mirvan give him reason to suppose that it meets with
our general approbation? I cannot thimk upon this subject without
inexpressible uneasiness; and yet I can think of nothing else.

 Adieu, my dearest Sir. Pray write to me immediately. How many
 long letters
has this one short fortnight produced! More than I may probably
ever write again. I fear I shall have tired you with reading them;
but you will now have time to rest, for I shall find but little to
say in future.

 And now, most honoured Sir, with all the follies and imperfections
 which I
have thus faithfully recounted, can you, and with unabated kindness,
suffer me to sign myself   Your dutiful and most affectionate EVELINA?


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXIV MR VILLARS TO EVELINA

Berry Hill, April 22.


HOW much do I rejoice that I can again address my letters to Howard
Grove! My Evelina would have grieved had she known the anxiety of my
mind during her residence in the great world. My apprehensions have
been inexpressibly alarming; and your journal, at once exciting and
relieving my fears, has almost wholly occupied me since the time of
your dating it from London.

 Sir Clement Willoughby must be an artful designing man: I am extremely
irritated at his conduct. The passion he pretends for you has neither
sincerity nor honour; the manner and the opportunities he has chosen
to declare it, are bordering upon insult.

 His unworthy behaviour after the opera, convinces me, that, had
 not your
vehemence frightened him, Queen Ann Street would have been the last
place whither he would have ordered his chariot. O, my child, how
thankful am I for your escape! I need not now, I am sure, enlarge
upon your indiscretion and want of thought, in so hastily trusting
yourself with a man so little known to you, and whose gaiety and
flightiness should have put you on your guard.

 The nobleman you met at the Pantheon, bold and forward as you describe
 him to
be, gives me no apprehension; a man who appears so openly licentious,
and who makes his attack with so little regard to decorum, is one who,
to a mind such as my Evelina's, can never be seen but with the disgust
which his manners ought to excite.

 But Sir Clement, though he seeks occasion to give real offence,
 contrives to
avoid all appearance of intentional evil. He is far more dangerous,
because more artful: but I am happy to observe, that he seems to
have made no impression upon your heart; and therefore a very little
care and prudence may secure you from those designs which I fear he
has formed.

 Lord Orville appears to be of a better order of beings. His spirited
 conduct
to the meanly impertinent Lovel, and his anxiety for you after the
opera, prove him to be a man of sense and feeling. Doubtless he thought
there was much reason to tremble for your safety while exposed to
the power of Sir Clement; and he acted with a regard to real honour,
that will always incline me to think well of him, in so immediately
acquainting the Mirvan family with your situation. Many men of this
age, from a false and pretended delicacy to a friend, would have
quietly pursued their own affairs, and thought it more honourable
to leave an unsuspecting young creature to the mercy of a libertine,
than to risk his displeasure by taking measures for her security.

 Your evident concern at leaving London is very natural, and yet
 it afflicts
me. I ever dreaded your being too much pleased with a life of
dissipation, which youth and vivacity render but too alluring; and
I almost regret the consent for your journey, which I had not the
resolution to withhold.

 Alas, my child, the artfulness of your nature, and the simplicity
 of your
education, alike unfit you for the thorny paths of the great and
busy world.  The supposed obscurity of your birth and situation,
makes you liable to a thousand disagreeable adventures. Not only
my views, but my hopes for your future life, have ever centered in
the country. Shall I own to you, that, however I may  differ from
Captain Mirvan in other respects, yet my opinion of the town, its
manners, inhabitants, and diversions, is much upon upon a level with
his own? Indeed it is the general harbour of fraud and of folly, of
duplicity and of impertinence; and I wish few things more fervently,
than that you may have taken a lasting leave of it.

 Remember, however, that I only speak in regard to a public and
 dissipated
life; in private families we may doubtless find as much goodness,
honesty, and virtue, in London as in the country.

 If contented with a retired station, I still hope I shall live to
 see my
Evelina the ornament of her neighbourhood, and the pride and delight
of her family; and giving and receiving joy from such society as may
best deserve her affection, and employing herself in such useful and
innocent occupations as may secure and merit the tenderest love of her
friends, and the worthiest satisfaction of her own heart. Such are my
hopes, and such have been my expectations. Disappointment them not,
my beloved child; but cheer me with a few lines, that may assure me,
this one short fortnight spent in town has not undone the work of
seventeen years spent in the country. ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXV EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, April 25.

NO, my dear Sir, no: the work of seventeen years remains such as
it was, ever unworthy your time and your labour; but not more so
now-at least I hope not,-than before that fortnight which has so much
alarmed you.

 And yet I must confess, that I am not half so happy here at present
 as I was
ere I went to town: but the change is in the place, not in me. Captain
Mirvan and Madame Duval have ruined Howard Grove. The harmony that
reigned here is disturbed, our schemes are broken, our way of life is
altered, and our comfort is destroyed. But do not suppose London to
be the source of these evils; for, had our excursion been any where
else, so disagreeable an addition to our household must have caused
the same change at our return.

 I was sure you would be displeased with Sir Clement Willoughby,  and
therefore I am by no means surprised at what you say of him; but
for Lord Orville-I must own I had greatly feared that my weak and
imperfect account would not have procured him the good opinion which
he so well deserves, and which I am delighted to find you seem to
have of him. O, Sir, could I have done justice to the merit of which
I believe him posessed;-could I have painted him to you such as he
appeared to me;-then, indeed, you would have had some idea of the
claim which he has to your approbation!

 After the last letter which I wrote in town, nothing more passed
 previous to
our journey hither, except a very violent quarrel between Captain
Mirvan and Madame Duval. As the Captain intended to travel on
horseback, he had settled that we four females should make use of
his coach. Madame Duval did not come to Queen Ann Street till the
carriage had waited some time at the door; and then, attended by
Monsieur Du Bois, she made her appearance.

 The Captain, impatient to be gone, would not suffer them to enter
 the house,
but insisted that we should immediately get into the coach. We obeyed;
but were no sooner seated, than Madame Duval said, "Come, Monsieur
Du Bois, these girls can make very good room for you; sit closer,
children."

 Mrs. Mirvan looked quite confounded; and M. Du Bois, after making some
apologies about crowding us, actually got into the coach, on the side
with Miss Mirvan and me. But no sooner was he seated, than the Captain,
who had observed this transaction very quietly, walked up to the
coach door, saying, "What, neither with your leave, nor by your leave?"

 M. Du Bois seemed rather shocked, and began to make abundance of
 excuses: but
the Captain neither understood nor regarded him, and, very roughly,
said, "Look'ee, Monseer, this here may be a French fashion for aught I
know,-but give and take is fair in all nations; and so now, d'ye see,
I'll make bold to show you an English one."

And then, seizing his wrist, he made him jump out of the coach.

 M. Du Bois instantly put his hand upon his sword, and threatened to
resent this indignity. The Captain, holding up his stick, bid him draw
at his peril. Mrs. Mirvan, greatly alarmed, got out of the coach, and,
standing between them, intreated her husband to re-enter the house.

 "None of your clack!" cried he angrily; "what the D-l, do you
 suppose I
can't manage a Frenchman?"

 Meantime, Madame Duval called out to M. Du Bois, "Eh, laissez-le,
 mon ami, ne
le corrigez pas; c'est une villaine bete qui n'en vaut pas la peine."

"Monsieur le Capitaine," cried M. Du Bois, "voulez-vous bien ne
demander pardon?"

 "O ho, you demand pardon, do you?" said the Captain," I thought as
 much; I
thought you'd come to;-so you have lost your relish for an English
salutation, have you?" strutting up to him with looks of defiance.

 A crowd was now gathering, and Mrs. Mirvan again besought her husband
 to go
into the house.

 "Why, what a plague is the woman afraid of?-Did you ever know
 a Frenchman
that could not take an affront?-I warrant Monseer knows what he is
about;-don't you Monseer?"

 M. Du Bois, not understanding him, only said, "plait-il, Monsieur?"

 "No, nor dish me neither," answered the Captain; "but, be that as
 it may,
what signifies our parleying here? If you've any thing to propose,
speak at once; if not, why let us go on our journey without more ado."

 "Parbleu, je n'entends rien, moi!" cried M. Du Bois, shrugging up his
shoulders, and looking very dismal.

 Mrs. Mirvan then advanced to him, and said in French, that she was
 sure the
Captain had not any intention to affront him, and begged he would
desist from a dispute which could only be productive of mutual
misunderstanding, as neither of them knew the language of the other.

 This sensible remonstrance had the desired effect; and M. Du Bois,
 making a
bow to every one except the Captain, very wisely gave up the point,
and took leave.

 We then hoped to proceed quietly on our journey; but the turbulent
 Captain
would not yet permit us. He approached Madame Duval with an exulting
air, and said, "Why, how's this, Madame? what, has your champion
deserted you? why, I thought you told me, that you old gentlewomen
had it all your own way among them French sparks?"

 "As to that, Sir," answered she, "it's not of no consequence what you
thought; for a person who can behave in such a low way, may think
what he pleases for me, for I sha'n't mind."

 "Why then, Mistress, since you must needs make so free," cried he,
 "please to
tell me the reason you took the liberty for to ask any of your
followers into my coach without my leave? Answer me to that."

 "Why, then, pray, Sir," returned she, "tell me the reaon why you
 took the
liberty to treat the gentleman in such an unpolite way, as to take
and pull him neck and heels out? I'm sure he hadn't done nothing to
affront you, nor nobody else; and I don't know what great hurt he
would have done you, by just sitting still in the coach; he would
not have eat it."

 "What, do you think, then, that my horses have nothing to do but
 to carry
about your snivelling Frenchmen? If you do, Madam, I must make bold
to tell you, you are out, for I'll see 'em hang'd first."

 "More brute you, then! For they've never carried nobody half so good."

 "Why, look'ee, Madam, if you must needs provoke me, I'll tell you
 a piece of
my mind; you must know, I can see as far into a millstone as another
man; and so, if you thought for to fob me off with another one of your
smirking French puppies for a son-in-law, why you'll find yourself
in a hobble, that's all."

"Sir, you're a-but I won't say what;-but I protest I hadn't no such
a thought, no more hadn't Monsieur Du Bois."

 "My dear," said Mrs. Mirvan, "we shall be very late."

 "Well, well," answered he, "get away then; off with you as fast as
 you can,
it's high time. As to Molly, she's fine lady enough in all conscience;
I want none of your French chaps to make her worse."

 And so saying he mounted his horse and we drove off. And I could
 not but
think, with regret, of the different feelings we experienced upon
leaving London, to what had belonged to our entering it.

 During the journey Madame Duval was so very violent against the
 Captain, that
she obliged Mrs. Mirvan to tell her, that, when in her presence,
she must beg her to choose some other subject of discourse.

 We had a most affectionate reception from Lady Howard, whose
 kindness and
hospitality cannot fail of making every body happy who is disposed
so to be.

 Adieu, my dearest Sir. I hope, though I have hitherto neglected
 to mention
it, that you have always remembered me to whoever has made any inquiry
concerning me.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXVI EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, April 27.


O MY dear Sir, I now write in the greatest uneasiness! Madame Duval
has made a proposal which terrifies me to death, and which was as
unexpected as it is shocking.

 She had been employed for some hours this afternoon in reading
 letters from
London: and, just about tea-time, she sent for me into her room, and
said, with a look of great satisfaction, "Come here, child, I've got
some very good news to tell you: something that will surprise you,
I'll give you my word, for you ha'n't no notion of it."

I begged her to explain herself; and then, in terms which I cannot
repeat, she said she had been considering what a shame it was to
see me such a poor country, shame-faced thing, when I ought to be a
fine lady; and that she had long, and upon several occasions, blushed
for me, though she must own the fault was none of mine; for nothing
better could be expected from a girl who had been so immured. However,
she assured me she had, at length, hit upon a plan, which would make
quite another creature of me.

 I waited, without much impatience, to hear what this preface led to;
 but I
was soon awakened to more lively sensations, when she aquainted me,
that her intention was to prove my birthright, and to claim, by law,
the inheritance of my real family!

 It would be impossible for me to express my extreme consternation
 when she
thus unfolded her scheme. My surprise and terror were equally great;
I could say nothing: I heard her with a silence which I had not the
power to break.

 She then expatiated very warmly upon the advantages I should reap from
her plan; talked in a high style of my future grandeur; assured me
how heartily I should despise almost every body and every thing I had
hitherto seen; predicted my marrying into some family of the first
rank in the kingdom; and, finally, said I should spend a few months in
Paris, where my education and manners might receive their last polish.

 She enlarged also upon the delight she should have, in common
 with myself,
from mortifying the pride of certain people, and showing them that
she was not to be slighted with impunity.

 In the midst of this discourse, I was relieved by a summons to
 tea. Madame
Duval was in great spirits; but my emotion was too painful for
concealment, and every body enquired into the cause. I would fain
have waived the subject, but Madame Duval was determined to make it
public. She told tham that she had it in her head to make something
of me, and that they should soon call me by another name than that
of Anville; and yet that she was not going to have the child married
neither.

 I could not endure to hear her proceed, and was going to leave
 the room;
which, when Lady Howard perceived, she begged Madame Duval would
defer her intelligence to some other opportunity; but she was so
eager to communicate her scheme, that she could bear no delay;
and therefore they suffered me to go without opposition. Indeed,
whenever my situation or affairs are mentioned by Madame Duval,
she speaks of them with such bluntness and severity, that I cannot
be enjoined a task more cruel than to hear her.

 I was afterwards accquainted with some particulars of the conversation
 by
Miss Mirvan; who told me that Madame Duval informed them of her plan
wih the utmost complacency, and seemed to think herself very fortunate
in having suggested it; but, soon after, she accidentally betrayed,
that she had been instigated to the scheme by her relations the
Branghtons, whose letters, which she received today, first mentioned
the proposal. She declared that she would have nothing to do with
any roundabout ways, but go openly and instantly to law, in order to
prove my birth, real name, and title to the estate of my ancestors.

How impertinent and officious in these Branghtons, to interfere
thus in my concerns! You can hardly imagine what a disturbance this
plan has made in the family. The Captain, without enquiring into any
particulars of the affair, has peremptorily declared himself against
it, merely because it has been proposed by Madame Duval; and they
have battled the point together with great violence. Mrs. Mirvan says,
she will not even think, till she hears your opinion. But Lady Howard,
to my great surprise, openly avows her appprobation of Madame Duval's
intention; however, she will write her reasons and sentiments upon
the subject to you herself.

 As to Miss Mirvan, she is my second self, and neither hopes nor
 fears but as
I do. And as to me,-I know not what to say, nor even what to wish; I
have often thought my fate peculiarly cruel, to have but one parent,
and from that one to be banished for ever;-while, on the other side,
I have but too well known and felt the propriety of the separation. And
yet, you may much better imagine, than I can express, the internal
anguish which sometimes oppresses my heart, when I reflect upon the
strange indifference that must occasion a father never to make the
least enquiry after the health, the welfare, or even the life of
his child!

 O Sir, to me the loss is nothing!-greatly, sweetly, and most
 benevolently
have you guarded me from feeling it; but for him, I grieve indeed!-I
must be divested, not merely of all filial piety, but of all humanity,
could I ever think upon this subject, and not be wounded to the soul.

 Again I must repeat, I know not what to wish; think for me, therefore,
my dearest Sir, and suffer my doubting mind, that knows not which way
to direct its hopes, to be guided by your wisdom and unerring counsel.
EVELINA.



</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXVII LADY HOWARD TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS


Howard Grove.


Dear Sir,


I CANNOT give a greater proof of the high opinion I have of your
candour, than by the liberty I am now going to take, of presuming to
offer you advice, upon a subject concerning which you have so just a
claim to act for yourself; but I know you have too unaffected a love
of justice, to be partially tenacious of your own judgment.

 Madame Duval has been proposing a scheme which has put us all in
 commotion,
and against which, at first, in common with the rest of my family,
I exclaimed: but, upon more mature consideration, I own my objections
have almost wholly vanished.

This scheme is no other than to commence a lawsuit with Sir John
Belmont, to prove the validity of his marriage with Miss Evelyn; the
necessary consequence of which proof will be, securing his fortune
and estate to his daughter.

 And why, my dear Sir, should not this be? I know that, upon first
 hearing,
such a plan conveys ideas that must shock you; but I know, too,
that your mind is superior to being governed by prejudices, or
to opposing any important cause on account of a few disagreeable
attendant circumstances.

 Your lovely charge, now first entering into life, has merit which
 ought not
to be buried in obscurity. She seems born for an ornament to the world.
Nature has been bountiful to her of whatever she had to bestow; and
the peculiar attention you have given to her education, has formed her
mind to a degree of excellence, that in one so young I have scarce
ever seen equalled.  Fortune alone has hitherto been sparing of her
gifts; and she, too, now opens the way which leads to all that is
left to wish for her.

 What your reasons may have been, my good Sir, for so carefully
 concealing the
birth, name, and pretensions of this amiable girl, and forbearing to
make any claim upon Sir John Belmont, I am totally a stranger to; but,
without knowing, I respect them, from the high opinion that I have
of your character and judgment: but I hope they are not insuperable;
for I cannot but think, that it was never designed for one who seems
meant to grace the world, to have her life devoted to retirement.

 Surely Sir John Belmont, wretch as he has shown himself, could never
 see his
accomplished daughter, and not be proud to own her, and eager to
secure her the inheritance of his fortune. The admiration she met
with in town, though merely the effect of her external attractions,
was such, that Mrs.  Mirvan assures me, she would have had the most
splendid offers, had there not seemed to be some mystery in regard
to her birth, which, she was well informed was assiduously, though
vainly, endeavoured to be discovered.

Can it be right, my dear Sir, that this promising young creature
should be deprived of the fortune and rank of life to which she is
lawfully entitled, and which you have prepared her to support and to
use so nobly? To despise riches may, indeed, be philosophic; but to
dispense them worthily must, surely, be more beneficial to mankind.

 Perhaps a few years, or indeed a much shorter time, may make this
scheme impracticable: Sir John, tho' yet young, leads a life too
dissipated for long duration; and when too late, we may regret that
something was not sooner done: for it will be next to impossible, after
he is gone, to settle or prove anything with his heirs and executors.

Pardon the earnestness with which I write my sense of this affair;
but your charming ward has made me so warmly her friend, that I cannot
be indifferent upon a subject of such importance to her future life.


Adieu, my dear Sir;-send me speedily an answer to this remonstrance,
and believe me to be, -c.  M. HOWARD.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXVIII MR VILLARS TO LADY HOWARD

Berry Hill, May 2.


YOUR letter, Madam, has opened a source of anxiety, to which I look
forward with dread, and which, to see closed, I scarcely dare expect. I
am unwilling to oppose my opinion to that of your Ladyship; nor,
indeed, can I, but by arguments which I believe will rather rank me
as a hermit ignorant of the world, and fit only for my cell, than as
a proper guardian, in an age such as this, for an accomplished young
woman. Yet, thus called upon, it behoves me to explain, and endeavour
to vindicate, the reasons by which I have been hitherto guided.


The mother of this dear child,-who was led to destruction by her own
imprudence, the hardness of heart of Madame Duval, and the villany of
Sir John Belmont,-was once, what her daughter is now, the best beloved
of my heart: and her memory, so long as my own holds, I shall love,
mourn and honour! On the fatal day that her gentle soul left its
mansion, and not many hours ere she ceased to breathe, I solemnly
plighted my faith, That her child if it lived, should know no father
but myself, or her acknowledged husband.


You cannot, Madam, suppose that I found much difficulty in adhering
to this promise, and forbearing to make any claim upon Sir John
Belmont. Could I feel an affection the most paternal for this poor
sufferer, and not abominate her destroyer? Could I wish to deliver to
him, who had so basely betrayed the mother, the helpless and innocent
offspring, who, born in so much sorrow, seemed entitled to all the
compassionate tenderness of pity?


For many years, the name alone of that man, accidentally spoken in my
hearing, almost divested me of my Christianity, and scarce could I
forbear to execrate him. Yet I sought not, neither did I desire, to
deprive him of his child, had he with any appearance of contrition,
or, indeed, of humanity, endeavoured to become less unworthy such a
blessing;-but he is a stranger to all parental feelings, and has with
a savage insensibility, forborne to enquire even into the existence
of this sweet orphan, though the situation of his injured wife was
but too well known to him.


You wish to be acquainted with my intentions.-I must acknowledge
they were such as I now perceive would not be honoured with your
Ladyship's approbation; for though I have sometimes thought of
presenting Evelina to her father, and demanding the justice which
is her due, yet, at other times, I have both disdained and feared
the application; disdained lest it should be refused; and feared,
lest it should be accepted!


Lady Belmont, who was firmly persuaded of her approaching dissolution,
frequently and earnestly besought me, that if her infant was a female,
I would not abandon her to the direction of a man so wholly unfit to
take the charge of her education: but, should she be importunately
demanded, that I would retire with her abroad, and carefully conceal
her from Sir John, till some apparent change in his sentiments and
conduct should announce him less improper for such a trust. And
often would she say, "Should the poor babe have any feelings
correspondent with its mother's, it will have no want while under
your protection." Alas! she had no sooner quitted it herself, than
she was plunged into a gulph of misery, that swallowed up her peace,
reputation, and life.


During the childhood of Evelina, I suggested a thousand plans for the
security of her birth-right;-but I as many times rejected them. I
was in a perpetual conflict, between the desire that she should
have justice done her, and the apprehension that, while I improved
her fortune, I should endanger her mind.  However, as her character
began to be formed, and her disposition to be displayed, my perplexity
abated; the road before me seemed less thorny and intricate, and I
thought I could perceive the right path from the wrong: for when I
observed the artless openness the ingenuous simplicity of her nature;
when I saw that her guileless and innocent soul fancied all the world
to be pure and disinterested as herself, and that her heart was open
to every impression with which love, pity, or art might assail it;-then
did I flatter myself, that to follow my own inclination, and to secure
her welfare, was the same thing; since, to expose her to the snares and
dangers inevitably encircling a house of which the master is dissipated
and unprincipled, without the guidance of a mother, or any prudent and
sensible female, seemed to me no less than suffering her to stumble
into some dreadful pit, when the sun is in its meridian. My plan,
therefore, was not merely to educate and to cherish her as my own, but
to adopt her the heiress of my small fortune, and to bestow her upon
some worthy man, with whom she might spend her days in tranquility,
cheerfulness, and good-humour, untainted by vice, folly, or ambition.


So much for the time past. Such have been the motives by which I have
been governed; and I hope they will be allowed not merely to account
for, but also to justify, the conduct which has resulted from them. It
now remains to speak of the time to come.


And here, indeed, I am sensible of difficulties which I almost despair
of surmounting according to my wishes. I pay the highest deference to
your Ladyship's opinion, which it is extremely painful to me not to
concur with;-yet I am so well acquainted with your goodness, that I
presume to hope it would not be absolutely impossible for me to offer
such arguments as might lead you to think with me, that this young
creature's chance of happiness seems less doubtful in retirement, than
it would be in the gay and dissipated world. But why should I perplex
your Ladyship with reasoning that can turn to so little account? for,
alas! what arguments, what persuasions, can I make use of, with any
prospect of success, to such a woman as Madame Duval? Her character
and the violence of her disposition, intimidate me from making the
attempt: she is too ignorant for instruction, too obstinate for
intreaty, and too weak for reason.


I will not, therefore, enter into a contest from which I have nothing
to expect but altercation and impertinence. As soon would I discuss the
effect of sound with the deaf, or the nature of colours with the blind,
as aim at illuminating with conviction a mind so warped by prejudice,
so much the slave of unruly and illiberal passions. Unused as she
is to control, persuasion would but harden, and opposition incense
her. I yield, therefore, to the necessity which compels my reluctant
acquiescence; and shall now turn all my thoughts upon considering
of such methods for the conducting this enterprise, as may be most
conducive to the happiness of my child and least liable to wound
her sensibility.


The law-suit, therefore, I wholly and absolutely disapprove.


Will you, my dear Madam, forgive the freedom of an old man, if I
own myself greatly surprised, that you could, even for a moment,
listen to a plan so violent, so public, so totally repugnant to all
female delicacy? I am satisfied your Ladyship has not weighed this
project. There was a time, indeed, when to assert the innocence
of Lady Belmont, and to blazon to the world the wrongs, not guilt,
by which she suffered, I proposed, nay attempted, a similar plan:
but then all assistance and encouragement was denied. How cruel to
the remembrance I bear of her woes is this tardy resentment of Madame
Duval! She was deaf to the voice of Nature, though she has hearkened
to that of Ambition.


Never can I consent to have this dear and timid girl brought forward to
the notice of the world by such a method; a method which will subject
her to all the impertinence of curiosity, the sneers of conjecture, and
the stings of ridicule. And for what?-the attainment of wealth which
she does not want, and the gratification of vanity which she does not
feel. A child to appear against a father!-no, Madam, old and infirm
as I am, I would even yet sooner convey her myself to some remote
part of the world, though I were sure of dying in the expedition.


Far different had been the motives which would have stimulated
her unhappy mother to such a proceeding; all her felicity in this
world was irretrievably lost; her life was become a burthen to her;
and her fair fame, which she had early been taught to prize above
all other things, had received a mortal wound: therefore, to clear
her own honour, and to secure from blemish the birth of her child,
was all the good which fortune had reserved herself the power of
bestowing. But even this last consolation was withheld from her!


Let milder measures be adopted: and-since it must be so-let application
be made to Sir John Belmont, but as to a law-suit, I hope, upon this
subject, never more to hear it mentioned.


With Madame Duval, all pleas of delicacy would be ineffectual;
her scheme must be opposed by arguments better suited to her
understanding. I will not, therefore, talk of its impropriety, but
endeavour to prove its inutility.  Have the goodness, then, to tell
her, that her own intentions would be frustrated by her plan; since,
should the lawsuit be commenced, and even should the cause be gained,
Sir John Belmont would still have it in his power, and, if irritated,
no doubt in his inclination, to cut off her grand-daughter with
a shilling.


She cannot do better herself than to remain quiet and inactive
in the affair: the long and mutual animosity between her and Sir
John will make her interference merely productive of debates and
ill-will. Neither would I have Evelina appear till summoned. And as
to myself, I must wholly decline acting; though I will, with unwearied
zeal, devote all my thoughts to giving counsel: but, in truth, I have
neither inclination nor spirits adequate to engaging personally with
this man.


My opinion is, that he would pay more respect to a letter from your
Ladyship upon this subject, than from any other person. I, therefore,
advise and hope, that you will yourself take the trouble of writing
to him, in order to open the affair. When he shall be inclined to see
Evelina, I have for him a posthumous letter, which his much injured
lady left to be presented to him, if ever such a meeting should
take place.


The views of the Branghtons, in suggesting this scheme, are obviously
interested. They hope, by securing to Evelina the fortune of her
father, to induce Madame Duval to settle her own upon themselves. In
this, however, they would probably be mistaken; for little minds have
ever a propensity to bestow their wealth upon those who are already
in affluence; and, therefore, the less her grandchild requires her
assistance, the more gladly she will give it.


I have but one thing more to add, from which, however, I can by no
means recede: my word so solemnly given to Lady Belmont, that her
child should never be owned but with her self, must be inviolably
adhered to.  I am, dear Madam, with great respect, Your Ladyship's
most obedient servant, ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXIX MR. VILLARS TO EVELINA

Berry Hill, May 2.


HOW sincerely do I sympathise in the uneasiness and concern which
my beloved Evelina has so much reason to feel! The cruel scheme in
agitation is equally repugnant to my judgment and my inclination;-yet
to oppose it seems impracticable. To follow the dictates of my own
heart, I should instantly recall you to myself, and never more consent
to your being separated from me; but the manners and opinion of the
world demand a different conduct. Hope, however, for the best, and be
satisfied you shall meet with no indignity; if you are not received
into your own family as you ought to be, and with the distinction that
is your due, you shall leave it for ever; and once again restored to
my protection, secure your own tranquillity, and make, as you have
hitherto done, all the happiness of my life.  ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXX EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS

Howard Grove, May 6.


THE die is thrown, and I attend the event in trembling! Lady Howard
has written to Paris, and sent her letter to town, to be forwarded in
the ambassador's packet; and, in less than a fortnight, therefore, she
expects an answer. O, Sir, with what anxious impatience shall I wait
its arrival! upon it seems to depend the fate of my future life. My
solicitude is so great, and my suspense so painful, that I cannot
rest a moment in peace, or turn my thoughts into any other channel.


Deeply interested as I now am in the event, most sincerely do I
regret that the plan was ever proposed. Methinks it cannot end to
my satisfaction: for either I must be torn from the arms of my more
than father,-or I must have the misery of being finally convinced,
that I am cruelly rejected by him who has the natural claim to that
dear title, which to write, mention, or think of, fills my whole soul
with filial tenderness.


The subject is discussed here eternally. Captain Mirvan and Madame
Duval, as usual, quarrel whenever it is started: but I am so wholly
engrossed by my own reflections, that I cannot even listen to them. My
imagination changes the scene perpetually: one moment, I am embraced
by a kind and relenting parent, who takes me to that heart from
which I have hitherto been banished, and supplicates, through me,
peace and forgiveness from the ashes of my mother!-at another, he
regards me with detestation, considers me as the living image of an
injured saint, and repulses me with horror!-But I will not afflict
you with the melancholy phantasms of my brain; I will endeavour to
compose my mind to a more tranquil state, and forbear to write again
till I have in some measure succeeded.


May Heaven bless you, my dearest Sir! and long, long may it continue
you on earth, to bless Your grateful EVELINA


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER XXXI LADY HOWARD TO SIR JOHN BELMONT, BART

Howard Grove, May 5.


Sir,

YOU will, doubtless, be surprised at receiving a letter from one who
had for so short a period the honour of your acquaintance, and that
at so great a distance of time; but the motive which has induced me to
take this liberty is of so delicate a nature, that were I to commence
making apologies for my officiousness, I fear my letter would be too
long for your patience.


You have, probably, already conjectured the subject upon which I
mean to treat. My regard for Mr. Evelyn, and his amiable daughter,
was well known to you: nor can I ever cease to be interested in
whatever belongs to their memory or family.


I must own myself somewhat distressed in what manner to introduce the
purport of my writing; yet as I think that, in affairs of this kind,
frankness is the first requisite to a good understanding between
the parties concerned, I will neither torment you nor myself with
punctilious ceremonies, but proceed instantly and openly to the
business which occasions my giving you this trouble.


I presume, Sir, it would be superfluous to tell you, that your child
resides still in Dorsetshire, and is still under the protection
of the Reverend Mr.  Villars, in whose house she was born: for,
though no enquiries concerning her have reached his ears, or mine,
I can never suppose it possible you have forborne to make them. It
only remains, therefore, to tell you, that your daughter is now
grown up; that she has been educated with the utmost care, and the
utmost success; and that she is now a most deserving, accomplished,
and amiable young woman.


Whatever may be your view for her future destination in life, it seems
time to declare it. She is greatly admired, and, I doubt not, will
be very much sought after: it is proper, therefore, that her future
expectations, and your pleasure concerning her, should be made known.


Believe me, Sir, she merits your utmost attention and regard. You
could not see and know her, and remain unmoved by those sensations of
affection which belong to so near and tender a relationship. She is
the lovely resemblance of her lovely mother;-pardon, Sir, the liberty
I take in mentioning that unfortunate lady; but I think it behoves
me, upon this occasion, to shew the esteem I felt for her: allow me,
therefore, to say, and be not offended at my freedom, that the memory
of that excellent lady has but too long remained under the aspersions
of calumny; surely it is time to vindicate her fame;-and how can that
be done in a manner more eligible, more grateful to her friends, or
more honourable to yourself, than by openly receiving as your child,
the daughter of the late Lady Belmont?


The venerable man who has had the care of her education, deserves
your warmest acknowledgments, for the unremitting pains he has taken,
and the attention he has shewn in the discharge of his trust. Indeed
she has been peculiarly fortunate in meeting with such a friend and
guardian; a more worthy man, or one whose character seems nearer to
perfection, does not exist.


Permit me to assure you, Sir, she will amply repay whatever regard and
favour you may hereafter shew her, by the comfort and happiness you
cannot fail to find in her affection and duty. To be owned properly
by you is the first wish of her heart; and, I am sure, that to merit
your approbation will be the first study of her life.


I fear that you will think this address impertinent; but I must rest
upon the goodness of my intention to plead my excuse.  I am, Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant, M. HOWARD.


</CHAPTER>
