<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXVII. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 
 Clifton, Oct. 7th.


YOU will see, my dear Sir, that I was mistaken in supposing I should
write no more from this place, where my residence now seems more
uncertain than ever.

This morning, during breakfast, Lord Orville took an opportunity to
beg me, in a low voice, to allow him a moment's conversation before
I left Clifton; "May I hope," added he, "that you will stroll into
the garden after breakfast?"

I made no answer, but I believe my looks gave no denial; for, indeed,
I much wished to be satisfied concerning the letter. The moment,
therefore, that I could quit the parlour, I ran up stairs for my
calash; but, before I reached my room, Mrs. Selwyn called after me,
"If you are going to walk, Miss Anville, be so good as to bid Jenny
bring down my hat, and I'll accompany you."

Very much disconcerted, I turned into the drawing-room, without making
any answer, and there I hoped to wait unseen, till she had otherwise
disposed of herself. But, in a few minutes, the door opened, and Sir
Clement Willoughby entered.

Starting at the sight of him, in rising hastily, I let drop the letter
which I had brought for Lord Orville's inspection, and, before I could
recover it, Sir Clement, springing forward, had it in his hand. He
was just presenting it to me, and, at the same time, enquiring after
my health, when the signature caught his eye, and he read aloud,
"Orville."

I endeavoured, eagerly, to snatch it from him, but he would not permit
me; and, holding it fast, in a passionate manner exclaimed, "Good God,
Miss Anville, is it possible you can value such a letter as this?"

The question surprised and confounded me, and I was too much ashamed to
answer him; but, finding he made an attempt to secure it, I prevented
him, and vehemently demanded him to return it.


"Tell me first," said he, holding it above my reach, "tell me if you
have since received any more letters from the same person?"


"No, indeed," cried I, "never!"


"And will you also, sweetest of women, promise that you never will
receive any more? Say that, and you will make me the happiest of men."


"Sir Clement," cried I, greatly confused, "pray give me the letter."


"And will you not first satisfy my doubts?-will you not relieve me
from the torture of the most distracting suspense?-tell me but that
the detested Orville has written to you no more!"


"Sir Clement," cried I, angrily, "you have no right to make any
conditions,-so pray give me the letter directly."


"Why such solicitude about this hateful letter? can it possibly
deserve your eagerness? tell me, with truth, with sincerity tell me,
does it really merit the least anxiety?"


"No matter, Sir," cried I, in great perplexity, "the letter is mine,
and therefore-"


"I must conclude, then," said he, "that the letter deserves your
utmost contempt,-but that the name of Orville is sufficient to make
you prize it."


"Sir Clement," cried I, colouring, "you are quite-you are very much-the
letter is not-"


"O, Miss Anville," cried he, "you blush!-you stammer!-Great Heaven! it
is then all as I feared!"


"I know not," cried I, half-frightened, "what you mean; but I beseech
you to give me the letter, and to compose yourself."


"The letter," cried he, gnashing his teeth, "you shall never see
more! You ought to have burnt it the moment you had read it!" And in
an instant he tore it into a thousand pieces.


Alarmed at a fury so indecently outrageous, I would have run out of
the room; but he caught hold of my gown, and cried, "Not yet, not yet
must you go! I am but half-mad yet, and you must stay to finish your
work. Tell me, therefore, does Orville know your fatal partiality?-Say
yes," added he, trembling with passion, "and I will fly you for ever!"


"For Heaven's sake, Sir Clement," cried I, "release me!-if you do not,
you will force me to call for help."


"Call then," cried he, "inexorable and most unfeeling girl; call,
if you please, and bid all the world witness your triumph;-but could
ten worlds obey your call, I would not part from you till you had
answered me. Tell me, then, does Orville know you love him?"


At any other time, an enquiry so gross would have given me
inexpressible confusion; but now, the wildness of his manner terrified
me, and I only said, "Whatever you wish to know, Sir Clement, I will
tell you another time; but, for the present, I entreat you to let
me go!"


"Enough," cried he, "I understand you!-the art of Orville has
prevailed;-cold, inanimate, phlegmatic as he is, you have rendered
him the most envied of men!-One thing more, and I have done:-Will he
marry you?"


What a question! my cheeks glowed with indignation, and I felt too
proud to make any answer.


"I see, I see how it is," cried he, after a short pause, "and I
find I am undone for ever!" Then, letting loose my gown, he put his
hand to his forehead, and walked up and down the room in a hasty and
agitated manner.


Though now at liberty to go, I had not the courage to leave him:
for his evident distress excited all my compassion. And this was our
situation, when Lady Louisa, Mr Coverley, and Mrs. Beaumont entered
the room.


"Sir Clement Willoughby," said the latter, "I beg your pardon for
making you wait so long, but-"


She had not time for another word; Sir Clement, too much disordered to
know or care what he did, snatched up his hat, and, brushing hastily
past her, flew down stairs, and out of the house.


And with him went my sincerest pity, though I earnestly hope I shall
see him no more. But what, my dear Sir, am I to conclude from his
strange speeches concerning the letter? Does it not seem as if he was
himself the author of it? How else should he be so well acquainted
with the contempt it merits?  Neither do I know another human being
who could serve any interest by such a deception. I remember, too,
that just as I had given my own letter to the maid, Sir Clement came
into the shop: probably he prevailed upon her, by some bribery, to
give it to him; and afterwards, by the same means, to deliver to me an
answer of his own writing. Indeed I can in no other manner account for
this affair. Oh, Sir Clement, were you not yourself unhappy, I know not
how I could pardon an artifice that has caused me so much uneasiness!


His abrupt departure occasioned a kind of general consternation.


"Very extraordinary behavior this!" cried Mrs. Beaumont.


"Egad," said Mr. Coverley, "the baronet has a mind to tip us a touch
of the heroics this morning!"


"I declare," cried Miss Louisa, "I never saw any thing so monstrous
in my life! it's quite abominable;-I fancy the man's mad;-I'm sure
he has given me a shocking fright!"


Soon after, Mrs. Selwyn came up stairs with Lord Merton. The former,
advancing hastily to me, said, "Miss Anville, have you an almanack?"


"Me?-no, Madam."


"Who has one, then?"


"Egad," cried Mr. Coverley, "I never bought one in my life; it would
make me quite melancholy to have such a time-keeper in my pocket. I
would as soon walk all day before an hour-glass."


"You are in the right," said Mrs. Selwyn, "not to watch time, lest
you should be betrayed, unawares, into reflecting how you employ it."


"Egad, Ma'am," cried he, "if Time thought no more of me than I do of
Time, I believe I should bid defiance, for one while, to old age and
wrinkles; for deuce take me, if ever I think about it at all."


"Pray, Mr. Coverley," said Mrs. Selwyn, "why do you think it necessary
to tell me this so often?"


"Often!" repeated he; "Egad, Madam, I don't know why I said it now;-but
I'm sure I can't recollect that ever I owned as much before."


"Owned it before!" cried she, "why, my dear Sir, you own it all day
long; for every word, every look, every action proclaims it."


I now not if he understood the full severity of her satire, but he
only turned off with a laugh: and she then applied to Mr. Lovel,
and asked if  he had an almanack?


Mr. Lovel, who always looks alarmed when she addresses him, with
some hesitation answered, "I assure you, Ma'am, I have no manner of
antipathy to an almanack,-none in the least,-I assure you;-I dare
say I have four or five."


"Four or five!-pray, may I ask what use you make of so many?"


"Use!-really, Ma'am, as to that,-I don't make any particular use of
them; but one must have them, to tell one the day of the month:-I'm
sure, else I should never keep it in my head."


"And does your time pass so smoothly unmarked, that, without an
almanack, you could not distinguish one day from another?"


"Really, Ma'am," cried he, colouring, "I don't see anything so
very particular in having a few almanacks; other people have them,
I believe, as well as me."


"Don't be offended," cried she, "I have but made a little
digression. All I want to know is, the state of the moon;-for if it
is at the full, I shall be saved a world of conjectures, and know at
once to what cause to attribute the inconsistencies I have witnessed
this morning. In the first place, I heard Lord Orville excuse himself
from going out, because he had business of importance to transact at
home;-yet have I seen him sauntering alone in the garden this half
hour. Miss Anville, on the other hand, I invited to walk out with
me; and, after seeking her every where round the house, I find her
quietly seated in the drawing-room. And, but a few minutes since,
Sir Clement Willoughby, with even more than his usual politeness,
told me he was come to spend the morning here;-when, just now,
I met him flying down stairs, as if pursued by the Furies; and far
from repeating his compliments, or making any excuse, he did not even
answer a question I asked him, but rushed past me, with the rapidity
of a thief from a bailiff!"


"I protest," said Mrs. Beaumont, "I can't think what he meant; such
rudeness, from a man of any family, is quite incomprehensible."


"My Lord," cried Lady Louisa to Lord Merton, "do you know he did the
same by me?-I was just going to ask him what was the matter; but he
ran past me so quick, that I declare he quite dazzled my eyes. You
can't think, my Lord, how he frightened me; I dare say I look as
pale-don't I look very pale, my Lord?"


"Your Ladyship," said Mr. Lovel, "so well becomes the lilies, that
the roses might blush to see themselves so excelled."


"Pray, Mr. Lovel," said Mrs. Selwyn," if the roses should blush,
how would you find it out?"


"Egad," cried Mr. Coverley, "I suppose they must blush, as the saying
is, like a blue dog,-for they are red already."


"Prithee, Jack," said Lord Merton, "don't you pretend to talk about
blushes, that never knew what they were in your life."


"My Lord," said Mrs. Selwyn, "if experience alone can justify
mentioning them, what an admirable treatise upon the subject may we
not expect from your Lordship!"


"O, pray, Ma'am," answered he, "stick to Jack Coverley,-he's your only
man; for my part, I confess I have a mortal aversion to arguments."


"O, fie, my Lord," cried Mrs. Selwyn, "a senator of the nation! a
member of the noblest parliament in the world!-and yet neglect the
art of oratory!"


"Why, faith, my Lord," said Mr. Lovel, "I think, in general, your House
is not much addicted to study; we of the Lower House have indubitably
most application; and, if I did not speak before a superior power
(bowing to Lord Merton) I should presume to add, we have likewise
the most able speakers."


"Mr. Lovel," said Mrs. Selwyn, "you deserve immortality for that
discovery!  But for this observation, and the confession of Lord
Merton, I protest that I should have supposed that a peer of the realm,
and an able logician, were synonymous terms."


Lord Merton, turning upon his heel, asked Lady Louisa if she would
take the air before dinner?


"Really," answered she, "I don't know;-I'm afraid it's monstrous
hot; besides (putting her hand to her forehead) I an't half well;
it's quite horrid to have such weak nerves!-the least thing in the
world discomposes me: I declare, that man's oddness has given me such
a shock,-I don't know when I shall recover from it. But I'm a sad,
weak creature;-don't you think I am, my Lord?"


"O, by no means," answered he, "your Ladyship is merely delicate,-and
devil take me if ever I had the least passion for an Amazon."


"I have the honour to be quite of your Lordship's opinion," said
Mr. Lovel, looking maliciously at Mrs. Selwyn; "for I have an
insuperable aversion to strength, either of body or mind, in a female."


"Faith, and so have I," said Mr. Coverley; "for egad, I'd as soon
see a woman chop wood, as hear her chop logic."


"So would every man in his senses," said Lord Merton, "for a
woman wants nothing to recommend her but beauty and good-nature; in
everything else she is either impertinent or unnatural. For my part,
deuce take me if ever I wish to hear a word of sense from a woman as
long as I live!"


"It has always been agreed," said Mrs. Selwyn, looking round her with
the utmost contempt, "that no man ought to be connected with a woman
whose understanding is superior to his own. Now I very much fear,
that to accommodate all this good company, according to such a rule,
would be utterly impracticable, unless we should choose subjects from
Swift's hospital of idiots."


How many enemies, my dear Sir, does this unbounded severity
excite! Lord Merton, however, only whistled; Mr. Coverley sang; and
Mr. Lovel, after biting his lips, said "'Pon honour, that lady-if
she was not a lady-I should be half tempted to observe,-that there
is something,-in such severity,-that is rather, I must say,-rather
oddish."


Just then a servant brought Lady Louisa a note upon a waiter, which
is a ceremony always used to her Ladyship; and I took the opportunity
of this interruption to the conversation to steal out of the room.


I went immediately to the parlour, which I found quite empty; for I
did not dare walk in the garden, after what Mrs. Selwyn had said.

In a few minutes a servant announced Mr. Macartney; saying, as he
entered the room, that he would acquaint Lord Orville he was there.


Mr. Macartney rejoiced much at finding me alone. He told me he had
taken the liberty to enquire for Lord Orville, by way of pretext for
coming to the house.


I then very eagerly enquired if he had seen his father.


"I have, Madam," said he, "and the generous compassion you have shown
made me hasten to acquaint you, that, upon reading my unhappy mother's
letter, he did not hesitate to acknowledge me."


"Good God," cried I, with no little emotion, "how similar are our
circumstances! And did he receive you kindly?"


"I could not, Madam, expect that he would; the cruel, transaction,
which obliged me to fly to Paris, was recent in his memory."


"And,-have you seen the young lady?"


"No, Madam," said he, mournfully, "I was forbid her sight."


"Forbid her sight!-and why?"


"Partly, perhaps, from prudence,-and partly from the remains of a
resentment which will not easily subside. I only requested leave
to acquaint her with my relationship, and to be allowed to call her
sister;-but it was denied me!  'You have no sister,' said Sir John,
'you must forget her existence.' Hard and vain command!"


"You have-you have a sister!" cried I, from an impulse of pity, which
I could not repress; "a sister who is most warmly interested in your
welfare, and who only wants opportunity to manifest her friendship
and regard."


"Gracious Heaven!" cried he, "what does Miss Anville mean?"


"Anville," said I, "is not my real name; Sir John Belmont is my
father,-he is your's,-and I am your sister!-You see, therefore, the
claim we mutually have to each other's regard; we are not merely bound
by the ties of friendship, but by those of blood. I feel for you,
already, all the affection of a sister; I felt it, indeed, before
I knew I was one.-Why, my dear brother, do you not speak?-do you
hesitate to acknowledge me?"


"I am so lost in astonishment," cried he, "that I know not if I
hear right!"-


"I have, then, found a brother," cried I, holding out my hand,
"and he will not own me!"


"Own you!-Oh, Madam," cried he, accepting my offered hand, "is it
indeed possible you can own me? -a poor, wretched adventurer! who so
lately had no support but from your generosity?-whom your benevolence
snatched from utter destruction?-Can you,-Oh, Madam, can you, indeed,
and without a blush, condescend to own such an outcast for a brother?"


"Oh, forbear, forbear," cried I, "is this language proper for a
sister? are we not reciprocally bound to each other?-Will you not
suffer me to expect from you all the good offices in your power?-But
tell me, where is our father at present?"


"At the Hot-Wells, Madam; he arrived there yesterday morning."


I would have proceeded with further questions, but the entrance of
Lord Orville prevented me. The moment he saw us, he started, and
would have retreated; but, drawing my hand from Mr. Macartney's,
I begged him to come in.


For a few moments we were all silent, and, I believe, all in equal
confusion.  Mr. Macartney, however, recollecting himself said "I hope
your Lordship will forgive the liberty I have taken in making use of
your name."


Lord Orville, rather coldly, bowed, but said nothing.


Again we were all silent, and then Mr. Macartney took leave.


"I fancy," said Lord Orville, when he was gone, "I have shortened Mr.
Macartney's visit?"


"No, my Lord, not at all."


"I had presumed," said he, with some hesitation, "I should have seen
Miss Anville in the garden;-but I knew not she was so much better
engaged."


Before I could answer, a servant came to tell me the chaise was ready,
and that Mrs. Selwyn was enquiring for me.


"I will wait on her immediately," cried I, and away I was running;
but Lord Orville, stopping me, said, with great emotion, "Is it thus,
Miss Anville, you leave me?"


"My Lord," cried I, "how can I help it?-perhaps, soon, some better
opportunity may offer-"


"Good Heaven!" cried he, "do you take me for a Stoic! what better
opportunity may I hope for?-is not the chaise come?-are you not
going? have you even deigned to tell me whither?"


"My journey, my Lord, will now be deferred. Mr. Macartney has brought
me intelligence which renders it at present unnecessary."


"Mr. Macartney," said he, gravely, "seems to have great influence;-yet
he is a very young counsellor."


"Is it possible, my Lord, Mr. Macartney can give you the least
uneasiness?"


"My dearest Miss Anville," said he, taking my hand, "I see, and I
adore the purity of your mind, superior as it is to all little arts,
and all apprehensions of suspicion; and I should do myself, as well as
you, injustice, if I were capable of harbouring the smallest doubts of
that goodness which makes you mine forever: nevertheless, pardon me,
if I own myself surprised,-nay, alarmed, at these frequent meetings
with so young a man as Mr. Macartney."


"My Lord," cried I, eager to clear myself, "Mr. Macartney is my
brother."


"Your brother! you amaze me!-What strange mystery, then, makes his
relationship a secret?"


Just then Mrs. Selwyn opened the door. "O, you are here!" cried she:
"Pray, is my Lord so kind as to assist you in preparing for your
journey, or in retarding it?"


"I should be most happy," said Lord Orville, smiling, "if it were in
my power to do the latter."


I then acquainted her with Mr. Macartney's communication.


She immediately ordered the chaise away: and then took me into her
own room, to consider what should be done.


A few minutes sufficed to determine her; and she wrote the following
note.


         "To Sir John Belmont, Bart."


        "MRS. SELWYN presents her compliments to Sir John Belmont;
        and, if he is at leisure, will be glad to wait on him this
        morning, upon business of importance."




She then ordered her man to enquire at the pump-room for a direction;
and went herself to Mrs. Beaumont to apologize for deferring her
journey.


An answer was presently returned, that Sir John would be glad to
see her.


She would have had me immediately accompany her to the Hot-Wells; but
I entreated her to spare me the distress of so abrupt an introduction,
and to pave the way for my reception. She consented rather reluctantly,
and, attended only by her servant, walked to the Wells.


She was not absent two hours; yet so miserably did time seem to
linger, that I thought a thousand accidents had happened, and feared
she would never return.  I passed the whole time in my own room,
for I was too much agitated even to converse with Lord Orville.


The instant that, from my window, I saw her returning, I flew down
stairs, and met her in the garden.


We both walked to the arbour.


Her looks, in which both disappointment and anger were expressed,
presently announced to me the failure of her embassy. Finding that
she did not speak, I asked her, in a faltering voice, whether or not
I had a father?


"You have not, my dear!" said she abruptly.


"Very well, Madam," said I, with tolerable calmness, "let the chaise
then be ordered again;-I will go to Berry Hill;-and there, I trust,
I shall still find one!"


It was some time ere she could give, or I could hear, the account of
her visit; and then she related it in a hasty manner; yet, I believe
I can recollect every word.


"I found Sir John alone. He received me with the utmost politeness. I
did not keep him a moment in suspense as to the purport of my
visit. But I had no sooner made it known, than, with a supercilious
smile, he said, 'And have you, Madam, been prevailed upon to revive
that ridiculous old story?'  Ridiculous, I told him, was a term which
he would find no one else do him the favour to make use of, in speaking
of the horrible actions belonging to the old story he made so light of;
'actions' continued I, 'which would dye still deeper the black annals
of Nero or Caligula.' He attempted in vain to rally; for I pursued him
with all the severity in my power, and ceased not painting the enormity
of his crime till I stung him to the quick, and, in a voice of passion
and impatience, he said, 'No more, Madam,-this is not a subject upon
which I need a monitor.' 'Make then,' cried I, 'the only reparation
in your power.-Your daughter is now at Clifton; send for her hither;
and, in the face of the world, proclaim the legitimacy of her birth,
and clear the reputation of your injured wife.' 'Madam,' said he,
'you are much mistaken, if you suppose I waited for the honour of this
visit before I did what little justice now depends upon me, to the
memory of that unfortunate woman: her daughter has been my care from
her infancy; I have taken her into my house; she bears my name; and
she will be my sole heiress.' For some time this assertion appeared
so absurd, that I only laughed at it: but, at last, he assured me,
I had myself been imposed upon; for that very woman who attended
Lady Belmont in her last illness, conveyed the child to him while
he was in London, before she was a year old. 'Unwilling,' he added,
'at that time to confirm the rumour of my being married, I sent the
woman with the child to France: as soon as she was old enough, I put
her into a convent, where she has been properly educated, and now
I have taken her home. I have acknowledged her for my lawful child,
and paid, at length, to the memory of her unhappy mother a tribute
of fame, which has made me wish to hide myself hereafter from all
the world.' This whole story sounded so improbable, that I did not
scruple to tell him I discredited every word. He then rung his bell;
and, enquiring if his hair-dresser was come, said he was sorry to
leave me; but that, if I would favour him with my company to-morrow,
he would do himself the honour of introducing Miss Belmont to me,
instead of troubling me to introduce her to him. I rose in great
indignation; and assuring him I would make his conduct as public as
it was infamous-I left the house."


Good Heaven, how strange the recital! how incomprehensible an
affair! The Miss Belmont then who is actually at Bristol, passes
for the daughter of my unhappy mother!-passes, in short, for your
Evelina! Who she can be, or what this tale can mean, I have not
any idea.


Mrs. Selwyn soon after left me to my own reflections. Indeed they were
not very pleasant. Quietly as I had borne her relation, the moment
I was alone I felt most bitterly both the disgrace and sorrow of a
rejection so cruelly inexplicable.


I know not how long I might have continued in this situation, had
I not been awakened from my melancholy reverie by the voice of Lord
Orville. "May I come in," cried he, "or shall I interrupt you?"


I was silent, and he seated himself next me.


"I fear," he continued, "Miss Anville will think I persecute her:
yet so much as I have to say, and so much as I wish to hear, with so
few opportunities for either, she cannot wonder-and I hope she will
not be offended-that I seize with such avidity every moment in my
power to converse with her. You are grave," added he, taking my hand;
"I hope the pleasure it gives to me, will not be a subject of pain to
you? -You are silent!-Something, I am sure, has afflicted you:-would
to Heaven I were able to console you!-Would to Heaven I were worthy
to participate in your sorrows!"


My heart was too full to bear this kindness, and I could only answer by
my tears. "Good Heaven," cried he, "how you alarm me!-My love, my sweet
Miss Anville, deny me no longer to be the sharer of your griefs!-tell
me, at least, that you have not withdrawn your esteem!-that you do
not repent the goodness you have shown me!-that you still think me
the same grateful Orville, whose heart you have deigned to accept!"


"Oh, my Lord," cried I, "your generosity overpowers me!" And I wept
like an infant. For now, that all my hopes of being acknowledged
seemed finally crushed, I felt the nobleness of his disinterested
regard so forcibly, that I could scarce breathe under the weight of
gratitude which oppressed me.


He seemed greatly shocked; and, in terms the most flattering, the
most respectfully tender, he at once soothed my distress, and urged
me to tell him its cause.


"My Lord," said I, when I was able to speak, "you little know what
an outcast you have honoured with your choice!-a child of bounty,-an
orphan from infancy,-dependant, even for subsistence, dependent, upon
the kindness of compassion!-Rejected by my natural friends,-disowned
for ever by my nearest relation,-Oh, my Lord, so circumstanced,
can I deserve the distinction with which you honour me? No, no,
I feel the inequality too painfully;-you must leave me, my Lord;
you must suffer me to return to obscurity; and there, in the bosom
of my first, best, my only friend,-I will pour forth all the grief
of my heart!-while you, my Lord, must seek elsewhere-"


I could not proceed; my whole soul recoiled against the charge I
would have given, and my voice refused to utter it.


"Never," cried he, warmly, "my heart is your's, and I swear to you an
attachment eternal!-You prepare me, indeed, for a tale of horror, and
I am almost breathless with expectation;-but so firm is my conviction,
that, whatever are your misfortunes, to have merited them is not of the
number, that I feel myself more strongly, more invincibly devoted to
you than ever!-Tell me but where I may find this noble friend, whose
virtues you have already taught me to reverence,-and I will fly to
obtain his consent and intercession, that henceforward our fates my be
indissolubly united;-and then shall it be the sole study of my life to
endeavor to soften your past,-and guard you from future misfortunes!"


I had just raised my eyes to answer this most generous of men, when
the first object they met was Mrs. Selwyn.


"So, my dear," cried she, "what, still courting the rural shades!-I
thought ere now you would have been satiated with this retired seat,
and I have been seeking you all over the house. But I find the
only way to meet with you,-is to enquire for Lord Orville. However,
don't let me disturb your meditation; you are possibly planning some
pastoral dialogue."


And, with this provoking speech, she walked on.


In the greatest confusion I was quitting the arbour, when Lord Orville
said, "Permit me to follow Mrs. Selwyn;-it is time to put an end to
all impertinent conjectures; will you allow me to speak to her openly?"


I assented in silence, and he left me.


I then went to my own room, where I continued till I was summoned to
dinner; after which, Mrs. Selwyn invited me to hers.


The moment she had shut the door, "Your Ladyship'" said she, "will,
I hope, be seated."


"Ma'am!" cried I, staring.


"O the sweet innocent! So you don't know what I mean?-but, my dear,
my sole view is to accustom you a little to your dignity elect, lest,
when you are addressed by your title, you should look another way, from
an apprehension of listening to a discourse not meant for you to hear."


Having, in this manner, diverted herself with my confusion, till her
raillery was almost exhausted, she congratulated me very seriously
upon the partiality of Lord Orville, and painted to me, in the
strongest terms, his disinterested desire of being married to me
immediately. She had told him, she said, my whole story, and yet
he was willing, nay eager, that our union should take place of any
further application to my family. "Now, my dear," continued she,
"I advise you by all means to marry him directly; nothing can be
more precarious than our success with Sir John; and the young men of
this age are not to be trusted with too much time for deliberation,
where their interests are concerned."


"Good God, Madam," cried I, "do you think I would hurry Lord Orville?"


"Well, do as you will," said she, "luckily you have an excellent
subject for Quixotism;-otherwise this delay might prove your ruin;
but Lord Orville is almost as romantic as if he had been born and
bred at Berry Hill."


She then proposed, as no better expedient seemed likely to be
suggested, that I should accompany her at once in her visit to the
Hot-Wells to-morrow morning.


The very idea made me tremble; yet she represented so strongly the
necessity of pursuing this unhappy affair with spirit, or giving it
totally up, that, wanting her force of argument, I was almost obliged
to yield to her proposal.


In the evening we all walked in the garden; and Lord Orville, who
never quitted my side, told me he had been listening to a tale, which
though it had removed the perplexities that had so long tormented him,
had penetrated him with sorrow and compassion. I acquainted him with
Mrs. Selwyn's plan for to-morrow, and confessed the extreme terror
it gave me. He then, in a manner almost unanswerable, besought me
to leave to him the conduct of the affair, by consenting to be his
before an interview took place.


I could not but acknowledge my sense of his generosity; but I told him
I was wholly dependent upon you; and that I was certain your opinion
would be the same as mine; which was, that it would be highly improper
I should dispose of myself for ever, so very near the time which must
finally decide by whose authority I ought to be guided. The subject of
this dreaded meeting, with the thousand conjectures and apprehensions
to which it gives birth, employed all our conversation then, as it
has all my thoughts since.


Heaven only knows how I shall support myself, when the long
expected-the wished-yet terrible moment arrives, that will prostrate
me at the feet of the nearest, the most reverenced of all relations,
whom my heart yearns to know, and longs to love!
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXVIII. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 
 Oct. 9th.


I COULD not write yesterday, so violent was the agitation of my
mind;-but I will not, now, lose a moment till I have hastened to
my best friend an account of the transactions of a day I can never
recollect without emotion.


Mrs. Selwyn determined upon sending no message, "Lest," said she,
"Sir John, fatigued with the very idea of my reproaches, should
endeavour to avoid a meeting. He cannot but see who you are, whether
he will do you justice or not."


We went early, and in Mrs. Beaumont's chariot; into which Lord Orville,
uttering words of the kindest encouragement, handed us both.


My uneasiness, during the ride, was excessive; but, when we stopped at
the door, I was almost senseless with terror! the meeting, at last,
was not so dreadful as that moment! I believe I was carried into
the house; but I scarce recollect what was done with me: however,
I know we remained some time in the parlour before Mrs. Selwyn could
send any message up stairs.


When I was somewhat recovered, I intreated her to let me return home,
assuring her I felt myself quite unequal to supporting the interview.


"No," said she; "you must stay now: your fears will but gain strength
by delay; and we must not have such a shock as this repeated." Then,
turning to the servant, she sent up her name.


An answer was brought, that he was going out in great haste, but
would attend her immediately. I turned so sick, that Mrs. Selwyn was
apprehensive I should have fainted; and, opening a door which led to
an inner apartment, she begged me to wait there till I was somewhat
composed, and till she had prepared for my reception.


Glad of every moment's reprieve, I willingly agreed to the proposal;
and Mrs.  Selwyn had but just time to shut me in, before her presence
was necessary.


The voice of a father -Oh, dear and revered name!-which then, for the
first time, struck my ears, affected me in a manner I cannot describe,
though it was only employed in giving orders to a servant as he came
down stairs.


Then, entering the parlour, I heard him say, "I am sorry, Madam,
I made you wait; but I have an engagement which now calls me away:
however, if you have any commands for me, I shall be glad of the
honour of your company some other time."


"I am come, Sir," said Mrs. Selwyn, "to introduce your daughter
to you."


"I am infinitely obliged to you," answered he; "but I have just had
the satisfaction of breakfasting with her. Ma'am, your most obedient."


"You refuse, then, to see her?"


"I am much indebted to you, Madam, for this desire of increasing
my family; but you must excuse me if I decline taking advantage of
it. I have already a daughter, to whom I owe everything; and it is
not three days since that I had the pleasure of discovering a son: how
many more sons and daughters may be brought to me, I am yet to learn;
but I am already perfectly satisfied with the size of my family."


"Had you a thousand children, Sir John," said Mrs. Selwyn, "this
only one, of which Lady Belmont was the mother, ought to be most
distinguished; and, far from avoiding her sight, you should thank your
stars, in humble gratitude, that there yet remains in your power the
smallest opportunity of doing the injured wife you have destroyed,
the poor justice of acknowledging her child!"


"I am very unwilling, Madam," answered he, "to enter into any
discussion of this point; but you are determined to compel me to
speak. There lives not at this time the human being, who should
talk to me of the regret due to the memory of that ill-fated woman;
no one can feel it so severely as myself; but let me, nevertheless,
assure you, I have already done all that remained in my power to
prove the respect she merited from me: her child I have educated,
and owned for my lawful heiress: if, madam, you can suggest to me
any other means by which I may more fully do her justice, and more
clearly manifest her innocence, name them to me; and, though they
should wound my character still deeper, I will perform them readily."


"All this sounds vastly well," returned Mrs. Selwyn; "but I must own
it is rather too enigmatical for my faculties of comprehension. You
can, however, have no objection to seeing this young lady."


"None in the world."


"Come forth, then, my dear," cried she, opening the door; "come forth
and see your father!" Then, taking my trembling hand, she led me
forward. I would have withdrawn it and retreated; but, as he advanced
instantly towards me, I found myself already before him.


What a moment for your Evelina-an involuntary scream escaped me, and,
covering my face with my hands, I sunk on the floor.


He had, however, seen me first; for, in a voice scarce articulate,
he exclaimed, "My God! does Caroline Evelyn still live!"


Mrs. Selwyn said something, but I could not listen to her; and in a
few minutes he added, "Lift up thy head-if my sight has not blasted
thee!-lift up thy head, thou image of my long lost Caroline!"


Affected beyond measure, I half arose, and embraced his knees, while
yet on my own.


"Yes, yes," cried he, looking earnestly in my face, "I see, I see thou
art her child! she lives-she breathes,-she is present to my view!-Oh,
God, that she indeed lived!-Go, child, go," added he, wildly starting,
and pushing me from him: "take her away, Madam,-I cannot bear to look
at her!" And then, breaking hastily from me, he rushed out of the room.


 Speechless, motionless myself, I attempted not to stop him; but
 Mrs. Selwyn,
hastening after him, caught hold of his arm: "Leave me, Madam," cried
he, with quickness, "and take care of the poor child:-bid her not
think me unkind; tell her, I would at this moment plunge a dagger in
my heart to serve her: but she has set my brain on fire; and I can see
her no more!" Then, with a violence almost frantic, he ran up stairs.


 Oh, Sir, had I not indeed cause to dread this interview?-an
 interview so
unspeakably painful and afflicting to us both! Mrs. Selwyn would have
immediately returned to Clifton; but I entreated her to wait some time,
in the hope that my unhappy father, when his first emotion was over,
would again bear me in his sight. However, he soon after sent his
servant to enquire how I did; and to tell Mrs. Selwyn he was much
indisposed, but would hope for the honour of seeing her to-morrow,
at any time she would please to appoint.


 She fixed upon ten o'clock in the morning; and then, with a heavy
 heart, I
got into the chariot. Those afflicting words, I can see her no
more! were never a moment absent from my mind.


 Yet the sight of Lord Orville, who handed us from the carriage,
 gave some
relief to the sadness of my thoughts. I could not, however, enter
upon the painful subject; but, begging Mrs. Selwyn to satisfy him,
I went to my own room.


 As soon as I communicated to the good Mrs. Clinton the present
 situation of
my affairs, an idea occurred to her which seemed to clear up all the
mystery of my having been so long disowned.


 The woman, she says, who attended my ever-to-be-regretted mother in
 her last
illness, and who nursed me the first four months of my life, soon
after being discharged from your house, left Berry Hill entirely,
with her baby, who was but six weeks older than myself. Mrs. Clinton
remembers, that her quitting the place appeared, at the time, very
extraordinary to the neighbours; but, as she was never heard of
afterwards, she was by degrees quite forgotten.


 The moment this was mentioned, it struck Mrs. Selwyn, as well as
 Mrs. Clinton
herself, that my father had been imposed upon; and that the nurse, who
said she had brought his child to him, had, in fact, carried her own.


 The name by which I was known, the secrecy observed in regard to
 my family,
and the retirement in which I lived, all conspired to render this
scheme, however daring and fraudulent, by no means impracticable; and,
in short, the idea was no sooner started, than conviction seemed to
follow it.


 Mrs. Selwyn determined immediately to discover the truth or mistake
 of this
conjecture; therefore, the moment she had dined, she walked to the
Hot Wells, attended by Mrs. Clinton.


 I waited in my room till her return; and then heard the following
 account of
her visit:


 She found my poor father in great agitation. She immediately informed
 him of
the occasion of her so speedy return, and of her suspicions of the
woman who had pretended to convey to him his child. Interrupting her
with quickness, he said he had just sent her from his presence; that
the certainty I carried in my countenance of my real birth, made him,
the moment he had recovered from a surprise which had almost deprived
him of reason, suspect, himself, the imposition she mentioned. He
had therefore sent for the woman, and questioned her with the utmost
austerity; she turned pale, and was extremely embarrassed; but still
she persisted in affirming, that she had really brought him the
daughter of Lady Belmont. His perplexity, he said, almost distracted
him: he had always observed, that his daughter bore no resemblance
to either of her parents; but, as he had never doubted the veracity
of the nurse, this circumstance did not give birth to any suspicion.


 At Mrs. Selwyn's desire, the woman was again called, and interrogated
 with
equal art and severity; her confusion was evident, and her answers
often contradictory; yet she still declared she was no impostor. "We
will see that in a minute," said Mrs. Selwyn; and then desired
Mrs. Clinton might be called up stairs. The poor wretch, changing
colour, would have escaped out of the room; but, being prevented,
dropt on her knees, and implored forgiveness. A confession of the
whole affair was then extorted from her.


 Doubtless, my dear Sir, you must remember Dame Green, who was my
 first nurse.
The deceit she has practised was suggested, she says, by a conversation
she overheard; in which my unhappy mother besought you, that, if her
child survived her, you would take the sole care of its education;
and, in particular, if it should be a female, you would by no means
part with her in early life. You not only consented, she says, but
assured her you would even retire abroad with me yourself, if my
father should importunately demand me.  Her own child, she said,
was then in her arms; and she could not forbear wishing it were
possible to give her the fortune which seemed so little valued for
me. This wish once raised was not easily suppressed; on the contrary,
what at first appeared a mere idle desire, in a short time seemed
a feasible scheme. Her husband was dead, and she had little regard
for any body but her child; and, in short, having saved money for
the journey, she contrived to enquire a direction to my father;
and, telling her neighbours she was going to settle in Devonshire,
she set out on her expedition.


 When Mrs. Selwyn asked her how she dared perpetrate such a fraud, she
protested she had no ill designs; but that, as Miss would be never
the worse for it, she thought it pity nobody should be the better.


 Her success we are already acquainted with. Indeed everything
 seemed to
contribute towards it: my father had no correspondent at Berry Hill;
the child was instantly sent to France; where, being brought up in
as much retirement as myself, nothing but accident could discover
the fraud.


 And here let me indulge myself in observing, and rejoicing to
 observe, that
the total neglect I thought I met with was not the effect of
insensibility or unkindness, but of imposition and error; and that,
at the very time we concluded I was unnaturally rejected, my deluded
father meant to show me most favour and protection.


 He acknowledges that Lady Howard's letter flung him into some
 perplexity: he
immediately communicated it to Dame Green, who confessed it was
the greatest shock she had ever received in her life; yet she had
the art and boldness to assert, that Lady Howard must herself have
been deceived: and as she had, from the beginning of her enterprise,
declared she had stolen away the child without your knowledge, he
concluded that some deceit was then intended him; and this thought
occasioned his abrupt answer.


 Dame Green owned, that, from the moment the journey to England
 was settled,
she gave herself up for lost. All her hope was to have had her
daughter married before it took place; for which reason she had so
much promoted Mr.  Macartney's addresses; for though such a match was
inadequate to the pretensions of Miss Belmont, she well knew it was
far superior to those her daughter could form after the discovery of
her birth.


 My first enquiry was, if this innocent daughter was yet acquainted
 with the
affair? "No," Mrs. Selwyn said; nor was any plan settled how to divulge
it to her. Poor unfortunate girl! how hard is her fate! She is entitled
to my kindest offices, and I shall always consider her as my sister.


 I then asked whether my father would again allow me to see him!


 "Why, no, my dear, not yet," answered she; "he declares the sight
 of you is
too much for him: however, we are to settle everything concerning
you to-morrow; for this woman took up all our time to-day."


 This morning, therefore, she is again gone to the Hot Wells. I am
 waiting in
all impatience for her return; but, as I know you will be anxious
for the account this letter contains, I will not delay sending it.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXIX. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  
October 9th.


 HOW agitated, my dear Sir, is the present life of your Evelina! every
 day
seems important, and one event only a prelude to another.


 Mrs. Selwyn, upon her return this morning from the Hot Wells,
 entering my
room very abruptly, said, "Oh, my dear, I have terrible news for you!"


 "For me, Ma'am!-Good God! what now?"


 "Arm yourself," cried she, "with all your Berry Hill philosophy;-con
 over
every lesson of fortitude or resignation you ever learnt in your
life;-for know,-you are next week to be married to Lord Orville!"


 Doubt, astonishment, and a kind of perturbation I cannot describe,
 made this
abrupt communication alarm me extremely; and, almost breathless,
I could only exclaim, "Good God, Madam, what do you tell me!"


 "You may well be frightened, my dear," said she, ironically;
 "for really
there is something mighty terrific in becoming, at once, the wife of
the man you adore,-and a Countess!"


 I entreated her to spare her raillery, and tell me her real
 meaning. She
could not prevail with herself to grant the first request, though
she readily complied with the second.


 My poor father, she said, was still in the utmost uneasiness: he
 entered upon
his affairs with great openness, and told her, he was equally
disturbed how to dispose either of the daughter he had discovered,
or the daughter he was now to give up; the former he dreaded to trust
himself with again beholding, and the latter he knew not how to shock
with the intelligence of her disgrace. Mrs. Selwyn then acquainted
him with my situation in regard to Lord Orville: this delighted him
extremely; and, when he heard of his Lordship's eagerness, he said he
was himself of opinion, the sooner the union took place the better;
and, in return, he informed her of the affair of Mr. Macartney.  "And,
after a very long conversation," continued Mrs. Selwyn, "we agreed,
that the most eligible scheme for all parties would be, to have both
the real and the fictitious daughter married without delay. Therefore,
if either of you have any inclination to pull caps for the title of
Miss Belmont, you must do it with all speed, as next week will take
from both of you all pretensions to it."


 "Next week!-dear Madam, what a strange plan!-without my being
consulted,-without applying to Mr. Villars,-without even the
concurrence of Lord Orville!"


 "As to consulting you, my dear, it was out of all question;
 because, you
know, young ladies' hearts and hands are always to be given with
reluctance;-as to Mr. Villars, it is sufficient we know him for your
friend;-and as for Lord Orville, he is a party concerned."


 "A party concerned!-you amaze me!"


 "Why, yes; for, as I found our consultation likely to redound to his
advantage, I persuaded Sir John to send for him."


 "Send for him!-Good God!"


 "Yes; and Sir John agreed. I told the servant, that if he could not
 hear of
his Lordship in the house, he might be pretty certain of encountering
him in the arbour.-Why do you colour, my dear?-Well, he was with us in
a moment: I introduced him to Sir John; and we proceeded to business."


 "I am very, very sorry for it!-Lord Orville must himself think
 this conduct
strangely precipitate."


 "No, my dear, you are mistaken; Lord Orville has too much good sense.
Everything was then discussed in a rational manner. You are to be
married privately, though not secretly, and then go to one of his
Lordship's country seats: and poor little Miss Green and your brother,
who have no house of their own, must go to one of Sir John's."


 "But why, my dear Madam, why all this haste? why may we not be
 allowed a
little longer time?"


 "I could give you a thousand reasons," answered she, "but that I
 am tolerably
certain two or three will be more than you can controvert, even with
all the logic of genuine coquetry. In the first place, you doubtless
wish to quit the house of Mrs. Beaumont: to whose, then, can you with
such propriety remove as to Lord Orville's?"


 "Surely, Madam," cried I, "I am not more destitute now than when
 I thought
myself an orphan."


 "Your father, my dear," answered she, "is willing to save the
 little impostor
as much of the mortification of her disgrace as is in his power;
now, if you immediately take her place, according to your right,
as Miss Belmont, why, not all that either of you can do for her,
will prevent her being eternally stigmatized as the bantling of Dame
Green, wash-woman and wet nurse, of Berry Hill, Dorsetshire. Now such
a genealogy will not be very flattering, even to Mr. Macartney, who,
all-dismal as he is, you will find by no means wanting in pride and
self-consequence."


 "For the universe," interrupted I, "I would not be accessary to the
degradation you mention; but surely, Madam, I may return to Berry
Hill?"


 "By no means," said she; "for though compassion may make us wish to
 save the
poor girl the confusion of an immediate and public fall, yet justice
demands you should appear henceforward in no other light than that
of Sir John Belmont's daughter. Besides, between friends, I, who know
the world, can see that half this prodigious delicacy for the little
usurper is the mere result of self-interest; for, while her affairs
are hushed up, Sir John's, you know, are kept from being brought
further to light. Now the double marriage we have projected obviates
all rational objections. Sir John will give you immediately L.30,000;
all settlements, and so forth, will be made for you in the name of
Evelina Belmont:-Mr. Macartney will at the same time take poor Polly
Green; and yet, at first, it will only be generally known that a
daughter of Sir John Belmont is married."


 In this manner, though she did not convince me, yet the quickness
 of her
arguments silenced and perplexed me. I enquired, however, if I might
not be permitted to again see my father, or whether I must regard
myself as banished his presence for ever?


 "My dear," said she, "he does not know you: he concludes that you
 have been
brought up to detest him; and therefore he is rather prepared to
dread than to love you."


 This answer made me very unhappy: I wished, most impatiently, to
 remove his
prejudice, and endeavour, by dutiful assiduity, to engage his kindness;
yet knew not how to propose seeing him, while conscious he wished to
avoid me.


 This evening, as soon as the company was engaged with cards,
 Lord Orville
exerted his utmost eloquence to reconcile me to this hasty plan;
but how was I startled when he told me that next Tuesday was the day
appointed by my father to be the most important of my life!


 "Next Tuesday!" repeated I, quite out of breath, "Oh, my Lord!-"


 "My sweet Evelina," said he, "the day which will make me the
 happiest of
mortals, would probably appear awful to you, were it to be deferred
a twelvemonth. Mrs. Selwyn has, doubtless, acquainted you with the
many motives which, independent of my eagerness, require it to be
speedy; suffer, therefore, its acceleration, and generously complete
my felicity, by endeavouring to suffer it without repugnance."


 "Indeed, my Lord, I would not wilfully raise objections, nor do I
 desire to
appear insensible of the honour of your good opinion;-but
there is something in this plan-so very hasty-so unreasonably
precipitate:-besides, I shall have no time to hear from Berry
Hill;-and believe me, my Lord, I should be for ever miserable,
were I, in an affair so important, to act without the sanction of
Mr. Villars's advice."


 He offered to wait on you himself: but I told him I had rather write
 to you.
And then he proposed, that, instead of my immediately accompanying him
to Lincolnshire, we should first pass a month at my native Berry Hill.


 This was, indeed, a grateful proposal to me, and I listened to it with
undisguised pleasure. And, in short, I was obliged to consent to
a compromise in merely deferring the day till Thursday! He readily
undertook to engage my father's concurrence in this little delay;
and I besought him, at the same time, to make use of his influence
to obtain me a second interview, and to represent the deep concern
I felt in being thus banished his sight.


 He would then have spoken of settlements; but I assured him I
 was almost
ignorant of the word.


 And now, my dearest Sir, what is your opinion of these hasty
 proceedings?
Believe me, I half regret the simple facility with which I have
suffered myself to be hurried into compliance; and, should you start
but the smallest objection, I will yet insist upon being allowed
more time.


 I must now write a concise account of the state of my affairs
 to Howard
Grove, and to Madame Duval.


 Adieu, dearest and most honoured Sir! everything at present depends
 upon your
single decision; to which, though I yield in trembling, I yield
implicitly.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXX. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 
 Oct. 11th.


 YESTERDAY morning, as soon as breakfast was over, Lord Orville went
 to the
Hot Wells, to wait upon my father with my double petition.


 Mrs. Beaumont then, in general terms, proposed a walk in the
 garden. Mrs.
Selwyn said she had letters to write; but Lady Louisa rose to
accompany Mrs.  Beaumont.


 I had had some reason to imagine, from the notice with which her
 Ladyship had
honoured me during breakfast, that her brother had acquainted her with
my present situation: and her behaviour now confirmed my conjectures:
for, when I would have gone up stairs, instead of suffering me,
as usual, to pass disregarded, she called after me with an affected
surprise, "Miss Anville, don't you walk with us?"


 There seemed something so little-minded in this sudden change
 of conduct,
that, from an involuntary motion of contempt, I thanked her with a
coldness like her own, and declined her offer. Yet, observing that
she blushed extremely at my refusal, and recollecting she was sister
to Lord Orville, my indignation subsided; and, upon Mrs. Beaumont
repeating the invitation, I accepted it.


 Our walk proved extremely dull: Mrs. Beaumont, who never says much,
 was more
silent than usual; Lady Louisa strove in vain to lay aside the
restraint and distance she has hitherto preserved; and, as to me, I
was too conscious of the circumstances to which I owed their attention,
to feel either pride or pleasure from receiving it.


 Lord Orville was not long absent: he joined us in the garden with
 a look of
gaiety and good humour that revived us all. "You are just the party,"
said he, "I wished to see together. Will you, Madam (taking my hand),
allow me the honour of introducing you, by your real name, to two of
my nearest relations?  Mrs. Beaumont, give me leave to present to
you the daughter of Sir John Belmont, a young lady who, I am sure,
must long since have engaged your esteem and admiration, though you
were a stranger to her birth."


 "My Lord," said Mrs. Beaumont, graciously saluting me, "the young
 lady's rank
in life, your Lordship's recommendation, or her own merit, would, any
one of them, have been sufficient to have entitled her to my regard;
and I hope she has always met with that respect in my house which is
so much her due; though, had I been sooner made acquainted with her
family, I should doubtless have better known how to have secured it."


 "Miss Belmont," said Lord Orville, "can receive no lustre from family,
whatever she may give to it. Louisa, you will, I am sure, be happy to
make yourself an interest in the friendship of Miss Belmont, whom I
hope shortly (kissing my hand, and joining it with her Ladyship's)
to have the happiness of presenting to you by yet another name,
and by the most endearing of all titles."


 I believe it would be difficult to say whose cheeks were, at that
 moment, of
the deepest dye, Lady Louisa's or my own; for the conscious pride
with which she has hitherto slighted me, gave to her an embarrassment
which equalled the confusion that an introduction so unexpected
gave to me. She saluted me, however; and, with a faint smile said,
"I shall esteem myself very happy to profit by the honour of Miss
Belmont's acquaintance."


 I only courtsied, and we walked on; but it was evident, from the
 little
surprise they expressed, that they had been already informed of the
state of the affair.


 We were soon after joined by more company: and Lord Orville then,
 in a low
voice, took an opportunity to tell me the success of his visit. In the
first place, Thursday was agreed to; and, in the second, my father,
he said, was much concerned to hear of my uneasiness; sent me his
blessing; and complied with my request of seeing him, with the same
readiness he should agree to any other I could make. Lord Orville,
therefore, settled that I should wait upon him in the evening, and,
at his particular request, unaccompanied by Mrs.  Selwyn.


 This kind message, and the prospect of so soon seeing him, gave
 me sensations
of mixed pleasure and pain, which wholly occupied my mind till the
time of my going to the Hot Wells.


 Mrs. Beaumont lent me her chariot, and Lord Orville absolutely
 insisted upon
attending me. "If you go alone," said he, "Mrs. Selwyn will certainly
be offended; but if you allow me to conduct you, though she may give
the freer scope to her raillery, she cannot possibly be affronted:
and we had much better suffer her laughter, than provoke her satire."


 Indeed, I must own, I had no reason to regret being so accompanied;
 for his
conversation supported my spirits from drooping, and made the ride
seem so short, that we actually stopped at my father's door, before
I knew we had proceeded ten yards.


 He handed me from the carriage, and conducted me to the parlour,
 at the door
of which I was met by Mr. Macartney. "Ah, my dear brother," cried I,
"how happy am I to see you here!"


 He bowed, and thanked me. Lord Orville, then, holding out his hand,
 said,
"Mr. Macartney, I hope we shall be better acquainted; I promise myself
much pleasure from cultivating your friendship."


 "Your Lordship does me but too much honour," answered Mr. Macartney.


 "But where," cried I, "is my sister? for so I must already call,
 and always
consider her:-I am afraid she avoids me;-you must endeavour, my
dear brother, to prepossess her in my favour, and reconcile her to
owning me."


 "Oh, Madam," cried he, "you are all goodness and benevolence! but
 at present
I hope you will excuse her, for I fear she has hardly fortitude
sufficient to see you: in a short time perhaps-"


 "In a very short time, then," said Lord Orville, "I hope you will
 yourself
introduce her, and that we shall have the pleasure of wishing you both
joy:-allow me, my Evelina, to say we, and permit me, in your name,
as well as my own, to entreat that the first guests we shall have
the happiness of receiving may be Mr. and Mrs. Macartney."


 A servant then came to beg I would walk up stairs.


 I besought Lord Orville to accompany me; but he feared the displeasure
 of Sir
John, who had desired to see me alone. He led me, however, to the
foot of the stairs, and made the kindest efforts to give me courage:
but indeed he did not succeed; for the interview appeared to me in
all its terrors, and left me no feeling but apprehension.


 The moment I reached the landing-place, the drawing-room door was
 opened: and
my father, with a voice of kindness, called out, "My child, is it you?"


 "Yes, Sir," cried I, springing forward, and kneeling at his feet,
 "it is your
child, if you will own her!"


 He knelt by my side, and, folding me in his arms, "Own thee,"
 repeated he,
"yes, my poor girl, and Heaven knows with what bitter
contrition!" Then, raising both himself and me, he brought me into the
drawing-room, shut the door, and took me to the window; where, looking
at me with great earnestness, "Poor unhappy Caroline!" cried he; and,
to my inexpressible concern, he burst into tears. Need I tell you,
my dear Sir, how mine flowed at the sight?


 I would again have embraced his knees; but, hurrying from me, he flung
himself upon a sofa, and, leaning his face on his arms, seemed for
some time absorbed in bitterness of grief.


 I ventured not to interrupt a sorrow I so much respected; but
 waited in
silence, and at a distance, till he recovered from its violence. But
then it seemed in a moment to give way to a kind of frantic fury;
for starting suddenly, with a sternness which at once surprised and
frightened me, "Child," cried he, "hast thou yet sufficiently humbled
thy father?-if thou hast, be contented with this proof of my weakness,
and no longer force thyself into my presence!"


 Thunderstruck by a command so unexpected, I stood still and
 speechless, and
doubted whether my own ears did not deceive me.


 "Oh go, go!" cried he, passionately; "in pity-in compassion,-if
 thou valuest my senses, leave me,-and for ever!"


 "I will, I will," cried I, greatly terrified; and I moved hastily
 towards the
door: yet, stopping when I reached it, and, almost involuntarily,
dropping on my knees, "Vouchsafe," cried I, "Oh, Sir, vouchsafe
but once to bless your daughter, and her sight shall never more
offend you!"


 "Alas," cried he, in a softened voice, "I am not worthy to bless
 thee!-I am
not worthy to call thee daughter!-I am not worthy that the fair
light of Heaven should visit my eyes!-Oh God! that I could but call
back the time ere thou wast born,-or else bury its remembrance in
eternal oblivion!"


 "Would to Heaven," cried I, "that the sight of me were less terrible
 to you!
that, instead of irritating, I could soothe your sorrows!-Oh Sir, how
thankfully would I then prove my duty, even at the hazard of my life!"


 "Are you so kind?" cried he, gently; "come hither, child;-rise,
Evelina:-Alas, it is for me to kneel,-not you;-and I would kneel,-I
would crawl upon the earth,-I would kiss the dust,-could I, by such
submission, obtain the forgiveness of the representative of the most
injured of women!"


 "Oh, Sir," exclaimed I, "that you could but read my heart!-that you
 could but
see the filial tenderness and concern with which it overflows!-you
would not then talk thus,-you would not then banish me your presence,
and exclude me from your affection!"


 "Good God," cried he, "is it then possible that you do not hate
 me?-Can the
child of the wronged Caroline look at,-and not execrate me? Wast thou
not born to abhor, and bred to curse me? Did not thy mother bequeath
thee her blessing on condition that thou should'st detest and avoid
me ?"


 "Oh no, no, no!" cried I; "think not so unkindly of her, nor so
 hardly of
me." I then took from my pocketbook her last letter; and, pressing
it to my lips, with a trembling hand, and still upon my knees, I held
it out to him.


 Hastily snatching it from me, "Great Heaven!" cried he, "'tis her
writing-Whence comes this?-who gave it you-why had I it not sooner?"


 I made no answer; his vehemence intimidated me, and I ventured not
 to move
from the suppliant posture in which I had put myself.


 He went from me to the window, where his eyes were for some time
 rivetted
upon the direction of the letter, though his hand shook so violently
he could hardly hold it. Then, bringing it to me, "Open it,"-cried
he,-"for I cannot!"


 I had myself hardly strength to obey him: but when I had, he took
 it back,
and walked hastily up and down the room, as if dreading to read it. At
length, turning to me, "Do you know," cried he, "its contents?"


 "No, Sir," answered I, "it has never been unsealed."


 He then again went to the window, and began reading. Having hastily
 run it
over, he cast up his eyes with a look of desperation; the letter fell
from his hand, and he exclaimed, "Yes! thou art sainted!-thou art
blessed!-and I am cursed for ever!" He continued some time fixed in
this melancholy position; after which, casting himself with violence
upon the ground, "Oh wretch," cried he, "unworthy life and light,
in what dungeon canst thou hide thy head?"


 I could restrain myself no longer; I rose and went to him; I did
 not dare
speak; but, with pity and concern unutterable, I wept and hung
over him.


 Soon after, starting up, he again seized the letter, exclaiming,
 "Acknowledge
thee, Caroline!-yes, with my heart's best blood would I acknowledge
thee!-Oh that thou could'st witness the agony of my soul!-Ten thousand
daggers could not have wounded me like this letter!"


 Then, after again reading it, "Evelina," he cried, "she charges me
 to receive
thee;-wilt thou, in obedience to her will, own for thy father the
destroyer of thy mother?"


 What a dreadful question!-I shuddered, but could not speak.


 "To clear her fame, and receive her child," continued he, looking
 stedfastly
at the letter, "are the conditions upon which she leaves me her
forgiveness: her fame I have already cleared;-and Oh, how willingly
would I take her child to my bosom, fold her to my heart,-call upon
her to mitigate my anguish, and pour the balm of comfort on my wounds,
were I not conscious I deserve not to receive it, and that all my
affliction is the result of my own guilt!"


 It was in vain I attempted to speak; horror and grief took from me
 all power
of utterance.


 He then read aloud from the letter, "Look not like thy unfortunate
 mother!"
"Sweet soul, with what bitterness of spirit hast thou written!-Come
hither, Evelina: Gracious Heaven! (looking earnestly at me) never
was likeness more striking!-the eyes-the face-the form-Oh, my child,
my child!" Imagine, Sir,-for I can never describe my feelings, when
I saw him sink upon his knees before me! "Oh, dear resemblance of
thy murdered mother!-Oh, all that remains of the most injured of
women! behold thy father at thy feet!-bending thus lowly to implore
you would not hate him.-Oh, then, thou representative of my departed
wife, speak to me in her name, and say that the remorse which tears
my soul tortures me not in vain!"


 "Oh, rise, rise, my beloved father," cried I, attempting to assist
 him; "I
cannot bear to see you thus; reverse not the law of nature; rise
yourself, and bless your kneeling daughter!"


 "May Heaven bless thee, my child!-"cried he, "for I dare not." He
 then rose;
and, embracing me most affectionately, added, "I see, I see that thou
art all kindness, softness, and tenderness; I need not have feared
thee, thou art all the fondest father could wish, and I will try to
frame my mind to less painful sensations at thy sight. Perhaps the
time may come, when I may know the comfort of such a daughter;-at
present I am only fit to be alone: dreadful as are my reflections,
they ought merely to torment myself.-Adieu, my child;-be not angry,-I
cannot stay with thee;-Oh, Evelina! thy countenance is a dagger to
my heart!-just so thy mother looked,-just so-"


 Tears and sighs seemed to choak him;-and, waving his hand, he would
 have left
me;-but, clinging to him, "Oh, Sir," cried I, "will you so soon
abandon me?-am I again an orphan!-Oh, my dear, my long-lost father,
leave me not, I beseech you! take pity on your child, and rob her
not of the parent she so fondly hoped would cherish her!"


 "You know not what you ask," cried he; "the emotions which now rend
 my soul
are more than my reason can endure; suffer me then, to leave
you;-impute it not to unkindness, but think of me as well as thou
canst. Lord Orville has behaved nobly;-I believe he will make thee
happy." Then, again embracing me, "God bless thee, my dear child,"
cried he, "God bless thee, my Evelina!-endeavour to love,-at least
not to hate me,-and to make me an interest in thy filial bosom,
by thinking of me as thy father."


 I could not speak; I kissed his hands on my knees: and then, with
 yet more
emotion, he again blessed me, and hurried out of the room,-leaving
me almost drowned in tears.


 Oh, Sir, all goodness as you are, how much will you feel for your
 Evelina,
during a scene of such agitation! I pray Heaven to accept the tribute
of his remorse, and restore him to tranquillity!


 When I was sufficiently composed to return to the parlour, I
 found Lord
Orville waiting for me with the utmost anxiety:-and then a new scene of
emotion, though of a far different nature, awaited me; for I learned
by Mr.  Macartney, that this noblest of men had insisted the so-long
supposed Miss Belmont should be considered, indeed, as my sister,
and as the co-heiress of my father; though not in law, in justice, he
says, she ought ever to be treated as the daughter of Sir John Belmont.


 Oh! Lord Orville!-it shall be the sole study of my happy life,
 to express,
better than by words, the sense I have of your exalted benevolence
and greatness of mind!
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXXI. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 
 Clifton, Oct. 12th.


 THIS morning, early, I received the following letter from Sir Clement
Willoughby:


         "To Miss Anville.


          "I HAVE this moment received intelligence that preparations
          are actually making for your marriage with Lord Orville.


          "Imagine not that I write with the imbecile idea of
          rendering those
        preparations abortive. No, I am not so mad. My sole view is
        to explain the motive of my conduct in a particular instance,
        and to obviate the accusation of treachery which may be laid
        to my charge.


          "My unguarded behaviour, when I last saw you, has, probably,
          already
        acquainted you, that the letter I then saw you reading was
        written by myself. For your further satisfaction, let me have
        the honour of informing you, that the letter you had designed
        for Lord Orville, had fallen into my hands.


          "However I may have been urged on by a passion the most
          violent that
        ever warmed the heart of man, I can by no means calmly submit
        to be stigmatized for an action seemingly so dishonourable;
        and it is for this reason that I trouble you with this
        justification.


          "Lord Orville,-the happy Orville, whom you are so ready to
        bless,-had made me believe he loved you not;-nay, that he
        held you in contempt.


          "Such were my thoughts of his sentiments of you, when I got
        possession of the letter you meant to send him. I pretend
        not to vindicate either the means I used to obtain it, or
        the action of breaking the seal; but I was impelled, by an
        impetuous curiosity, to discover the terms upon which you
        wrote to him.


          "The letter, however, was wholly unintelligible to me,
          and the
        perusal of it only added to my perplexity.


          "A tame suspense I was not born to endure, and I determined
          to clear
        my doubts at all hazards and events.


          "I answered it, therefore, in Orville's name.


          "The views which I am now going to acknowledge, must,
          infallibly,
        incur your displeasure;-yet I scorn all palliation.


          "Briefly, then, I concealed your letter to prevent a
          discovery of
        your capacity; and I wrote you an answer, which I hoped would
        prevent your wishing for any other.


          "I am well aware of every thing which can be said upon
          this subject.
        Lord Orville will, possibly, think himself ill-used; but I am
        extremely indifferent as to his opinion; nor do I now write
        by way of offering any apology to him, but merely to make
        known to yourself the reasons by which I have been governed.


          "I intend to set off next week for the Continent. Should his
        Lordship have any commands for me in the mean time, I shall
        be glad to receive them. I say not this by way of defiance,-I
        should blush to be suspected of so doing through an indirect
        channel; but simply that, if you show him this letter, he
        may know I dare defend, as well as excuse, my conduct.
          "CLEMENT WILLOUGHBY."




 What a strange letter! how proud and how piqued does its writer
 appear! To
what alternate meanness and rashness do the passions lead, when reason
and self-denial do not oppose them! Sir Clement is conscious he has
acted dishonourably; yet the same unbridled vehemence, which urged
him to gratify a blameable curiosity, will sooner prompt him to risk
his life, than, confess his misconduct. The rudeness of his manner of
writing to me, springs, from the same cause: the proof which he has
received of my indifference to him, has stung him to the soul, and he
has neither the delicacy nor forbearance to disguise his displeasure.


 I determined not to show this letter to Lord Orville, and thought
 it most
prudent to let Sir Clement know I should not. I therefore wrote the
following note:


          "To Sir Clement Willoughby.


         "SIR,


         "The letter you have been pleased to address to me, is
         so little
        calculated to afford Lord Orville any satisfaction, that you
        may depend upon my carefully keeping it from his sight. I will
        bear you no resentment for what is past; but I most earnestly
        intreat, nay implore, that you will not write again, while in
        your present frame of mind, by any channel, direct or indirect.


         "I hope you will have much pleasure in your promised
         expedition; and
        I beg leave to assure you of my good wishes."




Not knowing by what name to sign, I was obliged to send it without any.


The preparations which Sir Clement mentions, go on just as if your
consent were arrived: it is in vain that I expostulate; Lord Orville
says, should any objections be raised, all shall be given up; but
that, as his hopes forbid him to expect any, he must proceed as if
already assured of your concurrence.


We have had, this afternoon, a most interesting conversation, in
which we have traced our sentiments of each other from our first
acquaintance. I have made him confess how ill he thought of me upon
my foolish giddiness at Mrs.  Stanley's ball; but he flatters me
with assurances, that every succeeding time he saw me, I appeared to
something less and less disadvantage.


When I expressed my amazement that he could honour with his choice a
girl who seemed so infinitely, in every respect, beneath his alliance,
he frankly owned, that he had fully intended making more minute
inquiries into my family and connections; particularly concerning
those people he saw me with at Marybone, before he acknowledged his
prepossession in my favour: but seeing me again, put him quite off
his guard; and, "divesting him of prudence, left him nothing but
love." These were his words; and yet, he has repeatedly assured me,
that his partiality has known no bounds from the time of my residing
at Clifton.  * * * * * *


Mr. Macartney has just been with me, on an embassy from my father. He
has sent me his kindest love and assurances of favour; and desired
to know if I am happy in the prospect of changing my situation,
and if there is any thing I can name which he can do for me. And, at
the same time, Mr. Macartney delivered to me a draught on my father's
banker for a thousand pounds, which he insisted that I should receive
entirely for my own use, and expend in equipping myself properly for
the new rank of life to which I seem destined.


I am sure I need not say how much I was penetrated by this goodness:
I wrote my thanks, and acknowledged, frankly, that if I could see
him restored to tranquillity, my heart would be without a wish.

</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXXII. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 
 Clifton, Oct. 13th.


THE time approaches now when I hope we shall meet;-yet I cannot
sleep;-great joy is a restless as sorrow,-and therefore I will continue
my journal.


As I had never had an opportunity of seeing Bath, a party was formed
last night for showing me that celebrated city; and this morning, after
breakfast, we set out in three phaetons. Lady Louisa and Mrs. Beaumont
with Lord Merton; Mr. Coverley, Mr. Lovel, and Mrs. Selwyn; and myself
with Lord Orville.


We had hardly proceeded half a mile, when a gentleman from the
post-chaise which came gallopping after us, called out to the
servants, "Holla, my lads!-pray, is one Miss Anville in any of them
thing-em-bobs?"


I immediately recollected the voice of Captain Mirvan; and Lord
Orville stopped the phaeton. He was out of the chaise, and with us
in a moment. "So, Miss Anville," cried he, "how do you do? So I hear
you're Miss Belmont now;-pray, how does old Madame French do?"


"Madame Duval," said I, "is, I believe, very well."


"I hope she is in good case," said he, winking significantly, "and
won't flinch at seeing service: she has laid by long enough to refit
and be made tight. And pray how does poor Monseer Doleful do? Is he
as lank-jawed as ever?"


"They are neither of them," said I, "in Bristol."


"No!" cried he, with a look of disappointment; "but surely the old
dowager intends coming to the wedding! 'twill be a most excellent
opportunity to show off her best Lyons silk. Besides, I purpose to
dance a new fashioned jig with her. Don't you know when she'll come?"


"I have no reason to expect her at all."


"No!-'Fore George, this here's the worst news I'd wish to hear!-why
I've thought of nothing all the way, but what trick I should serve
her."


"You have been very obliging!" said I, laughing.


"O, I promise you," cried he, "our Moll would never have wheedled
me into this jaunt, if I'd known she was not here; for, to let you
into the secret, I fully intended to have treated the old buck with
another frolic."


"Did Miss Mirvan, then, persuade you to this journey?"


"Yes, and we've been travelling all night."


"We!" cried I: "Is Miss Mirvan, then, with you?"


"What, Molly?-yes, she's in that there chaise."


"Good God, Sir, why did you not tell me sooner?" cried I; and
immediately, with Lord Orville's assistance, I jumped out of the
phaeton, and ran to the dear girl. Lord Orville opened the chaise
door; and I am sure I need not tell you what unfeigned joy accompanied
our meeting.


We both begged we might not be parted during the ride; and Lord
Orville was so good as to invite Captain Mirvan into his phaeton.


I think I was hardly ever more rejoiced than at this so seasonable
visit from my dear Maria; who had no sooner heard the situation of
my affairs, than with the assistance of Lady Howard, and her kind
mother, she besought her father with such earnestness to consent
to the journey, that he had not been able to withstand their united
intreaties; though she owned that, had he not expected to have met with
Madame Duval, she believes he would not so readily have yielded. They
arrived at Mrs. Beaumont's but a few minutes after we were out of
sight, and overtook us without much difficulty.


I say nothing of our conversation, because you may so well suppose
both the subjects we chose, and our manner of discussing them.


We all stopped at a great hotel, where we were obliged to enquire for
a room, as Lady Louisa, fatigued to death, desired to take something
before we began our rambles.


As soon as the party was assembled, the Captain, abruptly saluting me,
said, "So, Miss Belmont, I wish you joy; so I hear you've quarrelled
with your new name already?"


"Me!-no, indeed, Sir."


"Then please for to tell me the reason you're in such a hurry to
change it?"


"Miss Belmont!" cried Mr. Lovel. Looking around him with the utmost
astonishment: "I beg pardon;-but, if it is not impertinent,-I must
beg leave to say I always understood that lady's name was Anville."


"'Fore George," cried the Captain, "it runs in my head, I've seen you
somewhere before! And now I think on't, pray a'n't you the person
I saw at the play one night, and who didn't know, all the time,
whether it was a tragedy or a comedy, or a concert of fiddlers?"


"I believe, Sir," said Mr. Lovel, stammering, "I, had once,-I think-the
pleasure of seeing you last spring."


"Aye, and if I live an hundred springs," answered he, "I shall never
forget it; by Jingo, it has served me for a most excellent good joke
ever since.  Well, howsomever, I'm glad to see you still in the land
of the living," (shaking him roughly by the hand.) "Pray, if a body
may be so bold, how much a night may you give at present to keep the
undertakers aloof?"


"Me, Sir!" said Mr. Lovel, very much discomposed; "I protest I never
thought myself in such imminent danger as to-really, Sir, I don't
understand you."


"O, you don't! why then I'll make free for to explain myself. Gentlemen
and Ladies, I'll tell you what; do you know this here gentleman,
simple as he sits there, pays five shillings a-night to let his
friends know he's alive!"


"And very cheap too," said Mrs. Selwyn, "if we consider the value of
the intelligence."


Lady Louisa being now refreshed, we proceeded upon our expedition.


The charming city of Bath answered all my expectations. The
Crescent, the prospect from it, and the elegant symmetry of the
Circus, delighted me. The Parades, I own, rather disappointed me;
one of them is scarce preferable to some of the best paved streets
in London; and the other, though it affords a beautiful prospect,
a charming view of Prior Park and of the Avon, yet wanted something
in itself of more striking elegance than a mere broad pavement,
to satisfy the ideas I had formed of it.


At the pump-room, I was amazed at the public exhibition of the ladies
in the bath; it is true, their heads are covered with bonnets; but
the very idea of being seen, in such a situation, by whoever pleases
to look, is indelicate.


"'Fore George," said the Captain, looking into the bath, "this would
be a most excellent place for old Madame French to dance a fandango
in! By Jingo, I wou'dn't wish for better sport than to swing her
round this here pond!"


"She would be very much obliged to you," said Lord Orville, "for so
extraordinary a mark of your favour."


"Why, to let you know," answered the Captain, "she hit my fancy
mightily; I never took so much to an old tabby before."


"Really now," cried Mr. Lovel, looking also into the bath, "I must
confess it is, to me, very incomprehensible why the ladies choose
that frightful unbecoming dress to bathe in! I have often pondered
very seriously upon the subject, but could never hit upon the reason."


"Well, I declare," said Lady Louisa, "I should like of all things
to set something new a-going; I always hated bathing, because one
can get no pretty dress for it! now do, there's a good creature,
try to help me to something."


"Who, me!-O, dear Ma'am," said he, simpering, "I can't pretend to
assist a person of your Ladyship's tastes; besides, I have not the
least head for fashions.-I really don't think I ever invented above
three in my life! But I never had the least turn for dress,-never
any notion of fancy or elegance."


"O fie, Mr. Lovel! how can you talk so?-don't we all know that you
lead the ton in the beau monde? I declare, I think you dress better
than any body."


"O, dear Ma'am, you confuse me to the last degree! I dress well!-I
protest I don't think I'm ever fit to be seen! I'm often shocked to
death to think what a figure I go. If your Ladyship will believe me,
I was full half an hour this morning thinking what I should put on!"


"Odds my life," cried the Captain, "I wish I'd been near you! I warrant
I'd have quickened your motions a little; Half an hour thinking what
you'd put on; and who the deuce do you think cares the snuff of a
candle whether you've any thing on or not?"


"O pray, Captain," cried Mrs. Selwyn, "don't be angry with the
gentleman for thinking, whatever be the cause, for I assure you he
makes no common practice of offending in that way."


"Really, Ma'am, you're prodigiously kind," said Mr. Lovel, angrily.


"Pray now," said the Captain, "did you ever get a ducking in that
there place yourself?"


"A ducking, Sir!" repeated Mr. Lovel: "I protest I think that's rather
an odd term!-but if you mean a bathing, it is an honour I have had
many times."


"And pray, if a body may be so bold, what do you do with that
frizle-frize top of your own? Why, I'll lay you what you will, there
is fat and grease enough on your crown to buoy you up, if you were
to go in head downwards."


"And I don't know," cried Mrs. Selwyn, "but that might be the easiest
way; for I'm sure it would be the lightest."


"For the matter of that there," said the Captain, "you must make
him a soldier, before you can tell which is lightest, head or
heels. Howsomever, I'd lay ten pounds to a shilling, I could whisk
him so dexterously over into the pool, that he should light plump
upon his foretop and turn round like a tetotum."


"Done!" cried Lord Merton; "I take your odds."


"Will you?" returned he; "why, then, 'fore George, I'd do it as soon
as say Jack Robinson."


"He, he!" faintly laughed Mr. Lovel, as he moved abruptly from the
window; "'pon honour, this is pleasant enough; but I don't see what
right any body has to lay wagers about one without one's consent."


"There, Lovel, you are out," cried Mr. Coverley, "any man may lay
what wager about you he will; your consent is nothing to the purpose:
he may lay that your nose is a sky-blue, if he pleases."


"Ay," said Mrs. Selwyn, "or that your mind is more adorned than your
person;-or any absurdity whatsoever."


"I protest," said Mr. Lovel, "I think it's a very disagreeable
privilege, and I must beg that nobody may take such a liberty with me."


"Like enough you may," cried the Captain;" but what's that to the
purpose?  Suppose I've a mind to lay that you've never a tooth in
your head-pray, how will you hinder me?"


"You'll allow me, at least, Sir, to take the liberty of asking how
you'll prove it?"


"How?-why, by knocking them all down your throat."


"Knocking them all down my throat, Sir!" repeated Mr. Lovel, with a
look of horror; "I protest I never heard any thing so shocking in my
life! And I must beg leave to observe, that no wager, in my opinion,
could justify such a barbarous action."


Here Lord Orville interfered, and hurried us to our carriages.


We returned in the same order we came. Mrs. Beaumont invited all
the party to dinner, and has been so obliging as to beg Miss Mirvan
may continue at her house during her stay. The Captain will lodge at
the Wells.


The first half-hour after our return was devoted to hearing Mr. Lovel's
apologies for dining in his riding-dress.


Mrs. Beaumont then, addressing herself to Miss Mirvan and me, inquired
how we liked Bath?


"I hope," said Mr. Lovel, "the ladies do not call this seeing Bath."


"No!-what should ail 'em?" cried the Captain, "do you suppose they
put their eyes in their pockets?"


"No, Sir; but I fancy you will find no person-that is-no person of
any condition-call going about a few places in a morning seeing Bath."


"Mayhap, then," said the literal Captain, "you think we should see
it better by going about at midnight?"


"No, Sir, no," said Mr. Lovel, with a supercilious smile, "I perceive
you don't understand me;-we should never call it seeing Bath, without
going at the right season."


"Why, what a plague, then," demanded he, "can you only see at one
season of the year?"


Mr. Lovel again smiled; but seemed superior to making any answer.


"The Bath amusements," said Lord Orville, "have a sameness in them,
which, after a short time, renders them rather insipid; but the
greatest objection that can be made to the place, is the encouragement
it gives to gamesters."


"Why, I hope, my Lord, you would not think of abolishing gaming,"
cried Lord Merton, "'tis the very zest of life! Devil take me if I
could live without it."


"I am sorry for it," said Lord Orville, gravely, and looking at
Lady Louisa.


"Your Lordship is no judge of this subject," continued the other;
"but if once we could get you to a gaming-table, you'd never be happy
away from it!"


"I hope, my Lord," cried Lady Louisa, "that nobody here ever occasions
your quitting it."


"Your Ladyship," said Lord Merton, recollecting himself, "has power
to make me quit any thing."


"Except herself," said Mr. Coverley. "Egad, my Lord, I think I've
helpt you out there!"


"You men of wit, Jack," answered his Lordship, "are always ready;-for
my part, I don't pretend to any talents that way."


"Really, my Lord?" asked the sarcastic Mrs. Selwyn; "well, that is
wonderful, considering success would be so much in your power."


"Pray, Ma'am," said Mr. Lovel to Lady Louisa, "has your Ladyship
heard the news?"


"News!-what news?"


"Why, the report circulating at the Wells concerning a certain person."


"O Lord, no: pray tell me what it is?"


"O no, Ma'am, I beg your La'ship will excuse me; 'tis a profound
secret, and I would not have mentioned it, if I had not thought you
knew it."


"Lord, now, how can you be so monstrous? I declare, now, you're a
provoking creature! But come, I know you'll tell me;-won't you now?"


"Your La'ship knows I am but too happy to obey you; but, 'pon honour,
I can't speak a word, if you won't all promise me the most inviolable
secrecy."


"I wish you'd wait for that from me," said the Captain, "and I'll
give you my word you'd be dumb for one while. Secrecy, quoth-a!-'Fore
George, I wonder you an't ashamed to mention such a word, when you
talk of telling it to a woman. Though, for the matter of that, I'd
as lieve blab it to the whole sex at once, as to go for to tell it
to such a thing as you."


"Such a thing as me, Sir!" said Mr. Lovel, letting fall his knife
and fork, and looking very important; "I really have not the honour
to understand your expression."


"It's all one for that," said the Captain; "you may have it explained
whenever you like it."


"'Pon honour, Sir," returned Mr. Lovel, "I must take the liberty to
tell you, that I should be extremely offended, but that I suppose
it to be some sea-phrase; and therefore I'll let it pass without
further notice."


Lord Orville, then, to change the discourse, asked Miss Mirvan if
she should spend the ensuing winter in London?


"No, to be sure," said the Captain, "what should she for? She saw
all that was to be seen before."


"Is London, then," said Mr. Lovel, smiling at Lady Louisa, "only to
be regarded as a sight?"


"Why, pray, Mr. Wiseacre, how are you pleased for to regard it
yourself?-Answer me to that."


"O Sir, my opinion, I fancy, you would hardly find intelligible. I
don't understand sea-phrases enough to define it to your
comprehension. Does not your La'ship think the task would be rather
difficult?"


"O Lard, yes," cried Lady Louisa; "I declare I'd as soon teach my
parrot to talk Welsh."


"Ha! ha! ha! Admirable;-'Pon honour, your La'ship's quite in luck
to-day; but that, indeed, your La'ship is every day. Though, to be
sure, it is but candid to acknowledge, that the gentlemen of the ocean
have a set of ideas, as well as a dialect, so opposite to our's, that
it is by no means surprising they should regard London as a mere show,
that may be seen by being looked at. Ha!  ha! ha!"


"Ha! ha!" echoed Lady Louisa; "Well, I declare you are the drollest
creature."


"He! he! 'Pon honour, I can't help laughing at the conceit of seeing
London in a few weeks!"


"And what a plague should hinder you?" cried the Captain; "do you
want to spend a day in every street?"


Here again Lady Louisa and Mr. Lovel interchanged smiles.


"Why, I warrant you, if I had the showing it, I'd haul you from
St. James's to Wapping the very first morning."


The smiles were now, with added contempt, repeated; which the Captain
observing, looked very fiercely at Mr. Lovel, and said, "Hark'ee my
spark, none of your grinning!-'tis a lingo I don't understand; and
if you give me any more of it, I shall go near to lend you a box o'
the ear."


"I protest, Sir," said Mr. Lovel, turning extremely pale, "I think
it's taking a very particular liberty with a person, to talk to one
in such a style as this!"


"It's like you may," returned the Captain: "but give a good gulp, and
I'll warrant you'll swallow it." Then, calling for a glass of ale, with
a very provoking and significant nod, he drank to his easy digestion.


Mr. Lovel made no answer, but looked extremely sullen; and, soon after,
we left the gentlemen to themselves.


I had then two letters delivered to me; one from Lady Howard and
Mrs. Mirvan, which contained the kindest congratulations; and the
other from Madame Duval;-but not a word from you,-to my no small
surprise and concern.


Madame Duval seems greatly rejoiced at my late intelligence: a violent
cold, she says, prevents her coming to Bristol. The Branghtons, she
tells me, are all well; Miss Polly is soon to be married to Mr. Brown;
but Mr. Smith has changed his lodgings, "which," she adds, "has made
the house extremely dull.  However, that's not the worst news; pardi,
I wish it was! but I've been used like nobody,-for Monsieur Du Bois
has had the baseness to go back to France without me." In conclusion,
she assures me, as you prognosticated she would, that I shall be sole
heiress of all she is worth, when Lady Orville.


At tea-time, we were joined by all the gentlemen but Captain Mirvan,
who went to the hotel where he was to sleep, and made his daughter
accompany him, to separate her trumpery, as he called it, from his
clothes.


As soon as they were gone, Mr. Lovel, who still appeared extremely
sulky, said, "I protest, I never saw such a vulgar, abusive fellow
in my life, as that Captain: 'pon honour, I believe he came here for
no purpose in the world but to pick a quarrel; however, for my part,
I vow I wo'n't humour him."


"I declare," cried Lady Louisa, "he put me in a monstrous fright;-I
never heard any body talk so shocking in my life!"


"I think," said Mrs. Selwyn, with great solemnity, "he threatened to
box your ears, Mr. Lovel;-did not he?"


"Really, Ma'am," said Mr. Lovel, colouring, "if one was to mind every
thing those low kind of people say, one should never be at rest for
one impertinence or other; so I think the best way is to be above
taking any notice of them."


"What," said Mrs. Selwyn, with the same gravity, "and so receive the
blow in silence!"


During this discourse, I heard the Captain's chaise stop at the door,
and ran downstairs to meet Maria. She was alone, and told me that
her father, who, she was sure, had some scheme in agitation against
Mr. Lovel, had sent her on before him. We continued in the parlour
till his return, and were joined by Lord Orville, who begged me not to
insist on a patience so unnatural, as submitting to be excluded our
society. And let me, my dear Sir, with a grateful heart let me own,
I never before passed half an hour in such perfect felicity.


I believe we were all sorry when the Captain returned; yet his
inward satisfaction, from however different a cause, did not seem
inferior to what our's had been. He chucked Maria under the chin,
rubbed his hands, and was scarce able to contain the fullness of his
glee. We all attended him to the drawing room; where, having composed
his countenance, without any previous attention to Mrs. Beaumont,
he marched up to Mr. Lovel, and abruptly said, "Pray, have you e'er
a brother in these here parts?"


"Me, Sir?-no, thank Heaven, I'm free from all encumbrances of that
sort."


"Well," cried the Captain, "I met a person just now so like you,
I could have sworn he had been your twin brother."


"It would have been a most singular pleasure to me," said Mr. Lovel,
"if I also could have seen him; for, really, I have not the least
notion what sort of a person I am, and I have a prodigious curiosity
to know."


Just then the Captain's servant, opening the door, said, "A little
gentleman below desires to see one Mr. Lovel."


"Beg him to walk up stairs," said Mrs. Beaumont. "But, pray what is
the reason William is out of the way?"


The man shut the door without any answer.


"I can't imagine who it is," said Mr. Lovel: "I recollect no little
gentleman of my acquaintance now at Bristol,-except, indeed the Marquis
of Charlton;-but I don't much fancy it can be him. Let me see, who
else is there so very little?"


A confused noise among the servants now drew all eyes towards the
door: the impatient Captain hastened to open it; and then, clapping
his hands, called out, "'Fore George, 'tis the same person I took
for your relation!"


And then, to the utter astonishment of every body but himself, he
hauled into the room a monkey, full-dressed, and extravagantly -e;
la mode!


The dismay of the company was almost general. Poor Mr. Lovel seemed
thunderstruck with indignation and surprise: Lady Louisa began a
scream, which for some time was incessant; Miss Mirvan and I jumped
involuntarily upon the seats of our chairs; Mrs. Beaumont herself
followed our example; Lord Orville placed himself before me as a guard;
and Mrs. Selwyn, Lord Merton, and Mr. Coverley, burst into a loud,
immoderate, ungovernable fit of laughter, in which they were joined by
the Captain, till, unable to support himself, he rolled on the floor.


The first voice which made its way through this general noise was that
of Lady Louisa, which her fright and screaming rendered extremely
shrill. "Take it away!" cried she, "take the monster away;-I shall
faint, I shall faint if you don't!"


Mr. Lovel, irritated beyond endurance, angrily demanded of the Captain
what he meant?


"Mean?" cried the Captain, as soon as he was able to speak; "why
only to shew you in your proper colours." Then rising, and pointing
to the monkey, "Why now, ladies and gentlemen, I'll be judged by you
all!-Did you ever see any thing more like?-Odds my life, if it wasn't
for this here tail, you wouldn't know one from t'other."


"Sir," cried Mr. Lovel, stamping, "I shall take a time to make you
feel my wrath."


"Come now," continued the regardless Captain, "just for the fun's sake,
doff your coat and waistcoat, and swop with Monseer Grinagain here;
and I'll warrant you'll not know yourself which is which."


"Not know myself from a monkey!-I assure you, Sir, I'm not to be used
in this manner, and I won't bear it-curse me if I will!"


"Why, hey-day!" cried the Captain, "what, is master in a passion?-well,
don't be angry:-come, he shan't hurt you;-here, shake a paw with
him:-why, he'll do you no harm, man!-come, kiss and be friends!"


"Who, I?" cried Mr. Lovel, almost mad with vexation; "as I'm a living
creature, I would not touch him for a thousand worlds!"


"Send him a challenge," cried Mr. Coverley, "and I'll be your second."


"Ay, do," said the Captain; "and I'll be second to my friend, Monseer
Clapperclaw here. Come to it at once!-tooth and nail!"


"God forbid!" cried Mr. Lovel, retreating, "I would sooner trust my
person with a mad bull!"


"I don't like the look of him myself," said Lord Merton, "for he
grins most horribly."


"Oh, I'm frightened out of my senses!" cried Lady Louisa, "take him
away, or I shall die!"


"Captain," said Lord Orville, "the ladies are alarmed; and I must
beg you would send the monkey away."


"Why, where can be the mighty harm of one monkey more than
another?" answered the Captain: "howsomever, if its agreeable to the
ladies, suppose we turn them out together?"


"What do you mean by that, Sir?" cried Mr. Lovel, lifting up his cane.


"What do you mean?" cried the Captain, fiercely, "be so good as to
down with your cane."


Poor Mr. Lovel, too much intimidated to stand his ground, yet too
much enraged to submit, turned hastily round, and, forgetful of
consequences, vented his passion by giving a furious blow to the
monkey.


The creature darting forwards, sprung instantly upon him; and,
clinging round his neck, fastened his teeth to one of his ears.


I was really sorry for the poor man; who, though an egregious fop,
had committed no offence that merited such chastisement.


It was impossible now to distinguish whose screams were loudest,
those of Mr.  Lovel, or of the terrified Lady Louisa, who I believe,
thought her own turn was approaching: but the unrelenting Captain
roared with joy.


Not so Lord Orville: ever humane, generous, and benevolent he quitted
his charge, who he saw was wholly out of danger, and seizing the monkey
by the collar, made him loosen the ear; and then with a sudden swing,
flung him out of the room, and shut the door.


Poor Mr. Lovel, almost fainting with terror, sunk upon the floor,
crying out, "Oh, I shall die, I shall die!-Oh, I'm bit to death!"


"Captain Mirvan," said Mrs. Beaumont, with no little indignation,
"I must own I don't perceive the wit of this action; and I am sorry
to have such cruelty practised in my house."


"Why Lord, Ma'am," said the Captain, when his rapture abated
sufficiently for speech, "how could I tell they'd fall out so?-By
jingo, I brought him to be a messmate for t'other."


"Egad," said Mr. Coverley, "I would not have been served so for a
thousand pounds."


"Why, then, there's the odds of it," said the Captain; "for you
see he is served so for nothing. But come," turning to Mr. Lovel,
"be of good heart, all may end well yet, and you and Monseer Longtail
be as good friends as ever."


"I'm surprised, Mrs. Beaumont," cried Mr. Lovel, starting up, "that
you can suffer a person under your roof to be treated so inhumanly."


"What argufies so many words?" said the unfeeling Captain; "it is but
a slit of the ear; it only looks as if you had been in the pillory."


"Very true," added Mrs. Selwyn; "and who knows but it may acquire
you the credit of being an anti-ministerial writer?"


"I protest," cried Mr. Lovel, looking ruefully at his dress, "my new
riding suit's all over blood!"


"Ha, ha, ha," cried the Captain, "see what comes of studying for an
hour what you shall put on!"


Mr. Lovel then walked to the glass; and, looking at the place,
exclaimed, "Oh heaven, what a monstrous wound! my ear will never be
fit to be seen again!"


"Why then," said the Captain, "you must hide it;-'tis but wearing
a wig."


"A wig!" repeated the affrighted Mr. Lovel; "I wear a wig?-no, not
if you would give me a thousand pounds an hour!"


"I declare," said Lady Louisa, "I never heard such a shocking proposal
in my life!"


Lord Orville, then, seeing no prospect that the altercation would
cease, proposed to the Captain to walk. He assented; and having given
Mr. Lovel a nod of exultation, accompanied his Lordship down stairs.


"'Pon honour," said Mr. Lovel, the moment the door was shut, "that
fellow is the greatest brute in nature! he ought not to be admitted
into a civilized society."


"Lovel," said Mr. Coverley, affecting to whisper, "you must certainly
pink him: you must not put up with such an affront."


"Sir," said Mr. Lovel, "with any common person I should not deliberate
an instant; but really with a fellow who has done nothing but fight
all his life, 'pon honour, Sir, I can't think of it!"


"Lovel," said Lord Merton, in the same voice, "you must call him
to account."


"Every man," said he, pettishly, "is the best judge of his own affairs;
and I don't ask the honour of any person's advice."


"Egad, Lovel," said Mr. Coverley, "you're in for it!-you can't possibly
be off!"


"Sir," cried he, very impatiently, "upon any proper occasion I should
be as ready to show my courage as any body; but as to fighting for
such a trifle as this-I protest I should blush to think of it!"


"A trifle!" cried Mrs. Selwyn, "good Heaven! and have you made this
astonishing riot about a trifle?"


"Ma'am," answered the poor wretch, in great confusion, "I did not
know at first but that my cheek might have been bit; but as 'tis no
worse, why, it does not a great deal signify. Mrs. Beaumont, I have
the honour to wish you a good evening; I'm sure my carriage must be
waiting." And then, very abruptly, he left the room.


What a commotion has this mischief-loving Captain raised! Were I
to remain here long, even the society of my dear Maria could scarce
compensate for the disturbances which he excites.


When he returned, and heard of the quiet exit of Mr. Lovel, his triumph
was intolerable. "I think, I think," he cried, "I have peppered him
well! I'll warrant he won't give an hour tomorrow morning to settling
what he shall put on; why, his coat," turning to me, "would be a most
excellent match for old Madame Furbelow's best Lyons silk! 'Fore
George, I'd desire no better sport than to have that there old cat
here to go her snacks!"


All the company the, Lord Orville, Miss Mirvan, and myself excepted,
played at cards; and we -oh, how much better did we pass our time!


While we were engaged in a most delightful conversation, a servant
brought me a letter, which he told me had by some accident been
mislaid. Judge of my feelings when I saw, my dearest Sir, your revered
hand-writing! My emotions soon betrayed to Lord Orville whom the
letter was from; the importance of the contents he well knew; and,
assuring me I should not be seen by the card-players, he besought me
to open it without delay.


Open it, indeed, I did-but read it I could not;-the willing, yet
awful consent you have granted-the tenderness of your expressions-the
certainty that no obstacle remained to my eternal union with the loved
owner of my heart, gave me sensations too various, and, though joyful,
too little placid for observation. Finding myself unable to proceed,
and blinded by the tears of gratitude and delight, which started into
my eyes, I gave over the attempt of reading till I retired to my own
room; and, having no voice to answer the enquiries of Lord Orville,
I put the letter into his hands, and left it to speak both for me
and itself.


Lord Orville was himself affected by your kindness: he kissed the
letter as he returned it; and, pressing my hand affectionately to
his heart, "Your are now," said he, in a low voice, "all my own! Oh,
my Evelina, how will my soul find room for its happiness?-it seems
already bursting!" I could make no reply, indeed I hardly spoke
another word the rest of the evening; so little talkative is the
fulness of contentment.


O, my dearest Sir, the thankfulness of my heart I must pour forth at
our meeting, when, at your feet, my happiness receives its confirmation
from your blessing; and when my noble-minded, my beloved Lord Orville,
presents to you the highly-honoured, and thrice-happy Evelina.


A few lines I will endeavour to write on Thursday, which shall be
sent off express, to give you, should nothing intervene, yet more
certain assurance of our meeting.


Now then, therefore, for the first-and probably the last time I
shall ever own the name, permit me to sign myself, Most dear Sir,
your gratefully affectionate, EVELINA BELMONT.


Lady Louisa, at her own particular desire, will be present at the
ceremony, as well as Miss Mirvan and Mrs. Selwyn: Mr. Macartney will,
the same morning, be united to my foster-sister; and my father himself
will give us both away.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXXIII. MR. VILLARS TO EVELINA.


EVERY wish of my soul is now fulfilled-for the felicity of my Evelina
is equal to her worthiness!


Yes, my child, thy happiness is engraved in golden characters upon
the tablets of my heart; and their impression is indelible: for,
should the rude and deep-searching hand of Misfortune attempt to
pluck them from their repository, the fleeting fabric of life would
give way; and in tearing from my vitals the nourishment by which they
are supported, she would but grasp at a shadow insensible to her touch.


Give thee my consent?-Oh thou joy, comfort, and pride of my life, how
cold is that word to express the fervency of my approbation! Yes, I do
indeed give thee my consent; and so thankfully, that, with the humblest
gratitude to Providence, I would seal it with the remnant of my days.


Hasten then, my love, to bless me with thy presence, and to receive
the blessings with which my fond heart overflows!-And oh, my Evelina,
hear and assist in one only, humble, but ardent prayer, which yet
animates my devotions: That the height of bliss to which thou art
rising may not render thee giddy, but that the purity of thy mind may
form the brightest splendour of thy prosperity!-and that the weak
and aged frame of thy almost idolizing parent, nearly worn out by
time, past afflictions, and infirmities, may yet be able to sustain
a meeting with all its better part holds dear; and then, that all the
wounds which the former severity of fortune inflicted, may be healed
and purified by the ultimate consolation of pouring forth my dying
words in blessings on my child!-closing these joy-streaming eyes in
her presence, and breathing my last faint sighs in her loved arms!


Grieve not, oh child of my care! Grieve not at the inevitable
moment! but may thy own end be equally propitious! Oh, may'st thou,
when full of days, and full of honour, sink down as gently to rest!-be
loved as kindly, watched as tenderly, as thy happy father! And mayest
thou, when thy glass is run, be sweetly, but not bitterly, mourned by
some remaining darling of thy affections-some yet surviving Evelina!
ARTHUR VILLARS.


</CHAPTER>
<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXXIV. EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS.


ALL is over, my dearest Sir; and the fate of your Evelina is
decided! This morning, with fearful joy and trembling gratitude,
she united herself for ever with the object of her dearest, her
eternal affection.


I have time for no more; the chaise now waits which is to conduct
me to dear Berry Hill, and to the arms of the best of men.  EVELINA.
THE END.

</CHAPTER>
