<CHAPTER>
 LETTER LXVII. MR. VILLARS TO EVELINA.  
Berry Hill, Sept. 28th.


DEAD to the world, and equally insensible to its pleasures or its
pains, I long since bad adieu to all joy, and defiance to all sorrow,
but what should spring from my Evelina,-sole source, to me, of all
earthly felicity. How strange, then, is it, that the letter in which
she tells me she is the happiest of human beings, should give me most
mortal inquietude!

Alas, my child!-that innocence, the first, best gift of Heaven,
should, of all others, be the blindest to its own danger,-the most
exposed to treachery,-and the least able to defend itself, in a world
where it is little known, less valued, and perpetually deceived!

Would to Heaven you were here!-then, by degrees, and with gentleness,
I might enter upon a subject too delicate for distant discussion. Yet
is it too interesting, and the situation too critical, to allow of
delay.-Oh, my Evelina, your situation is critical indeed!-your peace
of mind is at stake, and every chance for your future happiness may
depend upon the conduct of the present moment.

Hitherto I have forborne to speak with you upon the most important of
all concerns, the state of your heart:-alas, I need no information! I
have been silent, indeed, but I have not been blind.

Long, and with the deepest regret, have I perceived the ascendancy
which Lord Orville has gained upon your mind.-You will start at the
mention of his name,-you will tremble every word you read;-I grieve
to give pain to my gentle Evelina, but I dare not any longer spare her.

Your first meeting with Lord Orville was decisive. Lively, fearless,
free from all other impressions, such a man as you describe him
could not fail of exciting your admiration; and the more dangerously,
because he seemed as unconscious of his power as you of your weakness;
and therefore you had no alarm, either from his vanity of your own
prudence.

Young, animated, entirely off your guard, and thoughtless of
consequences, Imagination took the reins; and Reason, slow-paced,
though sure-footed, was unequal to the race of so eccentric and flighty
a companion. How rapid was then my Evelina's progress through those
regions of fancy and passion whither her new guide conducted her!-She
saw Lord Orville at a ball,-and he was the most amiable of men! -She
met him again at another,-and he had every virtue under Heaven!

I mean not to depreciate the merit of Lord Orville, who, one mysterious
instance alone excepted, seems to have deserved the idea you formed
of his character; but it was not time, it was not the knowledge of
his worth, obtained your regard: your new comrade had not patience
to wait any trial; her glowing pencil, dipt in the vivid colours
of her creative ideas, painted to you, at the moment of your first
acquaintance, all the excellencies, all the good and rare qualities,
which a great length of time and intimacy could alone have really
discovered.

You flattered yourself that your partiality was the effect of esteem,
founded upon a general love of merit, and a principle of justice;
and your heart, which fell the sacrifice of your error, was totally
gone ere you expected it was in danger.

A thousand times have I been upon the point of showing you the
perils of your situation; but the same inexperience which occasioned
your mistake, I hoped, with the assistance of time and absence, would
effect a cure: I was, indeed, most unwilling to destroy  your illusion,
while I dared hope it might itself contribute to the restoration of
your tranquillity; since your ignorance of the danger, and force of
your attachment, might possibly prevent that despondency with which
young people, in similar circumstances, are apt to persuade themselves,
that what is only difficult, is absolutely impossible.

But, now, since you have again met, and have become more intimate
than ever, all my hope from silence and seeming ignorance is at an end.

Awake then, my dear, my deluded child, awake to the sense of your
danger, and exert yourself to avoid the evils with which it threatens
you:-evils which, to a mind like yours, are most to be dreaded; secret
repining, and concealed, yet consuming regret! Make a noble effort for
the recovery of your peace, which now, with sorrow I see it, depends
wholly upon the presence of Lord Orville. This effort may indeed be
painful; but trust to my experience, when I assure you it is requisite.

You must quit him!-his sight is baneful to your repose, his society
is death to your future tranquillity! Believe me, my beloved child,
my heart aches for your suffering, while it dictates its necessity.

Could I flatter myself that Lord Orville would, indeed, be sensible
of your worth, and act with a nobleness of mind which should prove
it congenial to your own, then would I leave my Evelina to the
unmolested enjoyment of the cheerful society, and increasing regard,
of a man she so greatly admires: but this is not an age in which we
may trust to appearances; and imprudence is much sooner regretted
than repaired. Your health, you tell me, is much mended:-Can you then
consent to leave Bristol?-not abruptly, that I do not desire, but in a
few days from the time you receive this? I will write to Mrs. Selwyn,
and tell her how much I wish your return; and Mrs. Clinton can take
sufficient care of you.

I have meditated upon every possible expedient that might tend to
your happiness, ere I fixed upon exacting from you a compliance which
I am convinced will be most painful to you; but I can satisfy myself
in none. This will at least be safe; and as to success,-we must leave
it to time.

I am very glad to hear of Mr. Macartney's welfare.

Adieu, my dearest child! Heaven preserve and strengthen you! A.V.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
 LETTER LXVIII. EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS.  

Clifton, Sept. 28th.


SWEETLY, most sweetly, have two days more passed since I wrote:
but I have been too much engaged to be exact in my journal.

To-day has been less tranquil. It was destined for the decision of
the important bet, and has been productive of general confusion
throughout the house. It was settled that the race should be run
at five o'clock in the afternoon. Lord Merton breakfasted here, and
staid till noon. He wanted to engage the ladies to bet on his side,
in the true spirit of gaming, without seeing the racers. But he could
only prevail on Lady Louisa, as Mrs. Selwyn said she never laid a wager
against her own wishes, and Mrs. Beaumont would not take sides. As for
me, I was not applied to. It is impossible for negligence to be more
pointed than that of Lord Merton to me, in the presence of Lady Louisa.

But, just before dinner, I happened to be alone in the drawing-room,
when his Lordship suddenly returned; and, coming in with his usual
familiarity, he was beginning, "You see, Lady Louisa,-" but stopping
short, "Pray, where's every body gone?"

"Indeed I don't know, my Lord."

He then shut the door; and, with a great alteration in his face
and manner, advanced eagerly towards me, and said, "How glad I am,
my sweet girl, to meet you, at last, alone! By my soul I began to
think there was a plot against me, for I've never been able to have
you a minute to myself." And very freely he seized my hand.

I was so much surprised at this address, after having been so long
totally neglected, that I could make no other answer, than staring
at him with unfeigned astonishment.

"Why now," continued he, "if you was not the cruellest little angel
in the world, you would have helped me to some expedient: for you
see how I am watched here; Lady Louisa's eyes are never  off me. She
gives me a charming foretaste of the pleasures of a wife! However,
it won't last long."

Disgusted to the greatest degree, I attempted to draw away my hand;
but I believe I should not have succeeded if Mrs. Beaumont had not
made her appearance. He turned from me with the greatest assurance,
and said, "How are you, Ma'am?-how is Lady Louisa?-you see I can't
live a moment out of the house."

Could you, my dearest Sir, have believed it possible for such
effrontery to be in man?

Before dinner came Mr. Coverley, and, before five o'clock, Mr. Lovel
and some other company. The place marked out for the race, was a
gravel-walk in Mrs.  Beaumont's garden, and the length of the ground
twenty yards. When we were summoned to the course, the two poor old
women made their appearance. Though they seemed very healthy for
their time of life, they yet looked so weak, so infirm, so feeble,
that I could feel no sensation but that of pity at the sight. However,
this was not the general sense of the company; for they no sooner came
forward, than they were greeted with a laugh from every beholder, Lord
Orville excepted, who looked very grave during the whole transaction.
Doubtless he must be greatly discontented at the dissipated conduct and
extravagance of a man, with whom he is soon to be so nearly connected.

For some time, the scene was truly ridiculous: the agitation of the
parties concerned, and the bets that were laid upon the old women,
were absurd beyond measure. Who are you for? and whose side are you
of? was echoed from mouth to mouth by the whole company. Lord Merton
and Mr. Coverley were both so excessively gay and noisy, that I soon
found they had been free in drinking to their success. They handed,
with loud shouts, the old women to the race-ground, and encouraged
them by liberal promises to exert themselves.

When the signal was given for them to set off, the poor creatures,
feeble and frightened, ran against each other: and, neither of them
able to support the shock, they both fell on the ground.

Lord Merton and Mr. Coverley flew to their assistance. Seats were
brought for them; and they each drank a glass of wine. They complained
of being much bruised; for, heavy and helpless, they had not been
able to save themselves, but fell with their whole weight upon the
gravel. However, as they seemed equal sufferers, both parties were
too eager to have the affair deferred.

Again therefore they set off, and hobbled along, nearly even with each
other, for some time; yet frequently, to the inexpressible diversion of
the company, they stumbled and tottered; and the confused hallooing of
"Now, Coverley!" "Now, Merton!" run from side to side during the
whole affair.

Not long after, a foot of one of the poor women slipt, and with great
force she came again to the ground. Involuntarily, I sprung forward to
assist her; but Lord Merton, to whom she did not belong, stopped me,
calling out, "No foul play! No foul play!"

Mr. Coverley then, repeating the same words, went himself to help
her, and insisted that the other should stop. A debate ensued; but
the poor creature was too much hurt to move, and declared her utter
inability to make another attempt. Mr. Coverley was quite brutal:
he swore at her with unmanly rage, and seemed scarce able to refrain
even from striking her.

Lord Merton then, in great rapture, said it was a hollow thing;
but Mr.  Coverley contended, that the fall was accidental, and time
should be allowed for the woman to recover. However, all the company
being against him, he was pronounced the loser.

We then went to the drawing-room, to tea. After which, the evening
being remarkably warm, we all walked in the garden. Lord Merton was
quite riotous, and Lady Louisa in high spirits; but Mr. Coverley
endeavoured, in vain, to conceal his chagrin.

As Lord Orville was thoughtful, and walked by himself, I expected that,
as usual, I should pass unnoticed, and be left to my own meditations:
but this was not the case; for Lord Merton, entirely off his guard,
giddy equally from wine and success, was very troublesome to me;
and, regardless of the presence of Lady Louisa, which hitherto has
restrained him even from common civility, he attached himself to me,
during the walk, with a freedom of gallantry that put me extremely
out of countenance. He paid me the most high-flown compliments;
and frequently and forcibly seized my hand, though I repeatedly,
and with undissembled anger, drew it back. Lord Orville, I saw,
watched us with earnestness; and Lady Louisa's smiles were converted
into looks of disdain.

I could not bear to be thus situated; and complaining I was tired,
I quickened my pace, with intention to return to the house;  but
Lord Merton, hastily following, caught my hand, and saying the day
was his own, vowed he would not let me go.

"You must, my Lord," cried I, extremely flurried.

"You are the most charming girl in the world," said he, "and never
looked better than at this moment."

"My Lord," cried Mrs. Selwyn, advancing to us, "you don't consider,
that the better Miss Anville looks the more striking is the contrast
with your Lordship; therefore, for your own sake, I would advise you
not to hold her."

"Egad, my Lord," cried Mr. Coverley, "I don't see what right you have
to the best old, and the best young woman too, in the same day."

"Best young woman!" repeated Mr. Lovel; "'pon honour, Jack, you have
made a most unfortunate speech; however, if Lady Louisa can pardon
you,-and her Ladyship is all goodness,-I am sure nobody else can;
for you have committed an outrageous solecism in good manners."

"And pray, Sir," said Mrs. Selwyn, "under what denomination may your
own speech pass?"

Mr. Lovel, turning another way, affected not to hear her: and
Mr. Coverley, bowing to Lady Louisa, said, "Her Ladyship is well
acquainted with my devotion;-but, egad, I don't know how it is,-I
had always an unlucky turn at an epigram, and never could resist a
smart play upon words in my life."

"Pray, my Lord," cried I, "let go my hand! Pray, Mrs. Selwyn, speak
for me."

"My Lord," said Mrs. Selwyn, "in detaining Miss Anville any longer
you only lose time; for we are already as well convinced of your
valour and your strength, as if you were to hold her an age."

"My Lord," said Mrs. Beaumont, "I must beg leave to interfere: I know
not if Lady Louisa can pardon you; but as this young lady is at my
house, I do not choose to have her made uneasy."

"I pardon him!" cried Lady Louisa; "I declare I am monstrous glad to
get rid of him."

"Egad, my Lord," cried Mr. Coverley, "while you are grasping at a
shadow, you'll lose a substance; you'd best make your peace while
you can."

"Pray, Mr. Coverley, be quiet," said Lady Louisa, peevishly; "for I
declare I won't speak to him. Brother," taking hold of Lord Orville's
arm, "will you walk in with me?"

"Would to Heaven," cried I, frightened to see how much Lord Merton
was in liquor, "that I too had a brother!-and then I should not be
exposed to such treatment."

Lord Orville, instantly quitting Lady Louisa, said, "Will Miss Anville
allow me the honour of taking that title?" and then, without waiting
for any answer, he disengaged me from Lord Merton; and, handing me to
Lady Louisa, "Let me," added he, "take equal care of both my sisters;"
and then, desiring her, to take hold of one arm, and begging me to
make use of the other, we reached the house in a moment. Lord Merton,
disordered as he was, attempted not to stop us.

As soon as we entered the house, I withdrew my arm, and courtsied my
thanks, for my heart was too full for speech. Lady Louisa, evidently
hurt at her brother's condescension, and piqued extremely by Lord
Merton's behaviour, silently drew away hers; and biting her lips,
with a look of infinite vexation, walked sullenly up the hall.

Lord Orville asked her if she would not go into the parlour?

"No," answered she, haughtily, "I leave you and your new sister
together:" and then she walked up stairs.

I was quite confounded at the pride and rudeness of this speech. Lord
Orville himself seemed thunderstruck: I turned from him, and went into
the parlour: he followed me, saying, "Must I now apologize to Miss
Anville for the liberty of my interference?-or ought I to apologize,
that I did not, as I wished, interfere sooner?"

"O, my Lord," cried I, with an emotion I could not repress, "it is
from you alone I meet with any respect;-all others treat me with
impertinence, or contempt!"

I am sorry I had not more command of myself, as he had reason just
then to suppose I particularly meant his sister; which, I am sure,
must very much hurt him.

"Good Heaven," cried he, "that so much sweetness and merit can fail
to excite the love and admiration so justly their due! I cannot,-I
dare not express to you half the indignation I feel at this moment!"

"I am sorry, my Lord," said I, more calmly, "to have raised it;
but yet,-in a situation that calls for protection, to meet only with
mortifications,-indeed, but I am ill formed to bear them!"

"My dear Miss Anville," cried he, warmly, "allow me to be your friend;
think of me as if I were indeed your brother; and  let me intreat you
to accept my best services, if there is any thing in which I can be
so happy as to show my regard,-my respect for you!"

Before I had time to speak, the rest of the party entered the parlour;
and, as I did not wish to see anything more of Lord Merton, at least
before he had slept, I determined to leave it. Lord Orville, seeing
my design, said, as I passed him, "Will you go?" "Had not I best,
my Lord?" said I. "I am afraid," said he, smiling, "since I must now
speak as your brother, I am afraid you had; -you see you may trust me,
since I can advise against my own interest."

I then left the room, and have been writing ever since. And, methinks,
I can never lament the rudeness of Lord Merton, as it has more than
ever confirmed to me the esteem of Lord Orville.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
 LETTER LXIX. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Sept. 30th.


OH, Sir, what a strange incident have I to recite! what a field of
conjecture to open!

Yesterday evening we all went to an assembly. Lord Orville presented
tickets to the whole family; and did me the honour, to the no small
surprise of all here, I believe, to dance with me. But every day
abounds in fresh instances of his condescending politeness; and he
now takes every opportunity of calling me his friend and his sister.

Lord Merton offered a ticket to Lady Louisa; but she was so much
incensed against him, that she refused it with the utmost disdain:
neither could he prevail upon her to dance with him; she sat still the
whole evening, and deigned not to look at or speak to him. To me her
behaviour is almost the same: for she is cold, distant, and haughty,
and her eyes express the greatest contempt. But for Lord Orville,
how miserable would my residence here make me!

We were joined in the ball-room by Mr. Coverley, Mr. Lovel, and Lord
Merton, who looked as if he was doing penance, and sat all the evening
next to Lady Louisa, vainly endeavouring to appease her anger.

Lord Orville began the minuets: he danced with a young lady who
seemed to engage the general attention, as she had not been seen here
before. She is pretty, and looks mild and good-humoured.

"Pray, Mr. Lovel," said Lady Louisa, "who is that?"

"Miss Belmont," answered he, "the young heiress: she came to the
Wells yesterday."

Struck with the name, I involuntarily repeated it; but nobody heard me.

"What is her family?" said Mrs. Beaumont.

"Have you not heard of her, Ma'am?" cried he; "she is only daughter
and heiress of Sir John Belmont."

Good Heaven, how did I start! the name struck my ear like a
thunderbolt. Mrs.  Selwyn, who immediately looked at me, said,
"Be calm, my dear, and we will learn the truth of all this."

Till then I had never imagined her to be acquainted with my story;
but she has since told me, that she knew my unhappy mother, and was
well informed of the whole affair.

She asked Mr. Lovel a multitude of questions; and I gathered from
his answers, that this young lady was just come from abroad with Sir
John Belmont, who was now in London; that she was under the care of
his sister, Mrs. Paterson; and that she would inherit a considerable
estate.

I cannot express the strange feelings with which I was agitated during
this recital. What, my dearest Sir, can it possibly mean? Did you ever
hear of any after-marriage?-or must I suppose, that, while the lawful
child is rejected, another is adopted?-I know not what to think! I
am bewildered with a contrariety of ideas!

When we came home, Mrs. Selwyn passed more than an hour in my room
conversing upon this subject. She says, that I ought instantly to
go to town, find out my father, and have the affair cleared up. She
assures me I have too strong a resemblance to my dear, though unknown,
mother, to allow of the least hesitation in my being owned, when once
I am seen. For my part, I have no wish but to act by your direction.

I cannot give any account of the evening; so disturbed, so occupied
am I by this subject, that I can think of no other. I have entreated
Mrs. Selwyn to observe the strictest secrecy, and she has promised
that she will. Indeed, she has too much sense to be idly communicative.

Lord Orville took notice of my being absent and silent; but I ventured
not to intrust him with the cause. Fortunately, he was not of the
party at the time Mr. Lovel made the discovery.

Mrs. Selwyn says, that if you approve my going to town, she will
herself accompany me. I had a thousand times rather ask the protection
of Mrs.  Mirvan, but, after this offer that will not be possible.

Adieu, my dearest Sir. I am sure you will write immediately, and I
shall be all impatience till your letter arrives.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXX. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 

 Oct. 1st.


GOOD God, my dear Sir, what a wonderful tale have I again to
relate! even yet, I am not recovered from my extreme surprise.

Yesterday morning, as soon as I had finished my hasty letter, I was
summoned to attend a walking party to the Hot Wells. It consisted only
of Mrs. Selwyn and Lord Orville. The latter walked by my side all the
way; and his conversation dissipated my uneasiness, and insensibly
restored my serenity.

At the pump-room I saw Mr. Macartney; I courtsied to him twice ere
he would speak to me. When he did, I began to apologize for having
disappointed him; but I did not find it very easy to excuse myself, as
Lord Orville's eyes, with an expression of anxiety that distressed me,
turned from him to me, and me to him, every word I spoke. Convinced,
however, that I had really trifled with Mr. Macartney, I scrupled not
to beg his pardon. He was then not merely appeased, but even grateful.

He requested me to see him to-morrow; but I had not the folly to
be again guilty of an indiscretion; which had already caused me so
much uneasiness; and therefore I told him frankly, that it was not
in my power at present to see him but by accident; and, to prevent
his being offended, I hinted to him the reason I could not receive
him as I wished to do.

When I had satisfied both him and myself upon this subject, I turned to
Lord Orville, and saw, with concern, the gravity of his countenance. I
would have spoken to him, but knew not how; I believe, however, he
read my thoughts; for, in a little time, with a sort of serious smile,
he said, "Does not Mr.  Macartney complain of his disappointment?"

"Not much, my Lord."

"And how have you appeased him?" Finding I hesitated what to answer,
"Am I not your brother?" continued he, "and must I not enquire into
your affairs?"

"Certainly, my Lord," said I, laughing. "I only wish it were better
worth your Lordship's while."

"Let me, then, make immediate use of my privilege. When shall you
see Mr.  Macartney again?"

"Indeed, my Lord, I can't tell."

"But,-do you know that I shall not suffer my sister to make a private
appointment?"

"Pray, my Lord," cried I earnestly, "use that word no more! Indeed
you shock me extremely."

"That would I not do for the world," cried he, "yet you know not how
warmly, how deeply I am interested, not only in all your concerns,
but in all your actions."

This speech-the most particular one Lord Orville had ever made to me,
ended our conversation at that time; for I was too much struck by it
to make any answer.

Soon after, Mr. Macartney, in a low voice, intreated me not to deny
him the gratification of returning the money. While he was speaking,
the young lady I saw yesterday at the assembly, with the large party,
entered the pump-room.  Mr. Macartney turned as pale as death, his
voice faultered, and he seemed not to know what he said. I was myself
almost equally disturbed, by the crowd of confused ideas that occurred
to me. Good Heaven! thought I, why should he be thus agitated?-is it
possible this can be the young lady he loved?-

In a few minutes we quitted the pump-room; and, though I twice wished
Mr.  Macartney good morning, he was so absent he did not hear me.

We did not immediately return to Clifton, as Mrs. Selwyn had business
at a pamphlet shop. While she was looking at some new poems, Lord
Orville again asked me when I should see Mr. Macartney?

"Indeed, my Lord," cried I, "I know not, but I would give the universe
for a few moments' conversation with him!" I spoke this with a simple
sincerity, and was not aware of the force of my own words.

"The universe!" repeated he, "Good God, Miss Anville, do you say this
to me?"

"I would say it," returned I, "to any body, my Lord."

"I beg your pardon," said he, in a voice that showed him ill pleased,
"I am answered."

"My Lord," cried I, "you must not judge hardly of me. I spoke
inadvertently; but if you knew the painful suspense I suffer at this
moment, you would not be surprised at what I have said."

"And would a meeting with Mr. Macartney relieve you from that
suspense?"

"Yes, my Lord, two words might be sufficient."

"Would to Heaven," cried he, after a short pause, "that I were worthy
to know their import!"

"Worthy, my Lord!-O, if that were all, your Lordship could ask nothing
I should not be ready to answer! If I were but at liberty to speak, I
should be proud of your Lordship's enquiries: but, indeed, I am not-I
have not any right to communicate the affairs of Mr. Macartney;-your
Lordship cannot suppose I have."

"I will own to you," answered he, "I know not what to suppose;
yet there seems a frankness even in your mystery-and such an air of
openness in your countenance, that I am willing to hope,-" He stopped
a moment, and then added, "This meeting, you say, is essential to
your repose?"

"I did not say that, my Lord; but yet I have the most important
reasons for wishing to speak to him."

He paused a few minutes; and then said, with warmth, "Yes, you shall
speak to him!-I will myself assist you!-Miss Anville, I am sure,
cannot form a wish against propriety: I will ask no questions, I
will rely upon her own purity, and, uninformed, blindfold as I am,
I will serve her with all my power!" And then he went into the shop,
leaving me so strangely affected by his generous behaviour, that I
almost wished to follow him with my thanks.

When Mrs. Selwyn had transacted her affairs, we returned home.

The moment dinner was over, Lord Orville went out, and did not come
back till just as we were summoned to supper. This is the longest
time he has spent from the house since I have been at Clifton; and
you cannot imagine, my dear Sir, how much I missed him. I scarce knew
before how infinitely I am indebted to him alone for the happiness
I have enjoyed since I have been at Mrs.  Beaumont's.

As I generally go down stairs last, he came to me, the moment the
ladies had passed by, and said, "Shall you be at home tomorrow
morning?"

"I believe so, my Lord."

"And will you then receive a visitor for me?"

"For you, my Lord?"

"Yes:-I have made acquaintance with Mr. Macartney, and he has promised
to call upon me to-morrow about three o'clock."

And then, taking my hand, he led me down stairs.

O, Sir!-was there ever such another man as Lord Orville?-Yes, one
other now resides at Berry Hill!

This morning there has been a great deal of company here; but at the
time appointed by Lord Orville, doubtless with that consideration,
the parlour is almost always empty, as every body is dressing.

Mrs. Beaumont, however, was not gone up stairs when Mr. Macartney
sent in his name.

Lord Orville immediately said, "Beg the favour of him to walk in. You
see, Madam, that I consider myself as at home."

"I hope so," answered Mrs. Beaumont, "or I should be very uneasy."

Mr. Macartney then entered. I believe we both felt very conscious to
whom the visit was paid: but Lord Orville received him as his own
guest; and not merely entertained him as such while Mrs. Beaumont
remained in the room, but for some time after she had left it, a
delicacy that saved me from the embarrassment I should have felt,
had he immediately quitted us.

In a few minutes, however, he gave Mr. Macartney a book,-for I,
too, by way of pretence for continuing in the room, pretended to be
reading,-and begged he would be so good as to look it over, while he
answered a note, which he would dispatch in a few minutes, and return
to him.

When he was gone, we both parted with our books; and Mr. Macartney,
again producing the paper with the money, besought me to accept it.

"Pray," said I, still declining it, "did you know the young lady who
came into the pump-room yesterday morning?"

"Know her!" repeated he, changing colour, "Oh, but too well!"

"Indeed!"

"Why, Madam, do you ask?"

"I must beseech you to satisfy me further upon this subject; pray
tell me who she is."

"Inviolably as I meant to keep my secret, I can refuse you, Madam,
nothing;-that lady-is the daughter of Sir John Belmont!-of my father!"

"Gracious Heaven!" cried I, involuntarily laying my hand on his arm,
"you are then-" my brother, I would have said, but my voice failed me,
and I burst into tears.

"Oh, Madam," cried he, "what does this mean?-what can thus distress
you?"

I could not answer, but held out my hand to him. He seemed greatly
surprised, and talked in high terms of my condescension.

"Spare yourself," cried I, wiping my eyes, "spare yourself this
mistake,-you have a right to all I can do for you; the similarity of
our circumstances-"

We were then interrupted by the entrance of Mrs. Selwyn; and
Mr. Macartney, finding no probability of our being left alone, was
obliged to take leave, though, I believe, very reluctantly, while in
such suspense.

Mrs. Selwyn, then, by dint of interrogatories, drew from me the state
of this affair. She is so penetrating, that there is no possibility
of evading to give her satisfaction.

Is not this a strange event? Good Heaven! how little did I think
that the visits I so unwillingly paid at Mr. Branghton's would have
introduced me to so near a relation! I will never again regret the
time I spent in town this summer: a circumstance so fortunate will
always make me think of it with pleasure.  * * * * * *


I have just received your letter,-and it has almost broken my
heart!-Oh, Sir!  the illusion is over, indeed! how vainly have I
flattered, how miserably deceived myself! Long since, doubtful of
the situation of my heart, I dreaded a scrutiny;-but now, now that I
have so long escaped, I began, indeed, to think my safety insured, to
hope that my fears were causeless, and to believe that my good opinion
and esteem of Lord Orville might be owned without suspicion, and felt
without danger;-miserably deceived, indeed! His sight is baneful to
my repose;-his society is death to my future tranquillity! Oh, Lord
Orville! could I have believed that a friendship so grateful to my
heart, so soothing to my distresses, a friendship, which, in every
respect, did me so much honour, would only serve to embitter all my
future moments!-What a strange, what an unhappy circumstance, that
my gratitude, though so justly excited, should be so fatal to my peace!

Yes, Sir, I will quit him;-would to Heaven I could at this
moment! without seeing him again,-without trusting to my now conscious
emotion!-Oh, Lord Orville, how little do you know the evils I owe to
you! how little suppose that, when most dignified by your attention,
I was most to be pitied,-and when most exalted by your notice, you
were most my enemy!

You, Sir, relied upon my ignorance;-I, alas, upon your experience;
and, whenever I doubted the weakness of my heart, the idea that you
did not suspect it, reassured me,-restored my courage, and confirmed
my error!-Yet am I most sensible of the kindness of your silence.

Oh, Sir! why have I ever quitted you? why been exposed to dangers to
which I am so unequal?

But I will leave this place, leave Lord Orville,-leave him, perhaps,
for ever!-no matter; your counsel, your goodness, may teach me how
to recover the peace and the serenity of which my unguarded folly
has beguiled me. To you alone do I trust,-in you alone confide,
for every future hope I may form.

The more I consider the parting with Lord Orville, the less fortitude
do I feel to bear the separation;-the friendship he has shown me,-his
politeness,-his sweetness of manners,-his concern in my affairs,-his
solicitude to oblige me,-all, all to be given up!-

No, I cannot tell him I am going,-I dare not trust myself to take
leave of him,-I will run away without seeing him:-implicitly will I
follow your advice, avoid his sight, and shun his society!

To-morrow morning I will set off for Berry Hill. Mrs. Selwyn and
Mrs. Beaumont shall alone know my intention. And to-day-I will spend
in my own room. The readiness of my obedience is the only atonement
I can offer for the weakness which calls for its exertion.

Can you, will you, most honoured, most dear Sir! sole prop by which
the poor Evelina is supported,-can you, without reproach, without
displeasure, receive the child you have so carefully reared,-from
whose education better fruit might have been expected, and who,
blushing for her unworthiness, fears to meet the eye by which she has
been cherished?-Oh, yes, I am sure you will!  Your Evelina's errors
are those of the judgment; and you, I well know, pardon all but those
of the heart!
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXI. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  
Clifton, October 1st.

I HAVE only time, my dearest Sir, for three words, to overtake my
last letter, and prevent your expecting me immediately; for, when I
communicated my intention to Mrs. Selwyn, she would not hear of it,
and declared it would be highly ridiculous for me to go before I
received an answer to my intelligence concerning the journey from
Paris. She has, therefore, insisted upon my waiting till your next
letter arrives. I hope you will not be displeased at my compliance,
though it is rather against my own judgment: but Mrs. Selwyn quite
overpowered me with the force of her arguments. I will, however, see
very little of Lord Orville; I will never come down stairs before
breakfast; give up all my walks in the garden; seat myself next to
Mrs. Selwyn; and not merely avoid his conversation, but shun his
presence. I will exert all the prudence and all the resolution in
my power, to prevent this short delay from giving you any further
uneasiness.

Adieu, my dearest Sir. I shall not now leave Clifton till I have
your directions.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
 LETTER LXXII. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION. 

  October 2nd.


YESTERDAY, from the time I received your kind, though heart-piercing
letter, I kept my room,-for I was equally unable and unwilling to
see Lord Orville; but this morning, finding I seemed destined to
pass a few days longer here, I endeavoured to calm my spirits, and to
appear as usual; though I determined to avoid him to the utmost of my
power. Indeed, as I entered the parlour, when called to breakfast,
my thoughts were so much occupied with your letter, that I felt as
much confusion at his sight, as if he had himself been informed of
its contents.

Mrs. Beaumont made me a slight compliment upon my recovery, for I
had pleaded illness to excuse keeping my room: Lady Louisa spoke
not a word; but Lord Orville, little imagining himself the cause
of my indisposition, enquired concerning my health with the most
distinguishing politeness. I hardly made any answer; and, for the
first time since I have been here, contrived to sit at some distance
from him.

I could not help observing that my reserve surprised him; yet he
persisted in his civilities, and seemed to wish to remove it. But I
paid him very little attention; and the moment breakfast was over,
instead of taking a book, or walking in the garden, I retired to my
own room.

Soon after, Mrs. Selwyn came to tell me, that Lord Orville had been
proposing I should take an airing, and persuading her to let him
drive us both in his phaeton. She delivered the message with an
archness that made me blush; and added, that an airing, in my Lord
Orville's carriage, could not fail to revive my spirits. There is no
possibility of escaping her discernment; she has frequently rallied
me upon his Lordship's attention,-and, alas!-upon the pleasure with
which I have received it! However, I absolutely refused the offer.

"Well," said she, laughing, "I cannot just now indulge you with any
solicitation; for, to tell you the truth, I have business to transact
at the Wells, and am glad to be excused myself. I would ask you to
walk with me; -but since Lord Orville is refused, I have not the
presumption to hope for success."

"Indeed," cried I, "you are mistaken; I will attend you with pleasure."

"O rare coquetry!" cried she, "surely it must be inherent in our sex,
or it could not have been imbibed at Berry Hill."

I had not spirits to answer her, and therefore put on my hat and
cloak in silence.

"I presume," continued she, drily, "his Lordship may walk with us."

"If so, Madam," said I, "you will have a companion, and I will stay
at home."

"My dear child," cried she, "did you bring the certificate of your
birth with you?"

"Dear Madam, no!"

"Why then, we shall never be known again at Berry Hill."

I felt too conscious to enjoy her pleasantry; but I believe she was
determined to torment me, for she asked if she should inform Lord
Orville that I desired him not to be of the party?

"By no means, Madam; but, indeed, I had rather not walk myself."

"My dear," cried she, "I really do not know you this morning,-you
have certainly been taking a lesson of Lady Louisa."

She then went down stairs; but presently returning, told me she had
acquainted Lord Orville that I did not choose to go out in the phaeton,
but preferred a walk, tete-e-tete with her, by way of variety.

I said nothing, but was really vexed. She bad me go down stairs,
and said she would follow me immediately.

Lord Orville met me in the hall. "I fear," said he, "Miss Anville is
not yet quite well?" and he would have taken my hand, but I turned
from him, and courtsying slightly, went into the parlour.

Mrs. Beaumont and Lady Louisa were at work: Lord Merton was talking
with the latter; for he has now made his peace, and is again received
into favour.

I seated myself, as usual, by the window. Lord Orville, in a few
minutes, came to me, and said, "Why is Miss Anville so grave?"

"Not grave, my Lord," said I, "only stupid;" and I took up a book.

"You will go," said he, after a short pause, "to the assembly
to-night?"

"No, my Lord, certainly not."

"Neither then will I; for I should be sorry to sully the remembrance
I have of the happiness I enjoyed at the last."

Mrs. Selwyn then coming in, general enquiries were made to all but me,
of who would go to the assembly? Lord Orville instantly declared he
had letters to write at home; but every one else settled to go.

I then hastened Mrs. Selwyn away, though not before she had said to
Lord Orville, "Pray, has your Lordship obtained Miss Anville's leave
to favour us with your company?"

"I have not, Madam," answered he, "had the vanity to ask it."

During our walk, Mrs. Selvyn tormented me unmercifully. She told me,
that since I declined any addition to our party, I must, doubtless, be
conscious of my own powers of entertainment; and begged me, therefore,
to exert them freely. I repented a thousand times having consented
to walk alone with her; for though I made the most painful efforts
to appear in spirits, her raillery quite overpowered me.

We went first to the pump-room. It was full of company; and the moment
we entered, I heard a murmuring of, "That's she!" and, to my great
confusion, I saw every eye turned towards me. I pulled my hat over my
face, and, by the assistance of Mrs. Selwyn, endeavoured to screen
myself from observation, nevertheless, I found I was so much the
object of general attention, that I entreated her to hasten away. But
unfortunately she had entered into conversation, very earnestly,
with a gentleman of her acquaintance, and would not listen to me;
but said, that if I was tired of waiting, I might walk on to the
milliner's with the Miss Watkins, two young ladies I had seen at Mrs.
Beaumont's, who were going thither.

I accepted the offer very readily, and away we went. But we had not
gone three yards, before we were followed by a party of young men,
who took every possible opportunity of looking at us, and, as they
walked behind, talked aloud, in a manner at once unintelligible and
absurd. "Yes," cried one," 'tis certainly she!-mark but her blushing
cheek!"

"And then her eye -her downcast eye!"-cried another.

"True, oh most true," said a third, "every beauty is her own!"

"But then," said the first, "her mind,-now the difficulty is, to
find out the truth of that, for she will not say a word."

"She is timid," answered another; "mark but her timid air."

During this conversation, we walked on silent and quick; as we knew
not to whom it was particularly addressed, we were all equally ashamed,
and equally desirous to avoid such unaccountable observations.

Soon after we were caught in a shower of rain. We hurried on; and
these gentlemen, following us, offered their services in the most
pressing manner, begging us to make use of their arms; and, while I
almost ran, in order to avoid their impertinence, I was suddenly met
by Sir Clement Willoughby!

We both started; "Good God!" he exclaimed, "Miss Anville!" and then,
regarding my tormentors with an air of displeasure, he earnestly
enquired, if any thing had alarmed me?

"No, no;" cried I, for I found no difficulty now to disengage myself
from these youths, who, probably, concluding from the commanding air
of Sir Clement, that he had a right to protect me, quietly gave way
to him, and entirely quitted us.

With his usual impetuosity, he then began a thousand enquiries,
accompanied with as many compliments; and he told me, that he
arrived at Bristol but this morning, which he had entirely devoted
to endeavours to discover where I lodged.

"Did you know, then," said I, "that I was at Bristol?"

"Would to Heaven," cried he, "that I could remain in ignorance of your
proceedings with the same contentment you do of mine! then should I not
for ever journey upon the wings of Hope, to meet my own despair! You
cannot even judge of the cruelty of my fate; for the ease and serenity
of your mind incapacitates you from feeling for the agitation of mine!"

The ease and serenity of my mind! alas, how little do I merit those
words!

"But," added he, "had accident brought me hither, had I not known
of your journey, the voice of fame would have proclaimed it to me
instantly upon my arrival."

"The voice of fame!" repeated I.

"Yes, for yours was the first name I heard at the pump-room. But
had I not heard your name, such a description could have painted no
one else."

"Indeed," said I, "I do not understand you." But just then arriving
at the milliner's our conversation ended; for Miss Watkins called me
to look at caps and ribbons.

Sir Clement, however, has the art of being always at home; he was very
soon engaged, as busily as ourselves, in looking at lace ruffles;
yet he took an opportunity of saying to me, in a low voice, "How
charmed I am to see you look so well! I was told you were ill;-but
I never saw you in better health,-never more infinitely lovely!"

I turned away to examine the ribbons, and soon after Mrs. Selwyn made
her appearance. I found that she was acquainted with Sir Clement;
and her manner of speaking to him convinced me that he was a favourite
with her.

When their mutual compliments were over, she turned to me, and said,
"Pray, Miss Anville, how long can you live without nourishment?"

"Indeed, Ma'am," said I, laughing, "I have never tried."

"Because so long, and no longer," answered she, "you may remain
at Bristol."

"Why, what is the matter, Ma'am?"

"The matter!-why, all the ladies are at open war with you,-the whole
pump-room is in confusion; and you, innocent as you pretend to look,
are the cause.  However, if you take my advice, you will be very
careful how you eat and drink during your stay."

I begged her to explain herself: and she then told me, that a copy
of verses had been dropped in the pump-room, and read there aloud:
"The beauties of the Wells," said she, "are all mentioned, but you
are the Venus to whom the prize is given."

"Is it then possible," cried Sir Clement, "that you have not seen
these verses?"

"I hardly know," answered I, "whether any body has."

"I assure you," said Mrs. Selwyn, "if you give me the invention of
them, you do me an honour I by no means deserve."

"I wrote down in my tablets," said Sir Clement, "the stanzas which
concern Miss Anville this morning at the pump-room; and I will do
myself the honour of copying them for her this evening."

"But why the part that concerns Miss Anville?" said Mrs. Selwyn;
"Did you ever see her before this morning?"

"O yes," answered he, "I have had that happiness frequently at
Captain Mirvan's. Too, too frequently!" added he, in a low voice, as
Mrs. Selwyn turned to the milliner: and as soon as she was occupied
in examining some trimmings, he came to me, and almost whether I
would or not, entered into conversation with me.

"I have a thousand things," cried he, "to say to you. Pray where
are you?"

"With Mrs. Selwyn, Sir."

"Indeed!-then, for once, chance is my friend. And how long have you
been here?"

"About three weeks."



"Good Heaven! what an anxious search have I had, to discover your
abode, since you so suddenly left town! The termagant, Madame Duval,
refused me all intelligence. Oh, Miss Anville, did you know what I
have endured! the sleepless, restless state of suspense I have been
tortured with, you could not, all cruel as you are, you could not
have received me with such frigid indifference?"

"Received you, Sir!"

"Why, is not my visit to you?" Do you think I should have made this
journey, but for the happiness of again seeing you?"

"Indeed it is possible I might,-since so many others do."

"Cruel, cruel girl! you know that I adore you! you know you are the
mistress of my soul, and arbitress of my fate!"

Mrs. Selwyn then advancing to us, he assumed a more disengaged air,
and asked, if he should not have the pleasure of seeing her in the
evening at the assembly?

"Oh, yes," cried she, "we shall certainly be there; so you may bring
the verses with you, if Miss Anville can wait for them so long."

"I hope then," returned he, "that you will do me the honour to dance
with me?"

I thanked him, but said I should not be at the assembly.

"Not be at the assembly?" cried Mrs. Selwyn, "Why, have you, too,
letters to write?"

She looked at me with a significant archness, that made me colour;
and I hastily answered, "No, indeed, Ma'am!"

"You have not!" cried she, yet more drily; "then pray, my dear,
do you stay at home to help,-or to hinder others?"

"To do neither, Ma'am," answered I, in much confusion; "so, if you
please, I will not stay at home."

"You allow me, then," said Sir Clement, "to hope for the honour of
your hand?"

I only bowed,-for the dread of Mrs. Selwyn's raillery made me not
dare refuse him.

Soon after this we walked home: Sir Clement accompanied us; and the
conversation that passed between Mrs. Selwyn and him was supported
in so lively a manner, that I should have been much entertained,
had my mind been more at ease: but, alas! I could think of nothing
but the capricious, the unmeaning appearance which the alteration
in my conduct must make in the eyes of the Lord Orville! And much
as I wished to avoid him, greatly as I desire to save myself from
having my weakness known to him,-yet I cannot endure to incur his ill
opinion,-and, unacquainted as he is with the reasons by which I am
actuated, how can he fail contemning a change to him so unaccountable?

As we entered the garden, he was the first object we saw. He advanced
to meet us; and I could not help observing, that at sight of each
other both he and Sir Clement changed colour.

We went into the parlour, where we found the same party we had
left. Mrs.  Selwyn presented Sir Clement to Mrs. Beaumont; Lady Louisa
and Lord Merton he seemed well acquainted with already.

The conversation was upon the general subjects, of the weather,
the company at the Wells, and the news of the day. But Sir Clement,
drawing his chair next to mine, took every opportunity of addressing
himself to me in particular.

I could not but remark the striking difference of his attention, and
that of Lord Orville: the latter has such gentleness of manners, such
delicacy of conduct, and an air so respectful, that, when he flatters
most, he never distresses; and when he most confers honour, appears
to receive it! The former obtrudes his attention, and forces mine;
it is so pointed, that it always confuses me, and so public, that it
attracts general notice. Indeed I have sometimes thought that he would
rather wish, than dislike to have his partiality for me known, as he
takes great care to prevent my being spoken to by any but himself.

When at length he went away, Lord Orville took his seat, and said,
with a half smile, "Shall I call Sir Clement,-or will you call me
an usurper for taking this place?-You make me no answer?-Must I then
suppose that Sir Clement-"

"It is little worth your Lordship's while," said I, "to suppose any
thing upon so insignificant an occasion."

"Pardon me," cried he;-"to me nothing is insignificant in which you
are concerned."

To this I made no answer; neither did he say any thing more, till the
ladies retired to dress: and then, when I would have followed them,
he stopped me, saying, "One moment, I entreat you!"

I turned back, and he went on, "I greatly fear that I have been so
unfortunate as to offend you; yet so repugnant to my very soul is the
idea, that I know not how to suppose it possible I can unwittingly have
done the thing in the world that, designedly, I would wish to avoid."

"No, indeed, my Lord, you have not," said I.

"You sigh!" cried he, taking my hand, "would to Heaven I were
the sharer of your uneasiness, whencesoever it springs! with what
earnestness would I not struggle to alleviate it!-Tell me, my dear Miss
Anville,-my new-adopted sister, my sweet and most amiable friend!-tell
me, I beseech you, if I can afford you any assistance?"

"None, none, my Lord!" cried I, withdrawing my hand, and moving
towards the door.

"Is it then impossible I can serve you?-Perhaps you wish to see
Mr. Macartney again?"

"No, my Lord." And I held the door open.

"I am not, I own, sorry for that. Yet, oh! Miss Anville, there is a
question,-there is a conjecture,-I know not how to mention, because I
dread the result!-But I see you are in haste;-perhaps in the evening
I may have the honour of a longer conversation.-Yet one thing, will
you have the goodness to allow me to ask?-Did you, this morning,
when you went to the Wells,-did you know whom you should meet there?"

"Who, my Lord?"

"I beg your pardon a thousand times for a curiosity so unlicensed;-but
I will say no more at present."

He bowed, expecting me to go;-and then, with quick steps, but
a heavy heart, I came to my own room. His question, I am sure,
meant Sir Clement Willoughby; and had I not imposed upon myself the
severe task of avoiding, flying Lord Orville, with all my power, I
would instantly have satisfied him of my ignorance of Sir Clement's
journey. And yet more did I long to say something of the assembly,
since I found he depended upon my spending the evening at home.

I did not go down stairs again till the family was assembled to
dinner. My dress, I saw, struck Lord Orville with astonishment; and
I was myself so much ashamed of appearing whimsical and unsteady,
that I could not look up.

"I understood," said Mrs. Beaumont, "that Miss Anville did not go
out this evening."

"Her intention in the morning," said Mrs. Selwyn, "was to stay at
home; but there is a fascinating power in an assembly, which, upon
second thoughts, is not to be resisted."

"The assembly!" cried Lord Orville; "are you then going to the
assembly?"

I made no answer; and we all took our places at table.

It was not without difficulty that I contrived to give up my usual
seat; but I was determined to adhere to the promise in my yesterday's
letter, though I saw that Lord Orville seemed quite confounded at my
visible endeavours to avoid him.

After dinner, we all went into the drawing-room together, as there
were no gentlemen to detain his Lordship; and then, before I could
place myself out of his way, he said, "You are then really going to
the assembly?-May I ask if you shall dance?"

"I believe not,-my Lord."

"If I did not fear," continued he, "that you would be tired of the same
partner at two following assemblies, I would give up my letter-writing
till to-morrow evening, and solicit the honour of your hand."

"If I do dance," said I, in great confusion, "I believe I am engaged."

"Engaged!" cried he, with earnestness, "May I ask to whom?"

"To-Sir Clement Willoughby, my Lord."

He said nothing, but looked very little pleased, and did not address
himself to me any more all the afternoon. Oh, Sir!-thus situated,
how comfortless were the feelings of your Evelina!

Early in the evening, with his accustomed assiduity, Sir Clement came
to conduct us to the assembly. He soon contrived to seat himself
next me, and, in a low voice, paid me so many compliments, that I
knew not which way to look.

Lord Orville hardly spoke a word, and his countenance was grave and
thoughtful; yet, whenever I raised my eyes, his, I perceived, were
directed towards me, though instantly, upon meeting mine, he looked
another way.

In a short time, Sir Clement, taking from his pocket a folded paper,
said, almost in a whisper, "Here, loveliest of women, you will
see a faint, an unsuccessful attempt to paint the object of all my
adoration! yet, weak as are the lines for the purpose, I envy beyond
expression the happy mortal who has dared make the effort."

"I will look at them," said I, "some other time." For, conscious
that I was observed by Lord Orville, I could not bear he should see
me take a written paper, so privately offered, from Sir Clement. But
Sir Clement is an impracticable man, and I never succeeded in any
attempt to frustrate whatever he had planned.

"No," said he, still in a whisper, "you must take them now, while
Lady Louisa is away;" for she and Mrs. Selwyn were gone up stairs to
finish their dress, "as she must by no means see them."

"Indeed," said I, "I have no intention to show them."

"But the only way," answered he, "to avoid suspicion, is to take
them in her absence. I would have read them aloud myself, but that
they are not proper to be seen by any body in this house, yourself
and Mrs. Selwyn excepted."

Then again he presented me the paper, which I now was obliged to take,
as I found declining it was vain. But I was sorry that this action
should be seen, and the whispering remarked, though the purport of
the conversation was left to conjecture.

As I held it in my hand, Sir Clement teazed me to look at it
immediately; and told me, the reason he could not produce the lines
publicly was, that among the ladies who were mentioned, and supposed
to be rejected, was Lady Louisa Larpent. I am much concerned at
this circumstance, as I cannot doubt but that it will render me more
disagreeable to her than ever, if she should hear of it.

I will now copy the verses, which Sir Clement would not let me rest
till I had read.

         See last advance, with bashful grace,
           Downcast eye, and blushing cheek,
         Timid air, and beauteous face,
           Anville,-whom the Graces seek.
         Though ev'ry beauty is her own,
           And though her mind each virtue fills,
         Anville,-to her power unknown,
           Artless strikes,-unconscious kills.



I am sure, my dear Sir, you will not wonder that a panegyric such
as this should, in reading, give me the greatest confusion; and,
unfortunately, before I had finished it, the ladies returned.

"What have you there, my dear?" said Mrs. Selwyn.

"Nothing, Ma'am," said I, hastily folding, and putting it in my pocket.

"And has nothing," cried she, "the power of rouge?"

I made no answer; a deep sigh, which escaped Lord Orville at that
moment, reached my ears, and gave me sensations-which I dare not
mention!

Lord Merton then handed Lady Louisa and Mrs. Beaumont to the latter's
carriage. Mrs. Selwyn led the way to Sir Clement's, who handed me in
after her.

During the ride I did not once speak; but when I came to the assembly
room, Sir Clement took care that I should not preserve my silence. He
asked me immediately to dance; I begged him to excuse me, and seek
some other partner.  But on the contrary, he told me, he was very
glad I would sit still, as he had a million of things to say to me.

He then began to tell me, how much he had suffered from absence;
how greatly he was alarmed when he heard I had left town; and how
cruelly difficult he had found it to trace me; which, at last, he
could only do by sacrificing another week to Captain Mirvan.

"And Howard Grove," continued he, "which, at my first visit,
I thought the most delightful spot upon earth, now appeared to me
the most dismal: the face of the country seemed altered; the walks,
which I had thought most pleasant, were now most stupid: Lady Howard,
who had appeared a cheerful and respectable old lady, now appeared
in the common John Trot style of other aged dames: Mrs. Mirvan,
whom I had esteemed as an amiable piece of still-life, now became so
insipid, that I could hardly keep awake in her company: the daughter,
too, whom I had regarded as a good-humoured, pretty sort of a girl,
now seemed too insignificant for notice: and as to the Captain,
I had always thought him a booby,-but now he appeared a savage!"

"Indeed, Sir Clement," cried I, angrily, "I will not hear you speak
thus of my best friends."

"I beg your pardon," said he, "but the contrast of my two visits was
too striking not to be mentioned."

He then asked what I thought of the verses?

"Either," said I, "they are written ironically, or by some madman."

Such a profusion of compliments ensued, that I was obliged to propose
dancing, in my own defence. When we stood up, "I intended," said he,
"to have discovered the author by his looks; but I find you so much the
general loadstone of attention, that my suspicions change their object
every moment.  Surely you must yourself have some knowledge who he is?"

I told him no. Yet, my dear Sir, I must own to you, I have no doubt
but that Mr. Macartney must be the author; no one else would speak
of me so partially; and, indeed, his poetical turn puts it, with me,
beyond dispute.

He asked me a thousand questions concerning Lord Orville; how long he
had been at Bristol?-what time I had spent at Clifton?-whether he rode
out every morning?-whether I ever trusted myself in a phaeton? and
a multitude of other enquiries, all tending to discover if I was
honoured with much of his Lordship's attention, and all made with
his usual freedom and impetuosity.

Fortunately, as I much wished to retire early, Lady Louisa makes a
point of being the first who quit the rooms, and therefore we got
home in very tolerable time.

Lord Orville's reception of us was grave and cold: far from
distinguishing me, as usual, by particular civilities, Lady Louisa
herself could not have seen me enter the room with more frigid
unconcern, nor have more scrupulously avoided honouring me with any
notice. But chiefly I was struck to see, that he suffered Sir Clement,
who stayed supper, to sit between us, without any effort to prevent
him, though till then, he had seemed to be even tenacious of a seat
next mine.

This little circumstance affected me more than I can express; yet
I endeavoured to rejoice at it, since neglect and indifference from
him may be my best friends.-But, alas!-so suddenly, so abruptly to
forfeit his attention!-to lose his friendship!-Oh, Sir, these thoughts
pierced my soul!-scarce could I keep my seat; for not all my efforts
could restrain the tears from trickling down my cheeks: however,
as Lord Orville saw them not, for Sir Clement's head was constantly
between us, I tried to collect my spirits, and succeeded so far as
to keep my place with decency, till Sir Clement took leave; and then,
not daring to trust my eyes to meet those of Lord Orville, I retired.

I have been writing ever since; for, certain that I could not sleep,
I would not go to bed. Tell me, my dearest Sir, if you possibly
can, tell me that you approve my change of conduct,-tell me that
my altered behaviour to Lord Orville is right,-that my flying his
society, and avoiding his civilities, are actions which you would
have dictated.-Tell me this, and the sacrifices I have made will
comfort me in the midst of my regret,-for never, never can I cease
to regret that I have lost the friendship of Lord Orville!-Oh, Sir,
I have slighted,-have rejected,-have thrown it away!-No matter, it
was an honour I merited not to preserve; and now I see,-that my mind
was unequal to sustaining it without danger.

Yet so strong is the desire you have implanted in me to act with
uprightness and propriety, that, however the weakness of my heart
may distress and afflict me, it will never, I humbly trust, render
me wilfully culpable. The wish of doing well governs every other,
as far as concerns my conduct,-for am I not your child?-the creature
of your own forming!-Yet, Oh Sir, friend, parent, of my heart!-my
feelings are all at war with my duties! and, while I most struggle to
acquire self-approbation, my peace, my happiness, my hopes,-are lost!

'Tis you alone can compose a mind so cruelly agitated: you, I well
know, can feel pity for the weakness to which you are a stranger;
and, though you blame the affliction, soothe and comfort the afflicted.

</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXIII. MR. VILLARS TO EVELINA.  

Berry Hill, Oct. 3rd.


YOUR last communication, my dearest child, is indeed astonishing;
that an acknowledged daughter and heiress of Sir John Belmont should
be at Bristol, and still my Evelina bear the name of Anville, is to me
inexplicable; yet the mystery of the letter to Lady Howard prepared
me to expect something extraordinary upon Sir John Belmont's return
to England.

Whoever this young lady may be, it is certain she now takes a place
to which you have a right indisputable. An after-marriage I never
heard of; yet, supposing such a one to have happened, Miss Evelyn was
certainly the first wife, and therefore her daughter must, at least,
be entitled to the name of Belmont.

Either there are circumstances in this affair at present utterly
incomprehensible, or else some strange and most atrocious fraud has
been practiced; which of these two is the case it now behoves us
to enquire.

My reluctance to this step gives way to my conviction of its propriety,
since the reputation of your dear and much-injured mother must
now either be fully cleared from blemish, or receive its final and
indelible wound.

The public appearance of a daughter of Sir John Belmont will revive
the remembrance of Miss Evelyn's story in all who have heard it,-who
the mother was, will be universally demanded,-and if any other Lady
Belmont should be named, the birth of my Evelina will receive a stigma,
against which, honour, truth, and innocence may appeal in vain!-a
stigma, which will eternally blast the fair fame of her virtuous
mother, and cast upon her blameless self the odium of a title, which
not all her purity can rescue from established shame and dishonour!

No, my dear child, no; I will not quietly suffer the ashes of your
mother to be treated with ignominy! her spotless character shall be
justified to the world-her marriage shall be acknowledged, and her
child shall bear the name to which she is lawfully entitled.

It is true, that Mrs. Mirvan would conduct this affair with more
delicacy than Mrs. Selwyn; yet, perhaps, to save time, is of all
considerations the most important, since the longer this mystery
is suffered to continue, the more difficult may be rendered its
explanation. The sooner, therefore, you can set out for town, the
less formidable will be your task.

Let not your timidity, my dear love, depress your spirits: I shall,
indeed, tremble for you at a meeting so singular and so affecting,
yet there can be no doubt of the success of your application: I
enclose a letter from your unhappy mother, written, and reserved
purposely for this occasion: Mrs.  Clinton too, who attended her in
her last illness, must accompany you to town.-But, without any other
certificate of your birth, that which you carry in your countenance,
as it could not be affected by artifice, so it cannot admit of a doubt.

And now, my Evelina, committed at length to the care of your real
parent, receive the fervent prayers, wishes, and blessings, of him
who so fondly adopted you!

May'st thou, O child of my bosom! may'st thou, in this change of
situation, experience no change of disposition! but receive with
humility, and support with meekness the elevation to which thou
art rising! May thy manners, language, and deportment, all evince
that modest equanimity, and cheerful gratitude, which not merely
deserve, but dignify prosperity! May'st thou, to the last moments of
an unblemished life, retain thy genuine simplicity, thy singleness
of heart, thy guileless sincerity! And may'st thou, stranger to
ostentation, and superior to insolence, with true greatness of soul
shine forth conspicuous only in beneficence!  ARTHUR VILLARS.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXIV. LADY BELMONT TO SIR JOHN BELMONT. 


IN the firm hope that the moment of anguish which approaches will
prove the period of my sufferings, once more I address myself to Sir
John Belmont, in behalf of the child, who, if it survives its mother,
will hereafter be the bearer of this letter.

Yet, in what terms,-Oh, most cruel of men!-can the lost Caroline
address you, and not address you in vain? Oh, deaf to the voice of
compassion-deaf to the sting of truth-deaf to every tie of honour-say,
in what terms may the lost Caroline address you, and not address you
in vain!

Shall I call you by the loved, the respected title of husband?-No, you
disclaim it!-the father of my infant?-No, you doom it to infamy!-the
lover who rescued me from a forced marriage?-No, you have yourself
betrayed me!-the friend from whom I hoped succour and protection?-No,
you have consigned me to misery and destruction!

Oh, hardened against every plea of justice, remorse, or pity! how,
and in what manner, may I hope to move thee? Is there one method I
have left untried?  remains there one resource unessayed? No! I have
exhausted all the bitterness of reproach, and drained every sluice
of compassion!

Hopeless, and almost desperate, twenty times have I flung away my
pen;-but the feelings of a mother, a mother agonizing for the fate
of her child, again animating my courage, as often I have resumed it.

Perhaps when I am no more, when the measure of my woes is completed,
and the still, silent, unreproaching dust has received my sad
remains,-then, perhaps, when accusation is no longer to be feared,
nor detection to be dreaded, the voice of equity and the cry of nature
may be heard.

Listen, Oh Belmont, to their dictates! reprobate not your child,
though you have reprobated its mother. The evils that are past,
perhaps, when too late, you may wish to recal; the young creature
you have persecuted, perhaps, when too late, you may regret that
you have destroyed;-you may think with horror of the deceptions
you have practised, and the pangs of remorse may follow me to the
tomb:-Oh, Belmont, all my resentment softens into pity at the thought!
what will become of thee, good Heaven, when, with the eye of penitence,
thou reviewest thy past conduct!

Hear, then, the solemn, the last address, with which the unhappy
Caoline will importune thee.

If when the time of thy contrition arrives,-for arrive it must!-when
the sense of thy treachery shall rob thee of almost every other,
if then thy tortured heart shall sigh to expiate thy guilt,-mark the
conditions upon which I leave thee my forgiveness.

Thou knowest I am thy wife!-clear, then, to the world the reputation
thou hast sullied, and receive, as thy lawful successor, the child
who will present thee this, my dying request!

The worthiest, the most benevolent, the best of men, to whose consoling
kindness I owe the little tranquillity I have been able to preserve,
has plighted me his faith, that, upon no other conditions, he will
part with his helpless charge.

Should'st thou, in the features of this deserted innocent, trace the
resemblance of the wretched Caroline,-should its face bear the marks
of its birth, and revive in thy memory the image of its mother, wilt
thou not, Belmont, wilt thou not therefore renounce it?-Oh, babe of my
fondest affection! for whom already I experience all the tenderness of
maternal pity! look not like thy unfortunate mother,-lest the parent,
whom the hand of death may spare, shall be snatched from thee by the
more cruel means of unnatural antipathy!

I can write no more. The small share of serenity I have painfully
acquired, will not bear the shock of the dreadful ideas that crowd
upon me.

Adieu,-for ever!-

Yet, Oh!-shall I not, in this last farewell, which thou wilt not read
till every stormy passion is extinct, and the kind grave has embosomed
all my sorrows,-shall I not offer to the man, once so dear to me, a
ray of consolation to those afflictions he has in reserve? Suffer me,
then, to tell thee, that my pity far exceeds my indignation,-that I
will pray for thee in my last moments, and that the recollection of
the love I once bore thee, shall swallow up every other!

Once more, adieu! CAROLINE BELMONT.

</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXV. EVELINA TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS. 
 Clifton, Oct. 3rd.


THIS morning I saw from my window, that Lord Orville was walking in
the garden; but I would not go down stairs till breakfast was ready:
and then, he paid me his compliments almost as coldly as Lady Louisa
paid hers.

I took my usual place, and Mrs. Belmont, Lady Louisa, and Mrs. Selwyn,
entered into their usual conversation.-Not so your Evelina:
disregarded, silent, and melancholy, she sat like a cypher, whom,
to nobody belonging, by nobody was noticed.

Ill brooking such a situation, and unable to suport the neglect of
Lord Orville, the moment breakfast was over I left the room, and
was going up stairs; when, very unpleasantly, I was stopped by Sir
Clement Willoughby, who, flying into the hall, prevented my proceeding.

He enquired very particularly after my health, and entreated me to
return into the parlour. Unwillingly, I consented, but thought any
thing preferable to continuing alone with him; and he would neither
leave me, nor suffer me to pass on. Yet, in returning, I felt not a
little ashamed at appearing thus to take the visit of Sir Clement to
myself. And, indeed, he endeavoured, by his manner of addressing me,
to give it that air.

He stayed, I believe, an hour; nor would he, perhaps, even then have
gone, had not Mrs. Beaumont broken up the party, by proposing an
airing in her coach.  Lady Louisa consented to accompany her; but
Mrs. Selwyn, when applied to, said, "If my Lord, or Sir Clement,
will join us, I shall be happy to make one;-but really a trio of
females will be nervous to the last degree."

Sir Clement readily agreed to attend them; indeed, he makes it his
evident study to court the favour of Mrs. Beaumont. Lord Orville
excused himself from going out; and I retired to my own room. What
he did with himself I know not, for I would not go down stairs till
dinner was ready: his coldness, though my own change of behaviour
had occasioned it, so cruelly depresses my spirits, that I know not
how to support myself in his presence.

At dinner, I found Sir Clement again of the party. Indeed, he manages
every thing his own way; for Mrs. Beaumont, though by no means easy
to please, seems quite at his disposal.

The dinner, the afternoon, and the evening, were to me the most
irksome imaginable: I was tormented by the assiduity of Sir Clement,
who not only took, but made opportunities of speaking to me,-and
I was hurt,-Oh, how inexpressibly hurt!-that Lord Orville not only
forebore, as hitherto, seeking, he even neglected all occasions of
talking with me!

I begin to think, my dear Sir, that the sudden alteration in my
behaviour was ill-judged and improper; for, as I had received no
offence, as the cause of the change was upon my account, not his,
I should not have assumed, so abruptly, a reserve for which I dared
assign no reason,-nor have shunned his presence so obviously, without
considering the strange appearance of such a conduct.

Alas, my dearest Sir, that my reflections should always be too late to
serve me! dearly, indeed, do I purchase experience! and much, I fear,
I shall suffer yet more severely, from the heedless indiscretion
of my temper, ere I attain that prudence and consideration, which,
by foreseeing distant consequences, may rule and direct in present
exigencies. Oct. 4th.


Yesterday morning every body rode out, except Mrs. Selwyn and myself;
and we two sat for some time together in her room; but, as soon as
I could, I quitted her, to saunter in the garden; for she diverts
herself so unmercifully with rallying me, either upon my gravity, or
concerning Lord Orville,-that I dread having any conversation with her.

Here I believe I spent an hour by myself; when, hearing the
garden-gate open, I went into an arbour at the end of a long walk,
where, ruminating, very unpleasantly, upon my future prospects, I
remained quietly seated but a few minutes, before I was interrupted
by the appearance of Sir Clement Willoughby.

I started; and would have left the arbour, but he prevented me. Indeed,
I am almost certain he had heard in the house where I was, as it is
not, otherwise, probable he would have strolled down the garden alone.

"Stop, stop," cried he, "loveliest and most beloved of women, stop
and hear me!"

Then, making me keep my place, he sat down by me, and would have
taken my hand; but I drew it back, and said I could not stay.

"Can you, then," cried he, "refuse me the smallest gratification,
though, but yesterday, I almost suffered martyrdom for the pleasure
of seeing you?"

"Martyrdom! Sir Clement."

"Yes, beauteous insensible! martyrdom: for did I not compel myself
to be immured in a carriage, the tedious length of a whole morning,
with the three most fatiguing women in England?"

"Upon my word, the ladies are extremely obliged to you."

"Oh," returned he, "they have, every one of them, so copious a share
of their own personal esteem, that they have no right to repine at
the failure of it in the world; and, indeed, they will themselves be
the last to discover it."

"How little," cried I, "are those ladies aware of such severity from
you!"

"They are guarded," answered he, "so happily and so securely by their
own conceit, that they are not aware of it from any body. Oh, Miss
Anville, to be torn away from you, in order to be shut up with them,-is
there a human being, except your cruel self, could forbear to pity me?"

"I believe, Sir Clement, however hardly you may choose to judge of
them, your situation, by the world in general, would rather have been
envied than pitied."

"The world in general," answered he, "has the same opinion of them
that I have myself: Mrs. Beaumont is every where laughed at, Lady
Louisa ridiculed, and Mrs. Selwyn hated."

"Good God, Sir Clement, what cruel strength of words do you use!"

"It is you, my angel, are to blame, since your perfections have
rendered their faults so glaring. I protest to you, during our whole
ride, I thought the carriage drawn by snails. The absurd pride of
Mrs. Beaumont, and the respect she exacts, are at once insufferable
and stupifying; had I never before been in her company, I should
have concluded that this had been her first airing from the herald's
office,-and wished her nothing worse, than that it might also be the
last. I assure you, that but for gaining the freedom of her house,
I would fly her as I would plague, pestilence, and famine. Mrs.
Selwyn, indeed, afforded some relief from this formality, but the
unbounded license of her tongue-"

"O, Sir Clement, do you object to that?"

"Yes, my sweet reproacher, in a woman I do; in a woman I think it
intolerable.  She has wit, I acknowledge, and more understanding
than half her sex put together; but she keeps alive a perpetual
expectation of satire, that spreads a general uneasiness among all who
are in her presence; and she talks so much, that even the best things
she says weary the attention. As to the little Louisa, 'tis such a
pretty piece of languor, that 'tis almost cruel to speak rationally
about her,-else I should say, she is a mere compound of affectation,
impertinence, and airs."

"I am quite amazed," said I, "that, with such opinions, you can behave
to them all with so much attention and civility."

"Civility! my angel,-why I could worship, could adore them, only to
procure myself a moment of your conversation! Have you not seen me pay
my court to the gross Captain Mirvan, and the virago Madame Duval? Were
it possible that a creature so horrid could be formed, as to partake of
the worst qualities of all these characters,-a creature who should have
the haughtiness of Mrs.  Beaumont, the brutality of Captain Mirvan,
the self-conceit of Mrs. Selwyn, the affectation of Lady Louisa,
and the vulgarity of Madame Duval,-even to such a monster as that I
would pay homage, and pour forth adulation, only to obtain one word,
one look from my adored Miss Anville!"

"Sir Clement," said I, "you are greatly mistaken if you suppose this
duplicity of character recommends you to my good opinion. But I must
take this opportunity of begging you never more to talk to me in
this strain."

"Oh, Miss Anville, your reproofs, your coldness, pierce me to the
soul! look upon me with less rigour, and make me what you please;-you
shall govern and direct all my actions,-you shall new-form, new-model
me:-I will not have even a wish but of your suggestion; only deign
to look upon me with pity-if not with favour!"

"Suffer me, Sir," said I, very gravely, "to make use of this occasion
to put a final conclusion to such expressions. I entreat you never
again to address me in a language so flighty and so unwelcome. You
have already given me great uneasiness; and I must frankly assure
you, that if you do not desire to banish me from wherever you are,
you will adopt a very different style and conduct in future."

I then rose, and was going, but he flung himself at my feet to prevent
me, exclaiming, in a most passionate manner, "Good God! Miss Anville,
what do you say?-is it, can it be possible, that, so unmoved, that,
with such petrifying indifference, you can tear from me even the
remotest hope!"

"I know not, Sir," said I, endeavouring to disengage myself from him,
"what hope you mean, but I am sure that I never intended to give
you any."

"You distract me," cried he, "I cannot endure such scorn;-I beseech
you to have some moderation in your cruelty, lest you make me
desperate:-say, then, that you pity me,-O fairest inexorable! loveliest
tyrant!-say, tell me, at least, that you pity me!"

Just then, who should come in sight, as if intending to pass by
the arbour, but Lord Orville! Good Heaven, how did I start! and he,
the moment he saw me, turned pale, and was hastily retiring;-but I
called out "Lord Orville!-Sir Clement, release me,-let go my hand!"

Sir Clement, in some confusion, suddenly rose, but still grasped
my hand. Lord Orville, who had turned back, was again walking away;
but, still struggling to disengage myself, I called out "Pray, pray,
my Lord, don't go!-Sir Clement, I insist upon your releasing me!"

Lord Orville then, hastily approaching us, said, with great spirit,
"Sir Clement, you cannot wish to detain Miss Anville by force!"

"Neither, my Lord," cried Sir Clement, proudly, "do I request the
honour of your Lordship's interference."

However, he let go my hand, and I immediately ran into the house.

I was now frightened to death, lest Sir Clement's mortified pride
should provoke him to affront Lord Orville: I therefore ran hastily to
Mrs. Selwyn, and entreated her, in a manner hardly to be understood,
to walk towards the arbour. She asked no questions, for she is quick
as lightening in taking a hint, but instantly hastened into the garden.

Imagine, my dear Sir, how wretched I must be till I saw her
return! scarce could I restrain myself from running back: however,
I checked my impatience, and waited, though in agonies, till she came.

And now, my dear Sir, I have a conversation to write, the most
interesting to me that I ever heard. The comments and questions with
which Mrs. Selwyn interrupted her account I shall not mention; for
they are such as you may very easily suppose.

Lord Orville and Sir Clement were both seated very quietly in the
arbour: and Mrs. Selwyn, standing still, as soon as she was within
a few yards of them, heard Sir Clement say, "Your question, my Lord,
alarms me, and I can by no means answer it, unless you will allow me
to propose another."

"Undoubtedly, Sir."

"You ask me, my Lord, what are my intentions?-I should be very happy
to be satisfied as to your Lordship's."

"I have never, Sir, professed any."

Here they were both, for a few moments, silent; and then Sir Clement
said, "To what, my Lord, must I then impute your desire of knowing
mine?"

"To an unaffected interest in Miss Anville's welfare."

"Such an interest," said Sir Clement, drily, "is indeed very generous;
but, except in a father,-a brother,-or a lover-"

"Sir Clement," interrupted his Lordship, "I know your inference;
and I acknowledge I have not the right of enquiry which any of those
three titles bestow; and yet I confess the warmest wishes to serve
her and to see her happy. Will you, then, excuse me, if I take the
liberty to repeat my question?"

"Yes, if your Lordship will excuse my repeating, that I think it a
rather extraordinary one."

"It may be so," said Lord Orville; "but this young lady seems to
be peculiarly situated; she is very young, very inexperienced,
yet appears to be left totally to her own direction. She does not,
I believe, see the dangers to which she is exposed, and I will own
to you, I feel a strong desire to point them out."

"I don't rightly understand your Lordship,-but I think you cannot
mean to prejudice her against me?"

"Her sentiments of you, Sir, are as much unknown to me, as your
intentions towards her. Perhaps, were I acquainted with either,
my officiousness might be at an end: but I presume not to ask upon
what terms-"

Here he stopped; and Sir Clement said, "You know, my Lord, I am not
given to despair; I am by no means such a puppy as to tell you I am
upon sure ground; however, perseverance-"

"You are, then, determined to perservere?"

"I am, my Lord."

"Pardon me, then, Sir Clement, if I speak to you with freedom. This
young lady, though she seems alone, and, in some measure, unprotected,
is not entirely without friends; she has been extremely well educated,
and accustomed to good company; she has a natural love of virtue,
and a mind that might adorn any station, however exalted: is such
a young lady, Sir Clement, a proper object to trifle with?-for your
principles, excuse me, Sir, are well known."

"As to that, my Lord, let Miss Anville look to herself; she has an
excellent understanding, and needs no counsellor."

"Her understanding is indeed excellent; but she is too young for
suspicion, and has an artlessness of disposition I never saw equalled."

"My Lord," cried Sir Clement, warmly, "your praises make me doubt
your disinterestedness, and there exists not the man, whom I would
so unwillingly have for a rival as yourself. But you must give me
leave to say, you have greatly deceived me in regard to this affair."

"How so, Sir?" cried Lord Orville, with equal warmth.

"You were pleased, my Lord," answered Sir Clement, "upon our first
conversation concerning this young lady, to speak to her in terms by
no means suited to your present encomiums; you said she was a poor,
weak, ignorant girl, and I had great reason to believe you had a most
contemptuous opinion of her."

"It is very true," said Lord Orville, "that I did not, at our first
acquaintance, do justice to the merits of Miss Anville; but I knew
not then how new she was to the world; at present, however, I am
convinced, that whatever might appear strange in her behaviour, was
simply the effect of inexperience, timidity, and a retired education;
for I find her informed, sensible, and intelligent. She is not,
indeed, like most modern young ladies, to be known in half an hour:
her modest worth, and fearful excellence, require both time and
encouragement to show themselves. She does not, beautiful as she is,
seize the soul by surprise, but, with more dangerous fascination,
she steals it almost imperceptibly."

"Enough, my Lord," cried Sir Clement, "your solicitude for her welfare
is now sufficiently explained."

"My friendship and esteem," returned Lord Orville, "I do not wish to
disguise; but assure yourself, Sir Clement, I should not have troubled
you upon this subject, had Miss Anville and I ever conversed but as
friends. However, since you do not choose to avow your intentions,
we must drop the subject."

"My intentions," cried he, "I will frankly own, are hardly known
to myself. I think Miss Anville the loveliest of her sex; and,
were I a marrying man, she, of all the women I have seen, I would
fix upon for a wife: but I believe that not even the philosophy of
your Lordship would recommend me to a connection of that sort, with
a girl of obscure birth, whose only dowry is her beauty, and who is
evidently in a state of dependency."

"Sir Clement," cried Lord Orville, with some heat, "we will discuss
this point no further; we are both free agents, and must act for
ourselves."

Here Mrs. Selwyn, fearing a surprise, and finding my apprehensions
of danger were groundless, retired hastily into another walk, and
soon after came to give me this account.

Good Heaven, what a man is this Sir Clement! So designing, though so
easy; so deliberately artful, though so flighty! Greatly, however, is
he mistaken, all confident as he seems; for the girl, obscure, poor,
dependent as she is, far from wishing the honour of his alliance,
would not only now, but always have rejected it.

As to Lord Orville,-but I will not trust my pen to mention him,-tell
me, my dear sir, what you think of him?-tell me if he is not
the noblest of men?-and if you can either wonder at, or blame my
admiration?

The idea of being seen immediately by either party, after so singular
a conversation, was both awkward and distressing to me; but I was
obliged to appear at dinner. Sir Clement, I saw, was absent and
uneasy; he watched me, he watched Lord Orville, and was evidently
disturbed in his mind. Whenever he spoke to me, I turned from him
with undisguised disdain, for I am too much irritated against him,
to bear with his ill-meant assiduities any longer.

But, not once,-not a moment, did I dare meet the eyes of Lord
Orville! All consciousness myself, I dreaded his penetration, and
directed mine every way-but towards his. The rest of the day I never
quitted Mrs. Selwyn.

Adieu, my dear Sir: to-morrow I expect your directions, whether I am
to return to Berry Hill, or once more to visit London.
</CHAPTER>

<CHAPTER>
LETTER LXXVI. EVELINA IN CONTINUATION.  

Oct. 6th.


AND now, my dearest Sir, if the perturbation of my spirits will allow
me, I will finish my last letter from Clifton Hill. This morning,
though I did not go down stairs early, Lord Orville was the only
person in the parlour when I entered it. I felt no small confusion
at seeing him alone, after having so long and successfully avoided
such a meeting. As soon as the usual compliments were over, I would
have left the room, but he stopped me by saying, "If I disturb you
Miss Anville, I am gone."

"My Lord," said I, rather embarrassed, "I did not mean to stay."

"I flattered myself," cried he, "I should have had a moment's
conversation with you."

I then turned back; and he seemed himself in some perplexity: but,
after a short pause, "You are very good," said he, "to indulge my
request; I have, indeed, for some time past, most ardently desired
an opportunity of speaking to you."

Again he paused; but I said nothing, so he went on.

"You allowed me, Madam, a few days since, you allowed me to lay
claim to your friendship,-to interest myself in your affairs,-to call
you by the affectionate title of sister;-and the honour you did me,
no man could have been more sensible of; I am ignorant, therefore,
how I have been so unfortunate as to forfeit it:-but, at present,
all is changed! you fly me,-your averted eye shuns to meet mine,
and you sedulously avoid my conversation."

I was extremely disconcerted at this grave, and but too just
accusation, and I am sure I must look very simple;-but I made no
answer.

"You will not, I hope," continued he, "condemn me unheard; if there
is any thing I have done,-or any thing I have neglected, tell me,
I beseech you, what, and it shall be the whole study of my thoughts
how to deserve your pardon."

"Oh, my Lord," cried I, penetrated at once with shame and gratitude,
"your too, too great politeness oppresses me!-you have done nothing,-I
have never dreamt of offence-if there is any pardon to be asked it
is rather for me, than for you to ask it."

"You are all sweetness and condescension!" cried he, "and I flatter
myself you will again allow me to claim those titles which I find
myself so unable to forego. Yet, occupied as I am, with an idea
that gives me the greatest uneasiness, I hope you will not think
me impertinent, if I still solicit, still intreat, nay implore, you
to tell me, to what cause your late sudden, and to me most painful,
reserve was owing?"

"Indeed, my Lord," said I, stammering, "I don't,-I can't,-indeed,
my Lord,-"

"I am sorry to distress you," said he, "and ashamed to be so
urgent,-yet I know not how to be satisfied while in ignorance,-and
the time when the change happened, makes me apprehend,-may I, Miss
Anville, tell you what it makes me apprehend?"

"Certainly, my Lord."

"Tell me, then,-and pardon a question most essentially important
to me;-Had, or had not, Sir Clement Willoughby any share in causing
your inquietude?"

"No, my Lord," answered I, with firmness, "none in the world."

"A thousand, thousand thanks!" cried he: "you have relieved me from a
weight of conjecture which I supported very painfully. But one thing
more; is it, in any measure, to Sir Clement that I may attribute the
alteration in your behaviour to myself, which, I could not but observe,
began the very day after his arrival at the Hot Wells?"

"To Sir Clement, my Lord," said I, "attribute nothing. He is the last
man in the world who would have any influence over my conduct."

"And will you, then, restore to me that share of confidence and favour
with which you honoured me before he came?"

Just then, to my great relief,-for I knew not what to say,-Mrs.
Beaumont opened the door, and in a few minutes we went to breakfast.

Lord Orville was all gaiety; never did I see him more lively or more
agreeable. Very soon after, Sir Clement Willoughby called, to pay
his respects, he said, to Mrs. Beaumont. I then came to my own room,
where, indulging my reflections, which, now soothed, and now alarmed
me, I remained very quietly, till I received your most kind letter.

Oh, Sir, how sweet are the prayers you offer for your Evelina! how
grateful to her are the blessings you pour upon her head!-You commit
me to my real parent,-Ah, Guardian, Friend, Protector of my youth,-by
whom my helpless infancy was cherished, my mind formed, my very life
preserved,-you are the Parent my heart acknowledges, and to you do
I vow eternal duty, gratitude, and affection!

I look forward to the approaching interview with more fear than hope;
but, important as is this subject, I am just now wholly engrossed
with another, which I must hasten to communicate.

I immediately acquainted Mrs. Selwyn with the purport of your
letter. She was charmed to find your opinion agreed with her own,
and settled that we should go to town to-morrow morning: and a chaise
is actually ordered to be here by one o'clock.

She then desired me to pack up my clothes; and said she must go
herself to make speeches and tell lies to Mrs. Beaumont.

When I went down stairs to dinner, Lord Orville, who was still in
excellent spirits, reproached me for secluding myself so much from
the company. He sat next me,-he would sit next me,-at table; and he
might, I am sure, repeat what he once said of me before, that he
almost exhausted himself in fruitless endeavours to entertain me;
-for, indeed, I was not to be entertained: I was totally spiritless
and dejected; the idea of the approaching meeting,-and Oh, Sir,
the idea of the approaching parting,-gave a heaviness to my heart
that I could neither conquer nor repress. I even regretted the half
explanation that had passed, and wished Lord Orville had supported
his own reserve, and suffered me to support mine.

However, when, during dinner, Mrs. Beaumont spoke of our journey,
my gravity was no longer singular; a cloud instantly overspread the
countenance of Lord Orville, and he became nearly as thoughtful and
as silent as myself.

We all went together to the drawing-room. After a short and
unentertaining conversation, Mrs. Selwyn said she must prepare for
her journey, and begged me to see for some books she had left in
the parlour.

And here, while I was looking for them, I was followed by Lord
Orville. He shut the door after he came in, and, approaching me with
a look of anxiety, said, "Is this true, Miss Anville, are you going?"

"I believe so, my Lord," said I, still looking for the books.

"So suddenly, so unexpectedly must I lose you?"

"No great loss, my Lord," cried I, endeavouring to speak cheerfully.

"Is it possible," said he gravely, "Miss Anville can doubt my
sincerity?"

"I can't imagine," cried I, "what Mrs. Selwyn has done with these
books."

"Would to Heaven," continued he, "I might flatter myself you would
allow me to prove it!"

"I must run up stairs," cried I, greatly confused, "and ask what she
has done with them."

"You are going, then," cried he, taking my hand, "and you give me not
the smallest hope of your return!-will you not, then, my too lovely
friend!-will you not, at least, teach me, with fortitude like your own,
to support your absence?"

"My Lord," cried I, endeavouring to disengage my hand, "pray let
me go!"

"I will," cried he, to my inexpressible confusion, dropping on one
knee, "if you wish to leave me!"

"O, my Lord," exclaimed I, "rise, I beseech you, rise!-such a posture
to me!-surely your Lordship is not so cruel as to mock me!"

"Mock you!" repeated he earnestly, "no I revere you! I esteem and
I admire you above all human beings! you are the friend to whom my
soul is attached as to its better half! you are the most amiable,
the most perfect of women! and you are dearer to me than language
has the power of telling."

I attempt not to describe my sensations at that moment; I scarce
breathed; I doubted if I existed,-the blood forsook my cheeks,
and my feet refused to sustain me: Lord Orville, hastily rising,
supported me to a chair, upon which I sunk, almost lifeless.

For a few minutes, we neither of us spoke; and then, seeing me recover,
Lord Orville, though in terms hardly articulate, intreated my pardon
for his abruptness. The moment my strength returned, I attempted to
rise, but he would not permit me.

I cannot write the scene that followed, though every word is
engraven on my heart; but his protestations, his expressions, were
too flattering for repetition: nor would he, in spite of my repeated
efforts to leave him, suffer me to escape:-in short, my dear Sir,
I was not proof against his solicitations-and he drew from me the
most sacred secret of my heart!

I know not how long we were together; but Lord Orville was upon his
knees, when the door was opened by Mrs. Selwyn!-To tell you, Sir,
the shame with which I overwhelmed, would be impossible;-I snatched
my hand from Lord Orville,-he, too, started and rose, and Mrs. Selwyn,
for some instants, stood facing us both in silence.

At last, "My Lord" said she, sarcastically, "have you been so good
as to help Miss Anville to look for my books?"

"Yes, Madam," answered he, attempting to rally, "and I hope we shall
soon be able to find them."

"Your Lordship is extremely kind," said she, drily, "but I can by
no means consent to take up any more of your time." Then looking on
the window-seat, she presently found the books, and added, "Come,
here are just three, and so like the servants in the Drummer, this
important affair may give employment to us all." She then presented
one of them to Lord Orville, another to me, and taking a third herself,
with a most provoking look, she left the room.

I would instantly have followed her; but Lord Orville, who could not
help laughing, begged me to stay a minute, as he had many important
matters to discuss.

"No, indeed, my Lord, I cannot,-perhaps I have already stayed too
long."

"Does Miss Anville so soon repent her goodness?"

"I scarce know what I do, my Lord,-I am quite bewildered!"

"One hour's conversation," cried he, "will, I hope, compose your
spirits, and confirm my happiness. When, then, may I hope to see you
alone?-shall you walk in the garden to-morrow before breakfast?"

"No, no, my Lord; you must not, a second time, reproach me with making
an appointment."

"Do you then," said he, laughing, "reserve that honour only for
Mr. Macartney?"

"Mr. Mccartney," said I, "is poor, and thinks himself obliged to me;
otherwise-"

"Poverty," cried he, "I will not plead; but, if being obliged to you
has any weight, who shall dispute my title to an appointment?"

"My Lord, I can stay no longer,-Mrs. Selwyn will lose all patience."

"Deprive her not of the pleasure of her conjectures,-but tell me,
are you under Mrs. Selwyn's care?"

"Only for the present, my Lord."

"Not a few are the questions I have to ask Miss Anville: among them,
the most important is, whether she depends wholly on herself, or
whether there is any other person for whose interest I must solicit?"

"I hardly know, my Lord, I hardly know myself to whom I most belong."

"Suffer, suffer me, then," cried he, with warmth, "to hasten the time
when that shall no longer admit a doubt!-when your grateful Orville
may call you all his own!"

At length, but with difficulty, I broke from him. I went, however, to
my own room, for I was too much agitated to follow Mrs. Selwyn. Good
God, my dear Sir, what a scene! surely the meeting for which I shall
prepare to-morrow cannot so greatly affect me! To be loved by Lord
Orville,-to be the honoured choice of his noble heart,-my happiness
seemed too infinite to be borne, and I wept, even bitterly I wept,
from the excess of joy which overpowered me.

In this state of almost painful felicity I continued till I was
summoned to tea. When I re-entered the drawing room, I rejoiced much
to find it full of company, as the confusion with which I met Lord
Orville was rendered the less observable.

Immediately after tea, most of the company played at cards,-and
then-till supper time, Lord Orville devoted himself wholly to me.

He saw that my eyes were red, and would not let me rest till he
made me confess the cause; and when, though most reluctantly, I had
acknowledged my weakness, I could with difficulty refrain from weeping
again at the gratitude he expressed.

He earnestly desired to know if my journey could not be postponed! and
when I no, entreated permission to attend me to town.

"Oh, my Lord," cried I, "what a request!"

"The sooner," answered he, "I make my devotion to you in public,
the sooner I may expect, from your delicacy, you will convince the
world you encourage no mere danglers."

"You teach me, then, my Lord, the inference I might expect, if
I complied."

"And can you wonder I should seek to hasten the happy time, when
no scruples, no discretion will demand our separation? and the most
punctilious delicacy will rather promote, than oppose, my happiness
in attending you?"

To this I was silent, and he re-urged his request.

"My Lord," said I, "you ask what I have no power to grant. This
journey will deprive me of all right to act for myself."

"What does Miss Anville mean?"

"I cannot now explain myself; indeed, if I could, the task would be
both painful and tedious."

"O, Miss Anville," cried he, "when may I hope to date the period of
this mystery? when flatter myself that my promised friend will indeed
honour me with her confidence?"

"My Lord," said I, "I mean not to affect any mystery,-but my affairs
are so circumstanced, that a long and most unhappy story can alone
explain them.  However, if a short suspense will give your Lordship
any uneasiness,-"

"My beloved Miss Anville," cried he, eagerly, "pardon my
impatience!-You shall tell me nothing you would wish to conceal,-I
will wait your own time for information, and trust to your goodness
for its speed."

"There is nothing, my Lord, I wish to conceal,-to postpone an
explanation is all I desire."

He then requested, that, since I would not allow him to accompany
me to town, I would permit him to write to me, and promise to answer
his letters.

A sudden recollection of the two letters which had already passed
between us occurring to me, I hastily answered, "No, indeed, my Lord!-"

"I am extremely sorry," said he, gravely, "that you think me too
presumptuous.  I must own I had flattered myself, that, to soften the
inquietude of an absence, which seems attended by so many inexplicable
circumstances, would not have been to incur your displeasure." This
seriousness hurt me; and I could not forbear saying, "Can you indeed
desire, my Lord, that I should, a second time, expose myself, by an
unguarded readiness, to write to you?"

"A second time! unguarded readiness!" repeated he; "you amaze me!"

"Has your Lordship then quite forgot the foolish letter I was so
imprudent as to send you when in town?"

"I have not the least idea," cried he, "of what you mean."

"Why then, my Lord," said I, "we had better let the subject drop."

"Impossible!" cried he, "I cannot rest without an explanation!"

And then, he obliged me to speak very openly of both the letters: but,
my dear Sir, imagine my surprise, when he assured me, in the most
solemn manner, that, far from having ever written me a single line,
he had never received, seen, or heard of my letter!

This subject, which caused mutual astonishment and perplexity to us
both, entirely engrossed us for the rest of the evening; and he made
me promise to show him the letter I had received in his name to-morrow
morning, that he might endeavour to discover the author.

After supper, the conversation became general.

And now, my dearest Sir, may I not call for your congratulations upon
the events of this day? a day never to be recollected by me but with
the most grateful joy! I know how much you are inclined to think well
of Lord Orville; I cannot, therefore, apprehend that my frankness to
him will displease you.  Perhaps the time is not very distant, when
your Evelina's choice may receive the sanction of her best friend's
judgment and approbation,-which seems now all she has to wish!

In regard to the change in my situation which must first take place,
surely I cannot be blamed for what has passed! the partiality of Lord
Orville must not only reflect honour upon me, but upon all to whom
I do, or may belong.

Adieu, most dear Sir, I will write again when I arrive at London.
</CHAPTER>

