{"name": "Chapters28-30", "summary": "Chapter 28: As they ran through the fields, Sikes had tried to bring Oliver with him.  After Toby abandoned them however, it became impossible and stays alive at the same time, so he wrapped his shawl around Oliver's wound and left him in the field.  Then, diverting the attention of the pursuers to him and not Oliver, he fired his pistol and ran.  The butler of the house, Mr. Giles, a houseboy who was around the age of thirty, Brittles, and a tinker who was sleeping in the shed were the ones pursuing.  But hearing the gunshot, they soon gave up on their chase and went back to the house.  The next morning the three sat telling the tale of the robbery to the cook and the maid.  While this was going on, Oliver woke up alone in the field, with his hurt throbbing.  He realized that he had to get help or he would die alone in the field.  He wandered to the house they had tried to rob, and knocked on the door.  He collapsed, and the men telling the story, along with the women listening answered the door to find him there.  They called one of the mistresses of the house and she decided to take care of him, after speaking with her aunt.<PARAGRAPH>Chapter 29: Giles, dressed in his butler attire, was serving breakfast to the two ladies of the house.  The elder, Mrs. Maylie was the aunt of the beautiful young girl, Rose.  He tells them a bit about shooting Oliver, for which he was praised, but waits to tell the whole tale until after Dr. Losberne could attend.  When the doctor arrived he looked to Oliver and after a time reported to the ladies.  He invited them up to see the thief and they accepted; not knowing that Oliver was so young. \n\tChapter 30: The doctor brought them into the room, and when Rose saw Oliver she sat at his side and wept on his face lamenting that one so young and innocent looking could not be evil.  She pleaded with the doctor and her aunt to not do harm to Oliver, or put him in prison.  They agreed that nothing would be decided about what to do with him, until he woke up and they could judge if he had an evil character.  Hours later, Oliver woke and grateful that he was being taken care of, told them the story of his upbringing.  The listeners of the tale were in tears, and when he was finished, he quickly fell back to sleep.  They left the room and went down to the kitchen to question Mr. Giles to make certain that Oliver was the boy he shot that night in the cellar.  Both Giles and Brittles could not give their oaths that Oliver was the boy they saw, and as they were concluding the interview, someone came to the door.  They were horrified to find out it was the Bow Street Runners there to investigate the break in.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020210431/https://www.novelguide.com/oliver-twist/summaries/chap28-chap30"}