{"name": "Chapters37-39", "summary": "Chapter 37: Upon marrying the workhouse matron, the beadle became master of the workhouse.  Two months had gone by and Mr. Bumble already did not like his newly acquired matrimonial state.  He and Mrs. Bumble argued and she bested him, forcing him to wander the streets for a time.  Deciding he was thirsty, he stopped into an almost empty tavern and kept looking curiously at the man who sat in their also.  Finally they began talking and the man told Mr. Bumble that he had been searching him out.  He asked Mr. Bumble questions about the night Oliver Twist was born, and Bumble answered him as best as he could.  The strange man wanted to find the nurse that delivered Oliver, and Bumble told him that she had died the previous winter.  He also informed the strange man that the nurse had told his wife a secret about that night to his wife before she died, and Bumble agreed to bring his wife to see the man the next night.  They exchanged the address, and Mr. Bumble found out the man's name was Monks.<PARAGRAPH>Chapter 38: The Bumbles walked to the address that Monks gave the night before and let them in out of the rain.  They were in a bad part of town in a worn down building next to the river.  Mrs. Bumble negotiated with Monks and got him to give her twenty-five pounds for the information she was about to tell him.  When he agreed to the sum, Mrs. Bumble told him the story of the night Sally died.  In Sally's hand when she died was a pawnbroker's slip of an item she had pawned soon after she had taken it off Oliver Twist's mother's body.  Mrs. Bumble had redeemed the pawned item and gave it to Monks.  It was a gold locket, engraved with the name Agnes and contained a small gold band.  Monks was pleased and beckoned his visitors to stand away from the table.  He moved it to reveal a trap door in the floor that showed rushing water below.  To the evidence Mrs. Bumble had given him, he tied a weight, and explained that once thrown into the current, it could never again be used against him.  The Bumbles agreed to keep quiet with the matter and left the Monks establishment.\n\tChapter 39: Sikes was ill and confined to his apartment where Nancy was nursing him.  Fagin, Dodger, and Charlie Bates came to see him, and Sikes wanted some money from Fagin.  They agreed that Nancy was to go get the money and bring it back.  They left, and Monks showed up at Fagin's house saying that every thing was done.  Nancy, looking ill, walked back to Sikes with the money, and he expressed that she looked ill also.  Sikes made her rest and she gave him laudanum to put him to sleep.  After he slept, Nancy left and went to a hotel near Hyde Park.  At the front door she asked to see Mrs. Maylie, and after some arguing, was admitted.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201020210431/https://www.novelguide.com/oliver-twist/summaries/chap37-chap39"}