{"name": "Chapters  18 - 19", "summary": "CHAPTER SUMMARIES AND NOTESCHAPTER 18 Summary In this chapter, Angel Clare is developed in much more detail, especially in the aspects that will affect Tess. He is the youngest son of Mr. Clare, who is a Vicar in Emminster and respected throughout Wessex. He is the only one of the three sons not to choose a vocation in the ministry; as a result, his father has not sent him to Cambridge, and for several years Angel is at loose ends. He goes to London for a while, unsuccessfully seeking a profession; while there he is involved with an older woman. He realizes he is more suited for country living, and at age twenty-six has decided to learn the farming business, which he feels will allow him to have \"intellectual liberty.\" He is currently a trainee on the Talbothay farm, but he is not treated as an ordinary farmhand. Instead, he is treated as a gentleman who is learning the farming business. At the dairy, Angel at first remains aloof, eating by himself. Soon, however, he finds his fellow farm workers interesting and begins to eat with them, enjoying their company. He also begins to notice the beauty of nature and to enjoy outdoor life. After Tess arrives, Angel also notices her innocent beauty. He is deeply attracted towards her freshness and assumes she is a virgin. Angel judges her to be more than an ordinary milkmaid and is eager to get to know her. Tess, however, maintains a distance with Angel, because the ghosts of her stained past haunt her. Notes Several aspects of Angel Clare should be noted, for they will figure in his future relationship with Tess. His father, the Vicar in Emminster, has denied Angel an education at Cambridge because he has not chosen to go into the ministry; Mr. Clare is obviously a conservative person with fixed ideas. He, however, is respected as a special parson throughout Wessex, and some of his traits have been passed on to Angel. Everyone on the farm also recognizes Angel as someone different and special; even Mrs. Crick believes he should not eat with the other farmhands, for she perceives him as much better than her regular employees. Like Tess, he has had an adventure away from home, spending some time in London and having an affair with an older woman. In the end, however, he realizes he is best suited for country living. Angel Clare immediately recognizes that Tess is not an ordinary girl. Her pretty and delicate looks compensate for any sophistication that she lacks. Her mild manner and pure nature are reflected on her face. Her charming and attractive personality cannot easily be hidden. As a result, this beautiful young lady captivates Angel. It is important to notice the great irony in this chapter. From the moment Angel sets his eyes on Tess, he presumes her to be a virgin because of her loveliness. It never occurs to him that this delicate female could carry the stigma of a sordid past. CHAPTER 19 Summary Angel tries to befriend Tess. He even lines up her cows for her, which is against the rules. She says something to Angel about it, but then regrets having spoken. The same night, as she is walking in the garden, she hears Angel strumming on a harp. When he spies her, he takes the opportunity to ask her the reason for her somber behavior. She hides the truth and talks about life in general. Angel is surprised at both her intelligence and her pessimism and again thinks of her as more than a milkmaid. Tess wonders why a \"decidedly bookish, musical, thinking young man should have chosen deliberately to be a farmer, and not a clergyman, like his father and brother.\" Tess points out the difference in learning between them, and Angel offers to help her in reading. She turns him down, stating that what she wants to learn cannot be found in books. Nonetheless, Tess is anxious to have Angel think kindly about her. She discusses him with Mr. Crick and is amazed to learn from him that Angel does not have a good opinion about old families. As a result, Tess again feels she has no chance with Angel. Notes Each day introduces a new facet of Tess's personality to Angel. She appears ever intriguing and fresh to him. While Tess is unaware of Angel's strong attraction to her, she does enjoy his presence on the farm and her conversations with him. The early spring has changed to warm summer with a spread of \"juicy grass\" and dazzling flowers. Tess has settled into her routine as a milkmaid, but is fearful that fate will intervene to destroy her peaceful days at Talbothay's. She is happier than she has ever been, but believes her joy cannot continue. Her pessimism confuses Angel, but her intelligence and independent thought surprise him. With fascination, he listens to her talk about her own individuality. He offers to teach her anything of her interest and is baffled that she refuses him. She grows philosophical and wants to know why the sun shines \"on the just and the unjust alike.\" Not knowing her background, Angel finds her question quite puzzling and challenging. It is important to notice the image that Hardy creates around Angel. His name is significant; in addition, he is seen lounging in the garden and playing a harp. He is also pictured as extremely intelligent and kind. It is no wonder that Tess thinks of him almost as a god and believes his music to be heavenly. Hardy, however, hints that this way of thinking is dangerous; a love affair between the couple cannot be smooth. The author foreshadows this fact by making the garden (symbolic of the world) filled with ugly images, including offensive smells and slug slime. Just as Tess's innocence and purity have been spoiled by the world, even this idyllic scene has its darkness.", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820050202/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmTessD28.asp"}