{"name": "Chapter V", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210802030545/https://www.gradesaver.com/babbitt/study-guide/summary-chapters-iv-vi", "summary": "As Babbitt makes his elaborate preparations to leave the office to go to lunch at the Zenith Athletic Club, he continues to make promises of self-improvement that he blatantly and continuously breaks. At least the promises make him \"feel exemplary\". As he drives, he takes pride in the familiar setting and in his role in it. On impulse, he stops to buy himself an expensive electric cigar-lighter for the car. At the club, Babbitt makes small talk with Sidney Finkelstein and Vergil Gunch until Paul Riesling arrives. Babbitt hastens away to greet him like a proud and admiring \"older brother\". In the dining room, Babbitt decides not to sit with his friends, because he wants Paul \"to himself\". Babbitt confesses to Paul that he sometimes feels dissatisfied with his otherwise complete, successful, and moral life. Paul reacts in strong agreement, describing his resentment for his controlling wife Zilla and suggesting that \"this sweet, clean, respectable, moral life isn't all it's cracked up to be\". He speculates that many of Zenith's most upstanding men are restless, miserable, and bored with their lives and wives. Though Babbitt counters Paul's claims with appeals to integrity and a work ethic, he begins to agree with Paul in a way that contracts \"all his defense of duty and Christian patience,\" producing a \"curious reckless joy\". In a fit of rebellion, Babbitt decides that he will scheme to make it possible for himself and Paul to go up to Maine for their annual Babbitt-Riesling trip a few days earlier than their families--for a real vacation", "analysis": "Babbitt's ineptitude, inner conflict, and constant hypocrisy are perhaps most evident in his alleged attempts to quit smoking. He stops smoking \"at least once a month\"  by coming up with a new elaborate plan involving several steps and a very detailed schedule. He does most of what he sets out to do--except stop smoking. He consistently forgets that he has resolved to quit. He even buys himself an electric cigar lighter. This is more than mere hypocrisy. Lewis's biting sarcasm here indicates that Babbitt's behavior is a reflection upon his lack of inner resolve and his inability to determine what he wants and believes. Appropriately, his professional life is also devoid of integrity and meaning . Although he considers himself an honest and competent salesman, Lewis makes it clear through the plot and satire that he is, in fact, regularly unethical in his business dealings and that he does not know nearly \"everything about his own city and its environs,\" despite his claim that this is the \"duty and privilege of the realtor\" . He relies on newspapers and the Church to tell him what to think and believe. His drive toward conformity has completely obliterated his agency as an individual. Babbitt shows how easily persuaded he is during his conversation with Ted about getting his education by correspondence. Despite the fact that these advertisements, included in full, are the victims of brutal satiric ridicule, he is nearly convinced that with minimal effort and money, his son really can learn the art of \"Prosperity and Domination\" and can hold all the secrets of a masterful personality. In addition to the ways in which these ads undermine themselves with ludicrous rags-to-riches stories of expensive automobiles and unparalleled social status, Lewis offers an unexpected blow with the address listed on the posting: \"Shortcut Educational Pub. Co., Desk, WA, Sandpit, Iowa\" . These courses offer nothing more than a shortcut to nowhere, and Mrs. Babbitt is the only one sensible enough to notice  that Ted must go to college in order to attain money and prestige.  Far from the decision is any idea that an education is a good in itself as part of an individual's personal development. The Zenith Athletic Club is subject to a similar brand of satire. Lewis notes that it is \"not athletic and it isn't exactly a club\" . It also has a fireplace without a fire, musicianless musicians, and members who criticize other clubs but join a club the moment they are invited. Despite the focus on Babbitt's complacent conformity and inept hypocrisy, these chapters also hint at the rebellion that is floating through his consciousness. At lunch with Paul, he reveals that, though he feels guilty about it, he is significantly dissatisfied with his wife and family. He explains that he has fulfilled the requirements of the American Dream ), yet he feels that his life is empty. Paul explains that he, too, is dissatisfied and unhappy, and he suspects that plenty of the other upstanding gentlemen whom they know are in the same position. Their conversation is a reflection on how the merely external aspects of the American Dream, once achieved, leave the superficial person  feeling restless, unhappy, and betrayed."}