{"name": "Chapter XXVIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210802030545/https://www.gradesaver.com/babbitt/study-guide/summary-chapters-xxvii-xxx", "summary": "Tanis Judique calls George at the office about a leak in her apartment, and George goes to look things over. To him, Tanis represents the height of feminine class and grace, and he is enchanted by her. He stays for a cup of tea, and they talk for a great while, agreeing about most things as George basks in the \"glorious state of being appreciated\". He confides in her about his friendship with Seneca Doane and about the tension that developed with Vergil Gunch at the Athletic Club. They rejoice in mutual understanding and comfort, and Tanis reveals herself to be somewhat of a rebel as she smokes a cigarette. They decide to have dinner together, and George calls Myra from the deli with a lie about being out on business. They talk through the night, feeling utterly content in each other's company, and George returns home at dawn", "analysis": "Even at his most rebellious, Babbitt is plagued by the indecisiveness that is inevitable for someone without any thoughts or beliefs that are entirely his own. Although it is not necessarily inconsistent, he still vacillates between an elitist disapproval of the protesting workers and a feeling that they have \"just as much right to march as anybody else\" . He requires the influence of Seneca Doane, once again, to temporarily subscribe to the liberal support of the strikers. Even still, he refers to them as \"a bad element\"  and is confused by his own contradictions. This is, perhaps, the result of his living and having bought into a society so focused on conformity and so saturated by various forms of mass media. Finally, though, he is bold enough to support the socialist agenda in front of the men at the Athletic Club, and this results in the manipulative disdain that soon will contribute to Babbitt's renunciation of this rebellious phase. His rebellion is not strong enough to withstand such disdain among his colleagues. Although Babbitt believes that his relationship with Tanis Judique is based on a strong connection, mutual understanding, and respect, Lewis suggests that it is, like most things in Babbitt's life, a mere frivolity. During the long evening that they spend talking together, Babbitt feels as if they agree on everything. This, of course, might be an indication of their deep compatibility. Yet, Lewis informs us that \"They agreed that Prohibition was prohibitive. They agreed that art in the home was cultural,\" and they agreed that short skirts were short. The utter lack of substance in these impressions is made even more ridiculous by the fact that they interpret so much from this \"frank speaking\" . Lewis also emphasizes that Babbitt's attraction to Tanis results mainly from her willingness to offer him unlimited attention and sympathy. She feeds his ailing ego, but the moment she becomes burdensome, he no longer cares to exert the energy on their relationship. His eventual carelessness and lack of discretion in the affair may also indicate that his commitment to her is never as strong or complete as he believes it to be. Mrs. Mudge is one of several characters in the novel through whom Lewis critiques and satirizes the state of Jazz Age religion. She is a representative of the all-inclusive, nondescriptive religious category of New Thought, and her hour-long speech sounds  like nothing more than verbal sludge. Although her sermon hypnotizes the audience, leaving them mesmerized, no one can extract any comprehensible message from her great ocean of words. The entire sermon contains no punctuation whatsoever; it is merely a blur of pseudo-spiritual phrases that the audience clearly does not understand, even though they seem to carry significance. The lack of grammatical meaning is reflective of the sermon's lack of meaningful content, revealing Mrs. Mudge as a religious quack and suggesting that real spiritual salvation is especially needed in a culture so concerned with material objects."}