{"name": "Chapter XXX", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210802030545/https://www.gradesaver.com/babbitt/study-guide/summary-chapters-xxvii-xxx", "summary": "Myra returns to Zenith, confessing her fears that George neither missed her nor needed her. As soon as George feels the pressure of obligation to satisfy Tanis while keeping the affair a secret, he is suddenly resentful of Tanis and of \"women and the way they get you all tied up in complications. Still, he continues the affair somewhat carelessly and unapologetically. During an argument about George's smoking and drinking, Myra reveals that she is resentful of the fact that George gets to \"run around with anybody\" he pleases while she stays home, still a slave to routine. When George blindly agrees to help her gain culture, she requests that he accompany her to Mrs. Opal Emerson Mudge's New Thought meeting on Cultivating the Sun Spirit. Mrs. Mudge's speech is hypnotizing and incoherent, concluding with an announcement about the monthly magazine that costs a \"mere pittance\" per year. Though the audience listens with rapt adoration, Babbitt is unimpressed by this form of escapism, which upsets Myra. After another argument, George is unable to offer any assurance as Myra insinuates that their marriage is ending", "analysis": "Even at his most rebellious, Babbitt is plagued by the indecisiveness that is inevitable for someone without any thoughts or beliefs that are entirely his own. Although it is not necessarily inconsistent, he still vacillates between an elitist disapproval of the protesting workers and a feeling that they have \"just as much right to march as anybody else\" . He requires the influence of Seneca Doane, once again, to temporarily subscribe to the liberal support of the strikers. Even still, he refers to them as \"a bad element\"  and is confused by his own contradictions. This is, perhaps, the result of his living and having bought into a society so focused on conformity and so saturated by various forms of mass media. Finally, though, he is bold enough to support the socialist agenda in front of the men at the Athletic Club, and this results in the manipulative disdain that soon will contribute to Babbitt's renunciation of this rebellious phase. His rebellion is not strong enough to withstand such disdain among his colleagues. Although Babbitt believes that his relationship with Tanis Judique is based on a strong connection, mutual understanding, and respect, Lewis suggests that it is, like most things in Babbitt's life, a mere frivolity. During the long evening that they spend talking together, Babbitt feels as if they agree on everything. This, of course, might be an indication of their deep compatibility. Yet, Lewis informs us that \"They agreed that Prohibition was prohibitive. They agreed that art in the home was cultural,\" and they agreed that short skirts were short. The utter lack of substance in these impressions is made even more ridiculous by the fact that they interpret so much from this \"frank speaking\" . Lewis also emphasizes that Babbitt's attraction to Tanis results mainly from her willingness to offer him unlimited attention and sympathy. She feeds his ailing ego, but the moment she becomes burdensome, he no longer cares to exert the energy on their relationship. His eventual carelessness and lack of discretion in the affair may also indicate that his commitment to her is never as strong or complete as he believes it to be. Mrs. Mudge is one of several characters in the novel through whom Lewis critiques and satirizes the state of Jazz Age religion. She is a representative of the all-inclusive, nondescriptive religious category of New Thought, and her hour-long speech sounds  like nothing more than verbal sludge. Although her sermon hypnotizes the audience, leaving them mesmerized, no one can extract any comprehensible message from her great ocean of words. The entire sermon contains no punctuation whatsoever; it is merely a blur of pseudo-spiritual phrases that the audience clearly does not understand, even though they seem to carry significance. The lack of grammatical meaning is reflective of the sermon's lack of meaningful content, revealing Mrs. Mudge as a religious quack and suggesting that real spiritual salvation is especially needed in a culture so concerned with material objects."}