{"name": "volume 1, Chapter 14", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-8-14", "summary": "During her visit with the Westons, Mr. Elton continually attempts to be near Emma, who still hopes that she can fix the situation in Harriet's favor. Emma hears more about Frank Churchill and begins to wonder about the possibility of a match between them. Of all the men that she knows, Frank seems to suit her the best in terms of age, character, and condition.", "analysis": "At the Weston's Christmas Eve party, Emma suffers from her two companions. Mr. Elton is too eager to please, while Mr. John Knightley is completely unwilling to do so. Despite her growing dislike for Mr. Elton, she remains civil to him, still holding some hope that she can fix the situation. Yet again, Emma demonstrates her best trait and bears every slight or inconvenience without making a mistake in etiquette. This is the first part of the novel in which Emma actually considers marriage for herself. It is significant that even Emma, who can presumably marry anyone she wants, thinks of marriage in practical terms. Her considerations are age, character, and condition, essentially, the same status considerations that other women must take into account. At no point does Austen mention love. It is even more striking that Emma decides that Frank Churchill would be a suitable husband before even meeting him. She already knows what she needs to know--his age, his status, and his familial connections--and other information is secondary. Frank Churchill's story echoes that of his late mother. The Churchill family exerted great control and influence over their daughter, cutting her off when she disobeyed their wishes by marrying Mr. Weston. Similarly, Frank Churchill's aunt is very demanding, and seems to prevent him from visiting his father. Some bitterness remains from Mr. Weston's first marriage, and thus the Churchill family wishes to keep Frank away from him when at all possible"}