{"name": "volume 1, Chapter 10", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-8-14", "summary": "Emma and Harriet make a charitable visit to a poor family outside Highbury. She tells Harriet that she never wishes to marry because she would have to find someone superior to herself first. She reminds Harriet that, even unmarried, she would never be as pathetic as Miss Bates, for it is a lack of money that makes celibacy contemptible and Emma would still have her fortune. In conversation, Harriet brings up Miss Bates' niece, Jane Fairfax, who Emma dislikes because she is so highly praised. Emma continues to contrive a romance between Harriet and Mr. Elton.", "analysis": "The reason that Emma is unmarried becomes clear in this chapter. As a highly independent woman who will never need to marry, she resolves only to marry for love and only to marry when she finds someone superior, a condition that, considering Emma's own vanity, is unlikely to be fully satisfied. Marriage entails a sacrifice: Emma would lose her authority and have to submit to a husband. As a single woman with a fortune, however, she has the power to do whatever she chooses. This chapter also returns to Austen's distinctions between marriage for love and marriage for status. It is only the very few such as Emma Woodhouse who can marry for love, while status and security must be the overriding concern for women such as Harriet Smith. Austen also contrasts the reputations of Emma Woodhouse and Miss Bates, both of whom are single but are differentiated by fortune. In addition to providing a contrast to Emma's comfortable life, the characters of Mrs. Bates and Miss Bates serve as comic relief in the novel. Miss Bates chatters on incessantly about any topic, while Mrs. Bates' hearing difficulties result in aggravating situations. Yet, Austen also makes it clear that these women deserve pity and compassion, and that is the sole reason why Emma frequently visits the Bates family. It is certainly not, as Emma makes clear, out of any particular regard for the two women. The introduction of the character Jane Fairfax gives some dimension to Emma's vanity. With the exception of money, Jane is presented as Emma's equal in terms of beauty, wit, intelligence, and talent. Emma is unsettled by this competition, and her automatic dislike of Jane is no doubt linked to some jealousy on her part"}