{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 43", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-43-49", "summary": "The next day, the party goes to Box Hill for a picnic. Frank Churchill is still in a bad mood, but his mood improves when he concentrates only on amusing Emma. The party is listless, so Frank proposes a little game: everyone must say one thing very clever to Emma, or else two things moderately clever, or three things dull. When Miss Bates begins to chatter on incessantly, Emma puts her down harshly, telling her that she is limited to only three dull things. Later on, Emma, Jane and Frank discuss marriage. Jane speaks about how quick marriages can be salvaged, while Frank tells Emma to choose a wife for him and mold her. Emma returns to the idea of Frank and Harriet. Afterwards, Mr. Knightley scolds Emma for treating Miss Bates so rudely, telling her that Miss Bates deserves her compassion and not her scorn.", "analysis": "Although Miss Bates previously acted only as comic relief in Emma, she serves a greater purpose in this chapter. No matter how absurd, chattering or boorish she may be, even Miss Bates deserves to be treated with some dignity. Her low situation makes her deserving of even kinder treatment, which makes Emma's sharp remark particularly cruel. As Mr. Knightley reminds Emma, she made a great mistake when she puts down Miss Bates. As one of the highest members of Highbury society, Emma has a duty to treat those of lesser rank with kindness and to take pity on those such as Miss Bates. This is a turning point in Emma's behavior. Although she has thought ill of a number of Highbury residents before , this is the first time that Emma has not behaved politely to one of them. This parallels the events of Chapter Forty-two, in which Mr. Knightley acts as the voice of propriety and good manners in terms of Mrs. Elton. He upbraids Emma just as decisively, but there is a genuine warmth to his criticism. When he speaks to Emma about her mistake, he points out how admired and warmly considered Emma is. His wish is to improve Emma and not to put her in her place, as he did Mrs. Elton"}