{"name": "volume 2, Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-15-21", "summary": "Emma and Harriet call upon Mrs. and Miss Bates. Miss Bates speaks incessantly and pointlessly, but Emma behaves with exemplary manners, even asking about Jane Fairfax when Miss Bates mentions her. Miss Bates received a letter from Jane, who intends to visit next week. She will be sent by the Campbells, who paid for her education. Emma begins to suspect that Jane Fairfax might be involved with a married man with Mr. Dixon.", "analysis": "Emma's mistakes with regard to Harriet Smith have led her to greater self-examination. For the first time, Emma begins to consider her own faults and attempts to improve them. When she visits the Bates, this is an attempt to correct one of these faults:  she acknowledges that she is negligent towards Mrs. and Miss Bates, who depend on the compassion of the higher members of Highbury society. Once again, it is Mr. Knightley who has pointed out this flaw in Emma. He is certainly the only one who has both the status and temperament to challenge her. Miss Bates resembles Harriet Smith in a number of respects. Both are limited in wit and imagination and have positions at the fringes of society. However, with her grating, incessant chatter, Miss Bates is primarily comic relief. Whatever pity Austen has for Miss Bates is abstract and relates only to her social status: one should pity Miss Bates because she is a spinster with little income, not because of any intrinsic qualities. Harriet Smith, in contrast, is a more rounded character with greater shadings. Austen grants her some dignity, as when Emma remarks about how Harriet is superior for her sincerity. Once again, the mention of Jane Fairfax reminds the readers of Emma's vanity. To satisfy Emma's jealousy towards Jane, she invents the idea that Jane may be involved with some illicit affair with a married man. This is not a well-supported notion, but it does instill the idea that Jane Fairfax may be involved in some secretive arrangement"}