{"name": "Chapter XXX", "summary": "Chapter XXX. A Loss When David arrives at Yarmouth, he visits Mr. Omer, who tells him that Little Em'ly has not seemed herself recently. Mr. Omer also says that Martha, a friend of Little Em'ly's, has been missing since David was last in Yarmouth. David goes to Peggotty's house, where Mr. Peggotty and Little Em'ly are sitting in the kitchen, helping Peggotty. David learns that Mr. Barkis is unconscious and expected to die very soon. Mr. Peggotty says that Mr. Barkis will die with the receding tide. Little Em'ly seems unusually upset and hardly raises her eyes to say hello to David. Mr. Barkis dies as the tide recedes. Analysis -- Chapters XXVII-XXX In this section, Dickens builds suspense about Steerforth's future by conveying secondary characters' speculations about Steerforth's mysterious absence and by using David's narrative voice to imply that their friendship will soon reach a crucial point. The suspense is heightened by the fact that we take note of Steerforth's conspicuous absence far more than David, who is too busy with his new life in London and his love for Dora to notice that Steerforth has been gone. Littimer's appearance at the dinner party highlights Steerforth's absence and raises questions about him. Moreover, Steerforth himself behaves secretively and does not indicate why he is agitated. Finally, the adult David's reflection on his last moments with Steerforth is particularly effective in creating suspense because the adult David has full knowledge of what has happened between himself and Steerforth but deliberately chooses not to reveal this information to us. The suspenseful mood of these chapters contrasts with the young David's ignorance of coming events and with his jovial comportment with his friends. PARAGRAPH>Dickens uses sea imagery in connection with Mr. Peggotty to imply that Mr. Peggotty has mystical, unknown powers. In addition to spending much of his time fishing at sea, Mr. Peggotty lives in a boat near the water with Little Em'ly and Ham, two children whose parents lost their lives to the sea. For Mr. Peggotty, the sea both provides sustenance for life and represents a force that can take life away. His correct prediction that Mr. Barkis will die with the outgoing tide suggests that Mr. Peggotty gleans information from the sea that other characters cannot access. In this section of the novel, it seems that the sea allows Mr. Peggotty to understand and deal with death, unlike less mystical characters such as David, who feel confused and upset upon the death of Mr. Barkis. The contrast between Traddles and Steerforth in this section underscores Steerforth's fickle nature. The two young men are physical and emotional opposites: Traddles is the fat and wimpy boy at school while Steerforth is beautiful and heroic. Yet the true nature of these characters lies beneath the contrasting exteriors. Traddles, despite his shabby appearance, is generous and loyal, both at Salem House and here, when he encounters David in London. In contrast, Steerforth, though handsome, is self-centered and disloyal. Although earlier Steerforth supports Traddles and David equally at Salem House, his derision of Traddles now raises questions about the sincerity of his friendship with David. Dickens draws out the contrast between Traddles and Steerforth in subsequent chapters, always to Traddles's advantage. By doing so, he forces us to question Steerforth's character and David's relationship with him. David's defense of Traddles in the face of Steerforth's insults represents a major step in David's coming of age. David has long seen Steerforth as a hero and has esteemed Steerforth's every word and action while blinding himself to Steerforth's faults. Now, however, David's willingness to defend Traddles against Steerforth indicates that he is beginning to form opinions independently of Steerforth. David has also begun to see the good in the poverty-stricken and somewhat ridiculous Traddles. This new independence of thought and this ability to see beyond class and convention to the real good in people are crucial elements of David's maturation. Though it eventually takes a traumatic event to make David see the bad in Steerforth, his ability to see the good in Traddles is an important first step", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210124215354/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/copperfield/section8/"}