{"name": "Chapter XIV", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter XIV. My Aunt makes up her Mind about me The next morning, Miss Betsey reveals to David that she has written Mr. Murdstone to tell him where David is. She has invited Mr. Murdstone there to discuss David's fate. Miss Betsey sends David up to check on Mr. Dick's progress on his Memorial, an autobiography he is trying to write. But Mr. Dick continually starts his project over from scratch because, each time, he begins to muse in the text about King Charles I, whose demons he believes possess him. Mr. Dick has an enormous kite that he promises to fly with David someday. David returns to Miss Betsey and tells her that Mr. Dick sends his compliments to her. Miss Betsey reveals that she took in Mr. Dick when his brother tried to have him placed in an asylum. Mr. and Miss Murdstone arrive on donkeys, and Miss Betsey rushes out to chase the donkeys off her lawn. The Murdstones are rude to David during their visit, and Miss Betsey scolds them and forces them to leave. Mr. Murdstone warns her that if David does not come with him immediately, he will never be able to come back again. Miss Betsey asks David what he wants to do, and he says he wants to stay with her. It is resolved that he will do so, and Miss Betsey renames him Trotwood Copperfield. Analysis -- Chapters XI-XIV Dickens uses the Micawbers, who turn up periodically throughout the novel, to comment on the debtors' prisons common in England in the 1800s. Debtors were placed in these prisons until they were able to resolve their financial difficulties, which often took years. In the meantime, families were torn apart and suffered hardships as the  imprisoned heads of households were unable to earn money to support them. Dickens himself, as a member of a family with enormous financial problems, suffered as a direct result of debtors' prisons during his youth. Much like Mr. Micawber, Dickens's father, for all his financial woes, could not control his spending when it came to dining and drinking. The passages involving Mr. and Mrs. Micawber are based in large part on Dickens's own experience, as are the descriptions of David's job at the wine-bottling factory. David's sympathetic portrayal of Mr. Micawber suggests Dickens's concern for the underclass and his frustration at the harsh conditions of the debtors' prisons. The episodic, plot-heavy nature of David Copperfield stems from the fact that it was originally published as a serial, in pieces over time. Dickens inserted several mini-climaxes and resolutions and deliberately built suspense toward the end of each section in order to compel his readers to buy and read the next installment. The unnatural segmentation of David's life into separate parts and the heavy-handed foreshadowing add to the novel's suspense. For example, Dickens's description of David's life with his mother and Mr. Murdstone constitutes one self-contained section, which comprised the entire first part of the novel as it was published in serial form. The change of scene that opens the second section mirrors an internal change in David as he grows older. Because David Copperfield was written as a serial novel, it focuses in large part on plot and rarely stops to describe characters or settings in detail. The characters develop chiefly through their actions, and it is only over time that we get to know them--Dickens never includes any kind of thorough character analysis or description when he introduces a character. The novel's serial nature also partly explains why the characters' physical attributes match their internal characteristics. This correlation made character identification easier for readers who may have waited weeks since reading the previous installment of the novel. Ultimately, although many critics claim that Dickens's characters are too simple and flat, this simplicity is largely the practical result of Dickens's desire to gain new readers and keep current readers interested. PARAGRAPH>When David arrives at Miss Betsey's, the tone of the novel changes to reflect David's increased tolerance for the harshness of his world. We see that David's voice has lost some of its naivete and that he seems more prepared to deal with tragedy than in previous chapters. Miss Betsey plays a significant part in bringing about this change in the novel's tone, for she both provides David with physical comfort and is herself a quirky, humorous character, which contrasts the tragic drama of the first chapters. The fact that Miss Betsey turns out not to be the imposing character that she seems to be in the opening scenes of the novel brings some relief to the dark tone of the first part of the story. Miss Betsey's obsession with keeping donkeys off her lawn, for example, is an amusing touch that lightens the mood of the novel. Her concern about her lawn is inconsequential relative to David's troubles, yet she takes it as seriously as David takes his struggle to survive. Miss Betsey also introduces Mr. Dick, whose optimistic, simple faith in David and Miss Betsey contrasts with the Murdstones' dark pessimism. Unlike most of the other men in David Copperfield to this point, Mr. Dick is kind, gentle, and generous toward David--a far cry from the unforgiving Mr. Murdstone and the brutal Mr. Creakle. As we see, then, not only Miss Betsey but also the characters related to her momentarily change the tone of the novel from tragedy to comedy", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210124215354/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/copperfield/section4/"}