{"name": "Chapter LXIV", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter LXIV. A Last Retrospect David muses on the state of affairs at the time of his writing. He sees Miss Betsey, old but still upright, accompanied by Peggotty, who is also old but still bright and happy. Mr. Dick is still working on his autobiography. Mrs. Steerforth and Miss Dartle argue as usual. Doctor Strong continues to work on his dictionary while he and Annie live in marital bliss. Traddles is a successful lawyer and happily married to Sophy, and Agnes is forever the light of David's life. Analysis -- Chapters LIX-LXIV David's recovery in Switzerland gives him time to reflect on the events of his life and to mature into the good-hearted, honest man he is at the close of the novel. Each of the events in the final chapters is mirrored by some change in David when he returns from Switzerland. The death of Steerforth causes David to abandon his impetuous frivolity, while the heroism of Ham's death inspires selflessness in David. Dora's death kills David's romantic delusions about love and his tendency toward infatuation. Mr. Peggotty's devotion as he searches for Little Em'ly prompts David to develop a deeper love for Miss Betsey and Peggotty, who, he now realizes, have devoted themselves completely to his happiness. Although David is naive and simple throughout much of the novel, his ability to learn lessons about character from his friends in the final chapters demonstrates that he has developed significantly as a character. Agnes, who plays a relatively minor role in the novel until its conclusion, quickly becomes one of the most important characters. Agnes has been one of the most steadfast of David's relations throughout the novel, so in a sense, it is not surprising that she ultimately plays such a crucial role in David's life. She proudly bears David's failure to see his love for her and her love for him. She offers him sage advice on any number of topics, including his other loves, and she is always patient, kind, and good. In many ways, Agnes is the answer to the question David has asked throughout the novel: what is the most moral way to live. David finds good in Agnes that draws him to her, now that he is an older man who does not feel attracted to the silly frivolity he found in Dora. In the end, Agnes emerges triumphant from David's struggle to control his own emotions. At the end of David Copperfield, good triumphs absolutely over evil, as those characters who have been constant and well-meaning are rewarded, while evil characters are punished or killed. Dickens's morality is straightforward: those who believe in love and generosity rather than manipulation and greed succeed. Mrs. Steerforth and Miss Dartle, who are proud, vain, and petty, are miserable over Steerforth's death and are condemned to bicker among themselves for the rest of their lives. Little Em'ly and Mrs. Gummidge are both rewarded for transforming their characters, whereas Mr. Creakle, who was always cruel and vicious toward the boys at Salem House, now has the unpleasant job of running a jail. By assigning his characters fates that correspond to their traits, Dickens provides a straightforward definition of morality and justice. Dickens's meticulous resolution of each of David Copperfield's subplots stems from his desire to mete out justice clearly. Dickens hammers home the point that Annie and Doctor Strong's live in mutual happiness as a reward for their dedication to each other. In doing so, Dickens underscores his argument that those who are good can expect good from the world. By the same token, Dickens carefully describes the unpleasant fates of Littimer and Uriah Heep in order to dissuade us from acting as they do. Throughout the novel, Dickens draws a clear line between good and bad and leaves no character's morality ambiguous. Rather, Dickens suggests that there are absolute measures of good and evil which we must be aware of as we act", "analysis": null, "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210124215354/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/copperfield/section15/"}