{"name": "Chapter XXVII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-xxv-xxx", "summary": "New Destination For The Children Harriet worried over the fate of her children. The wife of Mr. Sands had seen Benny in the street and taken a fancy to him; Mr. Sands told her his true relation to them and she wanted to see the children. Harriet was stricken, for she had done so much to protect them and now they were threatened. It seemed like she could do nothing since they were his slaves, but she persuaded her grandmother to go to him and tell him Harriet was not dead and remind him that he had promised to emancipate them. Mr. Sands responded that they were free and Harriet could decide their fate, but that they were not safe here and should go north. He proposed that Ellen go north to stay with some of his relatives in Brooklyn. Before that she would go with Mr. and Mrs. Sands to Washington for a bit of time. Harriet's heart was heavy but she had to consent. Before Ellen left Harriet decided she must see her daughter face-to-face. She had observed her character for so long that she knew she could trust her with the secret. Harriet and Ellen had an emotional meeting and the two slept nestled together for the whole evening. It was a bitter parting the next day. Thankfully, Ellen never told the secret of Harriet's location. Mrs. Flint came to visit and said that sending Ellen away was akin to stealing, since she belonged to her daughter Emily Flint, who was now sixteen. Harriet grew nervous because she had not heard from Ellen, and wondered if she had been tricked. Finally, six months after she left, a young woman in the Sands family wrote and said Ellen was now safely in Brooklyn. Ellen was to be the girl's waiting maid, and Harriet wondered if this was a situation akin to slavery. She was troubled over this, as well as her young son's precarious situation. He believed himself free, but he certainly was not", "analysis": "In the analysis of the previous section, the topic of the slaves' Christmas festivities of both African and Christian provenance was discussed amid the context of the tendency among slaves to fuse their two heritages to imbue their lives with meaning as well as, in some cases, to subvert their masters and undermine the system of slavery. The songs and spirituals echoing through the fields and slave quarters were very much the same; these forms of expression allowed slaves to give voice to their fears, desires, and longing as well as function as a way to communicate with each other without attracting the attention of their masters. As slave culture was very clearly an oral one, it is not surprising that stories and tales with familiar archetypes and tropes circulated widely throughout the African American population. Slaves particularly enjoyed tales of animals and tricksters. These folk tales usually had underlying meanings and signified far more than their humble words suggested. Harriet proves herself to be a trickster in multiple places in the text, but an honorable one. Her deception is not based in cruelty or avarice but rather out of a desire to free herself and her children from bondage. One of the first examples of her cleverness and propensity to be a trickster is when the band of marauding whites in the aftermath of Nat Turner's Rebellion searches her grandmother's house and finds one of her letters. Assuming there are more letters and disconcerted at her ability to read, the captain questions her, asking if there are more and wondering who wrote to her. She replies, \"Most of my letters are from white people. Some request me to burn them after they are read, and some I destroy without reading\" . Her sardonic and knowing reply surprises her inquisitors and exposes the problematic treatment of slave women by white men. However, it is her honorable deception of Dr. Flint in Chapter XXV that exemplifies her embodiment of the trickster. She knows that she must equal the Dr. in his cunning and arranges for him  to receive letters from her dated from New York. When he receives the letters, he fabricates one from Harriet and brings it to her grandmother's house, reading her the new letter while Harriet, hidden, listens on and marvels at the man's duplicity. This situation ends up revealing Dr. Flint as a trickster as well, but a dishonorable and deceitful one. Harriet is the smarter trickster and outwits the Dr. This is accomplished by, first of all, the fact that her grandmother knew the content of the actual letter Harriet sent her master; Aunt Marthy was not swayed by his fraudulent attempt to make Harriet show herself. Also, Harriet was smart enough to claim that she was in Boston, a city in which the Dr. would have no success searching for his runaway slave. The mayor of Boston cements the Dr.'s inability to procure Harriet by simply never responding to the letter the Dr. sends him. The hero theme that runs through the tales of the trickster - the hero exposes evil and triumphs - is present in this these parts of Harriet's story. During Harriet's goodbye to Benny in Chapter XXIX, it is revealed that her son is also somewhat of a trickster. Harriet learns that Benny figured out that his mother was hiding in the storeroom shortly after Ellen was sent to Brooklyn. He heard a cough and put two and two together. Harriet \"asked him if he ever mentioned his suspicions to his sister. He said he never did; but after he heard the cough, if he saw her playing with other children on that side of the house, he always tried to coax her round to the other side, for fear they would hear me cough, too...Such prudence may seem extraordinary in a boy of twelve years, but slaves, being surrounded by mysteries, deceptions, and dangers, early learn to be suspicious and watchful, and prematurely cautious and cunning.\"  Slavery necessitates that the oppressed devise \"tricks\" in order to preserve their well-being or humanity. Secrets can protect family members or even just give a small shred of power to the powerless. One disturbing moment in these chapters is the response that Mr. Sands has when William runs away from him. Prior to this scene, it was possible for readers to come to the conclusion that Mr. Sands was perhaps a different kind of southern white man - affectionate and respectful toward his slave lover, honest and forthright, free of debilitating racial prejudice. While he might be preferable to the Flint men, Mr. Sands proves himself to be part of the same destructive mindset that failed to see slaves as anything other than inferior human beings if not outright property. He complains that William is \"young and inconsiderate\"  and was swayed by the specious promises of the abolitionists. He is certain that William will come crawling back to him, and boasts that he will not go looking for his wayward slave. His tone is full of scorn and paternalism, and Harriet soon learns that his version of the story was far from accurate - William left of his own accord and did not seem to feel as confident as Mr. Sands did that he would be granted his freedom in five years. Indeed, throughout the rest of Incidents Harriet comes to doubt Mr. Sands' intention to free her children, even though he is full of seemingly kindhearted protestations that it is his intention to do so. Clearly Mr. Sands is privy to some of the same shortcomings as other southerners, and can only contribute to Harriet's inability to rest her trust in anyone with white skin. What is conspicuous in these chapters, besides the continuing depravity of white southerners, is the love, support, and sacrifice evinced by the black community. When Aunt Nancy dies, she is given \"a mighty grand funeral\" with \"a large concourse of colored people, bond and free\" . Aunt Nancy's life was a sad one, but she was a constant encourager and supporter of Harriet. She would often tell Harriet \"I could die happy if I could only see you and the children free\" . Similarly, Peter, Philip, and Harriet's grandmother are also crucial figures in Harriet making her escape to the north. The two men in particular arrange all of her travel and take considerable risks to see her away. Her grandmother, of course, is always her bedrock and her great source of love and succor. It is not just blood that matters, however, for another runaway slave named Fanny is also enveloped into the escape scheme. It is quite evident that the strong bonds of community provided the means for Harriet to run away from her master, hide in a crawlspace for seven years and survive, and make it to the north. The autonomous, independent slave has no place here."}