{"name": "Chapter IV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180408172810/http://www.gradesaver.com/incidents-in-the-life-of-a-slave-girl/study-guide/summary-chapters-i-vi", "summary": "The Slave Who Dared To Feel Like A Man Harriet's grandmother was now the mistress of her own \"snug little home\" and wished her grandchildren could share it with her. Benjamin and Harriet longed to join her. William was now twelve. The three of them hated Dr. Flint with a passion. Harriet writes \"When he told me that I was made for his use, made to obey his command in every thing; that I was nothing but a slave whose will must and should surrender to him, ever before had my puny arm felt half so strong. William and Harriet lamented their fate together. Harriet urged him to be \"good and forgiving\" but knew that she was being hypocritical because she felt similarly ill-disposed toward her lot. She inwardly resolved to never be conquered. Sadly, this resolution did not help her. The first time she was punished was when she received new shoes from her grandmother. The mistress disliked the noise they made, so she commanded Harriet remove them and never put them back on again. Later, Harriet was made to run errands in the snow, barefoot. Dr. Flint refused to sell Harriet even though he received high offers for her. Harriet was glad that her little mistress loved her but was wary when Dr. Flint said his daughter was faking her affection. One day William came to Harriet and told her that Benjamin and the master had a row. Benjamin resisted being whipped and threw Dr. Flint. Benjamin came to say goodbye and Harriet begged him not to go, but Benjamin was full of righteous anger. They exchanged farewells and Benjamin departed. He made it onto a ship but was recognized and sent back to his master. He was then put in jail. The jailer knew Harriet's grandmother and allowed her and Harriet and William to sneak in and visit him. Benjamin was angry and said he could not trust in God anymore. Three months passed and Benjamin was not released or sold. He was filthy and morose, and any token of comfort sent by Harriet's grandmother did not make it to him. Harriet's grandmother was distraught. Harriet wrote of her despair: \"Could you have seen the mother clinging to her child, when they fastened the irons upon his wrists; could you have heard her heart-rending groans, and seen her bloodshot eyes wander wildly from face to face, vainly pleading for mercy; could you have witnessed that damnable scene as I saw it, you would exclaim, Slavery is damnable. Harriet's grandmother devoted her time to trying to free Benjamin. She wrote to a white gentleman friend of hers who worked to help free Benjamin. Benjamin finally made it to New York. There he encountered his brother Phillip, who was there on business for his master. Benjamin begged Phillip not to return, but the latter said he had to stay with their mother. The two shared an emotional parting and no one ever heard from Benjamin again. However, when Phillip came home he announced to the family that Benjamin was free and they rejoiced heartily. Later Harriet's grandmother was able to buy Phillip", "analysis": "Harriet's Jacobs's narrative, the first published narrative by a female former slave, is a remarkable adventure story, a poignant personal memoir that addresses the formation of identity, and a testament to the evils of slavery. In these early chapters Harriet introduces herself - a young slave girl who did not even know she was enslaved until she was six - and the immoral and cruel master and mistress she worked for. Some of the major themes of the text are presented early on; these include the terrible severing of familial ties in slave families, the hypocrisy and impiety of white southerners, and the particular trials of slave women through their lustful persecution by their white masters. Jacobs's story is of such significance because for so long the voices of black women were, as scholar Johnnie M. Stover writes, \"ignored, sentimentalized, or reduced in scope as addenda to the abolitionist-inspired texts.\" 19th century autobiographies by black women used their unique voices to interpret life experiences in the context of an America that sought to deny the identity of African Americans. Within the format of an autobiography, which Jacobs chooses to tell her tale, black women can attack the literary, sociological, and political systems that seek to marginalize them. Their narratives both blatantly and subtly demonstrate their capacity to use their voices instead of remaining silent. One literary strategy Harriet Jacobs employs in her autobiography is that of the sentimental novel. This genre, immensely popular with white women in the 19th century, usually pitted a virtuous female heroine against a predatory man; the heroine either died or triumphed and became a paragon of morality and femininity. In these chapters, Jacobs appeals to the sympathies of these white women - her primary audience - by presenting herself as virtuous and humble, showcasing the evil of Dr. Flint, and focusing on the relationships between mothers and children. She is trying to \"equalize the relationship between herself and her readership.\" These readers will also note that Harriet Jacobs, like other black women writers, does not separate herself from her community. Oftentimes the female narrator's voice is not just one voice but many; Jacobs will often step outside of her narration and encourage the reader to some realization or sentiment. This is different from slave narratives written by men, such as Frederick Douglass or Olaudah Equiano. In these narratives the male figure is independent, authoritative, strong, and heroic. There is not as much of a focus on familial or communal ties. One of the ways in which Harriet Jacobs resists oppression in her autobiography is through language. An African-American vernacular has been long recognized as created and developed by slaves; this was a way of speaking that was not a new language but a way of reshaping the language of the dominant society to use with people who sought to demean, dehumanize, or suppress them. This mother tongue \"misled, confused, tricked, or made a fool of the oppressor\" and tried to keep the oppressor off balance. The first strategy was using tools of subtle resistance; Stover writes that this meant using \"concealment, guile, hesitations, mumbling, secrecy, shifts in point of view, silence, and whispering.\" Jacobs often steps away from the narrative to offer her critique or her interpretation of events. She also uses rhetorical questions in order to provoke a feeling or emotion in her readership without directly criticizing them. She demonstrates how whispering was a way for slaves to communicate with each other, since much direct contact was limited. This mother tongue of silence allowed slaves to withhold information and conceal their true feelings or what they have seen or heard. The second strategy is masking - a tool that says one thing but means another; this includes \"biblical allusion/allegory, dissembling, innuendo, ironic humor, laughter, misdirection, physical antics, sarcasm, signals, song, and understatement.\" In regards to biblical allusions, Harriet often invokes the snake as a symbol for slavery or slaveholders, an allusion to the Garden of Eden as well as the abolitionist symbol of its cause. She also uses misdirection later in the text, trying to fool Dr. Flint about her true whereabouts, and uses disguise to conceal her escape. The third is tools of flagrant resistance, such as \"back talk, impertinence, impudence, insolence, invective, irony, lying, rage, and sass.\" Harriet is often very bold with Dr. Flint; her grandmother is as well. She also does not shy away from exhorting northern women to heed her situation. Within the text, the character of Betty exemplifies black woman's sass and Benjamin and William embody rage. Overall, the autobiography was a way for African American women to preserve their personal and cultural memory \"while at the same time challenging the sociopolitical, economic, and literary structures that minimized the contributions of that culture.\""}