{"name": "Chapter 5", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210225000603/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/candide/section2/", "summary": "A furious storm overtakes Candide's ship on its way to Lisbon. Jacques tries to save a sailor who has almost fallen overboard. He saves the sailor but falls overboard himself, and the sailor does nothing to help him. The ship sinks, and Pangloss, Candide, and the sailor are the only survivors. They reach shore and walk toward Lisbon. Lisbon has just experienced a terrible earthquake and is in ruins. The sailor finds some money in the ruins and promptly gets drunk and pays a woman for sex. Meanwhile the groans of dying and buried victims rise from the ruins. Pangloss and Candide help the wounded, and Pangloss comforts the victims by telling them the earthquake is for the best. One of the officers of the Inquisition accuses Pangloss of heresy because an optimist cannot possibly believe in original sin. The fall and punishment of man, the Catholic Inquisitor claims, prove that everything is not for the best. Through some rather twisted logic, Pangloss attempts to defend his theory", "analysis": "Readers have proposed various interpretations of Jacques's death. His death could represent Voltaire's criticism of the optimistic belief that evil is always balanced by good. Jacques, who is good, perishes while saving the sailor, who is selfish and evil; the result is not a balance but a case of evil surviving good. Jacques's death could also represent the uselessness of Christian values. Continually referred to as \"the Anabaptist,\" Jacques is an altruist who does not change society for the better; he ends up a victim of his own altruism.  Pangloss responds to Jacques's death by asserting that the bay outside Lisbon had been formed \"expressly for this Anabaptist to drown in.\" This argument is a parody of the complacent reasoning of optimistic philosophers. Convinced that the world God created must necessarily be perfectly planned and executed, optimists end up drawing far-fetched and unlikely connections between apparently unrelated events, such as the formation of a bay and the drowning of Jacques.  Voltaire bases the earthquake in Candide on an actual historical event that affected him deeply. A devastating earthquake on November 1, 1755--All Saints' Day--leveled Lisbon and killed over 30,000 people, many of whom died while praying in church. The earthquake challenged a number of Enlightenment thinkers' optimistic views of the world.  The sailor's debauchery amid the groans of the wounded represents indifference in the face of evil. Voltaire strongly condemned indifference, and his belief that human inaction allows suffering to continue is evident in his depictions of the sailor and Pangloss. At one point, when Candide is knocked down by rubble and begs Pangloss to bring him wine and oil, Pangloss ignores Candide's request and rambles on about the causes and ultimate purpose of the earthquake. Voltaire proposes a fundamental similarity between Pangloss's behavior and the sailor's actions. The sailor's sensual indulgence in the face of death is grotesque and inhumane. While less grotesque, Pangloss's philosophizing is no better, because it too gets in the way of any meaningful, useful response to the disaster.  The auto-da-fe, or act of faith, was the Inquisition's practice of burning heretics alive. Beginning in the Middle Ages, the officials of the Inquisition systematically tortured and murdered tens of thousands of people on the slightest suspicion of heresy against orthodox Christian doctrine. Jews, Protestants, Muslims, and accused witches were victims of this organized campaign of violence. Like many Enlightenment intellectuals, Voltaire was appalled by the barbarism and superstition of the Inquisition, and by the religious fervor that inspired it. Voltaire makes his ideological priorities clear in Candide. Pangloss's philosophy lacks use and purpose, and often leads to misguided suffering, but the Inquisition's determination to suppress dissenting opinion at any cost represents tyranny and unjust persecution. The Inquisition authorities twist Pangloss's words to make them appear to be a direct attack on Christian orthodoxy, and flog Candide for merely seeming to approve of what Pangloss says. This flogging of Candide represents exaggeration on Voltaire's part, an amplification of the Inquisition's repressive tactics that serves a satirical purpose. Along with outrage at the cruelty of the Inquisition, we are encouraged to laugh at its irrationality, as well as at the exaggerated nature of Candide's experience.  Cunegonde's situation inspires a similarly subversive combination of horror and absurdity. Her story demonstrates the vulnerability of women to male exploitation and their status as objects of possession and barter. Cunegonde is bought and sold like a painting or piece of livestock, yet the deadpan calm with which she relates her experiences to Candide creates an element of the absurd. Candide takes this absurdity further; as Cunegonde describes how her Bulgar rapist left a wound on her thigh, Candide interrupts to say, \"What a pity! I should very much like to see it.\" In the middle of this litany of dreadful events, Candide's suggestive comments seem ridiculous, but the absurdity provides comic relief from the despicably violent crimes that Cunegonde describes.  The stereotyped representation of the Jew Don Issachar may offend the contemporary reader, but it demonstrates the hypocrisy that afflicted even such a progressive thinker as Voltaire. Voltaire attacked religious persecution throughout his life, but he suffered from his own collection of prejudices. In theory, he opposed the persecution of Jews, but in practice, he expressed anti-Semitic views of his own. In his Dictionary of Philosophy, Voltaire describes the Jews as \"the most abominable people in the world.\" Don Issachar's character is a narrow, mean-spirited stereotype--a rich, conniving merchant who deals in the market of human flesh.  Voltaire makes another attack on religious hypocrisy through the character of the Franciscan who steals Cunegonde's jewels. The Franciscan order required a vow of poverty from its members, making Voltaire's choice of that order for his thief especially ironic."}