{"name": "act 3, Scene 4", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210722203413/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-rivals/study-guide/summary-part-4", "summary": "Acres' lodgings. Acres is there with David, his servant. They are discussing the fact that Acres has recently changed his wardrobe to be more sophisticated and urbane, after years of country living. Acres then talks about how he likes to dance in a country style, when they are interrupted by the arrival of Lucius O'Trigger. Lucius comes in and greets Acres, asking what has brought him to Bath. Acres tells him that he is in love with a woman, without mentioning her name. He tells Lucius that he has a rival named Beverley, who is also in love with the woman. Lucius encourages Acres to fight Beverley, but Acres insists, \". he has given me no provocation. Lucius insists that the fact that they love the same woman is provocation enough, and begins to stoke some animosity in Acres, who becomes determined to challenge Beverley to a duel. He becomes impassioned and sits down to write a letter. In the letter, he summons Beverley to King's-Mead-Fields. Before he leaves, Lucius tells Acres that he has a rival he would like to fight as well.", "analysis": "So much of the pleasure of the play comes from dramatic irony, the fact that the audience is privy to all the intricacies of the plot, while many of the characters are blissfully unaware. The pleasure of dramatic irony is exploited at the beginning of the act, when Jack has learned of his father's plot to marry him to the woman he already loves. While the audience knows that Jack loves Lydia and is more than willing to marry her, Jack pretends to be indifferent to the match, which infuriates his father. This tension, between what the audience knows and what Anthony knows, creates an especially comedic scenario. The secondary couple in the play, Julia and Faulkland, is not as intricately entangled as Jack and Lydia, but they create their own complications in the dynamic they have struck up. Faulkland is exceedingly insecure, and interprets nearly everything that Julia does as proof that she does not love him. No matter what Julia says, he cannot be consoled; he even sees her happiness in his absence as evidence of her inconstancy. While they have both expressed their affection for one another, Faulkland is unable to accept it, and sees Julia as disloyal, even though she is not. Matters only get more and more complicated as the play progresses. Jack plots to win over Lydia, maintaining one identity with Malaprop and his father, and another with his lover, Lydia. He must keep his two identities straight, as a betrayal of his plot to either party will ruin his plans to marry the woman he loves. Meanwhile, the audience delights in his trickery, especially when it leads him into particularly contradictory territory, such as when he must read an insulting letter that he wrote as Beverley about Malaprop to Malaprop. Through the character of Lydia Languish, the play satirizes a youthful orientation towards romance. Not only is her voracious consumption of romance novels comedic in its own right, but also her love for \"Ensign Beverley.\" So much of her affection for him comes from the fact that he tells her he is willing to give up earthly goods for the sake of love. His lack of materialism, and his willingness to \"forfeit that portion of  paltry wealth\" is what makes him so appealing, as it seems to prize affection and love over financial security. To a 17-year-old rich girl, there is nothing more romantic than being poor, and some of Lydia's most comic moments come from her preoccupation with penniless love, as when she says, \"How charming will poverty be with him!\" The joke for the audience is, of course, that poverty is never charming, and Lydia is naive to believe that it could be. While Jack Absolute's plot has been mostly smooth throughout the play, he faces some complication when Lucius O'Trigger encourages Bob Acres to challenge \"Beverley\"  to a duel. While he has imagined that he will be able to win Lydia's hand in marriage by posing as an ensign, his love is not unrivaled. The impressionable Bob Acres takes Lucius' call to arms seriously and becomes impassioned in his quest to protect his affection for Lydia. The act finishes with the promise of violence and retribution for our hero, Jack Absolute."}