{"name": "act 4, ", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210722203413/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-rivals/study-guide/summary-part-5", "summary": "At Acres' lodgings, David tries to dissuade Acres from fighting a duel, but Acres is insistent that he fight. David, no gentleman will ever risk the loss of his honour. he says, but David insists that because Acres risks death, it is not worth it, saying, \"Under favour, the surest way of not disgracing them, is to keep as long as you can out of their company. A servant enters and announces the arrival of Jack Absolute. Jack comes in and asks Acres why he called him there, and Acres hands him the challenge for Ensign Beverley. Jack agrees to deliver the challenge, when suddenly the servant comes back in and announces the arrival of Anthony Absolute, looking for Jack. Before Jack leaves, Acres asks him to tell Beverley that he is \"a determined dog", "analysis": "At every moment in which Jack's plot could potentially be revealed, something gets in the way to prevent the truth from coming to the surface. These convenient elisions always have a comical effect, for indeed they occur right in the nick of time, saving Jack from getting discovered. For instance, in Act 4, Scene 2, Anthony Absolute and Jack come to visit Lydia and Malaprop, but Lydia feels so averse to meeting him that she hides her face and refuses to look at him. If she looked at him, she would realize that he and Ensign Beverley are one and the same, but instead she prevents herself from learning her beloved's true identity for a time. This does not last long, however, as Anthony and Malaprop force a meeting between Jack and Lydia. As soon as Lydia turns around, she recognizes her beloved as Ensign Beverley, and Jack must come out with his plot to everyone. Malaprop and Anthony are both enraged by the deception for a moment, but soon enough, they decide to look past it and take heart in the fact that the two young lovers have found one another. With their approval, it is only Lydia who needs convincing from Jack that his love is worth the deception. A great deal of comic mileage comes from the fact that Lydia's preferences in a man are the complete opposite of what one would expect of a noblewoman. Instead of wanting a monied captain, she wants a lowly ensign with whom to live in poverty. When Jack's identity comes out, however, it becomes clear that her desires for a poor mate were less about poverty itself than about rebelling against her station. Incensed, she tells Jack, \"So, while I fondly imagined we were deceiving my relations, and flattered myself that I should outwit and incense them all--behold my hopes are to be crushed at once, by my aunt's consent and approbation--and I am myself the only dupe at last!\" Her desire to marry an ensign and to forfeit her inheritance was wrapped up in her desire to disobey her protective guardians, to make a decision for herself for once. While both Jack and Faulkland's deceptions are meant to ensure the love of their respective mistresses, their backhandedness proves to have the opposite effect, at least at first. Offended to have been duped by Jack, Lydia refuses his hand at first. Similarly, Julia is heartbroken when she realizes that Faulkland has only pretended to need to leave the country in a bid to test her affections. In the final act of the play, the unions between the two couples are broken, and it seems as though everyone will end up uncoupled, and perhaps, killed in a duel. In the end, the play is a romantic comedy, a lighthearted confection about the foolishnesses and beauty of romantic love. So it's no surprise that the two central couples, Jack and Lydia and Julia and Faulkland, are finally reunited and hope to live happy lives with one another. The epilogue only further amplifies the theme of romantic love, a series of rhyming couplets about the fact that while it may seem as though men have the upper hand in society, it is women who hold the keys to his social happiness and control the tides of romance."}