{"name": "act 4, Scene 3", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210722203413/https://www.gradesaver.com/the-rivals/study-guide/summary-part-5", "summary": "The North Parade. Lucius comes in and waits for Beverley, his opponent in the duel. Then, Jack enters, crestfallen at the fact that Lydia has denied him. I could cut own throat, or any other person's, with the greatest pleasure in the world. he says. He runs into Lucius, who wants to fight him, even though Absolute does not understand why. They agree to meet that night at 6, the same time Lucius is to fight Beverley. When Lucius leaves, Faulkland enters and asks Jack what is wrong. Jack tells him that Lydia does not love him and that Lucius has challenged him to a duel. He asks Faulkland to be his second at the duel, but Faulkland tells him he is very troubled by the fight he got into with Julia, and cannot attend the duel. A servant comes in and hands Faulkland a letter from Julia. Faulkland is too scared to read the letter, so Jack opens it and reads it. The letter says that Julia wishes to speak with him and is signed \"Yours ever and truly,\" but Faulkland is still not convinced of her love. Faulkland says to Jack, \". don't you think there is something forward, something indelicate, in this haste to forgive. Jack reproaches him and leaves. Left alone, Faulkland devises a plot to use the duel as a way of testing Julia's love for him. Act 5. In Julia's dressing room, she reads a letter from Faulkland about a \"dreadful accident. Faulkland enters and tells Julia that he was drawn into a quarrel and must flee the country. Julia tells him, \"My heart has long known no other guardian--I now entrust my person to your honour--we will fly together. Faulkland comes up with a number of reasons why she shouldn't come, but Julia proves steadfast in her devotion to him. Satisfied with her loving words, Faulkland reveals that he completely fabricated his need to leave the country. While Julia is relieved, she is also angered by his doubtfulness. She tells him that she has devoted herself to him in the same way she devoted herself to her father who passed away soon after she and Faulkland became acquainted. She then tells him that his deception is insulting and cruel and that she will never be his. She exits, leaving Faulkland heartbroken. After a brief monologue, he exits. Lydia and a maid come in, looking for Julia. When Julia comes back in, Lydia notices that she has been crying, but Julia refuses to say why. Lydia then tells Julia about her misfortune, the fact that she has been duped by Jack, but Julia tells her that she already knew, because Faulkland told her. Lydia vows never to marry Jack, but Julia insists that Jack loves her sincerely, and that she ought to forgive him. Suddenly, they are interrupted by Malaprop, Fag, and David. Malaprop tells the servants to tell Julia and Lydia about the duel that is to take place between Jack, Faulkland, Acres and Lucius. Malaprop is distressed to hear that Lucius is involved, and all three of the women decide that they must go to the dueling location and stop it", "analysis": "At every moment in which Jack's plot could potentially be revealed, something gets in the way to prevent the truth from coming to the surface. These convenient elisions always have a comical effect, for indeed they occur right in the nick of time, saving Jack from getting discovered. For instance, in Act 4, Scene 2, Anthony Absolute and Jack come to visit Lydia and Malaprop, but Lydia feels so averse to meeting him that she hides her face and refuses to look at him. If she looked at him, she would realize that he and Ensign Beverley are one and the same, but instead she prevents herself from learning her beloved's true identity for a time. This does not last long, however, as Anthony and Malaprop force a meeting between Jack and Lydia. As soon as Lydia turns around, she recognizes her beloved as Ensign Beverley, and Jack must come out with his plot to everyone. Malaprop and Anthony are both enraged by the deception for a moment, but soon enough, they decide to look past it and take heart in the fact that the two young lovers have found one another. With their approval, it is only Lydia who needs convincing from Jack that his love is worth the deception. A great deal of comic mileage comes from the fact that Lydia's preferences in a man are the complete opposite of what one would expect of a noblewoman. Instead of wanting a monied captain, she wants a lowly ensign with whom to live in poverty. When Jack's identity comes out, however, it becomes clear that her desires for a poor mate were less about poverty itself than about rebelling against her station. Incensed, she tells Jack, \"So, while I fondly imagined we were deceiving my relations, and flattered myself that I should outwit and incense them all--behold my hopes are to be crushed at once, by my aunt's consent and approbation--and I am myself the only dupe at last!\" Her desire to marry an ensign and to forfeit her inheritance was wrapped up in her desire to disobey her protective guardians, to make a decision for herself for once. While both Jack and Faulkland's deceptions are meant to ensure the love of their respective mistresses, their backhandedness proves to have the opposite effect, at least at first. Offended to have been duped by Jack, Lydia refuses his hand at first. Similarly, Julia is heartbroken when she realizes that Faulkland has only pretended to need to leave the country in a bid to test her affections. In the final act of the play, the unions between the two couples are broken, and it seems as though everyone will end up uncoupled, and perhaps, killed in a duel. In the end, the play is a romantic comedy, a lighthearted confection about the foolishnesses and beauty of romantic love. So it's no surprise that the two central couples, Jack and Lydia and Julia and Faulkland, are finally reunited and hope to live happy lives with one another. The epilogue only further amplifies the theme of romantic love, a series of rhyming couplets about the fact that while it may seem as though men have the upper hand in society, it is women who hold the keys to his social happiness and control the tides of romance."}