{"name": "act 4, scene i", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210126032913/https://www.sparknotes.com/shakespeare/antony/section7/", "summary": "Caesar, encamped near the Egyptian capital of Alexandria, receives Antony's challenge and laughs at it. Maecenas counsels him to take advantage of Antony's rage, for \"ever anger / Made good guard for itself\". Caesar prepares his army--swelled by deserters from his enemy's troops--and plans to crush Antony for good", "analysis": "Act IV, scenes i-viii Because the play's dramatic structure suggests that the battle in Act IV will be climactic and probably result in Antony's death, Antony's victory in these scenes is surprising and makes the plot much less predictable. After Antony's flight from battle in Act III, and after Cleopatra's apparent willingness to betray her lover, all seems lost for the lovers. Indeed, the opening scenes of Act IV confirm and build upon this impression. Caesar rejects Antony's proposal for hand-to-hand combat with such assurance that we feel that there is something prophetic in the line \"Know that tomorrow the last of many battles / We mean to fight\" . Antony, seemingly undone by the treachery of his own behavior, manages to burden his men with sadness rather than rouse them for battle, while several soldiers hear an otherworldly music they believe portends the destruction of the once great general and his forces. Not only do these scenes redirect our expectations, they also suggest different interpretations of Antony's and Cleopatra's characters. Up to this point in the play, the two lovers seem to have been so absorbed in their own romance that they have allowed nations to go to war. A decidedly Roman perspective has dominated the presentation of Cleopatra as a wanton gypsy and Antony as her fool. The day of battle, however, brings victory to Antony and, at least for a moment, restores him to good fortune. Fighting a vicious and bloody fight, Antony displays the martial abilities that have forged his reputation, and he wins the battle. In these scenes both Antony and Cleopatra display depths of character that cannot be reduced to the respective fool and strumpet. The boldest, most incontrovertible display of the honor for which Antony is famed comes not in battle but in his decision to return to Enobarbus his abandoned treasures. Enobarbus's defection to Caesar's side underscores one of the play's main concerns: the mutability of human character. Once one of Antony's most confident and self-assured comrades, Enobarbus becomes a man ruined by guilt over his disloyalty. The completeness of his change of heart is called into question, however, when he declares that he will go off to die in a ditch, because the latter part of his life has been foul. Although he has changed sides, he refuses to fight against Antony. Enobarbus lacks the distance necessary to see his life as a whole, and to understand the honorability of his past actions. He concentrates only on recent dishonorable actions, and so determines to die. But our understanding of Enobarbus must incorporate his former and present selves, the best and the foulest."}