{"name": "Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20170909142712/http://www.gradesaver.com/regeneration/study-guide/summary-part-iv-chapters-17-19", "summary": "Prior sneaks into Sarah's yard, waiting for a signal before climbing into her room through the window. He knows he should feel free after being released from duty, but he finds this freedom to be \"hollow\". Trying to remain quiet so as not to alert the landlady and the other tenants, Billy and Sarah whisper nervously. The couple, shy and sweet, lay on the bed together for a moment, anticipating sleeping together. Sarah says she is happy that Billy will not be returning to war, triggering a brief flashback. Billy considers telling her about his war experiences because he wants Sarah to know him \"deeply,\" but ultimately decides that he needs her to remain ignorant so he can hide in her innocence. They joke for a few moments before Billy announces that he loves her; after some brief hesitation, Sarah says she loves him as well. At the Conservative Club, Sassoon and Owen laugh over a book of awful poetry that was given to the lieutenant by the author. Sassoon makes a gift of the book to Owen, who remarks that whenever Sassoon does something intimate, he does it in a way that is \"impossible to take seriously\". Owen admits that Craiglockhart will be very lonely without Sassoon and Dr. Rivers. He reflects that he, like Sassoon, will soon be forced to leave and give up his bed for a needier patient. Sassoon gives his friend a letter of introduction to Robert Ross, a key figure in the London literary scene, and leaves without officially saying goodbye. Owen tries not to think about all he has lost.", "analysis": "The beginning chapters of Part IV of Regeneration focus heavily on women's issues during World War I. Sarah's mother Ada espouses a profoundly cynical view of relations between men and women; she sees marriage as little more than a business transaction. This represents a more practical and traditional way of thinking that emphasized the economic benefits of marriage over the romantic ones. Sarah undercuts her mother's opinion by continuing to spend time with Billy and even admitting to loving him. The changes women are experiencing during the war is one of Regeneration's recurring themes: the women in the novel have increased freedom, higher wages, and a wider choice of roles in society. This societal shift is reflected in the physical transformation of the female factory workers: their skin grows yellow and their hair turns frizzy and copper-colored. They are very literally changed in the wartime environment. Yet the new opportunities available to women come with severe costs, as well. Sarah's friend Betty has unprotected sex and, lacking access to reliable medical care, attempts to perform an abortion herself. Then, while seeking care for her self-inflicted injuries, a male doctor rebukes Betty condescendingly. Betty's cautionary experience conforms to Ada's concerns about Sarah's carefree love life. Just as Ada makes Sarah aware of the dangers of being unmarried and sexually active, Barker also reveals the consequences for homosexual behavior in England during this time. Graves pointedly tells Sassoon that one of their old friends has recently been arrested for soliciting gay sex and explains that the incident has spurred Graves to start a correspondence with a woman. Later, Dr. Rivers reinforces Graves's concerns about being perceived as a homosexual, explaining that Sassoon could face persecution if his sexual orientation becomes public. The psychologist compares gay romantic feelings to the platonic intimacy between men in a combat situation. He insinuates that society reviles homosexuality in order to underline the distinction between romantic love between men and the brotherhood that emerges on the battlefield; Rivers's point serves to further emasculate men in combat. Contemporary opinion during this time condemned homosexual men as feminine and weak; accusations of homosexuality based on close relationships with fellow soldiers would have been terrifying for many men. In a similar vein, Prior reinforces Dr. Rivers's own emasculation yet again by telling the doctor that he reminds him of his mother. Several men, most notably Sassoon and Prior, face the possibility of returning to war. Both characters experience contradictory reactions to the potential transition. Sassoon has publicly denounced the war as meaningless and cruel, yet agrees to return to battle so he can assuage his guilt for leaving his men behind. Prior wishes to return so that he can prove himself, yet he strongly fears the possibility of death. Both harbor shame for being safe at Craiglockhart: Sassoon feels that he has disappointed his fellow officers and soldiers, while Prior believes that his breakdown has shattered the image of him as a strong and competent man. Dr. Rivers confirms that feelings of shame or guilt are the burden of all those who survive a war. Through these specific examples, Barker illustrates that there is no simple reaction to something as complex as participating in combat. Sassoon's decision to return to France sparks conversations with Graves and Dr. Rivers about competing notions of responsibility. Graves believes that a man's ultimate responsibility revolves around contracts and institutional loyalty; in Graves's mind, Sassoon has agreed to fight and must complete his obligations to the British military, regardless of his feelings. Sassoon, on the other hand, feels a responsibility to his fellow soldiers that are dying in vain, and, more broadly, a responsibility to uphold his own ideals. Sensing that the motivations behind the war are unjust, Sassoon feels an obligation to denounce it. Furthermore, he feels repulsed by the fact that he is expected to hide his sexuality. Dr. Rivers mocks Sassoon's quest to be true to himself by comparing him to Don Quixote, a famous literary character who embarked on fantastical and useless missions. The psychologist feels a sense of responsibility to the military but also to Sassoon; his advises the lieutenant to hide his homosexuality in an attempt to protect Sassoon from facing the dire consequences. In an interview, Pat Barker once explained that the \"major theme--of all work--is recovery\". This is reflected elegantly in the novel's title: Regeneration. Part IV has many examples of how loving relationships can have a positive impact on a character's recovery. Through his intimacy with Sarah, Billy is able to reconnect with the world. Sarah brightens his mood whenever he encounters her; eventually, he has the courage to admit that he loves her, thus making himself vulnerable. This is a major accomplishment for the previously detached and vicious patient. Similarly, Owen and Sassoon are able to build a supportive friendship that assists each man in his recovery. Under Sassoon's mentorship, Owen blossoms as a poet, finally channeling and processing his memories of the war. With Owen's companionship, Sassoon becomes less aloof, finding joy and human connection in helping the young poet. These relationships reinforce the novel's major theme - the cycle of pain and destruction followed by regrowth and recovery"}