{"name": "part 1, Chapter 2", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 2 opens the following day. Lucy awakens to a beautiful view of Florence, but Charlotte enters her room and scolds her for leaning out of the window while not yet fully dressed. At breakfast, they are given advice by a clever older lady named Miss Eleanor Lavish. Miss Lavish offers to take Lucy to see the Santa Croce church, taking her by a \"dirty back way\" so that they can have an adventure. She tells Lucy to ignore her Baedeker Guidebook and to discover Italy for herself. PARAGRAPH>Miss Lavish and Lucy get lost on the way to Santa Croce, but Miss Lavish considers this to be an adventure, exclaiming with delight about the \"Florentine smell\" and quaint local color. One doesn't come to italy for niceness,\" she explains, \"one comes for life. Greeting the locals, Miss Lavish confesses that she is a \"real Radical\" and that she believes in \"civility to. inferiors. PARAGRAPH>Arriving at the church, Miss Lavish spies the Emersons and waits until they are in the church so that she will not have to speak to them. She laughs at the men, comparing them to \"a pair of cows. Lucy defends them. Just then, Miss Lavish spies someone she knows, and abandons Lucy. Lucy is left to explore the church alone and without her Baedeker. She knows she is supposed to find the church beautiful, but really, she finds it ugly, cold, and barnlike. She wanders about, unable to appreciate any of the art without a guide to tell her which pieces are supposed to be the best. PARAGRAPH>Suddenly, Lucy sees a little Italian boy trip on a tombstone and fall down. She hurries to help the crying child. Mr. Emerson also helps the boy, exclaiming loudly that a little child should be out in the sunshine, and not in a church, where he is bound to be \"hurt, cold, and frightened. Once the child is restored to his mother, the Emersons, seeing Lucy alone, invite her to join them on a tour of the church. The Emersons, seeing Lucy alone, invite her to tour the church with them. Out of propriety, she refuses, but Mr. Emerson sees through her, and tells her to stop pretending to be touchy. Lucy is shocked by his directness, but agrees to tour the church with them. PARAGRAPH>While looking at the famous frescoes painted by Giotto, they overhear a clergyman, Reverend Cuthbert Eager, who is giving a tour, speak about how \"beautiful and true\" the paintings are. Mr. Emerson loudly disagrees. Referring to a painting of the \"Ascension of St. John,\" he exclaims, \"Look at that fat man in blue. He must weigh as much as I do, and he is shooting into the sky like an air balloon. The Reverend Eager abruptly takes his group out of the chapel, and Mr. Emerson, who had not meant any offense, is mortified at having spoiled the group's tour. He runs off to apologize, leaving Lucy alone with George, who explains that the incident is typical for his father, who speaks out in an effort to help people and is misunderstood. PARAGRAPH>George makes Lucy uncomfortable. He looks healthy and strong, but gives Lucy the feeling of greyness and tragedy. Later, Mr. Emerson informs Lucy that his son is unhappy. He asks if she will help George, help pull him out of his sorrow and realize that \"by the side of the everlasting Why there is Yes. Lucy responds somewhat pedantically that George should find a hobby. Mr. Emerson looks saddened by her lack of deeper understanding. Just then, Miss Bartlett appears in the church and Lucy rushes away to join her cousin", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter1-chapter4"}