{"name": "part 2, Chapter 15", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 15, as the day has arrived when George will come for tennis at Windy Corner. As the Honeychurches prepare for a church, a red book lies outside in the garden, left there by Cecil. The book, titled Under a Loggia, will soon prove important to the plot. PARAGRAPH>After church, Lucy sees the Emersons, who have been offended to learn that they displaced the Miss Alans and that Cecil misrepresented them to Sir Harry as \"artistic. Lucy inwardly blames Cecil for the mess, but says nothing against him. the course of their conversation, George speaks beautifully and philosophically on the subject of kindness, and Mrs. Honeychurch is pleased by him. Lucy realizes that her mother and George will get along very well. She also observes how kindly and warmly George treats his father. Miss Bartlett arrives and George becomes flustered; Lucy again recognizes the weakness in him, as she saw when he threw her photographs into the river. The weakness makes him human to her; she realizes that men might be as clumsy as girls, and need help sometimes. Lucy also realizes during this conversation that George has not told his father about kissing Lucy, and she is inwardly ecstatic that it is still a secret. PARAGRAPH>Back at the house, Cecil asks about the Emersons, referring to them as his \"proteges. Lucy does not like the term. She sees that Cecil cannot conceive of an equal relationship with anyone; he must see himself as the protector or superior of others. At lunch Lucy is buoyed by cheerfulness. Normally she is depressed at meals, thinking of how she will soon need to leave Windy Corner and go to London, but today she feels differently. She plays piano, but then realizes that George has entered the room, and grows flustered, and stops. PARAGRAPH>After lunch they all play tennis while Cecil reads aloud from a book, making fun of how badly written it is. Lucy is happy playing tennis, and the view of the Sussex Weald is particularly beautiful to her, like the mountains of Italy. George speaks about views, saying that according to his father, the only perfect view is that of the sky above our heads. His comments impress Lucy. George plays energetically, and wins the match. PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, Cecil seems irritated not to be the center of Lucy's attention. As he continues reading from his book, Lucy realizes that this is Miss Lavish's book, and laughs about it, too--until suddenly Cecil reads a scene in which the heroine is kissed in a field of violets. There can be no mistake; Miss Lavish was writing about her and George. As they go in for tea, the passionate George seizes his chance to kiss Lucy again", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter13-chapter16"}