{"name": "part 1, Chapter 3", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 3 opens on a rainy afternoon at the Bertolini. Mr. Beebe watches Lucy play the piano and is impressed. He recalls having seen her play once before, back in England. As Lucy finishes, he remarks, \"If Miss Honeychurch ever takes to live as she plays, it will be very exciting--both for us and for her. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Beebe and Lucy discuss Miss Lavish, who is gone on an outing with Charlotte. Mr. Beebe thinks Charlotte and Miss Lavish an unlikely pair, as Miss Bartlett appears so stodgy and Miss Lavish so unrestrained. He wonders whether Italy is having an effect on Miss Bartlett, loosening up the prim chaperone. PARAGRAPH>Miss Catherine Alan, the old lady who is on holiday with her sister Teresa, enters the room, complaining about the impoliteness of the Italians. Mr. Beebe teases her gently, showing that he finds as much to criticize about the English as the Italians. From Miss Alan, Lucy learns that Miss Lavish is writing a new novel about modern Italy. Miss Alan comments that Miss Lavish acted very strangely when the Emersons arrived. When Mr. Emerson committed a faux pas by mentioning the word \"stomach\" at dinner , Miss Lavish was immediately intrigued by him, saying she enjoyed his plain speaking. However, shortly afterward she had become offended by something he said or did--nobody knew what--and refused to talk to him ever since. Hearing this story, Lucy begs to know whether Mr. Emerson is \"nice or not nice. Miss Alan concludes that he is not nice; Mr. Beebe asks Lucy to decide for herself. She decides that they are nice. Mr. Beebe feels sorry for the Emersons and decides to plan an outing that includes them. PARAGRAPH>Although evening is approaching, Lucy decides to venture out in Florence alone. Mr. Beebe and Miss Alan express their disapproval, but Lucy promises she will just go out for a little walk in the area frequented by tourists. Mr. Beebe blames Lucy's rebellious spirit on \"too much Beethoven", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter1-chapter4"}