{"name": "part 1, Chapter 4", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 4 begins as Lucy wanders outside of the pension alone. She longs for adventure, not gossip with Miss Alan or witty exchanges with Mr. Beebe. What she really wants is to take a ride on the electric tram, but knowing that it would be considered unladylike, Lucy decides to buy some photographs instead. Still feeling rebellious, she purposely chooses, among others, a nude of Venus by Botticelli, knowing her cousin won't approve. PARAGRAPH>Entering the Piazza Signoria, Lucy still feels restless, thinking \"Nothing ever happens to me. Suddenly, something does happen. Two Italians bickering over a debt begin sparring, and one stabs the other. The stabbed man looks directly at Lucy, seeming to want to speak to her, but then blood trickles from his lips and he falls. Lucy faints, and is caught and carried away by George Emerson, who also witnessed the scene. PARAGRAPH>Once Lucy revives herself, she is embarrassed and tries to return to the pension by herself, but George won't allow it. He fetches her photographs, which she dropped in the square, and the two walk back together, talking about the murder. As they reach the Arno River, George suddenly throws the photographs in the water, admitting that they were covered with blood, and that he hadn't known what to do with them. Lucy's heart warms toward George, as she sees his vulnerability for the first time, and feels something between them. She asks George not to say anything to the others at the pension about the way she fainted. He agrees. Lucy adds that it is strange, how something like this happens and then people return to the old life, but George says he can't return to his old life now. Deeply affected by the incident, the melancholy George has regained his desire to live. PARAGRAPH>Analysis of Chapters 1-4 The novel is set in the early 1900s, a time referred to as the Edwardian era in England. The Victorian era had ended, and societal rules were becoming more liberal during this period. However, the British class system was still rigid during the Edwardian era, and the society relatively repressed. As Lucy's chaperone in Italy, Charlotte Bartlett represents the stiff and conventional Edwardian society that is holding Lucy back with its rules of propriety, even as she is on holiday in Italy, a country that symbolizes romance and freedom, wildness and adventure, the very opposite of England. In fact, the whole society at the Bertolini, an English-owned pension , is a microcosm of well-ordered English society in the midst of the exciting disorder of the wider world to which Lucy longs to escape. PARAGRAPH>Mr. Emerson  and his son George represent free thinkers--people with a more open-minded \"view. The picturesque view of Italy they share with Lucy and Charlotte by trading rooms with them is symbolic of the exciting new worldview they will offer young Lucy. According to Charlotte and Mr. Beebe, Mr. Emerson is a \"Socialist\"--that is, someone who fails to respect class distinctions, viewing everyone of every station as equal. This view is threatening to the polite society of their small English-owned pension. PARAGRAPH>George's question mark is mysterious and seems evil and portentous to Charlotte. While probably meant to express an interest in Lucy, the question mark also indicates George's questioning nature. He is a young man who seeks answers from the universe, rather than accepting the conventional answers provided to him by English society. Mr. Emerson asks Lucy to help his son to see that \"by the side of the everlasting Why there is a Yes. After George and Lucy witness the murder together, it appears that the sudden glimpse of mortality, combined with a new closeness to Lucy, have helped give George a new resolve to live. PARAGRAPH>The character of Miss Lavish serves as a foil to Mr. Emerson. Miss Lavish presents herself as a Radical with democratic ideals, but she appears petty and conventional by contrast to the truly freethinking Mr. Emerson. Miss Lavish preaches \"civility to one's inferiors,\" while Mr. Emerson does not even recognize that he has inferiors; to him all are equal. Her idea of getting to know the \"real Italy\" is intriguing, but in reality, she has a patronizing view of the Italians as simple, quaint, and colorful. Along with the supercilious Mr. Eager and the uptight Charlotte Bartlett, Miss Lavish is a comically ridiculous character, a figure of satire through whom Forster criticizes the upper class of Edwardian society. PARAGRAPH>Miss Alan's comment that people do things that are \"most indelicate, and yet at the same time--beautiful\" states the most important theme of the novel. Lucy is learning to think for herself, to find her own way without using her Baedeker's guide, to say what she thinks rather than what is tactful, and to feel her true feelings rather than what it is \"proper\" to feel. She must also decide for herself what is beautiful and true, and it may not be what convention dictates. When that happens, Mr. Beebe's prediction about Lucy may come true, she may live her life the way she plays the piano, and it will be exciting for her and for everyone around her", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter1-chapter4"}