{"name": "part 2, Chapter 16", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 16, Lucy lies to George. She has become much better than before at repressing feelings in order to conform to what is proper and expected, and because she believes that her duty is to Cecil, she is able to tell herself that she never cared anything about George at all. The only thing to be done, she decides, it to turn him out. First, she calls in Charlotte Bartlett and confronts her about Miss Lavish's novel. Charlotte admits that she was the one who told Miss Lavish the secret, and is genuinely upset that it was used in the novel. PARAGRAPH>Lucy now demands that George be punished, but Charlotte is afraid to speak to him, so Lucy confronts him herself. He surprises her by giving a speech about why Cecil is wrong for her. You cannot live with Cecil Vyse,\" he says. He's only for an acquaintance. He is for society and cultivated talk. He should know no one intimately, least of all a woman. He exclaims that he loves Lucy, and unlike Cecil, he wants her to have her own thoughts. He pleads with Charlotte to understand him, but Lucy keeps calm and keeps firm, and George leaves. PARAGRAPH>Down in the garden, Lucy is overcome with emotion and feels that summer is ending. Freddy, learning that George has gone, calls to Cecil to play tennis with them, and Cecil refuses. There are some chaps who are no good for anything but books,\" he comments. Lucy suddenly realizes that George was right about Cecil. She breaks off the engagement that very evening. PARAGRAPH>Analysis of Chapters 13-16 Cecil becomes more and more unattractive to Lucy as she sees him distance himself from all that she knows and loves. Cecil wants to take Lucy away from what he sees as vulgar suburban life, but she fears this; knowing that like Cecil's mother, she will be crushed in the vise of London high society. Cecil, who views the Emersons as his \"proteges,\" is incapable of having equal relationships with others. He cannot let a woman think for herself. This is something that George Emerson understands, and he helps Lucy to see it, too. PARAGRAPH>Cecil's refusal to play tennis, although a seemingly minor incident, proves to be the final straw that pushes Lucy to break off their engagement. Cecil is selfish; he cannot see that by refusing to participate he is spoiling the fun of others. His rejection of physical exercise further characterizes Cecil as the Mediaeval type, one who despises the body as vulgar. The message of the book, as expressed at various times by Mr. Emerson, is that body and soul are one, and true love involves both; this is something Cecil, an effete and celibate man by nature, will never understand. PARAGRAPH>The tension over George continues to build in these chapters. Lucy's feelings for him are more and more difficult to deny, but she has \"developed\" into a person who is more talented than ever at repressing her true feelings for the sake of propriety. Although she is ready to break off her relationship with Cecil, she still cannot bring herself to admit that she loves George. Forster's message is that society is wrong when it teaches people to lie and to repress their natural feelings in order to conform with what is \"proper", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter13-chapter16"}