{"name": "part 2, Chapter 16", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 16, Lucy lied to George about her feelings. In Chapters 17-19, she continues by lying to everyone else in her life, including, of course, herself. This puts her into what Mr. Emerson wisely calls \"a muddle. She is unhappy, but she doesn't know why; the reason, of course, is that she is denying her true feelings. PARAGRAPH>Throughout the novel, Forster has Lucy's piano playing express her state of mind. The song Lucy plays at the end of Chapter 18 is \"Lucy Ashton's Song\" by Sir Walter Scott. It expresses the life of self-denial Lucy is imposing on herself by denying her love for George. From the way she sings the song, it seems that Lucy inwardly agrees with her brother: the ascetic's life of quiet self-denial is \"rotten. PARAGRAPH>As Mrs. Honeychurch astutely points out, Lucy is becoming more like her cousin Charlotte all the time. Just like Charlotte years before, she has decided that rather than be involved with a potentially improper relationship with a \"cad,\" she will live her life alone. For Forster, this is clearly not the right choice, at least not for Lucy. While Lucy reasons that she is being independent by taking off for Greece with the Miss Alans, really she is not; she is only running away from herself. PARAGRAPH>It is left to old Mr. Emerson to clear up Lucy's muddle and to give her the strength she needs to follow her heart. Mr. Beebe cannot do this for her, because what he wants for her is what has made him happy, the celibate life. Lucy's mother is too conservative and conventional to accept Lucy's choice of George, especially as it comes on the heels of a broken engagement. Although she will upset everyone around her, although the tickets have been bought, and Mr. Beebe does not approve, Lucy must live her own Truth. PARAGRAPH>Back in Italy with George, Lucy is enjoying a new Renaissance as a happily married woman. She and George are equal partners; she sees that he can be silly and foolish and childish, and sometimes, he is wrong while she is right. For his part, he has learned to be happy and laughing with her; she has brought him out of his melancholy and into joy. PARAGRAPH>The mystery of Charlotte remains at the end of the novel. It is unclear whether she really did hope for Lucy and George to be together, despite all she did to keep them apart. From the hints throughout the book, it seems that thirty years before, when she was young, Charlotte had a romance of her own, but rejected her suitor's advances as improper, thinking him a cad, or was hurt by a man who kissed her. I have met the type before,\" she tells Lucy in Chapter 7, \"They seldom keep their exploits to themselves. Perhaps at first she really meant to spare Lucy the pain she had felt, but then came to realize that she could not deny Lucy a chance at love. PARAGRAPH>A Room with a View is often classed as a comedy of manners. Human foibles and faults are satirized throughout the novel to comic effect, and the novel progresses from order to humorous misunderstanding or confusion and back again. Like all comedies, it has a happy ending. Also like all comedies, it has a serious message: that each person must follow his or her own truth, even at the risk of going against what others may deem proper. Published at a time when the restrictive attitudes of Victorian England were giving way to the more socially liberal thinking of the Edwardian Era, Forster's novel is one in which conventions clash with passion, and passion triumphs", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter17-chapter20"}