{"name": "part 2, Chapter 12", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 12, Freddy and Mr. Beebe pay a visit to the Emersons. Mr. Beebe notes and comments on the books they have brought, which include poetry by Byron, A. E. Housman's poetry collection A Shropshire Lad, Samuel Butler's novel, The Way of All Flesh, books of Roman history by Edward Gibbon, and philosophy books by Schopenhauer and Nietzsche. On the wardrobe, they see the inscription \"Mistrust all enterprises that require new clothes,\" a quote from Henry David Thoreau. The books and the quotation reveal the Emersons to be highly educated and free-thinking men. PARAGRAPH>Meeting George, Freddy blurts out an invitation to go swimming. Mr. Emerson approves of this, commenting that one day, even ladies will greet one another in that way, when the sexes are equal and people no longer despise their bodies. Mr. Beebe goes along for the swim. He tries to draw George out, commenting on what a coincidence it has been for them all to meet again. George says he thinks it is Fate. PARAGRAPH>At the pond, George is at first reticent, but soon all three men are naked and running around the pond, frolicking and chasing each other. Suddenly, Mrs. Honeychurch, Lucy, and Cecil come along the path on their way to visit a neighbor, Mrs. Butterworth, and see all the men naked. George, naked except for Mr. Beebe's hat, whoops in their faces and runs away. He returns wearing Freddy's pants, and shouts a hello to Lucy. PARAGRAPH>Analysis of Chapters 9-12 By the standards of English society at the time, Cecil and his London milieu are the upper class, but Forster shows in these chapters that upper class does not mean better class. Cecil looks down on the petty snobbishness of Lucy's provincial society, but in doing so, he is an even bigger snob. Cecil and his London acquaintances are effete and world-weary, while the Honeychurches are playful and whimsical. The line between Cecil's world and Lucy's world is drawn very clearly when at Windy Corner, Cecil stays indoors while Lucy and the others clown around at bumblepuppy. Cecil's small-minded attitudes are also contrasted negatively with those of the freethinking Emersons. The names of the characters shed some light on Forster's intentions. The name \"Vyse\" recalls a vise that squeezes and crushes with its force. Mrs. Vyse has been crushed, as in a vise, by the snobbish high society of London. The name \"Honeychurch\" reminds one of all that is sweet in home, family, and conventional beliefs--all the sweetness that Cecil, with his snobbishness toward provincial life, fails to appreciate. The name \"Emerson\" recalls the transcendentalist philosopher and his call to find truth expressed in nature. PARAGRAPH>The Sacred Lake is symbolic of a return to nature, similar to Walden Pond in the writing of Thoreau, another transcendentalist. As the bathers shed their clothing, they also shed the roles society has placed on them and become free creatures of the earth, playful and joyous. Freddy has on Mr. Beebe's clerical waistcoat; George has on his hat--social positions become meaningless in this Edenic setting in the woods. PARAGRAPH>The two scenes at the Sacred Lake provide a sharp contrast between Cecil and George. In the first scene, Lucy arrives at the Sacred Lake with Cecil and he kisses her, but his glasses are caught between them and it is an awkward moment. In the second scene, Lucy sees George naked and jubilant at the pond. Cecil's relationship to Lucy, as even he is aware, is cramped by notions of politeness and chivalry. George, on the other hand, unashamed of his nakedness, seems ready to share with Lucy in the \"Garden of Eden\" that his father spoke of, in which women and men no longer despise their bodies and become equals. PARAGRAPH>The motifs of a room and a view appear again in this part of the novel. Lucy always pictures Cecil with a room with no view, but she associates George with a beautiful view of the outdoors. A \"room\" stands for a civilized place, and also a place that is enclosed and limited. A \"view\" stands for an open, natural worldview, one that is as expansive as it is beautiful. Although he doesn't like to hear it, Lucy sees Cecil's world as small and limited. PARAGRAPH>It is ironic that it is Cecil who reintroduces George into Lucy's life. He fancies that he is opening up her world and helping her to be less snobbish by bringing the Emersons to her neighborhood. In fact he will open Lucy's world to new possibilities, but not in the way he thinks", "analysis": "", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210304063156/https://www.novelguide.com/a-room-with-a-view/summaries/chapter9-chapter12"}