{"name": "Chapter 10", "summary": "Chapter 10<PARAGRAPH>Isabel's friend, Henrietta Stackpole, the independent American journalist, arrives in England and visits at Gardencourt to see Isabel. She is described as a neat, plump person with a remarkably observant eye. Henrietta declares to the Touchetts that she would like to know if they consider themselves American or English, so that she will know how to talk to them. Ralph tells her that, in order to please her, he'll be an Englishman, or even a Turk. Isabel intercedes that Ralph is a cosmopolite. PARAGRAPH>Isabel discovers that Henrietta is writing an article on Gardencourt, and tells her that she should not write about the place. Henrietta thinks they will be delighted afterwards, and Isabel protests that Henrietta has no sense of privacy. Henrietta blushes. Later, she asks Isabel if there is some other place she can describe, and Isabel tells her that she could give her a glimpse of Lord Warburton, and perhaps she can observe him. PARAGRAPH>Henrietta finds it odd that Ralph spends his time so idly, without occupation. She asks how he can reconcile his idleness with his conscience, to which he responds, \"I have no conscience. Henrietta proceeds to interrogate him on having abandoned his own country, and Ralph responds that one's country is not a choice, but only an \"element of one's composition\". Henrietta counsels Ralph to \"take hold of something\" -- that is, find something to work on. A few days later, Henrietta diagnoses Ralph: \"I know what's the matter with you. you think you're too good to get married\". Ralph jokes that he thought so until he met Henrietta. She thinks that getting married would improve him, and that it is his \"duty\". Ralph suspects Henrietta has ulterior motives, so he decides to test this by circuitously suggesting that he is proposing to Henrietta. Henrietta gives him a look of resentment. PARAGRAPH>Isabel later tells Ralph that Henrietta thinks Europeans have a low tone towards women. Ralph notes that perhaps he treats her too personally. He thinks though, that she has the \"smell of the Future\"", "analysis": "Ralph and Henrietta do not seem to really get along -- perhaps they might remind us of friends in a TV sitcom who always make fun of each other, never see eye to eye, yet nevertheless get something out of each other's company.  Ralph finds it fun to evade straightforward answers to Henrietta's questions about his own identity and function in the world, and Henrietta persists in pinning him down with one.  Ralph seems to represent Europeans here -- a sick and idle, but cultured, person -- and Henrietta is the American of the \"Future\"  who is bold, persistent and hard working.  This is representative of Henry James' well-known \"American Theme\" in which Americans arrive in Europe, and seem to offer something new to a decadent culture.  But what is it, exactly that they offer? Henrietta seems to offer straightforward, puritan values.  <PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 12, we have what will be seen as her first great action, her refusal of Lord Warburton's marriage proposal.  For any American without a fortune, this would have been seen as a great opportunity: marrying a rich, well respected Lord from England.  Why does Isabel reject his marriage proposal?  She tells him she has nothing to give: she could mean this in a financial sense, but she could also mean that she believes she must develop as an individual, original and independent person in order to enter into a marriage.   She furthermore believes herself to be capable of an even greater opportunity: does this mean she believes another man of greater status will propose to her? Or does she think she will be able to occupy herself in life in some other way?  The great idea upon which her ambition settles is unclear.  What could it mean to engage in \"the free exploration of life\" ?  It would appear that Isabel's great idea is to assert some sort of independent freedom of character, but the means of expression of such freedom does not seem to be readily available to her.  It does not seem to lie in any possible occupation she could have, especially because she is not a very practical person, but rather a theoretical one.  It does not seem to lie in her social relations to others, because this seems to mean that she will have to submit to a particular social system thereby losing her freedom.  This leads to a more existential question that is being posed in the book: What is freedom? Can it be asserted in any other way, other than negatively?<PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, the fact that Caspar Goodwood has arrived at the same time that Lord Warburton has decided to propose forms something of a climax of the first section of the novel.  Isabel is presented with two possible, concrete realizations for her \"idea\" as to what she will do in life, and she rejects them both, although she rejects them for opposite reasons.  One man is not at all likeable, and not at all her ideal; the other is perfectly an ideal of a person, and she likes him perfectly well, but she intuitively feels that she does not want to marry him.  Her idea thus assumes expression only negatively here.<PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 14, we get some more exploration into Isabel's motivations for rejecting Lord Warburton's marriage proposal.  She claims that she does not want to separate herself from \"life\" - from the usual chances that most people suffer.  She seems to have a lust for a vague notion of experience, and she believes such experience cannot be found when one is protected from dangers through marriage.   Mrs. Touchett's simple declaration ironically is the most adequate for describing Isabel's rejection -- she does think that she can \"do something better.\" However, Mrs. Touchett is also a character that is not depicted in a flattering light; she is not the kind of person who can explore deep psychological motivations and intimate emotions.  Thus we are presented with the contradiction that Isabel's \"idea\" on the one hand can be described adequately in a superficial manner, but that it nevertheless breeds a lot of psychological interest and vague emotions.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-10-14"}