{"name": "Chapter 39", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 39<PARAGRAPH>In this chapter, we get Ralph's view of Isabel's marriage: he feels that she wears a mask. He has a theory about her unhappiness and how she is only playing the part of a happy wife, but he knows that she would never tell him if this were the case. The relations between Ralph and Isabel have cooled significantly - they always feel somewhat formal, and Ralph notices a definite difference. He feels that Isabel will never forgive him for having insulted her husband. PARAGRAPH>Ralph did manage to make it to the wedding. The ceremony was very small: only Countess Gemini, Mrs. Touchett and Pansy were there to witness it. Henrietta had been critical of Mr. Osmond as well, and Mr. Osmond did not like Henrietta. Mrs. Touchett had only formal and distant relations with Isabel, and she had also broken her friendship with Madame Merle. Madame Merle acted as if Mrs. Touchett had offended her, pretending that she had simply not noticed Isabel had felt affectionate towards Gilbert Osmond during their travels together. PARAGRAPH>We learn that Isabel has had a child, but she has also lost it. The life she leads gives all the appearance of being a successful one: from the outside, there was nothing to gape at or criticize. Ralph though recognizes this appearance as the \"hand of the master\". He notices that Isabel acts in too exaggerated a manner sometimes, and that she seems less curious, more indifferent. He feels that Isabel gives the appearance of a fine lady who is supposed to represent something -- namely, Gilbert Osmond. He realizes that Osmond had never had material with which express himself, but he had patiently waited. Isabel now serves the function of that material. But even though such material is very fine, Ralph thinks to himself, the thing being represented  is absolutely vulgar. Ralph realizes that Osmond had given the appearance of caring for intrinsic values, but in actual fact, he lived for what others thought of him. His purpose was to project an image of impertinence and mystification - to make the world feel as if he were superior to it. His ambition was not to please the world, but to please himself by exciting the world's curiosity and then declining to satisfy it,\"  the narrator tells us of Ralph's theory about Osmond. PARAGRAPH>Generally speaking Osmond does not seem to think Ralph is important enough to be disliked. However, once when Ralph stayed for too long in Rome, he knew that Osmond began to protest. Ralph then left so as not to disturb the relations between the couple. However, in a conversation with Lord Warburton, Ralph declares his intention to stay on, to see if Osmond will again protest. Also in this conversation, Lord Warburton and Ralph both intimate that they originally set upon their journey to see Isabel rather than to journey further south, as they had ostensibly planned to do. Ralph asks Warburton if he is trying to prove to Isabel that he does not intend to \"make love to her\"  by showing interest in Pansy. Warburton wonders if Isabel will be pleased that he is showing interest in Pansy", "analysis": "Many years have passed once Chapter 36 opens.  It is an interesting technical choice on the part of James to begin this second part of his novel through the third-person point of view of Edward Rosier.  Edward is not exactly an admirable character, and the narrator points out that his vision of Pansy is inaccurate.  He also seems to resemble Osmond in subtle ways: they are both collectors, and they both have a habit of comparing persons of value to objects of value.  He also believes that his own taste is quite accurately the only aesthetic standard - although it differs from Osmond's.  In other words, his perspective is certainly not characterized by the perspicacity of others.  Why then does James choose to introduce the story through his eyes?<PARAGRAPH>One answer might be that Edward is an example of James' technique of the \"ficelle\" - a character who is two-dimensional and is used merely to move the action of the story along.  It is James' way of economically summarizing what the relationship between Osmond and Isabel has turned out to be.  As James once famously said, \"Really, universally, relations stop nowhere, and the exquisite problem of the artist is eternally but to draw, by a geometry of his own, the circle within which they shall happily appear to do so\" .<PARAGRAPH>It is not until Chapter 40 that we get a peek into Isabel's world.  Instead, Ralph's analysis in Chapter 39 of the situation paints a bleak picture for us.  Ralph still believes Osmond is selfish and vulgar, and he believes that he has reduced Isabel to the function of being a \"representative\" of his own lack of values.  It is interesting to pause over what is meant by an \"intrinsic value\" as opposed to Osmond's true values.  Osmond cares what other people think of him, by Ralph's theory -- he cares how he appears to the world.  He cares about his reputation and about having the means to show himself off in the world.  But, the question is: does anyone else have an intrinsic value in this novel?<PARAGRAPH>Isabel is valuable, as James has explained in the preface, because others think she is interesting.  This too is a value gained because of the opinion of others.  Furthermore, a comparison can be made between Henry James as the author and Gilbert Osmond as the manipulative husband: Henry James also enjoyed financial success from \"using\" Isabel Archer to represent his own ideas.  What is the intrinsic value of the novel itself?  Is it supposed to be a representation of the author's ideas, or is it valuable for some other reason? This question is being posed in a meta-fictional sense.  Can we really detach the idea of \"intrinsic value\" from values for others -- isn't value, after all, a social phenomenon?", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-36-39"}