{"name": "Chapter 12", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 12<PARAGRAPH>Isabel is aware that Lord Warburton has arrived with some intention, and she feels curious about this intention at the same time she wishes to elude this intention. Although the narrator does not tell us so, it is obvious that Lord Warburton is about to propose marriage to her. She perceives Lord Warburton as \"looming up before her\"  and he appears to demand something of her, as if he is about to draw her into the orbit of the system in which he lives. Her instinct tells her to resist though, especially because she has a system of her own. She also notes that Caspar Goodwood is a man with no system at all, even though he has certain definite intentions with her. PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, Lord Warburton seems somewhat embarrassed. He was about to do something that would shock all his countrymen, even though he has only been in Isabel's company for 26 hours. Lord Warburton tells her he's in love with her, and that he will be forever. Isabel claims that he does not know her at all. He tells her if she is his wife, he will come to know her. She tells him that she believes in him, and does not need the recommendation of his friends to do so. But then, she thanks him for his offer. He tells her that this gives him some hope that she will come to accept him eventually. She tells him not to hope. She is sure that her opinion of him can only rise, but that his opinion of her will only lower with time. Isabel tells him she is refusing him not because she dislikes him, but because it's about what she herself can give to the marriage. Further, she is not sure that she ever wishes to marry anyone. PARAGRAPH>Isabel feels that she would give her little finger to have the impulse to accept Lord Warburton's proposal; she wishes she could believe it was the best possible opportunity she could have. However, she feels like a \"wild, caught creature in a vast cage\" when presented with this opportunity. This opportunity was not the greatest she could conceive of. Isabel tells him finally that he ought not to bring up the subject today again, and that she only needs time to think of some way to let him know that what he asks is impossible. Lord Warburton tells her he will live without purpose if she rejects him, and she protests that he will marry a better woman than she. She tells him that she only wants to collect her mind a little, and he responds that he is afraid of her \"remarkable\" mind. She responds, \"So am I, my lord. PARAGRAPH>As he leaves, Isabel feels that there had been no great difficult choice, as she simply could not have married him. The idea failed to support any enlightened prejudice in favour of the free exploration of life that she had hitherto entertained or was now capable of entertaining\"", "analysis": "Ralph and Henrietta do not seem to really get along -- perhaps they might remind us of friends in a TV sitcom who always make fun of each other, never see eye to eye, yet nevertheless get something out of each other's company.  Ralph finds it fun to evade straightforward answers to Henrietta's questions about his own identity and function in the world, and Henrietta persists in pinning him down with one.  Ralph seems to represent Europeans here -- a sick and idle, but cultured, person -- and Henrietta is the American of the \"Future\"  who is bold, persistent and hard working.  This is representative of Henry James' well-known \"American Theme\" in which Americans arrive in Europe, and seem to offer something new to a decadent culture.  But what is it, exactly that they offer? Henrietta seems to offer straightforward, puritan values.  <PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 12, we have what will be seen as her first great action, her refusal of Lord Warburton's marriage proposal.  For any American without a fortune, this would have been seen as a great opportunity: marrying a rich, well respected Lord from England.  Why does Isabel reject his marriage proposal?  She tells him she has nothing to give: she could mean this in a financial sense, but she could also mean that she believes she must develop as an individual, original and independent person in order to enter into a marriage.   She furthermore believes herself to be capable of an even greater opportunity: does this mean she believes another man of greater status will propose to her? Or does she think she will be able to occupy herself in life in some other way?  The great idea upon which her ambition settles is unclear.  What could it mean to engage in \"the free exploration of life\" ?  It would appear that Isabel's great idea is to assert some sort of independent freedom of character, but the means of expression of such freedom does not seem to be readily available to her.  It does not seem to lie in any possible occupation she could have, especially because she is not a very practical person, but rather a theoretical one.  It does not seem to lie in her social relations to others, because this seems to mean that she will have to submit to a particular social system thereby losing her freedom.  This leads to a more existential question that is being posed in the book: What is freedom? Can it be asserted in any other way, other than negatively?<PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, the fact that Caspar Goodwood has arrived at the same time that Lord Warburton has decided to propose forms something of a climax of the first section of the novel.  Isabel is presented with two possible, concrete realizations for her \"idea\" as to what she will do in life, and she rejects them both, although she rejects them for opposite reasons.  One man is not at all likeable, and not at all her ideal; the other is perfectly an ideal of a person, and she likes him perfectly well, but she intuitively feels that she does not want to marry him.  Her idea thus assumes expression only negatively here.<PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 14, we get some more exploration into Isabel's motivations for rejecting Lord Warburton's marriage proposal.  She claims that she does not want to separate herself from \"life\" - from the usual chances that most people suffer.  She seems to have a lust for a vague notion of experience, and she believes such experience cannot be found when one is protected from dangers through marriage.   Mrs. Touchett's simple declaration ironically is the most adequate for describing Isabel's rejection -- she does think that she can \"do something better.\" However, Mrs. Touchett is also a character that is not depicted in a flattering light; she is not the kind of person who can explore deep psychological motivations and intimate emotions.  Thus we are presented with the contradiction that Isabel's \"idea\" on the one hand can be described adequately in a superficial manner, but that it nevertheless breeds a lot of psychological interest and vague emotions.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-10-14"}