{"name": "Chapter 13", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 13<PARAGRAPH>Isabel decides to speak to her uncle, Mr. Touchett, about this event. Mr. Touchett, upon hearing of the proposal, tells her that he knew she would be a success here. He also already knew about Lord Warburton's intentions. Speaking with her uncle allows Isabel to feel that she has reasonable and natural emotions, rather than a vague intellectualism that rests upon an unfounded idea. She did not refuse Lord Warburton either because she planned on accepting Caspar Goodwood. In Caspar Goodwood's presence, she feels deprived of a sense of freedom, and she is often haunted by the sense that he might disapprove of what she did. Sometimes she thinks of Caspar Goodwood as the \"stubbornest fact she knew\". PARAGRAPH>The narrator informs the reader that Caspar Goodwood is the son of a proprietor of cotton-mills in Massachusetts, and therefore a man of means. He even had managed to invent an improvement to the process of cotton spinning and was seen as accomplished because of this. Isabel likes the idea that he is a character and a mover of men , but he does not move her imagination in any other ways. He did not correspond to her idea of a delightful person, although Lord Warburton did correspond to it exactly. However she was still unsatisfied. PARAGRAPH>Isabel decides not to reply to Mr. Goodwood. She writes to Lord Warburton after three days. She tells him, \"We see our lives from our own point of view,\" and that she can never see hers from the point of view of his wife. PARAGRAPH>Henrietta tries to get Ralph Touchett to allow Caspar Goodwood to visit, taking him for a stroll in the garden. Ralph hesitates, but finally agrees when Henrietta accuses him of being in love with Isabel. He tells her he will invite Caspar Goodwood to prove that he is not in love with Isabel. Henrietta tells him that he is inviting Caspar Goodwood to prove it to himself. Ralph writes to Caspar to invite him to Gardencourt, but Caspar refuses. This puzzles Henrietta. PARAGRAPH>Henrietta and Isabel decide to go on to London together, and Ralph joins them", "analysis": "Ralph and Henrietta do not seem to really get along -- perhaps they might remind us of friends in a TV sitcom who always make fun of each other, never see eye to eye, yet nevertheless get something out of each other's company.  Ralph finds it fun to evade straightforward answers to Henrietta's questions about his own identity and function in the world, and Henrietta persists in pinning him down with one.  Ralph seems to represent Europeans here -- a sick and idle, but cultured, person -- and Henrietta is the American of the \"Future\"  who is bold, persistent and hard working.  This is representative of Henry James' well-known \"American Theme\" in which Americans arrive in Europe, and seem to offer something new to a decadent culture.  But what is it, exactly that they offer? Henrietta seems to offer straightforward, puritan values.  <PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 12, we have what will be seen as her first great action, her refusal of Lord Warburton's marriage proposal.  For any American without a fortune, this would have been seen as a great opportunity: marrying a rich, well respected Lord from England.  Why does Isabel reject his marriage proposal?  She tells him she has nothing to give: she could mean this in a financial sense, but she could also mean that she believes she must develop as an individual, original and independent person in order to enter into a marriage.   She furthermore believes herself to be capable of an even greater opportunity: does this mean she believes another man of greater status will propose to her? Or does she think she will be able to occupy herself in life in some other way?  The great idea upon which her ambition settles is unclear.  What could it mean to engage in \"the free exploration of life\" ?  It would appear that Isabel's great idea is to assert some sort of independent freedom of character, but the means of expression of such freedom does not seem to be readily available to her.  It does not seem to lie in any possible occupation she could have, especially because she is not a very practical person, but rather a theoretical one.  It does not seem to lie in her social relations to others, because this seems to mean that she will have to submit to a particular social system thereby losing her freedom.  This leads to a more existential question that is being posed in the book: What is freedom? Can it be asserted in any other way, other than negatively?<PARAGRAPH>Meanwhile, the fact that Caspar Goodwood has arrived at the same time that Lord Warburton has decided to propose forms something of a climax of the first section of the novel.  Isabel is presented with two possible, concrete realizations for her \"idea\" as to what she will do in life, and she rejects them both, although she rejects them for opposite reasons.  One man is not at all likeable, and not at all her ideal; the other is perfectly an ideal of a person, and she likes him perfectly well, but she intuitively feels that she does not want to marry him.  Her idea thus assumes expression only negatively here.<PARAGRAPH>In Chapter 14, we get some more exploration into Isabel's motivations for rejecting Lord Warburton's marriage proposal.  She claims that she does not want to separate herself from \"life\" - from the usual chances that most people suffer.  She seems to have a lust for a vague notion of experience, and she believes such experience cannot be found when one is protected from dangers through marriage.   Mrs. Touchett's simple declaration ironically is the most adequate for describing Isabel's rejection -- she does think that she can \"do something better.\" However, Mrs. Touchett is also a character that is not depicted in a flattering light; she is not the kind of person who can explore deep psychological motivations and intimate emotions.  Thus we are presented with the contradiction that Isabel's \"idea\" on the one hand can be described adequately in a superficial manner, but that it nevertheless breeds a lot of psychological interest and vague emotions.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-10-14"}