{"name": "Chapter 54", "summary": "PARAGRAPH>Chapter 54<PARAGRAPH>Isabel's arrival in Gardencourt is as quiet as her first time there. She wonders to herself what would have happened to her if she had never met her aunt - would she have married Caspar Goodwood. Mrs. Touchett comes to greet Isabel and inform her of Ralph's condition. He is not doing well, and Mrs. Touchett states that he has not had a successful life. Isabel says that he has had a beautiful one. Mrs. Touchett asks Isabel three questions: has she ever regretted her refusal of Lord Warburton. Isabel says she has not. Are she and Madame Merle still friends. Isabel says she is not. What did Madame Merle do to her. Isabel replies that she made a convenience of her. PARAGRAPH>Isabel waits by Ralph's bedside for three days before he is finally well enough to speak. When he finally sits up, he believes he is near his end. He says he was not sure she would come. He then asks what she has done for him, implying that she has acted in opposition to her husband in coming to see him. She responds by asking him the same thing: what is it that he did for her. Did he really make her a rich woman. He tells her that he thinks he ruined her. Isabel admits that Osmond married her for her money. Ralph tells Isabel that she wanted to look at life, but ended up ground into the mill of the conventional. Yet he still has hope that she will be young again", "analysis": "The scene between Madame Merle and Isabel in Chapter 52 is a very important one for understanding James' project.  In the preface, he has declared that Isabel is made extraordinary by her perceptiveness.  Yet, we have learned that she often does not see what is right in front of her, being willfully ignorant, and she often sees more than what is right in front of her, allowing her imagination to work on the material right in front of her.  In this scene however, Isabel finally is victorious in understanding the situation and allowing herself to be seen as an all-knowing and seeing entity.  Merle sees that Isabel knows what she is - she knows her true nature.  However, Merle cannot resist taking her down a notch, proving to her that her vision is not so extraordinary after all, by telling her about Ralph's gift to her.   It is as if Isabel is a \"clear glass\" that allows Merle to see herself as a monstrosity for the first time.<PARAGRAPH>The end of the novel seems haunted by the past.  The so-called \"ghost\" of Ralph Touchett appears.  Recall that Isabel had earlier thought that the house of Gardencourt might be haunted, and Ralph had joked that she might live to see the ghost.  However, while Isabel had expected the ghost of European history to make its appearance in the house -- for she had associated European convention with haunted houses and Romances - now, this ghost has come to stand for the American experience in Europe. We might read this in terms of an understanding of Americans making their mark on the history of Europe, in line with the Old World vs. New World theme.<PARAGRAPH>Goodwood's forced kiss at the end of the novel and his speech to Isabel suggests that he thinks it is perfectly acceptable to begin an extramarital affair with her.  Isabel however, fights against this possibility.  Her running away from him suggests that she is willing to accept the consequences of her marriage to Osmond once and for all, and upholds the honor of her actions of marrying Osmond.  She wants to uphold a conventional notion of duty.  This is representative of Isabel's final moral action.<PARAGRAPH>We can also read the ending though as Isabel's weakness rather than her strength.  Every time she has a scene with Caspar Goodwood, she has a very physical reaction to him.  It is as if she is attracted to him physically but cannot accept this about herself.  Goodwood thus seems to represent her unconscious desires from which she runs away.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-52-55"}