{"name": "Chapter 50", "summary": "Chapter 50<PARAGRAPH>The Countess Gemini is visiting Isabel at the opening of this chapter. Pansy, Isabel and the Countess climb the Coliseum stairs together. Isabel notices, as Pansy and Countess ascend, that Edward Rosier is in the Coliseum as well, and he is watching them. PARAGRAPH>He comes over to Isabel and tells her that he has sold all of his bibelots. He has done so that he will have money instead, enough for Mr. Osmond to think he is rich. Isabel tells him that Mr. Osmond will think him unwise now. PARAGRAPH>Pansy and the Countess approach them, and Edward quickly leaves. On the way home, Pansy shoots Isabel a look of melancholy. Isabel feels sorry for Pansy, but also envious for her timid passion. The Countess and Edward go off together. Later, it seems that the Countess has sided with Edward. PARAGRAPH>The next week, Pansy informs Isabel that her father is sending her back to the convent. Pansy says it will give her time to reflect. She will be very quiet and think a great deal. Isabel promises to visit her. PARAGRAPH>That evening, Isabel tells Osmond that she will miss Pansy very much. He says that he is sending Pansy away because she is \"dusty\" and \"disheveled\" from being out in the world too much. The narrator tells us though that his explanation is not so much a real explanation as it is an attempt to put his idea into words, so that he may see how it might look. He declares that he wants Pansy to look at the world in the right way. PARAGRAPH>Isabel finds Osmond's \"sketch\" very interesting. She feels as if it is being presented to her so as to mystify her, to make her imagination work. PARAGRAPH>The Countess Gemini interrupts Osmond to say that he ought to say he is just banishing Pansy because of Mr. Rosier. Osmond replies that it would be easier to banish the Countess herself", "analysis": "Osmond's decision to send Pansy away is his attempt to exercise more control over Pansy and her understanding of the world.  Pansy, ever the obedient daughter, does not take it bitterly and resolves herself to do what her father tells her.  Osmond though wants to present his idea as if it is for his daughter's own interest, and he creates a \"portrait.\" This is an extended metaphor that is employed by the narrator to describe Osmond's actions.  This metaphor then is presented to Isabel, who realizes the aesthetic illusion this sketch is supposed to create.  The metaphor then serves to allow us to view these people's social relations and their attempts to manipulate the truth as similar to the way we approach a work of art.  The reader of this ClassicNote will remember that aesthetics is the philosophical inquiry into what makes something beautiful, and what makes something into a work of art.  Henry James, through this metaphor, is showing how Osmond can use aesthetic means to manipulate an ugly truth, to make an ugly truth appear better.  Isabel, who once was convinced by Osmond's good taste , now is suspicious of it.  She knows that it is a trick designed to work on her imagination, to make her believe that values are there which are not actually there.<PARAGRAPH>Osmond is able to control Isabel by appealing to her sense of higher values -- values that she realizes he does not share, but which he can nevertheless use against her.  She tries to point out his hypocrisy, but he is somehow maintains the upper hand.<PARAGRAPH>The Countess arrives to put one of the final pieces of the puzzle together for Isabel.  The use of a minor character to tie up this loose end and give a concrete reality to a suspicion that is only shadowy in Isabel's mind is a technique that is common to James' novels.  In his New York Edition Prefaces, he calls it the use of a 'ficelle': a character that helps advance the plot, economizing on the infinite possibilities of what might happen by being minor themselves and somewhat two-dimensional.<PARAGRAPH>When Isabel learns the truth, she shows her truly good nature by exercising her empathy for Madame Merle, who has so wickedly deceived her.  She recognizes that not even Pansy likes Madame Merle - Pansy, Merle's very own daughter.  Isabel has been successful exactly where Merle has not been: she has money, has received marriage proposals from prominent men, and she is often thought of as Pansy's guardian and stepmother.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-50-51"}