{"name": "Chapter 52", "summary": "Chapter 52<PARAGRAPH>Before departing for London, Isabel decides to visit Pansy. As she is waiting for Pansy, she is surprised to happen upon Madame Merle. Seeing this woman who was so present to her imagination all day in the flesh is like seeing \"a painted picture move\". Isabel feels that this is like evidence in court against Merle, of Merle's own interest in Pansy's affairs. PARAGRAPH>Merle offers up the excuse that she should have told Isabel she meant to visit Pansy, and that she only thought Pansy might be lonely. Merle talks at length about Pansy and the convent. Isabel then noted a sudden break in her voice -- a modulation that marked Merle's perception of Isabel's changed attitude towards her. She realizes that Isabel knows her secret. She falters for a moment, but then she regains herself. She realizes that she is only safe if she does not betray herself. PARAGRAPH>Isabel sees this all as if it is reflected in a \"clear glass\". Isabel enjoys the knowledge that Madame Merle had felt herself being exposed. Isabel is looking out the window though, and she sees - not the garden outside, but rather, the \"dry staring fact that she had been an applied handled hung-up tool\". Her only revenge though is not to react, to sit there silently. Merle realizes that Isabel will never reproach her, never given her the opportunity to defend herself. PARAGRAPH>Isabel goes to see Pansy, and she feels that the girl has been \"vanquished\" by her father's will. Pansy is worried that Isabel will leave her forever when she says that she will go to England. Pansy says it will be easier for her to do as Osmond and Merle like if Isabel is around. She declares that she does not like Merle, and Isabel cautions her to never say that again. PARAGRAPH>Merle appeals to Isabel before she leaves the convent again. Merle tells Isabel that her cousin Ralph once did he a great service, and asks Isabel if she knows what it is. She goes on to tell Isabel that Ralph is the one who made her a rich woman -- it was Ralph's idea to give her the money, and Isabel ought to thank him for making a brilliant match. Isabel ironically replies that she thinks it is Merle that she has to thank. Merle lowers her eyes, recognizes Isabel is unhappy, and declares that she will go to America", "analysis": "The scene between Madame Merle and Isabel in Chapter 52 is a very important one for understanding James' project.  In the preface, he has declared that Isabel is made extraordinary by her perceptiveness.  Yet, we have learned that she often does not see what is right in front of her, being willfully ignorant, and she often sees more than what is right in front of her, allowing her imagination to work on the material right in front of her.  In this scene however, Isabel finally is victorious in understanding the situation and allowing herself to be seen as an all-knowing and seeing entity.  Merle sees that Isabel knows what she is - she knows her true nature.  However, Merle cannot resist taking her down a notch, proving to her that her vision is not so extraordinary after all, by telling her about Ralph's gift to her.   It is as if Isabel is a \"clear glass\" that allows Merle to see herself as a monstrosity for the first time.<PARAGRAPH>The end of the novel seems haunted by the past.  The so-called \"ghost\" of Ralph Touchett appears.  Recall that Isabel had earlier thought that the house of Gardencourt might be haunted, and Ralph had joked that she might live to see the ghost.  However, while Isabel had expected the ghost of European history to make its appearance in the house -- for she had associated European convention with haunted houses and Romances - now, this ghost has come to stand for the American experience in Europe. We might read this in terms of an understanding of Americans making their mark on the history of Europe, in line with the Old World vs. New World theme.<PARAGRAPH>Goodwood's forced kiss at the end of the novel and his speech to Isabel suggests that he thinks it is perfectly acceptable to begin an extramarital affair with her.  Isabel however, fights against this possibility.  Her running away from him suggests that she is willing to accept the consequences of her marriage to Osmond once and for all, and upholds the honor of her actions of marrying Osmond.  She wants to uphold a conventional notion of duty.  This is representative of Isabel's final moral action.<PARAGRAPH>We can also read the ending though as Isabel's weakness rather than her strength.  Every time she has a scene with Caspar Goodwood, she has a very physical reaction to him.  It is as if she is attracted to him physically but cannot accept this about herself.  Goodwood thus seems to represent her unconscious desires from which she runs away.", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325075811/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-portrait-of-a-lady/study-guide/summary-chapters-52-55"}