{"name": "Chapter V", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter1-6", "summary": "David feels proud of having defeated his uncle's plot to kill him, and fantasizes about taking \"the upper hand,\" driving him \"like a herd of sheep,\" and becoming \"that man's king and ruler. When he confronts his uncle the next morning, Ebenezer tries to pass off his actions as a joke. There is a knock at the door. It is a cabin boy with a letter from Captain Hoseason to Ebenezer. In the letter, Hoseason says he is waiting at Queensferry harbor with his boat, the Covenant, and wants to know if Ebenezer has any further orders. It appears that Ebenezer and Hoseason have some kind of business partnership and that these business interests have run into problems. Hoseason also writes that he has had a disagreement with Mr. Rankeillor, a lawyer who has been acting as Ebenezer's agent. Ebenezer says that he must go to see Hoseason on business and that if David will go with him, they will both call on Mr. Rankeillor, a well-respected lawyer who knew David's father. Though David does not trust Ebenezer, he reasons that he can come to little harm in a populated area like the harbor, and he wishes to consult the lawyer, so he agrees to go. On the journey, David chats to the cabin boy, whose name is Ransome. Ransome talks about life on board the Covenant. He describes Hoseason as brutal, a quality that Ransome admires, and proudly shows David a wound on his leg caused by Mr. Shuan, the navigator. Ransome boasts about the wild and bad things he has done, but David only feels sorry for him. David learns that the Covenant has transported criminals to slavery in North America, as well as innocent people who were kidnapped for private interest or vengeance. David, Ebenezer and Ransome arrive at the Hawes Inn, Queensferry, where they are to meet Hoseason. David catches sight of the Covenant in the harbor, and pities all those who sail in her", "analysis": ""}