{"name": "Chapter XXX", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter25-30", "summary": "David tells Mr. Rankeillor that he must help Alan escape. He also wants to clear the name of James of the Glens concerning the Appin murder. Mr. Rankeillor agrees that David should help Alan to escape. But if he enters the witness box in court to try to clear James, he risks being tried for the crime himself, found guilty, and hanged. David is not dissuaded, as he feels it is his duty to come forward. Mr. Rankeillor gives David two letters. One is to his bankers, the British Linen Company, ordering them to give David his inheritance. The other letter is to a relative of David's, a well-respected Balfour, who will help him when he testifies to James's innocence. David arranges to send money to Alan so that he can travel to France. Near Edinburgh, the two men part. David goes to the British Linen Company bank to claim his inheritance. In a final note, the author writes that he may one day write a sequel telling how Alan escaped and what happened about the Appin murder. This will depend on the public's reception of this story. The author assures his readers that all went well for both men.", "analysis": "Stevenson introduces another fictionalized version of a historical character in Robin Oig, son of the folk hero Robert Roy MacGregor, who was popularly known as Rob Roy. Robin Oig's dismissal of David as \"only some kinless loon that didn't know his own father\" shows the importance to the Highlanders of the clan system. To Robin, clan is all-important, to the extent that a man such as David who does not know his own clan is utterly insignificant. Stevenson continues his critical and unheroic portrayal of Scottish folk heroes in the character of Robin, who is shown as proud, arrogant, petty, and generally unlikable. The bagpiping duel between Alan and Robin is one of the most famous episodes in the novel. It draws attention to the dual aspects of the fierce Highland people: the warrior and the poet. When Alan and Robin first meet, they are in warrior mode, squaring up to each other like two gladiators. They exchange hostile words, and it is only the intervention of Duncan Dhu that averts a swordfight. Duncan suggests a bagpiping duel instead. As the two men try to better one another's performance, it seems at first that the hostility has been transferred from swords to piping. But finally, Robin plays an air associated with the Appin Stewarts, Alan's clan, and Alan softens: \"The first notes were scarce out, before there came a change in his face; when the time quickened, he seemed to grow restless in his seat; and long before that piece was at an end, the last signs of his anger died from him, and he had no thought but for the music. Alan's former anger with Robin is transfigured into rapturous enjoyment of the music and the love for his clan that it represents. In addition, although this is not made explicit, Alan must surely appreciate the gesture of humility on Robin's part in playing an Appin Stewart air. Alan reciprocates by stepping back from his former confrontational stance and humbly praising Robin's playing unequivocally: \"Robin Oig. ye are a great piper. I am not fit to blow in the same kingdom with ye. Characteristically, however, Alan's full-hearted compliment on Robin's playing is undercut by a snide remark to the effect that Alan still thinks he could better Robin in a swordfight. But even this undercutting is couched within such high praise for Robin's musicianship that Robin would have to have a heart of stone to take offense. Such a fight would be unfair, Alan says, because \"It would go against my heart to haggle a man that can blow the pipes as you can. This incident could have been written to illustrate the words of the English playwright William Congreve in his 1697 play, The Mourning Bride: \"Music hath charms to soothe a savage breast. Mr. Rankeillor's role in this section is to bring a much-needed dose of common sense and level-headedness into the events of the novel. Since David left his father's house at the beginning of the novel, he has become involved with a host of unsavory and malicious characters, such as Ebenezer, Hoseason and the crew of the Covenant, and the blind robber. Even Robin Oig and Cluny Macpherson have a dangerous capriciousness to them that could potentially harm David. David's helper in dealing with these people has been Alan, but even he is something of a liability, being a wanted and hunted man. Mr. Rankeillor, in contrast, is a respected man in his community, making him the perfect guide for David at this moment of his re-entry into conventional society. He is both good-hearted and logical, combining benevolent intentions with an intelligent foresight that enables him to negotiate the legal difficulties of David's position. It is fitting that Alan leaves David's life at this point. His status an outlaw means that he can no longer be a mentor to David now that David has taken up his place in society as the laird of Shaws. Many critics find the ending of Kidnapped unsatisfying. The antagonist, Ebenezer, does not put up any fight in the final confrontation and simply gives in. The outcome of David's plan to give evidence to clear James of the Glens of the charge of complicity in Colin Campbell's murder is not covered. The reader is not told whether Alan gets safely away to France. Stevenson states in a final note to the reader that he may conclude these two unfinished plotlines in a sequel, depending on the public reception of this novel. But the tone of this passage suggests a lack of commitment that hardly makes the reader clamor for the next installment. In fact, Stevenson did publish a sequel, Catriona , which, however, was not a popular success"}