{"name": "Chapter XVIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter13-18", "summary": "When David and Alan awake next morning, David is angry with Alan and wants to part from him. He believes that Alan is responsible for the murder of Campbell, whether by pulling the trigger himself or ordering someone else to do it. But Alan insists that he had nothing to do with it: if he had planned to kill Campbell, he would not be without a sword and gun, with only a fishing rod. Alan swears upon his dagger  that he had no hand in the murder. Believing that Alan may have been a conspirator in the killing, David asks Alan if he knows the man in the black coat, whom David saw running away. Alan tries to confuse David's memory of the man, suggesting that his coat may have been blue. He says that he would rather forget anything that he did see. David then accuses Alan of deliberately showing himself to the soldiers in order to draw them away from the real killer. Alan agrees that this is \"likely,\" as he considers it the job of a \"gentleman\" to do so. David cannot understand why an innocent man should expose himself to suspicion. Alan reasons that the innocent have a chance of clearing their name in court, whereas the man who shot Campbell should be given a chance to escape. And that,\" says Alan, \"is the good Christianity. David says nothing, but respects Alan's readiness to sacrifice himself, albeit he thinks his morals are \"tail-first. David forgives Alan, and they shake hands. Alan says they must flee, as he is a wanted deserter, and David is a suspected accomplice to the murder. David protests that he has faith in the justice system, but Alan points out that the case would be tried in Campbell country, with a jury stacked with Campbells, presided over by a Campbell judge. Alan suggests going to the Lowlands, and David agrees, as he wants to go home and confront Ebenezer. Alan warns David that their life on the run will be hard, but the alternative is to be hanged. Alan tells David what happened after they fell overboard from the Covenant. He, Hoseason, and Riach were among the sailors who made it to shore. Hoseason ordered his men to capture Alan and take his money, but Riach refused, allowing Alan to escape.", "analysis": "The reference to the emigrant ship highlights the historical process known as the Highland Clearances, the forced displacement of the Highland peoples that took place during the eighteenth century. The clearances were carried out on the orders of clan chiefs, who had become landlords after the English fashion, reliant on income from their land. However, the actual evictions were frequently performed by Lowland or English factors  in order to turn the land over to more profitable sheep and cattle farming. Because the Highland inhabitants no longer had land on which they could grow food crops, they had to leave in search of a better life. Some moved to the Scottish Lowlands, and thousands emigrated to America, Canada, and Australia. The Clearances played a major role in the demolition of the clan system after King George II's forces put down the Jacobite Risings. Many critics comment on the unrealistic quality of David's turning up in Lettermore wood just at the moment of the Appin murder. It is true that it is a coincidence that is hard to credit, though Stevenson has to some extent set his hero up for this moment by making him a somewhat naive young man who has a talent for wandering into dangerous situations. The unlikeliness of this moment contrasts with Stevenson's more realistic treatment of David's time on the barren island. David notes, \"In all the books I have read of people cast away, they had either their pockets full of tools, or a chest of things would be thrown on the beach along with them, as if on purpose\". This part of the novel is widely viewed as Stevenson's critique of Daniel Defoe's novel Robinson Crusoe , in which the hero is washed up on a desert island with  a full box of tools and other objects useful for survival. In a realistic touch, David is cast ashore not only without useful objects, but also without knowledge of the sea. This last point leads to an anti-climactic but again realistic incident in which David does not realize that he only has to wait for the tide to go out in order to wade comfortably across to the mainland. While this has the anti-romantic and anti-heroic effect of making David's predicament seem tame in retrospect, it is an authentic detail. Experts frequently comment on real-life wilderness deaths that it is not always external conditions that are the inevitable cause of death, but the lack of knowledge of terrain, how to use equipment or improvise in its absence, and so forth. This section of the novel explores the theme of the cultural differences between the Whig Lowlander David and the Jacobite Highlander Alan. After the shooting of Colin Campbell in the wood of Lettermore, Alan tells David  that he has a duty to draw the soldiers' attention to themselves and away from the true killer, even though they are innocent of the murder. He feels it is the right thing to do as a Highlander and as an enemy of the Campbells. This way of thinking is foreign to David, who feels that the guilty person should be punished and the innocent go free according to proper legal process. Nevertheless, David feels respect for Alan's views and readiness to sacrifice himself for his cause: \"Alan's morals were all tail-first; but he was ready to give his life for them, such as they were\". For Alan, the true crime was Campbell's persecution of the Stewarts: for this, Campbell's killing was just punishment. For David, murder is a crime in law, whatever the justifications that Jacobites may claim, and he trusts due legal process to punish the guilty and acquit the innocent. Alan, on the other hand, assumes that the legal institutions were put in place by the government of England: the jury will be stacked with Campbells, and the presiding judge will be head of the Campbell clan. Thus there will be no real justice for the Stewarts. In such a climate, Alan and his fellow clan members feel justified in taking the law into their own hands, as vigilantes. David's success in overcoming the cheating guide and the blind robber  show his maturation, albeit that he is left somewhat the poorer by his dealings with the guide. No longer the gullible dupe who walked straight into the traps set for him by Ebenezer, he has learned valuable lessons in survival from the trials he has passed through with the guidance of Alan. David feels tempted to part from Alan for two reasons. First, he knows that Alan is a wanted man and so he is risking arrest and worse if he stays with him. Second, when David believes that Alan is responsible for the murder of Campbell, he is morally repelled by Alan. Nevertheless, David overcomes his doubts and chooses to stay with Alan for reasons of friendship - a major theme of the novel. Alan's insistence on his innocence can probably be taken at face value, as his own code of honor suggests that he would not lie to his friend"}