{"name": "Chapter XXV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter25-30", "summary": "Alan takes the sick David to a house in Balquidder belonging to the Maclarens, a clan friendly to the Stewarts. They put David to bed and call a doctor. David is out of bed after a week, and ready to travel again within a month. Alan refuses to leave David, although David often urges him to do so. Soon, the entire community gets to know that David is staying at the house, and come to visit him. A \"Wanted\" poster showing David is pinned near the foot of his bed, but while his host Duncan Dhu and others must know who he is, no one asks him any awkward questions. One day, David is visited by Robin Oig, a son of Rob Roy. Robin behaves as if were among inferiors. On hearing that David is a Balfour, he asks if he is related to a surgeon of the same name who cured his brother's leg, which had been broken in the battle of Prestonpans. David says that he knows nothing of his descent. Robin goes to leave, appearing sorry that he ever bothered to talk to David. David overhears him telling Duncan that he is \"only some kinless loon that didn't know his own father. As Robin Oig is leaving, he meets Alan coming in. The two men exchange hostile words. Alan reminds Robin that his chief, Ardshiel, defeated Robin's father Rob Roy in a swordfight, and accuses Rob Roy of adding Campbell to his own name. Alan and Robin agree to fight a duel, but Duncan intervenes, suggesting that as both are acclaimed pipers, they have a bagpiping contest instead. They take turns in playing different airs with ever-increasing refinements. Finally, Robin plays a piece associated with the Appin Stewarts, Alan's own clan. Alan softens visibly. He tells Robin that he is a far greater piper than himself; and that though he thinks that he could still beat Robin in a swordfight, he feels it would be wrong to indulge in an unequal fight with such a piper. Thus the quarrel is made up. David ends the account of his meeting with Robin Oig by noting that he was later tried and hanged in the Netherlands", "analysis": ""}