{"name": "Chapter XXIV", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210511071637/https://www.novelguide.com/kidnapped/summaries/chapter19-24", "summary": "Alan and David continue their journey in silence. David is angry with Alan for gambling away their money, while Alan is ashamed of himself and angry with David for taking offense. David thinks more and more of parting from Alan, but cannot admit this to Alan, as he knows that Alan loves him. In an attempt at reconciliation, Alan apologizes, and asks if David wants to say anything. David replies coldly that he has nothing to say. Alan offers to part. David angrily replies that he would never turn his back on a friend. Alan says that he already owed David his life and now he owes him money, too, that this is a burden to him, and that David should bear this in mind. David knows he is behaving badly, but becomes even more cruel. Alan and David travel for days in the cold and rain. David again becomes ill. David is still angry with Alan. Alan offers to carry his pack, but David refuses. Alan appears to forgive himself for his behavior at Cluny's, and begins to taunt David as a Whig. David's illness is growing so bad that he believes he will die. He unleashes an angry outburst at Alan, who by way of reply whistles a Jacobite song composed to mock the defeat of King George's army at the battle of Prestonpans. David remembers that at Prestonpans, Alan had been fighting for King George. He cruelly reminds Alan that he has been on the losing side when fighting for the English king and subsequently when fighting for the Jacobites: \"you have been beaten on both sides. David also insults the Stewarts. Alan says, \"This is a pity. There are things said that cannot be passed over. David challenges Alan to a duel, and draws his sword, but Alan cannot bring himself to fight David, as such an unfair contest would be \"fair murder. Alan throws his sword aside. David's anger evaporates. He feels sorry for his behavior, but knows he cannot simply take back his words. He remembers Alan's kindness and courage in the past, and how much he helped him. David's sickness seems to grow worse, and he has the thought that while an apology would be useless, a cry for help \"might bring Alan back to my side. David begs Alan to get him to a house where he can die in comfort, and asks Alan to forgive him. Alan, close to tears, asks David to forgive him in turn: he had forgotten how young David was, and did not notice that he was dying on his feet. David admits that neither of them is in a position to criticize the other, and says they must be tolerant with each other. Alan promises to find a house for David to rest in, and says that he likes David even better now that they have quarreled.", "analysis": "This section introduces fictionalized versions of two historical characters, James of the Glens  and Cluny Macpherson. The use of such historical figures lends \"verisimilitude\"  to Stevenson's adventure story. Compounding the realism is the fact that Stevenson portrays these legendary Scottish heroes as fallible, idiosyncratic, and even eccentric, showing their weaknesses as well as their strengths. James, the acting head of the Stewart clan in Scotland, is fearful and borders on treacherous to his fellow clansman Alan as he plans to help King George II's forces to capture Alan and David for their assumed complicity in Campbell's murder. While James's motive is partly to defend the true killer, possibly a Cameron, it is also partly to protect himself and his family from suspicion by appearing to be Alan's enemy. In his constant harping on his family, however, James appears to be hiding behind the skirts of his family in an attempt to justify his ineffectual response to the Appin murder. In contrast to the legend that had grown up around James as a martyr who had sacrificed himself for the Jacobite cause, Stevenson shows him as a man who was prepared to sacrifice the cause for his own safety. His strategy is the decidedly unheroic one of attempted appeasement of the Campbells. James is certainly not a swashbuckling hero in the mold of Alan, though even Alan, in the episode in which he gambles away his and David's money, is shown as having a weak side. Alan's courage is not in doubt, but his wisdom is. Cluny Macpherson's historical counterpart was Ewan Macpherson of Cluny, who was a prominent leader in the Jacobite Risings and helped Charles Stuart, Bonnie Prince Charlie, to escape Scotland. Stevenson's characterization shows him as having acquired some unusual habits through living in isolation in the forest. While still the undoubted leader of his clan, his former heroic exploits are reduced to card-sharping and fussing over cookery methods. In his portrayal of the clan chiefs James and Cluny, Stevenson was chronicling a way of life - the clan system - that was already dying out at the time the novel was set, and which had almost vanished by Stevenson's time. But he is also undermining the romance that had attached itself to the Highland way of life. Not only is the Highland way of life in decline, but Stevenson seems to be determined to show traditional folk heroes as flawed and occasionally weak and ridiculous human beings - no better and no worse than the rest of humanity. Nevertheless, Stevenson is not an apologist for the Hanoverian government's oppressive policies in Scotland in the wake of the Jacobite Risings. James of the Glens' men's frantic attempts to hide their weapons in the moss recalls the historical passage in 1746 of the Act of Proscription, which required all swords to be surrendered to King George II's government and prohibited the wearing of traditional Scottish tartan or kilts. The dialogue between Alan the Highland Jacobite and David the Lowland Whig continues. While Alan is brave, a superb fighter, and skilled at surviving in dangerous circumstances, David is the more prudent and responsible, at least where money is concerned. Previously in the novel, their closeness despite their differences has been emphasized. But in the quarrel over Alan's gambling their money away, their differences come to the fore. David's wish to part from Alan has never been stronger, and he can barely contain his anger at his reckless behavior. Stevenson's handling of the quarrel displays masterly psychological realism. David knows that he is behaving badly, but this realization merely seems to spur him on to more cruelty. When he recognizes that he has gone to far to expect Alan to forgive him, he resorts to changing his strategy completely. He gives in to his growing illness and, telling Alan that he expects to die, asks if he will forgive him first. While David is probably exaggerating his illness, there is an emotional desperation in his request that is so profoundly felt that it wins Alan over completely. David is acknowledging his need for Alan's friendship. His conciliatory words to Alan - \"We're neither one of us to mend the other - that's the truth. We must just bear and forbear, man Alan. are a recognition that neither is better or worse than the other. Each has his strengths and weaknesses, and together they are stronger and more effective than either would be alone"}