{"name": "Act 4 Scene 3 ", "summary": "Scene.iii Context This scene takes place in another room in the castle. Othello is entertaining Lodovico, but soon dismisses Desdemona and Emilia, and Desdemona complies as she only wishes to obey her husband and lord. Emilia prepares her mistress for bed and Desdemona still wishes that her love would return to her. In front of Emilia she clearly forgives her husband for his strange behavior. She reminisces about her happy childhood and her mother's maid Barbara who died when her lover deserted her. She remembers that Barbara used to sing a sad song, \"The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree; sing all a green willow; her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee, sing willow, willow, willow. The fresh streams ran by her and murmur&#8217d her moans, sing willow, willow, willow. Her salt tears fell from her, and soften&#8217d the stones, sing willow, willow, willow.\" Desdemona asks Emilia if there are really women who betray their husband's love and Emilia responds that there are such women. Desdemona can't understand this. Emilia hints that she would be unfaithful to her husband if the price was right, but that is because he treats her indifferently and doesn't consider her feelings.", "analysis": "Interpretation This scene marks the prelude to the impending tragedy. We see Desdemona as a compliant, na've and innocent victim of Iago's evil. Her innocence is emphasized by her regression to happy childhood days illustrated by the singing of the song 'Willow'. We also gain an insight into Emilia's views on men and her poor relationship with Iago. She says of men, \"When they change us for others? Is it sport? I think it is. And doth affection breed it? I think it doth. Is't frailty that thus errs? It is so too. And have not we affections, desires for sport, and frailty, as men have? Then let them use us well; else let them know, the ills we do, their ills instruct us so.\" This comes as a shock to Desdemona. She sees a type of womankind that is foreign to her, coming from a sheltered upbringing. She has no desire to return evil for evil."}