{"name": "act iv, scene i", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210120141529/https://www.sparknotes.com/shakespeare/juliuscaesar/section8/", "summary": "Antony meets Octavius and Lepidus at his house. They review a list of names, deciding who must be killed. Lepidus agrees to the death of his brother if Antony will agree to allow his nephew to be killed. Antony suggests that, as a way of saving money, they examine Caesar's will to see if they can redirect some of his funds. Lepidus departs, and Antony asks Octavius if Lepidus is a worthy enough man to rule Rome with him and Octavius. Octavius replies that he trusts him, but Antony harbors doubts. Octavius points out that Lepidus is a \"tried and valiant soldier,\" to which Antony responds, \"So is my horse\": he goes on to compare Lepidus to a mere animal, calling him a \"barren-spirited fellow\" and a mere tool. Antony now turns the conversation to Brutus and Cassius, who are reportedly gathering an army; it falls to Octavius and Antony to confront them and halt their bid for power. There is a tide in the affairs of men. And we must take the current when it serves", "analysis": "Act IV, scenes i-ii These scenes deal with the events that take place in the vacuum of power left by Caesar's death. Antony's speech to the Roman citizens in Act III, scene ii centers on the fact that Caesar had set aside money for each citizen. Now, ironically, he searches for ways to turn these funds into cash in order to raise an army against Brutus and Cassius. Although he has gained his current power by offering to honor Caesar's will and provide the citizens with their rightful money, we now see that he apparently has no intention of fulfilling this promise. In a strange dialogue with Octavius, he also badly insults Lepidus, explaining how, just as his horse has been taught to fight, turn, stop, and move his body according to Antony's will, so, too, must Lepidus now be trained. Antony declares Lepidus \"a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds / On objects, arts, and imitations\"; he reproaches Octavius, saying, \"Do not talk of him / But as a property,\" that is, as a mere instrument for the furtherance of their own goals . Lepidus proves an effective tool for them in that he is malleable and apparently not intelligent enough to devise his own motives. While Shakespeare may have inserted this string of insults simply for comic relief, this abuse serves as another illustration of Antony's sense of political expediency: while he does not respect Lepidus, he still uses him for his own purposes. Meanwhile, questions of honor plague the conspirators as well, as Cassius and Brutus exchange accusations. Their argument seems to arise partially from a misunderstanding but also partially from stubbornness. Though Brutus claims that his honor forbids him from raising money in unscrupulous ways, he would still use such money as long as it was not he himself, but rather Cassius, who raised it. We see that Brutus speaks against corruption, but when he has no other means of paying his army, he quickly consents to unscrupulousness, if only indirectly. Portia's death is reported twice in scene ii . Some argue that the repetition of the announcement of Portia's suicide reveals the effect of revision on Shakespeare's part; perhaps, while adding in one section of the scene, he forgot to remove another. Other scholars suggest that Brutus's two separate comments regarding Portia's death show two separate sides of his personality--again, the private versus the public. That is, alone with Cassius, he admits that his distress at the loss of his wife, but before his men, he appears indifferent or dispassionate. Perhaps the latter reaction is merely a facade, and Brutus simply has too much pride to show his true feelings in public. Brutus's words to Cassius proclaiming their readiness for battle are significant in that they emphasize Brutus's belief in the power of the will over fate: We at the height are ready to decline.There is a tide in the affairs of menWhich, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;Omitted, all the voyage of their lifeIs bound in shallows and in miseries.On such a full sea are we now afloat,And we must take the current when it serves,Or lose our ventures.   Throughout the play, the theme of fate versus free will proves important: here, Brutus suggests that both exist and that one should take advantage of fate by asserting one's will. While subsequent events demonstrate that the force of fate  is stronger than Brutus's individual actions, his speech still makes for a graceful, philosophic axiom, showing Brutus to be a man of deep reflection. Brutus cannot sleep--perhaps because he is brooding internally on his guilt; in any case, this guilt is soon manifested externally in the form of the Ghost of Caesar. This phantom's identification of himself to Brutus as \"thy evil spirit\" could mean either that the Ghost is an evil spirit appearing to Brutus's eyes only--a spirit that is \"his\" alone--or that the Ghost represents Brutus's own spirit, which is secretly evil . However one interprets the arrival of the specter, the event can only bode ill for Brutus in the battle to come."}