{"name": "Chapter 25", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20200917203216/https://www.gradesaver.com/dombey-and-son/study-guide/summary-chapters-20-25", "summary": "Captain Cuttle wakes up very early to find Rob in his apartment. Rob has come to tell him that he had woken up that morning to find Sol Gills mysteriously vanished. The packet Sol left behind was addressed to Cuttle, so Rob has brought it to him. Cuttle opens it to find that Sol has enclosed his will, with instructions for it not to be opened for one year, or until Walter's fate has been determined. Sol says he may never be seen or heard from again, but that his debts are paid, and that he hopes Cuttle will look out for Rob. Rob and Cuttle go back to the shop, but Cuttle cannot find any clues of where Sol might have gone. Cuttle believes that Sol's despair about Walter has driven him to commit suicide. Cuttle decides to move into Sol's lodgings and take over the shop, so that if either Sol or Walter ever returns, they will have something to come back to. He keeps Rob at the shop to help him", "analysis": "This section reveals how the status and wealth of the Dombey family makes it hard for them to cultivate genuine relationships with others, or to know whom to trust. When Bagstock implies that Miss Tox has been aspiring to marry Dombey, Dombey is dismissive of this idea. While it will turn out that Tox is actually a faithful and benevolent character, this does make it clear that she has had her own motivations for cultivating a relationship with the Dombey family. Bagstock of course is scheming and being disingenuous in revealing this information, in that he has own reasons for wanting to ensure that Tox and Dombey never marry. Bagstock also plays an active role in introducing Dombey to Mrs. Skewton and Edith Granger, two characters that quickly assess him as a potential match and start calculating how to ensure that he wants to marry Edith. At the same time as Dombey finds himself at the center of a web of schemes, Florence is also attracting attention. While Carker's precise plans are not yet clear, he is clearly interested in her connection to Sol and Walter. His recruitment of Rob Toodle as a spy introduces the theme of surveillance into the novel. Carker will both observe the Dombey house himself and make sure that he knows the whereabouts of Florence. Furthering the idea of Florence's intuitive wisdom, she is immediately uncomfortable with Carker. Because, unlike her father, she is not blinded by pride and vanity, she can see Carker for what he truly is. As Florence gets older, she also becomes the subject of interest as a marriage prospect, especially now that she is the sole heiress to the Dombey fortune. While relatively kind and benign, the Skettles family is clearly aspiring to a match between Florence and their young son. Carker is also very interested in whether or not Florence might have hopes of marrying Walter. Because of her position, Florence is rarely taken on her own terms: she represents a kind of asset to be used in mergers and acquisitions."}